Precious Family Day Care Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of Education [2025] FCAFC 148 (24 October 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Precious Family Day Care Pty Ltd v
Secretary, Department of Education
[2025] FCAFC 148
Appeal from:
Precious Family Day Care Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of
[2024] FCA 20
File number:
NSD 154 of 2024
Judgment of:
WHEELAHAN, SNADEN AND MEAGHER JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
– appeal from
orders of a judge of the Court dismissing an “appeal” brought
pursuant to
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
– the Administrative Appeals Tribunal affirmed a decision of the Secretary
to refuse the appellant’s application
for approval as a provider of child
care services – consideration of the conditions for approval in Division 1
of Part 8 of
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
(Cth) – consideration of amendments made by
Family Assistance
Legislation Amendment (Cheaper Child Care) Act 2022
(Cth) – repeal of
s 194E(1)(g) of the Act and insertion of ss 194C(da) and 194D(da) –
amendments commenced after the conclusion
of the hearing before the Tribunal but
before the publication of its decision – applicability of the amendments
Khalil v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2025] HCA 33
considered – whether
the Tribunal denied the appellant procedural fairness – whether the
appellant was afforded procedural
fairness in relation to the Tribunal’s
findings – whether any errors by the Tribunal were material to its
whether the Tribunal was required to make findings in relation
to each of the matters in s 194E(1) of the Administration Act –
whether the Tribunal erred in only making findings “for and against”
approval and failing to consider probative material
– appeal dismissed.
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION
– interpretation of
System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
construction of transitional provisions of
Family Assistance Legislation
Amendment (Cheaper Child Care) Act 2022
(Cth) – construction of
“but had not been determined”.
Legislation:
Commonwealth of
Constitution
Act (The Constitution) 1977
A New Tax System (Family Assistance and Related Measures) Act
(Cth) schs 5, 6
A New Tax System (Family Assistance)
(Administration)
(Cth) ss 3(1), 194A, 194B,
194C, 194C(da), 194D, 194D(da), 194E, 194F, 194G, 195A
A New Tax System
(Family Assistance) Act 1999
, 194E(1)(k)
Interpretation Act 1901
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Administrative Review Tribunal (Consequential and Transitional
Provisions No
1) Act 2024
(Cth) schs 16,
Family Assistance Legislation Amendment
(Cheaper Child Care) Act 2022
Veterans’ Entitlements Act 1986
Care Subsidy Minister’s Rules 2017
Regulations 1994
(Cth) reg 1.15A
Explanatory Memorandum,
Assistance Legislation Amendment (Cheaper Child Care) Bill 2022
Education and Care Services National Law Act 2010
Cases cited:
3D Scaffolding Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner
of Taxation
[2009] FCAFC 75
AB (a pseudonym) v Independent
Broad-based Anti-Corruption Commission
[2024] HCA 10
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
Bardetta v Baulkham Hills Shire Council
[2001] NSWLEC 164
120 LGERA 17
Boensch v Pascoe
[2019] HCA 49
CK Design Pty Ltd v Penrith City Council (No 2)
[2022] NSWLEC
Clements v Independent Indigenous Advisory Committee
[2003] FCAFC
Collector of Customs (NSW) v Brian Lawlor Automotive Pty
[1979] FCA 21
; 24 ALR 307
Collector of Customs v Pozzolanic
Enterprises Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 456
Commissioner for
Australian Capital Territory Revenue v Alphaone Pty Ltd
[1994] FCA 293
Commissioner of Taxation v Fortunatow
[2020] FCAFC 139
Comptroller-General of Customs v Pharm-A-Care Laboratories Pty
[2020] HCA 2
270 CLR 494
Esber v the Commonwealth
174 CLR 430
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media
Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 5
250 CLR 503
Frugtniet v Australian
Securities and Investments Commission
[2019] HCA 16
Gameplan Sports & Leisure Pty Limited v South Sydney City
[2000] NSWLEC 112
Haritos v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2015] FCAFC 92
233 FCR 315
He v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2017] FCAFC 206
Hollingsworth v Commissioner
(1998) 47 NSWLR 104
Hong v Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection
[2019] FCAFC 55
Hossain v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] HCA 34
(2018) 264 CLR
Hyundai Automotive Distributors v Australian Customs Service
[1998] FCA 297
Ismail v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship
and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 2
280 CLR 265
Repatriation Commission
[1988] FCA 105
Jokona Pty Ltd v
Liverpool City Council
[1997] NSWLEC 17
Khalil v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
Korat v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and
Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCAFC 59
303 FCR 261
Li v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2008] FCA 902
102 ALD 354
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2024] HCA 12
280 CLR 321
Maxwell v Murphy
McAuliffe v Department of Social Security
McNamara v Consumer Trader and Tenancy Tribunal
221 CLR 646
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v SZMTA
[2019] HCA 3
264 CLR 421
Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship v Khadgi
[2010] FCAFC 145
190 FCR 248
Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Pochi
[1980] FCA 85
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
185 CLR 259
Mobil Oil Australia Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
[1963] HCA 41
113 CLR 475
MZAPC v Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection
[2021] HCA 17
273 CLR 506
Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 26
Disability Insurance Agency v WRMF
[2020] FCAFC 79
276 FCR 415
Industries Pty Ltd v Lucas
[1967] HCA 30
116 CLR 537
Ogden Industries
Pty Ltd v Lucas
[1970] AC 113
Pelka v Secretary, Department of
Families, Housing, Community Services and Indigenous Affairs
[2008] FCAFC
Plaintiff M1/2021 v Minister for Home Affairs
275 CLR 582
Plaintiff S22/2025 v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
[2025] HCA 36
Precious Family Day Care and
Secretary, Department of Education
[2023] AATA 99
Precious Family Day
Care Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of Education
[2024] FCA 20
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal; Ex parte 2HD Pty Ltd
[1979] HCA 62
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
Affairs; Ex parte Applicants S134/2002
[2003] HCA 1
211 CLR 441
Migration Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
Stead v State Government Insurance Commission
[1986] HCA 54
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2006] HCA 63
228 CLR 152
v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] FCAFC 145
266 FCR 105
v Minister for Immigration & Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
V324 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2004] FCAFC 259
Wills v Chief Executive Officer of the Australian Skills Quality
[2022] FCAFC 10
289 FCR 175
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Ligeti Partners
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr P Knowles SC with Ms C Ernst
Solicitor for the Respondent:
MinterEllison
NSD 154 of 2024
PRECIOUS FAMILY DAY CARE PTY
SECRETARY OF DEPARTMENT OF
WHEELAHAN, SNADEN AND MEAGHER JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appeal be dismissed.
appellant pay the respondent’s costs of the appeal.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
WHEELAHAN J:
appellant sought review by the Administrative Appeals Tribunal of a decision to
refuse its application for approval as a provider
of child care services. The
Tribunal affirmed the decision under review:
Precious Family Day Care and
Secretary, Department of Education
[2023] AATA 99
(8 February 2023)
). The appellant then “appealed” the Tribunal’s
decision on questions of law to the Court in its original jurisdiction
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
). That proceeding was dismissed by the primary judge:
Precious Family Day Care Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of Education
[2024] FCA 20
). The appellant now appeals the dismissal of that
proceeding to the Full Court. The notice of appeal raises three grounds of
that correspond to the grounds of appeal that were argued at first
instance and alleges error by the primary judge in not accepting
addition to the three grounds of appeal, a further issue arises in relation to
whether the Tribunal applied the legislation
in the correct form that was
applicable to the review.
Secretary has filed a notice of contention which, in response to the third
ground of appeal, seeks to have the primary judge’s
decision upheld on
grounds other than those relied on by the primary judge. It will not be
necessary to address the notice of contention.
The legislation – the family assistance law
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999
Assistance Act
) provides for various forms of assistance, including
care subsidy
additional child care subsidy
). Under ss 85BA and 85CA of the Family Assistance Act an
individual may be eligible for CCS or ACCS in respect of care provided to
child by an
approved child care service
. An approved child care service
is one in respect of which there is an approved provider:
A New Tax System
(Family Assistance) (Administration)
Administration Act
), s 194G. The Family Assistance Act, the
Administration Act, legislative instruments including regulations made under
those Acts,
and Schedules 5 and 6 to the
A New Tax System (Family Assistance
and Related Measures) Act 2000
(Cth) are referred to in the legislation as
family assistance law
: Administration Act, s 3(1).
The legislation in more detail
legislation comprising the family assistance law has been frequently amended.
One set of amendments that arises for consideration
was made by the
Assistance Legislation Amendment (Cheaper Child Care) Act 2022
amendments included the repeal of s 194E(1)(g) and the insertion of s
194C(da) and s 194D(da) which relate to the requirement
to have arrangements in
place to ensure compliance with the family assistance law. I will summarise the
legislation principally in
the form it took prior to the 2022 amendments and
then identify the relevant amendments.
The legislation applicable to the Tribunal’s review in
the form prior to the 2022 amendments
8 of the Administration Act establishes a scheme for the approval by the
Secretary of providers of child care services that the
provider operates or
proposes to operate. There are two layers to the approval under Part 8. The
first layer is approval of the provider
under s 194B(1). The second layer
is approval under s 194B(2) of the provider in respect of at least one
child care service that
meets the requirements in s 194B(3). Subsection
194B(1) of the Administration Act provides for the approval of a provider and is
dependent upon the Secretary’s satisfaction of two
conditions –
(a) the provider satisfies the provider eligibility rules in section 194C;
(b) the provider operates, or will operate, at least one child care service that
satisfies the service eligibility rules in section
relation to the approval of a provider in respect of a child care service,
s 194B(3) provides for two conditions of approval that
are dependent upon
the Secretary’s satisfaction that the child care
(a) is or will be operated by the provider; and
(b) satisfies the service eligibility rules in section 194D.
194B(1) directs attention to the provider eligibility rules under s 194C.
To the extent relevant, s 194C provides –
194C Provider eligibility rules
A provider satisfies the provider eligibility rules if:
(b) the provider is a fit and proper person to be involved in the administration
of CCS and ACCS; and
(c) any person with management or control of the provider is a fit and proper
person to be involved in the administration of CCS
and ACCS; and
(d) any person who will be a person with management or control of the provider
on the day the provider’s approval takes effect,
or the day the
provider’s approval in respect of a child care service takes effect, is a
fit and proper person to be involved
in the administration of CCS and ACCS; and
Subsections
194B(1) and (3) both direct attention to the service eligibility rules under
s 194D. To the extent relevant, s 194D provides
194D Service eligibility rules
A child care service satisfies the service eligibility rules if:
(c) each person who is responsible for the day-to-day operation of the service
(whether or not the person is employed by the provider
of the service) is a fit
and proper person to be involved in the administration of CCS and ACCS; and
(d) each person who will be responsible for the day-to-day operation of the
service (whether or not the person is employed by the
provider of the service)
on the day that the provider’s approval in respect of the service takes
effect is a fit and proper
person to be involved in the administration of CCS
and ACCS; and
relevant provisions of ss 194C and 194D set out above establish as
mandatory conditions for approval that the provider, persons
involved with the
management and control of the provider, and persons responsible for the day to
day operation of the child care
service, are fit and proper persons to be
involved in the administration of CCS and ACCS. Section 194E then sets out the
to which the Secretary must have regard in determining whether a person
is a fit and proper person. All of the matters below are
relevant to the
appellant’s argument on appeal, but of particular relevance are paragraphs
(g) and (l) –
194E Fit and proper person considerations
(1) The Secretary must have regard to the following matters in determining
whether a person is a fit and proper person for the purpose
of paragraph
194C(b), (c) or (d) or 194D(c) or (d):
(a) any non-compliance by a relevant person with a law of the Commonwealth or a
State or Territory;
(b) any proceedings currently before a court or tribunal that involve a relevant
(c) any decision made under a law of the Commonwealth or a State or Territory
relating to child care which adversely affects a relevant
(d) subject to Part VIIC of the
Crimes Act 1914
, any conviction, or
finding of guilt, against a relevant person for an offence against a law of the
Commonwealth or a State or Territory,
including (without limitation) an offence
against children, or relating to dishonesty or violence;
(e) any order for a relevant person to pay a pecuniary penalty for the
contravention of a civil penalty provision of a law of the
Commonwealth or a
State or Territory;
(f) any act of a relevant person involving fraud or dishonesty;
(g) the arrangements the person has:
(i) to ensure the person complies with the family assistance law; and
(ii) to ensure anyone the person is responsible for managing complies with the
family assistance law;
(h) the record of administering of Commonwealth, State or Territory funds of a
relevant person;
(i) any debts to the Commonwealth incurred by a relevant person (whether or not
the debt has been discharged);
(j) the record of financial management of a relevant person, including any
instances of bankruptcy, insolvency or external administration
involving the
(k) any other matter prescribed by the Minister’s rules;
(l) any other matter the Secretary considers relevant.
mandatory considerations provided for by s 194E(1)(b), (c), (d), (e), (f),
(i), and (j) refer to matters relating to a
relevant person
, which is the
subject of the definition in s 194E(2) –
(2) For the purposes subsection (1), a
relevant person
(a) the person; and
(b) another person or body in respect of which the person is or has ever been a
person with management or control.
Note: See section 194F for the
definition of
person with management or
194F provides for when a
relevant person
person with management
of a person or body:
194F Meaning of person with management or control
(1) A person is a
person with management or control
of a body, if
the person is any of the following:
(a) a member of the group of persons responsible for the executive decisions of
(b) a person who has authority or responsibility for, or significant influence
over, planning, directing or controlling the activities
of the body;
(c) a person who is responsible for the day-to-day operation of the body
(whether or not the person is employed by the body);
(d) a person who is responsible for the day-to-day operation of a child care
service in respect of which the body is approved or
is seeking to be approved
(whether or not the person is employed by the body).
(2) Without limiting paragraph (1)(a), the following persons are taken to be
members of the group referred to in that paragraph:
(a) if the body is a body corporate—an officer of the body corporate
(within the meaning of the
Corporations Act 2001
(b) if the body is a partnership—a partner;
(c) in any other case—a member of the body’s governing body.
The 2022 amendments
amendments effected by the 2022 amending Act included the repeal of
s 194E(1)(g). This was accompanied by the insertion of a new
s 194C(da) and a new s 194D(da). Those paragraphs set out additional
conditions that the provider and the child care service must
satisfy in order to
meet the provider eligibility rules and the service eligibility rules
respectively. Paragraph 194C(da) contains
an additional condition for a
(da) the provider has arrangements in place to ensure that the provider and the
following persons comply with the family assistance
(i) the persons mentioned in
paragraphs (c) and (d);
(ii) each person that the provider, or a person mentioned in subparagraph (i),
is responsible for managing; and
194D(da) contains an additional condition for a child care service –
(da) the provider of the service has arrangements in place to ensure that the
following persons comply with the family assistance
(i) the persons mentioned in paragraphs (c) and (d);
(ii) each person that a person mentioned in subparagraph (i) is responsible for
managing; and
effect of the amendments, in general terms, is to elevate the presence of
arrangements to ensure compliance with the family assistance
law from a matter
that goes to whether the provider is a fit and proper person to an independent
condition for approval that must
amendments commenced operation on 30 November 2022, which was after the hearing
before the Tribunal had concluded on 28 October
2022, but before the Tribunal
published its decision on 8 February 2023. The relevant amendments are the
subject of item 4 of Part
1 of Schedule 4 of the amending Act providing for
their application, which is in the following terms –
4 Application of amendments
Application for approval of a provider
(1) The amendments of the
A New Tax System (Family Assistance)
(Administration) Act 1999
made by this Part apply in relation to an
application for approval of a provider under Division 1 of
of that Act if
the application:
(a) is made on or after the commencement of this item; or
(b) was made before the commencement of this item but had not been determined
before that commencement.
Continued satisfaction of eligibility rules
(3) For the purposes of applying
subsection 195A(1)
A New Tax System
(Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
on or after the commencement
of this item in relation to an approved provider that was approved under
Division 1 of
of that Act before that commencement, or an approved child
care service of the approved provider in respect of which the provider
approved under that Division before that commencement:
(a) the reference in paragraph 195A(1)(a) of that Act to the provider
eligibility rules in section 194C of that Act is a reference
to the rules in
that section as amended by this Part; and
(b) the reference in paragraph 195A(1)(b) of that Act to the service eligibility
rules in section 194D of that Act is a reference
to the rules in that section as
amended by this Part.
Tribunal did not refer to the amendments to the Administration Act in its
decision and proceeded by reference to the Act in the
form it took before the
amendments.
Did the 2022 amendments apply to the Tribunal’s
primary judge decided the application by reference to the Administration Act
before the 2022 amendments. Before her Honour, the
parties proceeded on the
basis that s 194E(1)(g), which had been repealed, was relevant to the
proceeding. In support of her Honour’s
approach the primary judge cited
Frugtniet v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
(2019) 266 CLR 250
), where at [14] Kiefel CJ, Keane
and Nettle JJ stated that the Tribunal –
is subject to the same general constraints as the original decision-maker and
should ordinarily approach its task as though it were
performing the relevant
function of the original decision-maker
in accordance with the law as it
applied to the decision-maker at the time of the original decision
(Emphasis added, citations omitted.)
emphasised words in the above passage in
found support in
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Pochi
[1980] FCA 85
at 46 (Smithers J) and in
Shi v Migration Agents Registration
[2008] HCA 31
235 CLR 286
(Kiefel J, who dissented), which their Honours cited. The other four
members of the Court in
(Bell, Gageler, Gordon and
Edelman JJ) did not address the issue.
no party to this appeal submitted that there had been any error by the Tribunal
or by the primary judge in not applying
the relevant provisions of the
Administration Act as amended.
the hearing of this appeal, and while judgment was reserved, the High Court
published its decision in
Khalil v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] HCA 33
). The issue in
was whether the Tribunal, in
reviewing a decision of a delegate of the Minister to refuse an application for
a visa, was bound by
the relevant Ministerial Direction in force under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) at the time of the
delegate’s decision, or at the time of the Tribunal’s decision. The
High Court upheld the decisions
below that the Ministerial Direction in force at
the time of the Tribunal’s decision was applicable. In doing so, the Court
at [15] approved the statement of Brennan J in his dissenting judgment in
Esber v the Commonwealth
[1992] HCA 20
174 CLR 430
at 448 that, “[w]here, on a rehearing de novo, the question for decision
is whether an applicant should be granted a right,
the law as it then exists is
applied, not the law as it existed at an earlier time”. The Court held
that the principle stated
by Brennan J was consistent with the general
principle stated by Mason J in
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v
Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
Peko-Wallsend
45 that an administrative decision-maker is required to make a decision on the
basis of material available to the decision-maker
at the time the decision is
[17], the Court cited with approval
Re Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; Ex parte Applicants
211 CLR 441
where at [63] Gaudron and Kirby JJ in a dissenting
judgment stated that “[i]t is well settled and it is not in issue that a
review body invested with a review power of the kind conferred by s 415(1) of
the [Migration] Act is required, in conducting that
review, to apply the law as
it stands at the date of the review”. The Court at [19] cited with
approval the reasons of Hayne
and Heydon JJ in
at [101], and
stated that “[t]o the extent that the dissenting reasons of Kiefel J can
be read as stating that the Tribunal
was ordinarily required to apply the law as
it stood at the time of the decision under review, her Honour’s reasons
rejected as inconsistent with those of the majority”.
[20], the Court stated that the
statement of Kiefel CJ, Keane
and Nettle JJ in
which I set out at [
] above was “incorrect”.
The Court concluded on this topic at [21] –
The principle that the Tribunal was to apply the laws governing the exercise of
powers and discretions in force at the time of the
Tribunal’s decision may
be displaced by a provision of an enactment excluding or modifying s 43(1) of
the AAT Act, as contemplated
by s 25(6) of that Act. If not displaced, the
principle requires the Tribunal to apply all relevant laws in force at the time
the Tribunal’s decision
including any relevant saving or
transitional provision
(Emphasis added.)
publication of the High Court’s decision in
Court gave leave to the parties to make supplementary written submissions
relating to –
(a) the decision in
at [15]–[21];
(b) the proper construction of the relevant transitional provisions in the
amending Act; and
(c) any consequences for the appeal.
The application of the 2022 amendments – the
appellant’s submissions
appellant submitted that the provisions of the Administration Act that commenced
on 30 November 2022 applied at the time of the
Tribunal’s decision on 8
February 2023, and that this had the consequence that the Tribunal asked itself
the wrong question
in addressing s 194E(1)(g) which had been repealed, and
in not addressing s 194C(da) which had been inserted. The appellant
that this error did not otherwise affect the grounds of appeal. In
support of its submissions the appellant relied on
, and submitted
that the operation of s 43(1) of the AAT Act was not displaced by a
provision of an enactment excluding or modifying
it because there is no
provision of the 2022 amending Act that modifies the operation of the AAT Act.
In relation to the relevant
transitional provisions for the 2022 amending Act,
the appellant submitted that the original decision of the delegate was part of
an “administrative continuum”, citing
(Bell, Gageler, Gordon and Edelman JJ). This principle was relied on to support
the submission that the appellant’s
application had not been determined at
the commencement of the amendments with the consequence that the criteria for
approval, as
amended, were applicable to the review before the Tribunal.
an aid to construction of the transitional provisions, the appellant relied on
[150] of the Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill
which resulted in the
amendments. That paragraph referred to the obligation of providers to have
appropriate arrangements in place
to ensure that the family assistance law is
complied with as “an indispensable requirement for providers that must be
The appellant submitted that Parliament’s intention should not
be construed as being that the requirement was only “indispensable”
for applications that are yet to be determined by a first-level delegate, but
are otherwise dispensable where a review delegate or
the Tribunal could still
make the dispositive decision with practical consequences resulting in the
provision of Commonwealth subsidised
child care.
appellant also relied for context on item 4(3) of the transitional provisions
which provides that s 195A of the Administration
Act, which concerns
continuing compliance, is effective from the commencement date by reference to
the provider eligibility rules
in s 194C and the service eligibility rules
in s 194D as amended. The appellant submitted that there would be an incongruity
on review, an application were granted by reference to the criteria in the
Administration Act before the amendments, but immediately
upon approval the
provider would be subject to the obligations effective after the amendments. The
appellant submitted that a more
harmonious construction of the relevant
transitional provisions was one that made consideration of an application for
approval upon
review the subject of the amended criteria.
appellant submitted that by not addressing the legislation in the form that it
took after the 2022 amendments the Tribunal asked
itself the wrong question, and
that this error was material to the outcome of the review. While the appellant
did not formally seek
to amend its notice of appeal to raise this ground of
error, because of the orders giving leave to the parties to make submissions
the topic it is a question that is fairly before the Court as a foundational
The application of the 2022 amendments – the
Secretary’s submissions
Secretary submitted that the amendments did not apply to the review before the
Tribunal and relied on the transitional provisions.
The Secretary compared the
use of the word “determined” in the transitional provisions for the
2022 amending Act to other
legislation that employed the term “finally
determined”:
Migration Act 1958
Veterans’ Entitlements Act 1986
I note that in
the legislation cited by the Secretary, “finally determined” in each
instance is a defined concept for
specific statutory purposes. The Secretary
submitted that the word “determined” was to be understood in its
meaning, and that because the original decision of the delegate had
been made before the commencement date, the appellant’s
application had
been determined. The Secretary submitted that the original decision of the
delegate resolved the appellant’s
application and, while it was subject to
internal review and then review by the Tribunal, it was legally operative and
sense incomplete or provisional.
the alternative, the Secretary submitted that any error by the Tribunal in
addressing the wrong provision was not material to its
The application of the 2022 amendments –
consideration
party submitted that the appellant’s application for administrative
approval to provide a child care service gave rise to
any accrued rights such as
to attract the operation of
Acts Interpretation Act
or any principles of statutory construction akin to those
referred to in
Maxwell v Murphy
[1957] HCA 7
(Dixon CJ) and
Ogden Industries Pty Ltd v Lucas
[1967] HCA 30
at 564 (Kitto J). There were no facts or events that had occurred
that gave rise to any rights.
High Court’s decision in
at [21] gives effect to the
principle stated by Brennan J in
in relation to the general
approach to reviews or appeals by way of rehearing. The reference in
at [21] to any relevant saving or transitional provision in legislation is
important. Saving and transitional provisions are a common
legislative amendments. In this appeal, the transitional provisions of the
amending Act formed part of the law that was
in force at the time of the
Tribunal’s decision on review. The transitional provisions identified
which applications for approval
were the subject of the legislation as amended.
The transitional provisions are therefore the starting point and are
determinative
in resolving the question of whether the Tribunal should have
applied the Administration Act as amended. The question becomes whether,
date of commencement of the relevant amendments to the Administration Act, the
appellant’s application for approval
as a provider of child care services
had been made “but had not been determined”.
correct construction of the phrase “but had not been determined” in
the transitional provisions is not free from difficulty.
Similar phrases in
other legislation have given rise to disputes in relation to the application of
amendments to planning instruments,
resulting in apparently inconsistent
Jokona Pty Ltd v Liverpool City Council
[1997] NSWLEC 17
Hollingsworth v Commissioner of Police
(1998) 47 NSWLR
at 114 (Hill J) and 141 (Hungerford J);
Gameplan Sports &
Leisure Pty Limited v South Sydney City Council
[2000] NSWLEC 112
–[22] (Cowdroy J);
Bardetta v Baulkham Hills Shire Council
[2001] NSWLEC 164
120 LGERA 17
–[24] (Talbot J);
Pty Ltd v Penrith City Council (No 2)
[2022] NSWLEC 97
(Robson J). These authorities have limited utility beyond their anecdotal
value and as illustrations of the way in which
other judges have approached
similar problems. That is because the processes of reasoning that have been
applied in other cases in
relation to other legislation do not speak to the
proper construction of the legislation in this case: see
Ogden Industries Pty
Ltd v Lucas
[1970] AC 113
at 127F-G (PC);
McNamara v Consumer Trader and
Tenancy Tribunal
[2005] HCA 55
221 CLR 646
(McHugh, Gummow and
Heydon JJ).
this case, the Court’s task is to construe the text of the relevant
transitional provisions having regard to the text, context,
and purpose of the
Administration Act and its amendments: see
Acts Interpretation Act
Text includes surrounding provisions and context includes
legislative history and extrinsic materials to which regard is had at the
stage and in its widest sense:
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(Hayne, Heydon, Crennan
and Kiefel JJ);
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Media
Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 5
250 CLR 503
(French CJ, Hayne,
Crennan, Bell and Gageler JJ);
SZTAL v Minister for Immigration &
Border Protection
[2017] HCA 34
262 CLR 362
(Kiefel CJ, Nettle
and Gordon JJ).
Administration Act refers throughout to the determination by the Secretary of
claims for family assistance. However, Part 8 of
the Administration Act, which
provides for the approval of providers of child care services, does not speak of
a “determination”
in relation to an application, but
“approval” if the application is granted. Subsection 109A(1B),
which relates to internal
review by an authorised review officer, operates by
reference to a “decision” by an officer under Part 8. And for
purposes of review by the Tribunal, s 138 also uses the term
“decision”. However, I do not consider that the difference
language between the transitional provisions in the amending legislation and the
Administration Act is significant. The Explanatory
Memorandum to the
Assistance Legislation Amendment (Cheaper Child Care) Bill 2022
refers to applications that had not been
“decided” –
Subitem (1) provides that, in respect of an application for approval of a
provider, the amendments apply to applications made after
commencement, and to
application made before commencement that had not been decided at the time of
commencement.
appellant referred to the continuum of administrative decision-making. The idea
of an administrative decision-making continuum
has its genesis in the reasons of
Davies J in
Jebb v Repatriation Commission
[1988] FCA 105
at 333, which was cited by Bell, Gageler, Gordon and Edelman JJ in
at [53]. In this case, the original decision, the internal
review by the authorised review officer, and the review by the Tribunal,
regarded as a continuum of decision-making at three levels, being the original
decision by the delegate, the internal decision
of the authorised review
officer, and the decision on review by the Tribunal where it has long been
accepted that the Tribunal’s
role is to “do over again” what
the original decision-maker did: see
Mobil Oil Australia Pty Ltd v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1963] HCA 41
113 CLR 475
at 502 (Kitto J),
at [100] (Hayne and Heydon JJ). In this case, the
Tribunal was required to review the decision of the authorised review officer:
Administration
Act, s 138(1). A decision at each of these levels is capable
of being regarded as a “determination” of the appellant’s
application for approval, thereby supporting the appellant’s submission
that the determination of an application was on a continuum,
and that the
appellant’s application had not been determined at the time of
commencement of the amendments. However, the “continuum”
administrative decision-making is a metaphor, and while it is of utility in
characterising the circumstances that arise in some
cases, statutes are not
usually drafted around metaphors, and metaphors are not substitutes for
legislative text. The legislative
text of the application provision of the
amending Act directs attention to whether the appellant’s application had
been determined
construction of the relevant transitional provision advanced by the Secretary is
the better construction, although I acknowledge
the force of the submissions
advanced by the appellant.
amendments made to the Administration Act by Part 1 of Schedule 4 of the
amending Act are to ss 194C, 194D, and 194E. Those provisions
apply to an
application for approval made pursuant to s 194A of the Administration Act,
and also to the conditions for continued
approval provided for by s 195A,
which require that the provider continue to comply with the provider eligibility
rules and service
eligibility rules in ss 194C and 194D respectively. In
relation to the consideration of applications for approval, it would make
sense if the transitional provision was construed so that the amendments applied
to the review of all applications for approval
on the basis that until all
avenues of review are exhausted the application had not been determined. That
would leave little or no
work to do for the condition “had not been
determined before that commencement” in the transitional provision.
phrase “but had not been determined” in the transitional provision
uses the past perfect continuous tense in a negative
form. The subject matter of
the phrase is the application itself. It fastens upon a characteristic of the
application as at the date
of commencement of the amendments, and looks back
rather than forward. At the time of commencement of the amending provisions on
30 November 2022, the decision of the authorised review officer to refuse the
appellant’s application had been made. By operation
of s 41(1) of the
AAT Act, the application to the Tribunal to review that decision did not affect
the operation of the decision.
appellant pointed to the contextual anomaly that, on the Secretary’s
construction, an application for approval and the continuing
conditions of any
approval would be the subject of different criteria. I agree that this is
anomalous, but that is the effect of
the legislative text, and it falls short of
being an absurd outcome. No less anomalous would be an application that was
in the days or weeks before the commencement of the amendments that
would then be subject to the conditions of continued approval
picked up by
s 195A of the Administration Act in their amended form immediately upon the
commencement of the amending Act. I also
acknowledge that the purpose of the
amendments might be better served if they applied to all applications, whether
or not they had
been determined before the commencement of the amendments. But
that is not what the legislation says.
the transitional provision to the appellant’s application for approval,
the application is to be characterised as one
that had been determined at the
date of the commencement of the 2022 amending Act. In
Collector of Customs
(NSW) v Brian Lawlor Automotive Pty Ltd
[1979] FCA 21
; 24 ALR 307, the Full
Court (Bowen CJ, Smithers and Deane JJ) held that the word
“decision” in s 25 of the AAT Act referred
to a decision in
fact made, whether or not the decision was valid. A similar approach may be
adopted in relation to the word “determined”
in the transitional
provisions under consideration. The provision is concerned with whether, before
the commencement of the amending
Act, an application for approval had not been
determined in fact. Any variation, setting aside, or substitution of the
decision under
review by the Tribunal would not alter the position that the
appellant’s application had been determined in fact. Therefore,
amendments to ss 194C, 194D, and 194E did not apply to the Tribunal’s
review of the appellant’s application.
follows that the primary judge was correct to accept at J [13] that the
legislation in the form it took prior to the 2022 amendments
was the legislation
relevant to the proceeding.
Background facts
Muna Abdi was the sole director of the appellant and was the only person
identified as having management or control of the appellant
on its application
for approval. She gave evidence and was cross-examined before the Tribunal.
2013 and 2016 Ms Abdi was employed by another child care provider, Golden
Family Day Care Pty Ltd (
Golden Heart
). Ms Abdi’s
husband, Ali Elmi, whom she married in 2015, and her husband’s sister, Ms
Kadra Elmi, were directors of Golden
Heart. There was evidence before the
Tribunal that on 20 February 2017 the approval of Golden Heart for the purposes
of family assistance
law was cancelled for reasons including inaccurate
reporting, making reckless false statements, and reporting care that was not
computer-based system known as the Child Care Management System, or CCMS, was in
place between 2009 and 2018 and was used for the
administration of child care
fee assistance payments. There was evidence before the Tribunal that commencing
26 June 2014 Ms Abdi
was added to the CCMS as an authorised person of Golden
Heart, which carried with it authority to make certain entries on the CCMS.
There was evidence that Ms Abdi was responsible for making numerous entries on
the CCMS on behalf of Golden Heart, including the
submission of 2,905 session of
care reports, 83 formal enrolment notices, and the update of personnel records.
Before the Tribunal,
the Secretary relied on this and other evidence to support
a claim that Ms Abdi was a person with management or control of Golden
and that accordingly Golden Heart was a
relevant person
consequence that the conduct of Golden Heart was a matter to which the Tribunal
was required to have regard pursuant to
s 194E(1)(b), (c), (d), (e),
(f), (i), and (j) of the Administration Act in assessing whether Ms Abdi was a
fit and proper person
to be involved in the administration of CCS and ACCS.
Abdi, her husband, and her sister-in-law, gave evidence before the Tribunal and
disputed that Ms Abdi had been a person with management
or control of Golden
Heart. The primary judge at J [32]–[33] set out some of that evidence
as extracted by the Tribunal in
its reasons. Ms Abdi stated in an affidavit that
her role with Golden Heart was purely administrative in character and denied
she had any say or involvement in executive decisions and denied that she
was responsible for the day-to-day operation of the service.
In oral evidence Ms
Abdi did not accept that she had submitted 2,905 session of care reports bearing
her name and was not able to
say who did.
Tribunal did not think much of this evidence, stating that it was
“completely underwhelmed” by the evidence, and that
persuaded that Ms Abdi was not a person responsible for the day-to-day
operations of Golden Heart: J [35]. The Tribunal
also found that Ms
Abdi’s evidence concerning whether she submitted reports and notices on
the CCMS and whether she was an
authorised person was “slightly
confused”: J [36]. The Tribunal then made the following findings at
R [162]–[163],
which were set out by the primary judge at J [37]
and which the appellant seeks to impugn on the ground that it was denied
Based upon the evidence, the Tribunal is unable to determine whether Ms Abdi was
an authorised person at Golden Heart. Based upon
the conflicting evidence and
lack of sound data, the Tribunal cannot make a finding that she was a person
with management or control
of the service.
However, [t]he Tribunal does find that Ms Abdi’s role at Golden Heart
should be considered as a moderate factor for refusing
Precious FDC’s
approval for CCS as she was an integral staff member at the service during its
period of significant non compliance.
the above findings, the Tribunal did not make any finding that Ms Abdi was a
person with management or control
of Golden Heart’s service, which
would have rendered Golden Heart a
relevant person
for the purpose of the
mandatory considerations in s 194E. However, the Tribunal made the lesser
finding that Ms Abdi was an “integral
staff member” of Golden Heart
during a period of significant non-compliance, and that this was a moderate
factor for refusing
the appellant’s application for approval. The
Tribunal’s finding that Ms Abdi was an integral staff member of Golden
Heart did not engage any statutory term or condition that rendered the conduct
of Golden Heart or the regulatory decisions taken
against it a mandatory
consideration in assessing whether Ms Abdi was a fit and proper person. However,
the Tribunal took account
of Ms Abdi’s history as an integral staff member
of Golden Heart in its assessment of whether she was a fit and proper
was a second issue to which the Tribunal gave considerable attention, which was
the content of the appellant’s “governance
documents”. These
documents had been prepared by or on behalf of the appellant and submitted to
the Tribunal. They were in
the nature of written policies and procedures that
were directed to compliance with obligations, including reporting obligations,
under the family assistance law. The Tribunal was quite critical of the
appellant’s governance documents. In a passage of the
reasons set out at J [47] the Tribunal stated –
... this documentation exemplifies the lack of clarity and understanding by
Precious FDC of its obligations in administering the
FAL. The Tribunal found
these documents difficult to navigate and interpret. These policies and
procedures were contradictory, and
this was compounded by Ms Abdi’s
contradictory evidence to the Tribunal. The Tribunal could not find one clear
concise document
to assist staff, educators and parents to comprehend their
requirements under the FAL.
The Tribunal finds this lack of clarity and
understanding is sufficient enough to warrant the refusal of Precious
, as it is this very lack of guidance to staff,
educators and parents that leads to human error and fraudulent activity
in overpayments and subsequent debts to the Commonwealth.
(Emphasis added.)
emphasised words in the above passage are important, because they are relevant
to whether any claimed denial of procedural fairness
by the Tribunal in relation
to the Tribunal’s findings as to Ms Abdi’s involvement with Golden
Heart was material to
the Tribunal’s decision, and ultimately to whether
there was any error in the Tribunal’s decision. They are also relevant
whether any failure to consider the 2022 amendments to ss 194C and 194D of
the Administration Act was material to the Tribunal’s
decision, on the
hypotheses that those provisions were applicable.
further matter that was material to the Tribunal’s decision and which
weighed against granting approval to the appellant was
that the Tribunal
considered that Ms Abdi did not demonstrate a sound knowledge and understanding
of the family assistance law. As
the primary judge noted at J [77],
s 194E(1)(k) of the Administration Act required the Tribunal to have regard
to “any other
matter prescribed by the Minister’s rules”.
Subsection 46(3) of the
Child Care Subsidy Minister’s Rules
(Cth) required the Secretary, and on review the Tribunal, to have
regard to the understanding that can be demonstrated by the appellant
of the obligations that would apply under the family assistance law, and their
level of commitment to complying with those
obligations. In relation to this
consideration, the Tribunal was critical of Ms Abdi’s evidence-in-chief
and answers to written
questions. The Tribunal found that Ms Abdi demonstrated
an understanding at a basic level of the requirements of the day-to-day running
of a family day care centre, but was not able to persuade the Tribunal that she
had sufficient knowledge for the appellant to be
granted approval for child care
support. The Tribunal expressed particular concern at these deficiencies having
regard to the fact
that Ms Abdi was the director of another registered provider
of child care services, Little Beginners Family Day Care, which she
operated in
partnership with her mother.
its concluding paragraphs, the Tribunal determined that the appellant and Ms
Abdi were not fit and proper persons to be involved
in the administration of CCS
and ACCS, stating –
Fit and Proper Person
Tribunal finds that Ms Abdi had a genuine desire to provide a much-needed child
care service to the ethnically diverse, lower
sociodemographic families within
her community. The Tribunal finds that there is no evidence that Ms Abdi had
been involved in any
fraudulent activity or mismanagement in her role as a
director of Little Beginnings.
Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s contention that governance arrangements
are of vital significance in determining whether
a provider is a fit and proper
person to be involved in the administration of CCS and ACCS. On this basis, as
the Tribunal has found
that Precious FDC’s governance arrangements are
inadequate, this weighs heavily against a finding that Ms Abdi and Precious
are fit and proper persons to be involved in the administration of CCS and ACCS.
Tribunal, having determined that Ms Abdi and Precious FDC are not fit and proper
persons to be involved in the administration
of CCS and ACCS, affirms the
decision under review.
The first ground of appeal to this Court
the primary judge the appellant claimed that the Tribunal denied it procedural
fairness, or constructively failed to exercise
Abdi was an integral staff member of Golden Heart during a period of significant
non-compliance.
As I have mentioned, the Tribunal considered this to be a
moderate factor for refusing the appellant’s application for approval.
appellant claimed that the notion that Ms Abdi was an integral staff member of
Golden Heart, and that this was an adverse factor
in its own right, was not a
matter of which she had fair notice as a relevant issue because it had not been
raised in the decisions
under review, had not been the subject of oral or
written submissions before the Tribunal, had not been the subject of evidence,
including cross-examination, and was not grounded in any discernible part of the
legislation.
The primary judge did not accept that there had been a
denial of procedural fairness
primary judge did not accept that there had been any denial of procedural
fairness, and by extension, any constructive failure
to exercise jurisdiction.
Further, the primary judge held that the claimed denial of procedural fairness,
if established, was not
material to the Tribunal’s decision. Both elements
of the primary judge’s decision are challenged on appeal.
relation to the primary judge’s rejection of the claim that there had been
a denial of procedural fairness, her Honour’s
path of reasoning took the
following steps.
J [18], the primary judge set out the principles relevant to establishing a
breach of the rules of procedural fairness that her
Honour had formulated with
reference to Full Court and High Court authority in
Wills v Chief Executive
Officer of the Australian Skills Quality Authority
[2022] FCAFC 10
) at [114]–[120], with Logan J and
Griffiths J agreeing. Those principles are not controversial, and some
aspects of the principles
were referred to by the High Court more recently in
AB (a pseudonym) v Independent Broad-based Anti-Corruption Commission
[2024] HCA 10
278 CLR 300
the principles to which the primary judge referred, her Honour emphasised at
J [19] and [39] that procedural fairness does
not generally require a
decision-maker to disclose his or her thought processes or evaluation of the
evidence, citing
v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2018] FCAFC 145
266 FCR 105
(Besanko, Gleeson and Burley JJ), which cited
Commissioner for
Australian Capital Territory Revenue v Alphaone Pty Ltd
[1994] FCA 293
) at 590–591 (Northrop, Miles and
French JJ), which in turn was cited in
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration
and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2006] HCA 63
228 CLR 152
) at [29] and [32] (Gleeson CJ, Kirby, Hayne, Callinan
and Heydon JJ). The primary judge also noted that
at [38] had
been approved in
National Disability Insurance Agency v WRMF
[2020] FCAFC
276 FCR 415
(Flick, Mortimer and Banks-Smith JJ).
J [26], the primary judge held that taking account of the finding that Ms
Abdi was an integral staff member of Golden Heart was
a permissible relevant
consideration because s 194E(1)(l) of the Administration Act required that
the Tribunal have regard to “any
other matter that [the Tribunal]
considers relevant” in determining whether a person is a fit and proper
primary judge at J [28]–[30] referred to the parties’
statements of facts issues and contentions and oral submissions
Tribunal. Her Honour stated that it was common ground that before the Tribunal
the focus of the parties was on whether
Ms Abdi was a person with management or
control of Golden Heart on the basis that she was an authorised person for the
submitting certain reports in the CCMS. However, her Honour
considered that the question whether Ms Abdi was a person with management
control of Golden Heart invited consideration of what her role actually was. To
demonstrate this point, the primary judge at
J [32]–[33] set out
extensive passages of evidence before the Tribunal concerning Ms Abdi’s
activities, role, duties,
and responsibilities when employed by Golden
primary judge held at J [34]–[38] that the Tribunal’s findings
in relation to Ms Abdi’s activities while employed
by Golden Heart
constituted a middle-point between the parties’ submissions. Her Honour
referred to the parties’ submissions
before the Tribunal and to the
Tribunal’s findings, and in effect held that the Tribunal’s findings
were more nuanced
than an acceptance of one party’s case over the other.
Her Honour referred to the fact that the Tribunal was “completely
underwhelmed” by the evidence of Ms Abdi, and Ms and Mr Elmi, and
that the Tribunal was not persuaded by their evidence that
Ms Abdi was not
a person responsible for the day-to day operations of Golden Heart. On the other
hand, the Tribunal did not give
decisive weight to the records of entries on the
CCMS bearing Ms Abdi’s name in the face of Ms Abdi’s denial that she
was an authorised person for that process. While the Tribunal found that Ms
Abdi’s evidence was slightly confused on the issue,
in the face of
conflicting evidence the Tribunal was unable to determine whether Ms Abdi was an
authorised person at Golden Heart
and stated that it could not make a finding
that she was a person with management or control of the service. The primary
at [38] that, subject to the question of procedural fairness, these
findings were plainly open to the Tribunal on the evidence before
J [39], the primary judge framed the relevant issue as being whether the
appellant was fairly on notice of matter that was adverse
to its interests of
which the Tribunal proposed to take account, noting that the Tribunal was not
required to put the parties on
notice of an issue which was obvious and arose on
a natural evaluation of the materials before the Tribunal, and nor was the
required to give the appellant “a running commentary upon what it
thinks about the evidence that is given”:
J [40], the primary judge held that the nature and importance of Ms
Abdi’s role at Golden Heart was in issue on the material
Tribunal, and that in characterising Ms Abdi’s role as
“integral” the Tribunal did not raise a new issue
in respect of
which notice needed to be given to the appellant in order to comply with the
natural justice hearing rule. Rather,
her Honour held that the Tribunal simply
did not accept either party’s submissions in relation to Ms Abdi’s
role, finding
that the truth lay somewhere in the middle. The Tribunal then gave
that finding moderate weight in affirming the decision under review.
The appellant’s challenge to the primary judge’s
finding that there was no denial of procedural fairness
appellant’s first ground of appeal largely corresponds to its claim before
the primary judge that the Tribunal denied procedural
fairness to it and alleges
that her Honour was in error in rejecting this claim. In particular, the
appellant claimed that having
rejected that Ms Abdi was an authorised person at
Golden Heart, and having
found that she was a person with management
or control of its child care service, it was not open to the Tribunal to then
different adverse finding without giving the appellant a chance to be
heard on the issue. In support of this aspect of the first
ground of appeal the
appellant developed the following submissions.
the appellant submitted that the issue whether Ms Abdi was
“integral” to Golden Heart “during its period of significant
non-compliance” did not feature in the original decision dated 1 April
2020 or the decision of the authorised review officer
of 3 June 2021 and was not
considered dispositive by those decision-makers. The significance of this
submission was to one aspect
of the content to be given to the obligation to
accord procedural fairness referred to in
at [119], namely that
... the Tribunal is required to put a party on notice of critical issues on
review in circumstances where (as in the present case
with respect to Standard
7.1) the issues were not considered dispositive by the primary decision-maker:
see by analogy
at [35] (the Court); see also
(the Court).
the appellant submitted that its three witnesses were asked questions about
Golden Heart, but none of them was asked whether Ms
Abdi was an “integral
staff member”. It was submitted that the focus of the witness’ oral
evidence was the same
as the authorised review officer’s decision, namely,
whether Ms Abdi was an “authorised person” for the purposes
Child Care Management System, or CCMS. It was submitted that it was never
suggested to Ms Abdi or the other witnesses for
the appellant that the fact of
Ms Abdi’s employment at Golden Heart alone could be an adverse factor in a
way that departed
from how the authorised review officer had decided the
application.
the appellant submitted that the primary judge had accepted that the
Tribunal’s findings departed from the way that both parties
their respective cases.
the appellant submitted that the ultimate difficulty with the Tribunal’s
findings, especially in identifying a new “moderate
factor” adverse
to the appellant, was that it was unclear how Ms Abdi’s
“integral” role at Golden Heart could
be relevantly adverse to the
appellant by reference to the statutory criteria. It was submitted that based
upon the Tribunal’s
findings, Ms Abdi’s role could not be an adverse
factor to the fit and proper person considerations in s 194E(1)(a), (b), (c),
(d), (e), (f), (h), (i) or (j), which all depended on establishing that Golden
Heart was a “relevant person” because
Ms Abdi was a person with
management or control of it for the purposes of s 194F. It was submitted that
having determined that it
could not make a finding that Ms Abdi was a person
with management or control of the service, the only remaining potentially
consideration was s 194E(1)(l) concerning “any other matter the
Secretary considers relevant”. It was submitted, however,
s 194E(1)(l) was not the subject of relevant analysis in the internal
review decision or in the parties’ submissions and
evidence before the
Tribunal. It was submitted that if the appellant was alerted to the possibility
that the Tribunal could find
Ms Abdi’s role as an “integral staff
member” to be a “moderate” adverse factor for the purposes of
considering s 194E(1)(l), then the appellant could have put forward further
evidence and submissions.
The Secretary’s response to the appellant’s
claim that there was a denial of procedural fairness
first submitted that the appellant did not contend that the
question whether Ms Abdi was an “integral staff member” of
Heart was an irrelevant consideration, in the sense that the statute prohibited
the Tribunal from having regard to this factor:
R v Australian
Broadcasting Tribunal; Ex parte 2HD Pty Ltd
[1979] HCA 62
(Stephen, Mason, Murphy, Aickin and Wilson JJ). This submission may be
accepted, as far as it goes, on the ground that upon
its review the Tribunal,
standing in the shoes of the Secretary, was permitted to have regard to
“any other matter the Secretary
considers relevant’:
s 194E(1)(l).
and in light of the first submission, the Secretary characterised the finding of
the Tribunal that Ms Abdi had an “integral
role” at Golden Heart as
a mental process which did not require disclosure.
the Secretary submitted that any suggestion that the appellant did not have an
opportunity to be heard on whether Ms Abdi had an
“integral role” at
Golden Heart was wrong as a matter of fact. The Secretary submitted that the
evidence that Ms Abdi
gave concerning her responsibilities while employed by
Golden Heart, the evidence of the former directors of Golden Heart, a witness
called by the appellant, Ms Tillet, who gave evidence about different roles in a
family day care service, and a compliance officer
at the Department, Ms Lewis,
who was called by the Secretary, clearly bore upon that issue. The Secretary
submitted that the nature
of Ms Abdi’s work at Golden Heart was logically
relevant both to whether she had management or control of Golden Heart and
whether there was some other reason she should not be considered a fit and
proper person.
the Secretary submitted that it followed that procedural fairness did not
require the Tribunal to signal in advance that, while
it was unable to conclude
Ms Abdi exercised management or control of Golden Heart, it nonetheless
considered her role at Golden Heart
to be a relevant matter. It was submitted
that the relevance of Ms Abdi’s role was not in issue before the Tribunal.
The Secretary
claimed that there was an essential difficulty with the first
ground of appeal because it had been obvious to the parties that Ms
role at Golden Heart was a relevant issue. It was submitted that no further
matters of relevance needed to be identified,
because the Golden Heart issue had
already been addressed elsewhere in the analysis for the purposes of the fit and
proper person
criteria in s 194E.
the Secretary submitted that the appellant’s attempt to quarantine the s
194E(1)(l) analysis is in tension with the structure
of s 194E(1). It was
submitted that paragraph (l) conferred on the Tribunal an obligation to take
into account any matters it regarded
as relevant, including matters that were
raised under the rubric of the preceding paragraphs but did not, on the
considered assessment, meet the specific statutory descriptions
in those paragraphs. It was submitted that the appellant’s
suggestion that
s 194E(1)(l) should be compartmentalised was in tension with authority to the
effect that, where reasons are structured
sequentially by reference to a number
of statutory criteria, the decision-maker should not be taken to have
“forgotten the
substance of the preceding parts of the reasons” or
to have “quarantined the assessment of each topic from every other
topic”, citing
Ismail v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and
Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 2
280 CLR 265
(Gageler CJ,
Gordon, Edelman, Gleeson and Jagot JJ). It was submitted that, accordingly,
the appellant could not safely have proceeded
on the basis that, if Ms Abdi was
not a person with management or control of Golden Heart, the Tribunal would not
have been permitted
to take her role at that centre into account.
There was a denial of procedural fairness by the
respectfully take a different view from that taken by the primary judge in
relation to whether it was open to the Tribunal in the
circumstances to take
account of its finding that Ms Abdi was an integral staff member at Golden Heart
as a factor that carried moderate
weight against the granting of the application
for approval.
starting point is to identify the significance of establishing that Ms Abdi was
person with management or control
of Golden Heart, and then to turn to
what one is to make of the Tribunal’s finding that Ms Abdi was an
“integral staff
member” of Golden Heart. If the Tribunal had made a
finding that Ms Abdi was a person with management or control of Golden
then the contraventions by Golden Heart, and the sanctions against it, namely
suspension and then cancellation of its approval,
would have been brought into
the evaluation as mandatory relevant considerations in determining whether Ms
Abdi, as a person with
management and control of the appellant, was a fit and
proper person to be involved in the administration of CCS and ACCS. The conduct
of Golden Heart that the Secretary sought to bring in was reasonably well
identified, and Ms Abdi’s involvement with that conduct
was clearly
alleged, namely that she was an authorised person responsible for various
entries on behalf of Golden Heart on the Child
Care Management System.
case against the appellant had its foundation in the reasons of the authorised
review officer. Those reasons were well structured
and clearly expressed. The
reasons specifically stated at [79] that the authorised review officer had not
made any adverse finding
against Ms Abdi by reference to s 194E(1)(l). The
authorised review officer concluded that Ms Abdi was an authorised person of
Heart for the purpose of activity on the Child Care Management System,
that Ms Abdi was a person with management or control of Golden
Heart, and that
adverse findings should be made against Golden Heart as a
relevant person
for the purposes of the considerations in s 194E(1)(a), (c), (g), and (h)
of the Administration Act. The authorised review officer
further held at [88]
that Ms Abdi had “sufficient influence” at Golden Heart and that he
was not satisfied that she was
not at least aware of the non-compliant practices
at its service which ultimately led to its cancellation of approval. The
review officer concluded at [89] that the non-compliance by Golden
Heart as a relevant person weighed very heavily against a finding
that Ms Abdi
and the appellant were fit and proper persons to be involved in the operation of
CCS and ACCS.
the Tribunal the parties filed statements of facts issues and contentions. These
were important documents. Under s 39 of the
the Tribunal was
required to ensure that every party to the proceeding was given a reasonable
opportunity to present his or her case.
In furtherance of that exhortation,
under s 33(2) of the Act, the Tribunal was empowered to give directions and, in
particular, was
empowered by s 33(2A)(c) to require any person who was a party
to a proceeding to provide a statement of matters or contentions upon
reliance was intended to be placed at the hearing. Documents of this type may
shape the review conducted by the Tribunal:
Hong v Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection
[2019] FCAFC 55
(Bromwich and
Wheelahan JJ). The appellant’s statement of facts, issues and
contentions specifically noted at [20] that the
Secretary had made no adverse
findings by reference to s 194E(1)(l) and addressed only those criteria that
were in issue. The statement
filed by the Secretary was structured and addressed
individual paragraphs of s 194E(1). It relied on the conduct of and
non-compliance
by Golden Heart as a relevant person. In relation to
s 194E(1)(l), the Secretary specifically submitted that “[t]he
does not contend that any further matters are relevant”
legal representatives for the parties made oral opening and closing addresses
before the Tribunal. Counsel for the appellant referred
the Tribunal to the
parties’ statements of facts issues and contentions in opening: T5/12. At
T6/18-20, Counsel for the appellant
framed the issues by reference to those
statements, and at T6/35 took the Tribunal to the Secretary’s statement
the Golden Heart issue. It was submitted to the Tribunal at T7/6-7
that if the Secretary did not get a favourable finding in relation
to the claim
that Ms Abdi was a person with management or control of Golden Heart, that issue
fell away. At T24/3-13 the legal representative
for the Secretary referred the
Tribunal in opening to the authorised review officer’s decision, its focus
on Golden Heart and
Golden Heart’s history of non-compliance, and Ms
Abdi’s involvement as a person with management or control that weighed
adversely against a finding that she was a fit and proper person in the
administration of the CCS. At T24/19, the representative
for the Secretary did
not take issue with the core issues identified by counsel for the appellant but
identified nine ancillary issues.
At T24/37 the legal representative of the
Secretary described the question whether Ms Abdi was a person with management or
of Golden Heart as, in some respects, a key focus of the application and
of deciding whether a number of the fit and proper person
considerations were
engaged. At T206, counsel for the appellant closed and referred again to the
issues which he had opened. At T230/33-35
the representative for the Secretary
in closing came back to the nine issues that were opened. At T231/24 the
representative commenced
addressing the question whether Ms Abdi was a person
with management or control of Golden Heart. At T237/37-38 the representative
the Secretary submitted that Ms Abdi was an “authorised person” and
that this aligned with the meaning of
person with management or control
in s 194F(1)(c) and (d). There was no submission that any other finding should
be made in relation to Ms Abdi’s employment
by Golden Heart which did not
lead to her engaging the statutory concept of a
person with management or
of Golden Heart.
Tribunal did not accept the Secretary’s case that Ms Abdi engaged the
statutory concept of a
person with management or control
of Golden Heart.
Instead, the Tribunal made a finding that Ms Abdi was an “integral staff
member” of Golden Heart. However,
this did not engage any paragraph of
s 194E on which the Secretary had relied and around which the review had
been conducted and
submissions made. And the Tribunal left unexplained what
being an “integral staff member” entailed, and how this involved
culpability by Ms Abdi that would lead to her personal conduct in this regard
being a moderate factor for refusing the appellant’s
application for
approval. The Tribunal’s finding was tantamount to tainting Ms Abdi with
the contraventions of Golden Heart
but without having engaged s 194E, by
bringing the conduct of Golden Heart into consideration by a side door. The
path of reasoning was untethered from the way the case had been
argued and was untethered from any of the considerations in s 194E
were in play. While it is true that “any other matter that the Secretary
considers relevant” was a permissible consideration
s 194(1)(l), the Secretary had expressly disclaimed reliance on any other
matter, and the Tribunal gave no notice to the appellant
that it proposed to
consider any other matter relevant. This departure from the way the review was
presented and conducted deprived
the appellant of the practical ability to meet
the new case onto which the Tribunal fastened.
The primary judge did not accept that any denial of
procedural fairness was material
the primary judge the appellant submitted that the Tribunal’s error in
failing to accord procedural fairness was material
because it could not be said
that there was no possibility of a different outcome, as required by the
authorities. Before the primary
judge, the appellant argued that it was denied
an opportunity to make submissions to contradict the purported association based
Ms Abdi’s “
” involvement in the tainted
entity, and that this could have made a difference to the outcome and the
ultimate finding about
fitness and propriety.
primary judge held that any failure by the Tribunal to comply with the natural
justice hearing rule was not material. The primary
judge at J [42] cited
relevant High Court authority concerning materiality in the context of
establishing a jurisdictional error,
Hossain v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2018] HCA 34
(2018) 264 CLR 123
[29]–[30] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler and Keane JJ);
Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection v SZMTA
[2019] HCA 3
(2019) 264 CLR 421
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2021] HCA 17
(2018) 273 CLR
v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 26
) at [32]–[33]
(Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson JJ) which her Honour set out –
explained in
, the materiality of a breach requires consideration of
“the basal factual question of how the decision that was in fact made
in fact made”. This question is determined by proof of historical facts on
the balance of probabilities. Then, it is necessary
to consider whether the
decision that was in fact made could have been different had the relevant
condition been complied with “
as a matter of reasonable conjecture
within the parameters set by the historical facts that have been
determined”. The burden falls on the plaintiff to prove “on
balance of probabilities the historical facts necessary to enable the court to
be satisfied of the realistic possibility that
a different decision could have
been made had there been compliance with that condition”.
will generally be a realistic possibility that a decision-making process could
have resulted in a different outcome if a party
was denied an opportunity to
present evidence or make submissions on an issue that required consideration.
The standard of “reasonable
conjecture” is undemanding. It
recognises that a fundamental purpose of affording procedural fairness is to
afford an opportunity
to raise relevant matters which are not already obvious,
or not liable to be advanced by the apparently persuasive “story”
the opposing party. Where a Tribunal errs by denying a party a reasonable
opportunity to present their case, “reasonable
conjecture” does not
require demonstration of how that party might have taken advantage of that lost
opportunity. Nothing said
in MZAPC denies this. To the contrary, the standard of
“reasonable conjecture”, correctly applied, proceeds on assumptions
that are derived from the rationale for procedural fairness, namely that, if
given a fair opportunity to present their case, a party
will take advantage of
that opportunity and that, by doing so, the party could achieve a favourable
(Citations omitted, emphasis added by the primary judge.)
setting out the above passages from
, the primary judge stated
at J [43] –
In assessing the question of materiality in
, Kiefel CJ, Keane
and Gleeson JJ considered that it was “
necessary to consider how
the Tribunal’s decision was in fact made
” and how the provision
of additional evidence or submissions could have “
affected the
Tribunal’s evaluative fact finding
”: at [39].
at J [46] her Honour stated –
... Applying
, the question remains whether the applicant has
proved on the balance of probabilities, the historical facts necessary to
a realistic possibility that a different decision could have been made
absent the legal error.
reference to these principles, the primary judge held that there were two
reasons why the appellant had failed to establish that
the denial of procedural
fairness was material. The first reason was that her Honour held at J [45]
that, if given the opportunity
to address the Tribunal in relation to Ms
Abdi’s involvement with Golden Heart, the most favourable finding for
which the appellant
could have contended was a neutral finding on that issue.
The second reason was that the primary judge accepted at J [46]–[50]
a submission of the Secretary that the Tribunal’s findings as to the
deficiencies in the appellant’s governance documents
unsatisfactory evidence given by Ms Abdi in relation to her understanding of
obligations under the family assistance law
was a sufficient and independent
basis for its decision to affirm the rejection of the appellant’s
application for approval.
At J [47] the primary judge set out the substance
of R [177] of the Tribunal’s reasons (see
above), where the Tribunal addressed what it described as the appellant’s
governance documentation. At J [48] the primary
judge considered the
Tribunal’s findings at R [177] in the following
In other words, the Tribunal found that the lack of clarity and understanding by
the applicant of its obligations in administering
the FAL alone was fatal to the
applicant’s application for approval, even though it did not limit its
consideration of whether
the applicant and Ms Abdi were fit and proper persons
to that factor. This is plain from the Tribunal’s description of its
finding as “
sufficient enough
” to warrant refusal of the
Honour held at J [49] that, fairly read, the Tribunal’s reasons
showed that it gave determinative weight to the governance
issues. I will set
out the primary judge’s conclusion at J [50], because its terms were
the subject of submissions by the parties
In these circumstances, even if the applicant had been afforded procedural
fairness and persuaded the Tribunal to give neutral weight
to the Golden Heart
issue, I consider that there was no realistic possibility that this
have led to a different outcome. As such, any such error
would not be jurisdictional.
(Emphasis added.)
The appellant’s challenge to the primary judge’s
finding that any denial of procedural fairness was not material
appellant submitted that the primary judge erred in concluding, at J [50], that
“even if the applicant had been afforded
procedural fairness ... there was
no realistic possibility that this
have led to a different outcome.
As such, any such error would not be jurisdictional.” (emphasis added).
The appellant submitted
that the correct test was: (i) whether there was an
error of law warranting relief under s 44 of the AAT Act; and (ii) whether the
denial of procedural fairness “could” have resulted in a different
outcome. The appellant submitted that in this case,
the denial of procedural
fairness on a material issue adverse to the appellant
realistically
have resulted in a different outcome.
appellant initially submitted in writing that the primary judge had not applied
the correct threshold to establish materiality.
The primary judge’s
decision pre-dated the High Court’s decision in
LPDT v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
280 CLR 321
) where at [14]–[16] Gageler
CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward, Gleeson and Jagot JJ (with whom Beech-Jones
at [38] agreed) stated
question in these cases is whether the decision that was in fact made
, “realistically” have been different
had there been no error. “Realistic” is used to distinguish the
of the possibility of a different outcome from one where the
possibility is fanciful or improbable. Though the applicant must satisfy
court that the threshold of materiality is met in order to establish that the
error is jurisdictional, meeting that threshold
is not demanding or
must be shown to demonstrate that an established error meets the threshold of
materiality will depend upon the error. In some
cases, it will be sufficient to
show that there has been an error and that the outcome is consistent with the
error having affected
the decision. Where the error is a denial of procedural
fairness arising from a failure to put the applicant on notice of a fact
issue, the court may readily be able to infer that, if fairly put on notice of
that fact or issue, the applicant might have addressed
it by way of further
evidence or submissions, and that the decision-maker would have approached the
applicant’s further evidence
or submissions with an open mind. In those
cases, it is “no easy task” for the court to be satisfied that the
such an opportunity did not deprive the person of the possibility of a
successful outcome. Importantly, a court called upon to determine
whether the
threshold has been met must be careful not to assume the function of the
decision-maker: the point at which the line
between judicial review and merits
review is crossed may not always be clear, but the line must be maintained. This
case affords
an example.
sum, unless there is identified a basis on which it can be affirmatively
concluded that the outcome would inevitably have been
the same had the error not
been made, once an applicant establishes that there has been an error and
demonstrates that there exists
a realistic possibility that the outcome of the
decision could have been different had that error not been made, the threshold
materiality will have been met (and curial relief will be justified subject
to any issue of utility or discretion).
(Citations omitted.)
appellant relied in particular on
at [14], and the reference to
”, and initially submitted that the
primary judge had erred at J [51] in the use of “would” in her
formulation of the applicable threshold.
appellant submitted that, had the Tribunal given notice that it proposed to
consider its finding that Ms Abdi was an integral
staff member at Golden Heart
during its period of non-compliance as a relevant matter for the purposes of
s 194E(1)(l), then the
appellant could have made submissions about the
content of that finding and its significance to the weighing process, including
pointing to other factors that were favourable to the appellant, such as the
need for childcare facilities in the area where the
appellant was proposing to
operate. The appellant submitted that a full appraisal of factors relevant to
the Tribunal’s consideration
for the purposes of s 194E(1)(l) could
have resulted in those matters amounting to more than just a neutral factor in
the outcome
and could have resulted in a different outcome.
appellant submitted that the Court should not accept, as the primary judge did
at J [46], that “the Tribunal’s findings
in relation to the
governance issues constitute an independent and sufficient basis for the
Tribunal’s decision”. It
was submitted that the Tribunal did not say
this, and that it did not say in its decision that it would have decided the
case adversely
to the appellant simply by reference to its consideration of s
194E(1)(g) and nothing else in that provision. The appellant sought
distinguish
, which the primary judge cited, on the ground that
was a clear instance where the Tribunal’s error could not
have affected the final result because there was a separate basis
on which the
Tribunal had to affirm the decision of a delegate which it was reviewing.
was submitted that in the present case the Tribunal’s reasoning purported
to weigh the various factors, and that the Tribunal’s
expression of the
lack of clarity and understanding by the appellant of its obligations in
administering the family assistance law
as being “sufficient enough to
warrant the refusal” at [177] of its reasons addressed the wrong issue
because s 194E(1)
of the Administration Act provided that the
decision-maker “must have regard to the following matters” in
194E(1)(a) to (l), not just paragraph (g). It was submitted that the
present case bore similarities to
, and that the Tribunal’s
error in relation to placing moderate weight on its finding that Ms Abdi was an
integral staff member
at Golden Heart during its period of non-compliance
“contributed to the evaluative and discretionary decision which the
at [35]. The appellant submitted that the
Court should not engage in “improper speculation to attempt to discern how
the Tribunal
would have reasoned if it had not departed from the required
process”: see
The failure to accord procedural fairness was not material
to the Tribunal’s decision
first matter to observe is that the “appeal” to the primary judge
was a statutory appeal on a question of law under
s 44 of the AAT Act, and
not a claim of jurisdictional error by the Tribunal in support of a claim for a
constitutional writ. Whether
materiality should affect the outcome of the
appellant’s appeal is therefore to be assessed through the lens of
s 44 and the
Court’s powers under ss 44(4) and (5), which are
now subject to the transitional provisions in the
Administrative Review
Tribunal (Consequential and Transitional Provisions No
1) Act 2024
Comptroller-General of Customs v Pharm-A-Care Laboratories Pty Ltd
270 CLR 494
Pharm-A-Care
), which concerned an appeal under
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
, Kiefel CJ,
Bell, Gageler, Keane and Gordon JJ stated at [40] –
it does not follow that the Comptroller-General’s appeal to the Federal
Court from the decision of the Tribunal ought
to have succeeded. That is
because, for an error of law on the part of the Tribunal identified in an appeal
on a question of law
to the Federal Court to result in an order setting aside
the decision of the Tribunal,
the error must be shown to be material to the
decision of the Tribunal in the sense that the decision which was in fact made
Tribunal might have been different if the error of law had not
(Emphasis added, citations omitted.)
formulation of the threshold for materiality in
Pharm-A-Care
namely that the decision in fact made “might have been different”
should take account of the more elaborate formulation
[14]–[16]. However, unlike the authorities that have addressed materiality
for the purposes of jurisdictional error, s 44
of the AAT Act does not
expressly say anything about an onus of proof involving the balance of
probabilities. But as
Pharm-A-Care
indicates, it is incumbent on an
applicant seeking relief under s 44 of the AAT Act and cognate provisions
to show that any error
was material to the Tribunal’s decision.
Pharm-A-Care
at [40] cited
Hyundai Automotive Distributors v
Australian Customs Service
[1998] FCA 297
, where Hill, Sackville
and Madgwick JJ stated at 599 –
It is now well accepted that not every error of law discovered by this Court in
the reasoning of the Tribunal will result in the
matter being remitted. The
error in question must be material to the Tribunal’s decision before this
course will be adopted:
Casarotto v Australian Postal Commission
[1989] FCA 116
BTR plc v Westinghouse Brake & Signal Co (Australia)
(1992) 34 FCR 246
at 253-254;
at 41-42 per Lockhart and Hill
Owens (AJ) v Repatriation Commission
(1995) 59 FCR 559
at 570; 38 ALO
481 at 509;
Zhang Jia Qing v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
(1997) 149 ALR 519
at 531. An error of law may be material if its
correct resolution might affect the decision. We say “may” because
application of the correct law to the facts may involve questions of fact
and degree which are the province of the Tribunal and not
this Court: cf
Commissioner of Taxation (Cth) v Brixius
(1987) 16 FCR 359
question of fact and degree involved no question of law.
Court also cited
3D Scaffolding Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
[2009] FCAFC 75
3D Scaffolding
at [35] Emmett, Kenny and McKerracher JJ stated –
follows from this that, even if the alleged breach of procedural fairness were
established, the error could not have affected the
result. It is well accepted
that an immaterial error of law will not vitiate a tribunal’s decision:
BTR Plc v Westinghouse Brake & Signal Co (Aust) Ltd
(1992) 34 FCR
at 253-254;
at 105-106;
at 41-42 per Lockhart and Hill
Klinkert v Australian Postal Corporation
(1992) 16 AAR 86
per Hill J. It is apparent that the tribunal would have reached the same result,
whether or not an error of the kind alleged
were made by it: compare
State Government Insurance Commission
(1986) 161 CLR 141 at 145;
[1986] HCA 54
60 ALJR 662
[1986] HCA 54
at 23-24 per Mason, Wilson, Brennan, Deane and
citation in the above passage by the Full Court in
3D Scaffolding
Stead v State Government Insurance Commission
[1986] HCA 54
; 161 CLR 141
) at 145 is significant.
concerned the power of
an intermediate appellate court to order a new trial. The Court drew a
distinction between a denial of natural
justice to a party affecting an
entitlement at trial to make submissions on a question of law, and a denial of
an opportunity to
make submissions on an issue of fact. At 145–146 the
Court stated –
However, when the Full Court is invited by a respondent to exercise these powers
in order to arrive at a conclusion that a new trial,
sought to remedy a denial
of natural justice relevant to a finding of fact, could make no difference to
the result already reached,
it should proceed with caution. It is no easy task
for a court of appeal to satisfy itself that what appears on its face to have
been a denial of natural justice could have had no bearing on the outcome of the
trial of an issue of fact.
statements have force in relation to an appeal on a question of law from a
decision of an administrative tribunal, where the
court does not generally
review findings of fact. However, as the Full Court emphasised in
Commissioner of Taxation v Fortunatow
[2020] FCAFC 139
(McKerracher, Davies and Thawley JJ), the point made by
the High Court in
Pharm-A-Care
at [40] is that a decision will not
be set aside if the
would not have been different, even
if the decision in fact reached is shown to have been affected by legal error,
stating that a
tribunal’s decision will not ordinarily be set aside if it
is shown that, even if the error had not been made, the outcome
necessarily have been the same on the facts as found.
will address each component of the appellant’s challenge to the primary
judge’s reasons on materiality. In relation
to the claim that the primary
judge applied an incorrect formulation of the threshold for materiality, bearing
in mind that her Honour’s
decision pre-dated
consider that her Honour’s reasons disclose any relevant error, and in
oral submissions counsel for the appellant accepted
this to be the case. In
at [14], which I extracted at [
] above, the question was framed as
“whether the decision that was in fact made
, ‘realistically’ have been different had there been no
error”, citing
at [32], [46], and [63]. The primary judge
at J [43] and [46] correctly formulated the principles by reference to
at [32]–[33], which her Honour cited. I doubt that her
Honour’s change in language from whether there was a realistic
possibility
that a different decision
have been made, to concluding at
J [50] that there was no realistic possibility that the claimed error
have led to a different outcome, represented a shift in the
threshold referred to in
that her Honour plainly appreciated,
and which was later developed in
Nonetheless,
the outcome of this appeal should not turn on these differences of expression.
The question for this Court to consider
on this appeal by way of rehearing, by
reference to the principles essayed in
, is whether the primary judge
was in error in holding that any denial of procedural fairness was not material.
Taking account of
the caution that is counselled before concluding that a denial
of procedural fairness was not material to the evaluation of factual
my view it is clear from the Tribunal’s reasons that there was no
realistic possibility that there could have been
a different outcome on the
hypothesis that there had not been the denial of procedural fairness in relation
to the “integral
staff member” finding. I respectfully agree with
the primary judge’s examination of this question at J [48], which I
have set out at [
] above. I agree
with her Honour that the Tribunal’s reasons show that the issues
surrounding the appellant’s lack of
clarity and understanding of its
obligations under the family assistance law, and the deficiencies in its
policies and procedures
that were criticised by the Tribunal, were fatal to the
appellant’s application for approval. In addition to what the Tribunal
said at [177] of its reasons, the Tribunal returned to the appellant’s
inadequate governance arrangements at [182], concluding
that this weighed
heavily against a finding that Ms Abdi and the appellant were fit and proper
persons to be involved in the administration
of CCS and ACCS.
the above reasons, I conclude that the Tribunal’s denial of procedural
fairness to the appellant was not material to its
decision, and that there was
therefore no error of law on this account for the purposes of s 44 of the
AAT Act, and that there was
no error by the primary judge in so holding.
have rejected the appellant’s submissions that the Tribunal addressed the
wrong statutory criteria in ss 194C, 194D and 194E
of the Administration
Act. Had it been necessary to consider whether any failure by the Tribunal to
address those provisions in their
amended form was material to the outcome, then
I would have come to a different conclusion, namely that the error was material.
a tribunal to address the wrong statutory criteria is an error of a
fundamental nature: see
at [40] (Nettle J) and [72]
(Edelman J). Although the provisions before and after amendments are
expressed in similar terms, and
may have similar consequences, it remains the
fact that the parties before the Tribunal and the Tribunal did not address
to the criteria in ss 194C, 194D, and 194E as amended. While as
a matter of conjecture one could conclude that it was very much on
that the outcome would have been the same, it is a step too far to re-work the
Tribunal’s findings so that they address
statutory criteria which the
Tribunal itself did not address and which the parties did not address in their
evidence or submissions
before the Tribunal: see
The second ground of appeal to this Court
the primary judge the appellant alleged that the Tribunal had erred by failing
to make findings in relation to each of the
matters referred to in
s 194E(1) of the Administration Act. I set out s 194E(1) in the form
that was applicable to the Tribunal’s
review at [
] above. The appellant relied on
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2008] FCA 902
102 ALD 354
He v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCAFC 206
He v Minister
) (Siopis, Kerr and
Rangiah JJ) to support its claim that the Tribunal was required to make
findings in relation to each of the matters
in s 194E(1).
The primary judge did not accept that the Tribunal failed to
have regard to each of the matters in s 194E(1)
primary judge at J [59] accepted that the requirement in s 194E(1) of
the Administration Act that the Secretary “must have
regard to the
following matters in determining whether a person is a fit and proper
person” had the consequence that each of
the prescribed matters was a
mandatory relevant consideration. However, at J [60] her Honour drew a
distinction between the obligation
to make findings about the matters referred
to in s 194E(1), and the Tribunal’s obligation to provide written
reasons. Her
Honour held at J [64] that the Tribunal was not required to
set out findings in relation to each prescribed matter and held at J
that the Tribunal correctly had regard to the matters prescribed by
primary judge noted at J [64] that the Tribunal had set out s 194E of
the Administration Act at [24] of its reasons and had summarised
parties’ submissions directed to the matters in s 194E(1) at [71] and
[119]–[142] of its reasons. At R [71] of its
reasons the Tribunal
the submissions made by the appellant in terms that
picked up the language of each paragraph of s 194E(1). At R [121] to
its reasons the Tribunal summarised the submissions made by the
Secretary in relation to each of the matters in s 194E(1), again
and picking up the language of each of the individual paragraphs
of s 194E(1). At J [66] the primary judge summarised the submissions
that were ultimately pressed before the Tribunal by the parties in relation to
the matters referred to in s 194E(1) –
In summary, the parties’ submissions as ultimately pressed before the
Tribunal in respect of each of the s 194E(1) prescribed
matters were as
any non-compliance by a relevant person by a relevant person with a law
of the Commonwealth, State or a Territory (s 194E(1)(a))
: the Secretary
submitted that the Golden Heart issue was relevant to this consideration; the
parties both made submissions in respect
of Little Beginners and this
consideration;
any proceedings currently before a court or tribunal that involve a
relevant person (s 194E(1)(b))
: neither party submitted that this
consideration was relevant;
any decision relating to child care which adversely affects a relevant
person (s 194E(1)(c))
: the Secretary submitted that the Golden Heart
issue was relevant to this consideration; the Secretary submitted that a
refusal of service approval of the applicant on 6 February 2018
was relevant to this consideration;
any conviction or finding of guilt against a relevant person for an
offence against children or relating to dishonesty or violence
(s 194E(1)(d))
: neither party submitted that this consideration was
any order for a relevant person to pay a pecuniary penalty
(s 194E(1)(e))
: neither party submitted that this consideration was
any act of a relevant person involving fraud or dishonesty
(s 194E(1)(f))
: neither party submitted that this consideration was
the arrangements the person has to ensure compliance with the family
assistance law (s 194E(1)(g))
: the Secretary submitted that the
governance issues related to this consideration;
the record of administering funds of a relevant person
(s 194E(1)(h))
: the Secretary submitted that the Golden Heart issue was
relevant to this consideration; the applicant submitted that Little Beginners
record of administering funds was relevant to this consideration;
any debts to the Commonwealth incurred by a relevant person
(s 194E(1)(i))
: the Secretary submitted that the Golden Heart issue was
relevant to this consideration; the applicant submitted that the fact that
Little Beginners did not have any debts to the Commonwealth was relevant to this
consideration;
the record of financial management of a relevant person
(s 194E(1)(j))
: the Secretary submitted that the Golden Heart issue was
relevant to this consideration; the applicant submitted that Little
record of financial management was relevant to this
consideration;
any other matter prescribed by the Minister’s rules
(s 194E(1)(k))
: the Secretary submitted that Ms Abdi’s
written assessment results were relevant to this consideration;
any other matter the Secretary considers relevant
(s 194E(1)(l))
: the applicant submitted that Ms Abdi’s
motivation to provide child care services in Epping due to the need for such
in that area was relevant to this consideration.
the above issues, which correspond to the paragraphs in s 194E(1), the
primary judge held at J [70] that the inference to be drawn
in relation to
the failure specifically to make findings which respect to (b), (d), and (e) was
that the Tribunal did not consider
them to be material in circumstances where
the parties did not make submissions that they were relevant. As to the balance
matters, the primary judge held at J [69]–[80] that the
Tribunal’s finding that Golden Heart was not a
relevant person
determinative of many of the matters.
J [72], the primary judge referred to s 194E(1)(f) and the finding
that the Tribunal made at R [181] of its reasons that “there
evidence that Ms Abdi had been involved in any fraudulent activity or
mismanagement in her role as a director of Little [Beginners]”.
primary judge stated that the Tribunal expressly addressed the matter prescribed
by s 194E(1)(f) in relation to Ms Abdi and Little
Beginners as relevant
primary judge held that, apart from s 194E(1)(c), the Tribunal had
otherwise addressed the balance of the matters. As to s 194E(1)(c),
Secretary had submitted to the Tribunal that a previous refusal of an
application for approval that had been made by the appellant
in February 2018
should weigh heavily against a finding that it was a fit and proper person. The
Tribunal recorded the Secretary’s
submission at R [123](b) of its
reasons but did not thereafter give the matter any weight. The primary judge
held at J [75] that
this potential error by the Tribunal was not material
because any finding would have been either adverse or alternatively neutral
the appellant.
The appellant’s challenge to the primary judge’s
rejection of its claim that the Tribunal failed to have regard to each
matters in s 194E(1)
its second ground of appeal the appellant claims that the primary judge erred in
failing to hold that the Tribunal made an error
of law in that it failed to have
regard to and make findings upon the matters prescribed by s 194E(1) of the
Administration Act.
By its notice of appeal, the appellant expressed its second
ground in the following terms –
primary judge erred in failing to hold that the Tribunal made an error of law in
that it failed to have regard to and make findings
“matters” prescribed by s 194E(1) of the Administration Act in
determining whether the Appellant (and any person
with management or control of
the Appellant) was a fit and proper person, including by:
to have regard to, for the purposes of s 194E(1)(c) of the Administration Act,
“any decision made under a law of the
Commonwealth or a State or Territory
relating to child care which adversely affects a
relevant person
(emphasis added) – which, contrary to J [75], was an error that was
material to the outcome of the Tribunal’s
review (for the reasons outlined
in paragraph 1(e) above as to the correct test for materiality in the context of
an appeal under
s 44 of the AAT Act);
to have regard to, for the purposes of s 194E(1)(a) of the Administration Act,
“any non-compliance by a
relevant person
with a law of the
Commonwealth or a State or Territory” (emphasis added);
to have regard to, for the purposes of s 194E(1)(h) of the Administration Act,
“the record of administering of Commonwealth,
State or Territory funds of
relevant person
” (emphasis added);
in light of the Tribunal’s finding (at TD [162]) that Ms Abdi was not a
“person with management or control” of
Golden Heart (which had the
consequence that Golden Heart was not a “relevant person”) and its
finding (at TD [38]) that
Ms Abdi is “person with management or
control” of Little Beginners.
support of its second ground of appeal the appellant submitted that the
underlying error of law asserted by this ground was that
the Tribunal’s
reasons from R [143] onwards under the heading “Consideration”
disclose a failure to “have
regard to” or “consider” the
prescribed matters in s 194E(1). The appellant submitted that the
findings in its reasons under the heading
“Consideration” were limited, in substance, to only three issues,
being those
concerning (1) Golden Heart; (2) Little Beginners; and (3) what it
described as “Governance Issues”. It was submitted
that, contrary to
the primary judge’s reasoning at J [68] onwards, the Tribunal failed
to have regard to each matter as well
as “the overall balance of
circumstances” which it submitted s 194E(1) required be considered, citing
Jessup J in
at [24] in a different statutory context. It was
submitted that the Tribunal’s approach was also contrary to the way that
parties put their respective cases and that the correct approach had been
taken in the decision of the authorised review officer.
It was submitted that
the correct approach was to make findings about, and then to weigh, each of the
considerations referred to
in s 194E(1).
appellant submitted that the Tribunal’s findings concerning Golden Heart,
Little Beginners and “Governance Issues”
did not refer to s 194E(1)
or even use the words “fit and proper person”. It was submitted that
that phrase only appeared
in the concluding paragraphs of the Tribunal’s
reasons at R [182] and [183]. It was submitted that in the circumstances,
Tribunal’s reasons disclosed the same type of error that was discussed
by the Full Court in
He v Minister
at [76] concerning a different
statutory scheme. The appellant relied on the following observations of Siopis,
Kerr and Rangiah JJ
He v Minister
... If the written statement does not set out a finding concerning any of the
prescribed matters ... it may (but will not necessarily)
lead to an inference
that the Tribunal member made no such finding as part of his or her mental
process when making the decision”
and “[i]n such a case, the
Tribunal will not have complied with its obligation ... to
‘consider’ all of the circumstances.
oral submissions, counsel for the appellant submitted that at the heart of the
second ground of appeal was that if the Court accepted
that the Full
Court’s reasoning in
He v Minister
applied to s 194E(1) of the
Administration Act, then the Tribunal was required to make a finding about each
matter referred to in
s 194E(1). It was submitted that the primary judge
had erred at J [71] in distinguishing the legislation that was the subject
consideration in
He v Minister
, being reg 1.15A of the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth). In oral submissions, counsel for the
appellant also drew attention to the primary judge’s finding at
J [72], submitting
that it showed that in relation to s 194E(1)(f),
the absence of fraud or dishonesty by Ms Abdi in her role as a director of
Beginners was taken into account by the Tribunal.
appellant further submitted that, consistently with the reasoning in
at [35]–[36], the Court should find that the potential error by the
Tribunal which the primary judge identified at J [75] was
material. It was
submitted that her Honour’s reasoning to the contrary, which suggested
that the Tribunal’s finding “would
have been either
or alternatively neutral” involved “improper speculation to attempt
to discern how the Tribunal would have reasoned”
in making an
“evaluative and discretionary decision” having regard to all the
evidence and relevant factors. It was submitted
that this claimed error was
sufficient to uphold the appeal on this ground.
There was no error by primary judge in rejecting the
appellant’s claim that the Tribunal failed to have regard to each of the
matters in s 194E(1)
Full Court’s decision in
He v Minister
is distinguishable from the
present case because the legislation under consideration was materially
He v Minister
concerned the question whether the Migration
Review Tribunal erred in its application of reg 1.15A of the
Regulations
for the purpose of determining whether the appellant was the
spouse of another person.
Regulation 1.15A(2)
provided that “the Minister
must consider all of the circumstances of the relationship, including the
matters set out in subregulation
(3)”. The appellant claimed that the
Tribunal had failed to have regard to or make findings on the circumstances of
the claimed
relationship as required by reg 1.15A(3)(a), (b) and (c), which
relevantly provided –
(3) The matters for subregulation (2) are:
(a) the financial aspects of the relationship, including:
(i) any joint ownership of real estate or other major assets; and
(ii) any joint liabilities; and
(iii) the extent of any pooling of financial resources, especially in relation
to major financial commitments; and
(iv) whether one person in the relationship owes any legal obligation in respect
of the other; and
(v) the basis of any sharing of day to day household expenses; and
(b) the nature of the household, including:
(i) any joint responsibility for the care and support of children; and
(ii) the living arrangements of the persons; and
(iii) any sharing of the responsibility for housework; and
(c) the social aspects of the relationship, including:
(i) whether the persons represent themselves to other people as being married to
each other; and
(ii) the opinion of the persons’ friends and acquaintances about the
nature of the relationship; and
(iii) any basis on which the persons plan and undertake joint social activities;
He v Minister
, the appellant’s submissions were directed
particularly to reg 1.15A(3)(a)(iii), (b)(ii) and (iii), and (c)(ii). It
was submitted
that the Tribunal did not assess the pooling of financial
resources as required by reg 1.15A(3)(a)(iii), did not assess the living
arrangements or the responsibility for housework as required by reg
1.15A(3)(b)(ii) and (iii), and did not assess what may be concluded
from the evidence of others attesting to the relationship that was relevant to
the matters in reg 1.15A(3)(c)(ii). The
Full Court held at [52] and [73]
that the matters in reg 1.15A(3) set out in the subparagraphs bearing Roman
numerals were relevant
considerations which the decision-maker was bound to
consider and that the decision-maker must at least apply an active intellectual
process and give proper, genuine and realistic consideration to each of the
prescribed circumstances. At [54] and [70], the Court
held that what the word
“consider” requires a decision-maker to do must depend upon the
statutory context in which the
word is used. The Full Court held at [76] that on
the proper construction of reg 1.15A(3), the nature of the prescribed
matters was
such that each of them posed, in effect, a question or questions.
The Full Court construed the subregulation as requiring that the
questions be
answered, which required findings, and not merely that they be thought about.
This was so even if the finding was that
no conclusion could be reached upon the
matter: cf,
Pelka v Secretary, Department of Families, Housing, Community
Services and Indigenous Affairs
[2008] FCAFC 92
–[25] (Sundberg, Emmett and Siopis JJ) which the Full Court
distinguished at [66]. The Full Court stated at [78] that its conclusions
function of the way in which reg 1.15A had been drafted. This is an
important point. The Full Court then held upon an examination
Tribunal’s reasons that the matters put in issue by the appellant had been
considered by the Tribunal as required by
the regulations.
do not construe the matters prescribed by s 194E of the Administration Act
as posing questions for the decision-maker to answer,
or which identify matters
to which the decision-maker
necessarily
must give weight. Rather, they
are topics that the decision-maker is required to address. Some topics may
require more in the way
of analysis than others. Within the bounds of legal
reasonableness and the obligation to accord procedural fairness it is for the
decision-maker to determine the focal length of the inquiry and the analysis
that is undertaken in relation to those topics. Some
topics may require no
further consideration if the decision-maker determines that they do not arise.
Each of paragraphs (a), (b),
(c), (d), (e), (f), (i), (k), and (l) of
s 194E(1) commences with the word “any”. The drafting of these
paragraphs has
the result that it is the existence of a particular condition
that engages the subparagraph and which then requires the decision-maker
the relevant matter into account. For example, it is only if there were
relevant proceedings before a court or tribunal,
conviction or finding of guilt,
order that a relevant person pay a
pecuniary penalty, or
act involving fraud or dishonesty that
enlivened the subject-matter of the applicable paragraphs. In the present case,
the Tribunal
summarised the parties’ submissions on each of the prescribed
matters, and as the primary judge held at J [70], the matters
prescribed by
s 194E(1)(b), (d) and (e) were not put in issue because the relevant
condition was not engaged. In relation to s 194E(1)(f),
the primary judge
held at J [72] that the Tribunal expressly addressed that prescribed matter
by its finding at [181]. However, the
Tribunal did not refer to
s 194E(1)(f) in its finding at R [181], and the Tribunal’s
finding at R [181] is also capable of
explanation on the basis that the
record of administering of Commonwealth, State or Territory funds of a relevant
person was a matter
to which s 194E(1)(h) required the Tribunal to have
regard, and to which the Tribunal did have regard at R [164]–[166] of
reasons. In the end, nothing turns on the fact that the Tribunal stated that
there was no evidence that Ms Abdi had been involved
in any fraudulent activity
or mismanagement in her role as a director of Little Beginnings but did not
expressly state, for instance,
that there were no relevant proceedings currently
before a court or tribunal that involved a relevant person, or that there were
no convictions or findings of guilt against a relevant person, or that there had
been no order for a pecuniary penalty against a
relevant person. The
Tribunal’s summaries of the submissions of the parties on these prescribed
matters made clear that the
Tribunal had regard to them, but that they were not
enlivened. As a result, there were no findings on material questions of fact
relating to these matters that fell to be made: see
V324 v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2004] FCAFC 259
(Hill and Allsop JJ), citing
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
Affairs v Yusuf
[2001] HCA 30
; 206 CLR 323.
turn now to the appellant’s submission that the primary judge erred at
J [75] in holding as not material the Tribunal’s
failure to make a
finding in relation to a submission made by the Secretary that a previous
refusal of an application by the appellant
for approval weighed heavily against
approval, which was a matter prescribed by s 194E(1)(c). There was no error
in the primary judge’s
reasoning at J [75] or in her Honour’s
conclusion. I am unable to conceive how, based on the Tribunal’s other
there was any realistic possibility that there could have been
findings on that matter that could have affected the Tribunal’s
in a way that was favourable to the appellant.
for the reasons given by the primary judge at J [69]-[80] the Tribunal did
have regard to the other prescribed matters
in s 194E(1) that were
enlivened, and no claimed error in considering those matters has been
demonstrated.
The third ground of appeal to this Court
the primary judge, the appellant sought to impugn other aspects of the
Tribunal’s reasoning. The appellant relied on
the terms of the
Tribunal’s reasons at R [163], [166], [177] and [180] –
The Tribunal does find that Ms Abdi’s role at Golden Heart should be
considered as a
moderate factor
for refusing Precious FDC’s
approval for CCS as she was an integral staff member at the service during its
period of significant
non-compliance.
Tribunal considers that Ms Abdi’s role as director of Little Beginners
weighs neither for nor against
Precious FDC being granted CCS
Tribunal finds that this documentation exemplifies the lack of clarity and
understanding by Precious FDC of its obligations in
administering the FAL. The
Tribunal found these documents difficult to navigate and interpret. These
policies and procedures were
contradictory, and this was compounded by Ms
Abdi’s contradictory evidence to the Tribunal. The Tribunal could not find
clear concise document to assist staff, educators and parents to comprehend
their requirements under the FAL. The Tribunal finds
this lack of clarity and
understanding
is sufficient enough to warrant the refusal
Precious FDC’s CCS approval, as it is this very lack of guidance to staff,
educators and parents that leads to human error
and fraudulent activity
resulting in overpayments and subsequent debts to the
Commonwealth.
Tribunal finds that Ms Abdi did not demonstrate a sound knowledge and
understanding of the FAL and this
weighs against
granting CCS
approval to Precious FCD.
(Emphasis added.)
appellant claimed that the Tribunal had not weighed the factors identified in
the above paragraphs for the purpose of evaluating
whether the appellant and Ms
Abdi were fit and proper persons to be involved in the administration of CCS and
ACCS for the purpose
of being satisfied that the appellant and its childcare
service satisfied the eligibility rules referred to in ss 194C and 194D.
Instead, the appellant claimed, the Tribunal made the above findings only by
reference to whether the appellant’s application
for approval should be
The primary judge rejected the appellant’s claim of
error under ground three and held that the Tribunal had correctly understood
statutory task
primary judge at J [84] accepted that the Tribunal’s language in the
impugned passages of its reasons was imprecise, but
held that overall, it was
clear that the Tribunal understood its task, which was to determine whether the
appellant and Ms Abdi were
fit and proper persons. Her Honour emphasised that
the Tribunal’s reasoning should not be construed minutely and finely with
an eye keenly attuned to the perception of error, citing
Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
[1996] HCA 6
185 CLR 259
Wu Shan Liang
at 272 (Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh and
Gummow JJ).
primary judge noted that at R [16]–[25] of its reasons the Tribunal
outlined the legislative context, and at R [26] of its
reasons identified
the issue as being whether the appellant met the approval requirements in
accordance with s 194B(1) of the Administration
Act. The primary judge then
at J [85]–[86] gave the following reasons for concluding that the
Tribunal had understood its statutory
As identified above, s 194B(1) provides that the “
Secretary may approve
a provider for the purposes of the family assistance law if the Secretary is
” that the applicant satisfied certain criteria. Those
criteria included that the applicant satisfied the eligibility rules
which in turn required the applicant and any person with management or control
of the applicant to be fit and proper persons
to be involved in the
administration of CCS and ACCS. After considering the evidence and making
relevant findings, the Tribunal’s
decision has the heading “
and Proper Person
”. Under that heading, the Tribunal summarised its
findings and the weight to be given to pertinent factors: at [181]–[182].
The Tribunal then under the heading “
” concluded
having determined that Ms Abdi and [the applicant] are not fit
and proper persons to be involved in the administration of CCS and
ACCS, affirms
the decision under review
”: at [183]. Accordingly, it is apparent on a
fair reading of the Tribunal’s reasons as a whole that the Tribunal
its statutory task.
in the present case and as the Secretary submits, the question of whether the
applicant should be granted approval turned on whether
Ms Abdi and the applicant
were fit and proper persons. In a practical sense, if the applicant does not
satisfy the eligibility criteria
in s 194D, one of which being that the
applicant and Ms Abdi be fit and proper persons, then the decision-maker
“must refuse
to approve” the application to be an approved child
care service provider (emphasis added): see ss 194B(1), (6), 194C of the
Administration Act. It follows that if the Tribunal was not satisfied that the
applicant was a fit and proper person, that finding
would, by virtue of the Act,
be determinative of whether the provider approval could be granted. Against that
background, the Tribunal’s
reference to whether certain factors weighed
for or against the granting of “approval” should be understood as a
recognition
of the fact that whether a factor weighed for or against a finding
of fitness and propriety in practice also ultimately functioned
as a factor for
or against granting the final approval, being the issue ultimately in
at J [87], the primary judge addressed an alternative submission by the
Secretary that any error by the Tribunal in the way
alleged under ground three
was not material to the Tribunal’s decision and rejected that
submission.
The appellant’s challenge to the primary judge’s
conclusion that the Tribunal did not misunderstand its statutory
its notice of appeal, the appellant expressed its third ground as
primary judge erred in failing to hold that the Tribunal made an error of law in
that it failed to perform and/or misunderstood
its statutory task, in
made findings only about whether there were factors “for [or] against
Precious FDC being granted CCS approval” (TD
[166]; see also TD [163],
[166], [177], [180]) rather than having regard to each of the
“matters” it was required to
under s 194E(1) of the Administration
Act for the purposes of determining whether it was satisfied as to the criteria
in s 194C(b)
the circumstances, the Tribunal failed to consider probative material which was
seriously advanced as being relevant to the specific
matters in s 194E(1) and
the applicable criteria in s 194C of the Administration Act.
appellant submitted that the primary judge was in error in rejecting its claims
that the Tribunal took an incorrect approach to
its decision. The appellant
submitted that the Tribunal’s approach disclosed error because its task
was not to find for or
against granting to the appellant “CCS
approval” (see the impugned passages of the Tribunal’s reasons set
] above). Rather, it was
submitted, the central issue was whether the Tribunal was satisfied that the
appellant met the provider eligibility
rules in s 194C(b) to (d) which directed
attention to the fit and proper person considerations in s 194E(1) that were to
in forming the required state of satisfaction. It was submitted that
the consideration of the circumstances prescribed by s 194E(1)
s 194C(b) to (d) and s 194B of the Administration
Act, citing
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Khadgi
[2010] FCAFC 145
) at [57] (Stone, Foster and Nicholas JJ), but
noting that it concerned a different statute. The appellant drew attention to
the observations
by the Court in
at [57] that “[i]n order to
comply with that prerequisite, the decision-maker must engage in what has been
described as ‘an
active intellectual process’ in which each of the
prescribed circumstances receives his or her ‘genuine’
consideration”.
The Court in
then stated at [58] that it is
generally for the decision-maker to determine the appropriate weight to be given
to the prescribed
circumstances, citing
Peko-Wallsend
at 41 (Mason
appellant submitted that by only identifying factors for or against being
granted “CCS approval”, rather than weighing
the prescribed matters
in s 194E(1) for the purposes of being satisfied pursuant to s 194C(b) to (d)
and s 194B, the Tribunal impermissibly
conflated the statutory requirements by
only purporting to weigh an ultimate outcome. It was submitted that contrary to
the premise
of the primary judge’s conclusions at J [85]–[86], the
consideration of prescribed circumstances in s 194E(1) and the
ultimate state of
satisfaction required by s 194B(1) and s 194C are conceptually different
parts of the decision-making process,
and a finding about one is not
determinative of the other. To illustrate this submission, the appellant relied
upon the 2022 amendments
that were made to s 194C of the Administration
Act, whereby the new paragraph (da) was inserted by which provider arrangements,
were formerly part of the fit and proper person considerations in
s 194E(1)(g) (now repealed), are a separate matter about which
decision-maker must be satisfied. The appellant submitted that where Parliament
intends that a matter is to be determinative,
it makes provision
accordingly.
The primary judge was correct to reject ground
Plaintiff M1/2021 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 17
275 CLR 582
, Kiefel CJ, Keane, Gordon and Steward JJ affirmed the principle
that the Court is not “astute to discern error”. More
recently, in
Plaintiff S22/2025 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] HCA 36
, Gageler CJ, Edelman and Jagot J affirmed
that reasons for decision of an administrative decision-maker “are not to
be construed
minutely and finely with an eye keenly attuned to the perception of
error”, citing
Wu Shang Liang
at 272. These principles are
long-standing and have been expressed in different ways. In
Collector of
Customs v Pozzolanic Enterprises Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 456
Neaves, French and Cooper JJ stated that “[t]he Court will not be
concerned with looseness in the language of the Tribunal
nor with unhappy
phrasing of the Tribunal's thoughts”. And in
McAuliffe v Department of
Social Security
[1992] FCA 731
, in a passage cited with approval
Wu Shan Liang
at 272, Spender, Foster and O’Loughlin JJ
stated at 616 that “[t]he reasons of an administrative body are meant to
and not to be reviewed by an eye seeking to discern whether some
inadequacy may be gleaned from the way in which the reasons are
expressed”.
do not consider that the infelicities of expression in R [163], [166],
[177], and [180] of the Tribunal’s reasons sustain
the appellant’s
submission that the Tribunal departed from its statutory task to have regard to
the matters in s 194E(1) in
forming a view as to whether the appellant and
Ms Abdi were fit and proper persons. Like the primary judge, I consider
that the structure
of the Tribunal’s reasons, and an appraisal of the
reasons as a whole show otherwise. In particular –
(a) the Tribunal at [26] formed the issue in the following terms –
The Tribunal must consider whether Precious FDC meets the requirements for
approval for CCS and ACCS in accordance with section 194B(1)
Administration Act.
(b) as I have mentioned already, at [71] of its reasons the Tribunal summarised
the submissions made to it by the appellant expressly
by reference to each of
the considerations prescribed by s 194E(1), and did so under the heading
Fit and Proper Person
(c) at [119] to [142] of its reasons, under a further heading “
Proper Person
”, the Tribunal referred the submissions put to it by the
Secretary, stating at [119]–[120] –
Respondent submitted that section 194C of the Administration Act sets out the
provider eligibility rules and Precious FDC must
meet all of the requirements in
paragraphs 194C(a)-(f) to satisfy the provider eligibility rules. The Respondent
contended that Ms
Abdi and Precious FDC do not satisfy paragraphs 194C(b) and
194C(c) of the Administration Act because they are not fit and proper
be involved in the administration of CCS and ACCS.
Respondent submitted that in order to determine whether a person is a fit and
proper person for the purposes of sections 194C(b)
and 194C(c), the Tribunal
must have regard to the matters set out in section 194E of the Administration
Act. The Respondent submitted
the following in relation to each of the matters
in section 194E:
(d) the Tribunal then summarised the Secretary’s submissions by reference
to each of the considerations prescribed by s 194E(1);
(e) against the above background, when the Tribunal made the various findings at
[163], [166], [177] and [180], they should be understood
as findings going to
the considerations referred to in s 194E(1), which the Tribunal well
understood went to the fit and proper person
requirement; and
(f) that this was the Tribunal’s understanding is confirmed by its
concluding analysis at [181] to [183] of its reasons, which
I have set out at
] above, which is couched around
conclusions that the appellant and Ms Abdi were not fit and proper persons to be
involved in the
administration of CCS and ACCS.
the appellant has not established the error the subject of ground three, it is
not necessary to consider the Secretary’s
notice of contention that
challenges the primary judge’s finding that the error would not have been
the foregoing reasons the appeal should be dismissed. There is no reason why
costs should not follow the event.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
twenty-eight (128) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Judgment of
the Honourable Justice
Dated: 24 October 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
have been fortunate to read a draft of the reasons for judgment of
Meagher J. Respectfully, I agree with the orders that her Honour
and, subject to one observation, with the reasons for which she proposes them.
In the short reasons that follow, I shall
endeavour to use the same defined
terms as her Honour uses.
the time of the Internal Review Decision and the Tribunal’s decision, the
Administration Act was amended. Before the
primary judge, the parties were
apparently content to proceed on the footing that those amendments were of no
moment. Hence, her
Honour noted (PJ, [13]-[14]):
...after the authorised review officer’s decision and before the
Tribunal’s decision, s 194E(1)(g) was repealed. However,
Frugtniet v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
(2019) 266 CLR 250
”], Kiefel CJ,
Keane and Nettle JJ held at [14] that the question for the Tribunal on
merits review is whether the decision
under review is the correct or preferable
decision and in so deciding the Tribunal “is subject to the same general
constraints
as the original decision-maker and should ordinarily approach its
task as though it were performing the relevant function of the
decision-maker in accordance with the law as it applied to the decision-maker at
the time of the original decision”
(emphasis added).
Thus the parties proceeded on the basis that s 194E(1)(g) was relevant to
the proceeding. In those circumstances, I have decided
the application by
reference to the earlier version of the Administration Act.
Honour’s approach mirrored that of the Tribunal itself, which conducted
its review of the Internal Review Decision by reference
to the statutory
provisions that applied when it was made (that is,
to the passage
of the Amendment Act).
some doubt has been cast on the correctness of that approach. In
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
[2025] HCA 33
(2025) 99 ALJR 1341 (Gageler
CJ, Gordon, Edelman, Steward,
Gleeson, Jagot and Beech-Jones JJ) (“
the High Court had occasion to consider the passage within
which the primary judge referred (above, [
])—and, in particular, its
application to s 43(1) of the AAT Act—describing it (at 1346 [20])
unambiguously as “incorrect”.
Instead, the court was clear to
explain (at 1345 [15]) that, generally speaking, the Tribunal’s task is
“...to apply
the laws governing the exercise of powers and discretions in
force at the time of the Tribunal's decision.” That general proposition
was later (at 1346 [21]) qualified as follows:
The principle that the Tribunal was to apply the laws governing the exercise of
powers and discretions in force at the time of the
Tribunal's decision may be
displaced by a provision of an enactment excluding or modifying s 43(1) of
the AAT Act, as contemplated
by s 25(6) of that Act. If not displaced, the
principle requires the Tribunal to apply all relevant laws in force at the time
the Tribunal's decision including any relevant saving or transitional
amending legislation often does, the Amendment Act comprised of a series of
schedules, within which various provision was made
for the amendment of various
enactments. Section 3 of the Amendment Act provided such that legislation
referred to in a schedule
was, thereby, amended or repealed in the way or ways
that the items within it set out; and, otherwise, that the items within those
schedules had effect according to their terms.
to the Amendment Act was entitled, “Dealing with serious
non-compliance”. It comprised of multiple parts,
the first of which (Part
1) was entitled, “Arrangements to comply with family assistance
law”. That part set out the
amendments to the Administration Act that are
the subject of exploration at [
below of the reasons of Meagher J.
4 of pt 1 of sch 4 to the Amendment Act relevantly provided as
Application of amendments
Application for approval of a provider
(1) The amendments of the
A New Tax System (Family Assistance)
(Administration) Act 1999
made by this Part apply in relation to an
application for approval of a provider under Division 1 of
that Act if the application:
(a) is made on or after the commencement of this item; or
(b) was made before the commencement of this item but had not been determined
before that commencement.
the High Court pronounced its judgment in
, the parties in the
present matter were invited to (and later did) make submissions about the extent
to which the judgment there
might bear upon the determination of this appeal.
The appellant submitted that, in light of that judgment, the Tribunal must be
understood to have “...asked itself the wrong question in addressing
s 194E(1)(g) which had been repealed and by not addressing
the criterion in
s 194C(da)”. It submitted that “[t]he operation of
s 43(1) of the AAT Act...was not ‘displaced
by a provision of an
enactment excluding or modifying’ that provision”.
respondent submitted that, for the purposes of item 4(1), the
Delegate’s Decision was apt to “determine” the
appellant’s application for approval to administer the CCS. That
decision, the submission continued, was “...in no sense
incomplete or
provisional” despite its liability to review (including by the Tribunal).
That being so, the respondent maintained,
“...the Amendment Act did not
apply to the Application...not because of some general principle of law...but
rather because
[item 4(1)] operated to displace the general principle identified
”. The respondent further submitted that the Amendment
Act, at least for present purposes, was of little practical significance
event, as it introduced into the Administration Act s 194C(da), which
served a purpose materially similar to that which had
previously been served by
s 194E(1)(g).
of both parties’ submissions are correct.
makes clear that
the point of principle thought to have emerged from
upon which the Tribunal, the parties and the primary judge either expressly or
by inference relied—is not good law.
Respectfully, the respondent’s
submission that item 4(1) operated to displace the general principle identified
(that the Tribunal’s task was “...to apply the laws
governing the exercise of powers and discretions in force at the
time of the
Tribunal's decision”) should not be accepted. It is the case that, prior
to the enactment of the Amendment Act,
the application that was the subject of
the Delegate’s Decision had “been determined”; however,
neither item 4(1)
nor any other provision of the Amendment Act served, for the
purposes of the Tribunal’s review task, to exclude from operation
amendments thereby introduced. The Tribunal was not tasked with deciding an
application for approval under the Administration
Act; rather, it was tasked
with deciding a review application made to it under pt 5 of the
Administration Act and pt IV of the AAT
Act. Its powers in that regard
were conferred by s 43(1) of the AAT Act, which provided as
Tribunal’s decision on review
(1) For the purpose of reviewing a decision, the Tribunal may exercise all the
powers and discretions that are conferred by any relevant
enactment on the
person who made the decision and shall make a decision in writing-
(a) affirming the decision under review;
(b) varying the decision under review; or
(c) setting aside the decision under review and-
(i) making a decision in substitution for the decision so set aside; or
(ii) remitting the matter for reconsideration in accordance with any directions
or recommendations of the Tribunal.
understood, the ruling that emerges from
applies: the powers that
s 43(1) of the AAT Act conferred upon the Tribunal were not those that
applied in respect (or at the time)
of the Internal Review Decision (or the
original decision from which it arose); but, rather, were those that the
Administration Act
conferred at the time that the review came before the
the time that it reviewed the Internal Review Decision, the Tribunal was obliged
to approach its task on the basis that the Administration
Act applied in its
amended form. Had it been necessary to do so, it would have been difficult to
see how any failure in that regard
might not have amounted to an error of
developments notwithstanding, the appellant does not now seek to amend its
notice of appeal so as to challenge the primary judgment
on the basis of any
such error. Respectfully, that is sensible. Even accepting that it
misunderstood which version of the Administration
Act it was to apply, I am not
persuaded that the Tribunal failed to consider anything that the correct version
obliged it to consider.
More to the point, if there was an error of law at all
inherent in that misunderstanding, it was not one that was material to the
outcome to a point that might warrant interference by this court. Either way,
the primary judge’s refusal to set the Tribunal’s
decision aside
should not be impugned as a product of error worthy of correction on
the Administration Act in its pre-amendment form, s 194E(1)(g) directed
attention to whether an approval applicant and its managers
were, in each case,
a “fit and proper person to be involved in the administration of CCS and
ACCS”; and one of the considerations
guiding that assessment concerned the
arrangements that they had in place to ensure that they and those whom they
managed complied
with the family assistance law. In its (relevantly) amended
form, the Act elevated to a condition of satisfaction of the “provider
eligibility rules” that an applicant had arrangements in place to ensure
materially identical instances of statutory compliance.
Explanatory Memorandum to the Amendment Act notes (at [137]-[139]):
Part 1—Arrangements to comply with family assistance law
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
must already have appropriate arrangements in place to ensure that they, and any
persons with management or control of the
provider, and employees or contractors
of the service, comply with the family assistance law...This requirement was
previously part
of the fit and proper person test in section 194E of the Family
Assistance Administration Act.
amendment will promote the importance of having appropriate arrangements in
place to ensure compliance with the family assistance
law, by making this
requirement a specific provider and service eligibility rule, rather than simply
a consideration in the fit and
proper person test.
intent of this amendment is not to change the substance of the provider’s
obligation. Instead, it is to ensure that obligation
is given an appropriately
important status and sufficient weight in administrative decisions, including
consideration of applications
for provider approval (under section 195B) and
whether to cancel a provider approval (under section 195H).
3 repeals paragraph 194E(1)(g). This paragraph was the obligation to have
arrangements in place to ensure compliance with the
family assistance law.
obligation has been moved into sections 194C and 194D. This is because it is an
indispensable requirement for providers that
must be met. Implementing this
obligation through the fit and proper person test was less effective, as there
are many fit and proper
person considerations that must be weighed against each
other to determine compliance. Providers must have appropriate arrangements
place to ensure the family assistance law is complied with, regardless of
whether they meet the other fit and proper person criteria
is set out in the judgment of Meagher J, the Tribunal in this matter found
that the appellant’s governance documents contained
significant
deficiencies, which it considered to be of “vital significance” to a
finding about whether relevant persons
had the requisite qualities of fitness
and propriety; and that that was sufficient to warrant refusal of the
application for approval
(with the result that it affirmed the Internal Review
is nothing arising from the fact that the Tribunal here discharged its task on
the mistaken basis that the Administration Act
applied in its pre-amended form
that could suggest that there was any prospect that it might have reached a
different conclusion
had that error not occurred. The Tribunal directed itself
to considerations that were materially identical to those that it was
consider. The suggestion that the Tribunal might have been led to a different
conclusion on the applicant’s suitability
for approval had it correctly
understood the altered statutory architecture to which the Amendment Act gave
effect is wholly unrealistic.
Even assuming that an error of law occurred,
there is (and was) no warrant for the court to interfere with the decision that
appeal should be dismissed with costs.
I certify that the preceding eighteen (18) numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 24 October 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
is an appeal from a decision of this Court dismissing an appeal under
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
decision of the Administrative Appeals
Precious Family Day
Care Pty Ltd v Secretary, Department of Education
[2024] FCA 20
The Tribunal affirmed a decision of the authorised review officer of the
respondent, the Secretary of the Department of Education
internal review decision
), which affirmed the decision of a delegate of
the Secretary to refuse to grant the appellant approval to administer the family
law pursuant to
A New Tax System (Family
Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
Administration Act
delegate decision
Precious Family Day Care and Secretary,
Department of Education
[2023] AATA 99
notice of appeal raises three grounds as follows:
primary judge erred in failing to hold that the Tribunal made an error of law in
that it denied the Appellant procedural fairness
and/or constructively failed to
exercise jurisdiction by making an adverse finding (at TD [163]) that the sole
director of the Appellant,
Ms Muna Abdi’s, “role at Golden Heart
should be considered as a moderate factor for refusing Precious FDC’s
for CCS as she was an
integral staff member
service during its period of significant non-compliance” (emphasis added),
in circumstances where:
notion that Ms Abdi was “an integral staff member” of Golden Heart,
and that this could be an adverse factor in its
own right, was:
raised in the Respondent’s oral submissions, statement of facts, issues
and contentions, or evidence;
raised as an issue in the original delegate’s decision or the internal
review decision; and
part of the statutory criteria (under s 194E of the Administration Act) being
considered by the Tribunal, which relevantly concerned
whether Ms Abdi was a
“person with management or control” of Golden Heart and, therefore,
whether Golden Heart was a
“relevant person”.
of the witnesses for the Appellant were cross-examined or asked questions about
whether Ms Abdi was an “integral staff
member” of Golden Heart.
Respondent’s essential contention was that Ms Abdi was an
“authorised person” under its policy and therefore
with management or control” of Golden Heart for the purposes of the
Administration Act (on the basis that Golden
Heart was a “relevant
person” as defined in s 194E(2) and for the purposes of s 194E(1) of the
Administration Act).
was not open to the Tribunal, having rejected (at TD [162]) the proposition that
“Ms Abdi was an authorised person at Golden
Heart” and then holding
that “the Tribunal cannot make a finding that she was a person with
management or control of
the service”, to then make the adverse finding at
TD [163] without giving the Appellant a chance to be heard on the issue.
primary judge erred in concluding, at J [50], that “even if the applicant
had been afforded procedural fairness ... there
was no realistic possibility
have led to a different outcome. As such, any such
error would not be jurisdictional.” (Emphasis added.) The correct test
(i) whether there was an error of law warranting relief under s 44 of the
AAT Act; (ii) whether the denial of procedural fairness
” have resulted in a different outcome. In this case,
the denial of procedural fairness on a material adverse issue could
realistically
have resulted in a different outcome.
primary judge erred in failing to hold that the Tribunal made an error of law in
that it failed to have regard to and make findings
” prescribed by s 194E(1) of the Administration Act
in determining whether the Appellant (and any person with management or
of the Appellant) was a fit and proper person, including by:
to have regard to, for the purposes of s 194E(1)(c) of the Administration Act,
made under a law of the Commonwealth or a State or
Territory relating to child care which adversely affects a
” (emphasis added) – which, contrary to J [75], was an
error that was material to the outcome of the Tribunal’s
review (for the
reasons outlined in paragraph 1(e) above as to the correct test for materiality
in the context of an appeal under
s 44 of the AAT Act);
to have regard to, for the purposes of s 194E(1)(a) of the Administration Act,
“any non-compliance by a
relevant person
with a law of the
Commonwealth or a State or Territory” (emphasis added);
to have regard to, for the purposes of s 194E(1)(h) of the Administration Act,
“the record of administering of Commonwealth,
State or Territory funds of
relevant person
” (emphasis added);
in light of the Tribunal’s finding (at TD [162]) that Ms Abdi was
a “person with management or control” of Golden Heart
(which had the consequence that Golden Heart was not a “relevant
person”) and its finding (at TD [38]) that Ms Abdi is “person with
management or control” of Little Beginners.
primary judge erred in failing to hold that the Tribunal made an error of law in
that it failed to perform and/or misunderstood
its statutory task, in
made findings only about whether there were factors “for [or] against
Precious FDC being granted CCS approval” (TD
[166]; see also TD [163],
[166], [177], [180]) rather than having regard to each of the
” it was required to under s 194E(1) of the
Administration Act for the purposes of determining whether it was satisfied as
the criteria in s 194C(b) and (c).
the circumstances, the Tribunal failed to consider probative material which was
seriously advanced as being relevant to the specific
matters in s 194E(1) and
the applicable criteria in s 194C of the Administration
(Emphasis in original.)
Secretary filed a notice of contention by which he seeks to have the primary
Judge’s decision upheld on grounds other than
those relied on by the
primary Judge. By its first ground, the notice contends that the primary Judge
erred in failing to hold that,
had the Tribunal made the error the subject of
ground three of the notice of appeal, such an error would not be material. By
two, the Secretary relatedly contends that even if the Tribunal had made
the error the subject of ground three of the notice of appeal,
the Court would
not exercise its discretion to grant relief under s 44 of the AAT Act.
respect to the appellant’s contention that the primary Judge’s
finding at [50] demonstrated the misapplication of
the relevant test of
materiality, being whether the decision “
‘realistically’ have been different” absent the error, this
submission was abandoned at the hearing: see
LPDT v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
Nathanson v Minister for Home
[2022] HCA 26
) at [32], [46]
and [63]. The parties agreed it was no more than infelicitous use of language.
stated above, the appeal is brought pursuant to s 44 of the AAT
Act, as then in force. While the AAT Act is now repealed, the Court
equivalent powers in relation to the appeal to those it had under s 44:
Administrative Review Tribunal (Consequential and Transitional Provisions No
(Cth), Sch 17 item 1 and Sch 16 item 25.
the reasons that follow, the appeal shall be dismissed.
STATUTORY FRAMEWORK
44 of the AAT Act reads, in part:
44 Appeals to Federal Court of Australia from decisions of the Tribunal
Appeal on question of law
(1) A party to a proceeding before the Tribunal may appeal to the Federal Court
of Australia, on a question of law, from any decision
of the Tribunal in that
proceeding.
Note 1: This Part does not apply to certain migration proceedings (see section
Note 2: A party to a child support first review may in some instances appeal
instead to the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 2) (see
section 44AAA).
Powers of Federal Court
(4) The Federal Court of Australia shall hear and determine the appeal and may
make such order as it thinks appropriate by reason
of its decision.
to s 194A(1) of the Administration Act, an individual, a body corporate, a
partnership or an entity or body prescribed by
the Minister’s rules
“may apply to be approved for the purposes of the family assistance law in
respect of one or more
child care services that the provider operates or
proposes to operate”. Section 194B describes the conditions for provider
approval, including:
(1) The Secretary may approve a provider for the purposes of the family
assistance law if the Secretary is satisfied that:
(a) the provider satisfies the provider eligibility rules in section 194C;
(b) the provider operates, or will operate, at least one child care service that
satisfies the service eligibility rules in section
194C of the Administration Act provides that, inter alia, a provider satisfies
the provider eligibility rules if “the
provider is a fit and proper person
to be involved in the administration of CCS and ACCS”: Administration Act,
194D prescribes a number of service eligibility rules that must be satisfied by
the child care service as follows:
194D Service eligibility rules
A child care service satisfies the service eligibility rules if:
(a) the service is of a type referred to in subclause 2(3) of Schedule 2 to the
Family Assistance Act but is not any of the following:
(i) informal care provided through personal arrangements;
(ii) a service primarily conducted to provide instruction in an activity (such
as sport or music);
(iii) a service primarily conducted to provide a disability or early
intervention service;
(iv) a service where a parent primarily provides care or is readily available
and retains responsibility for the child while the
service is provided (such as
a play group);
(v) a service primarily providing short‑term irregular care at premises
where the parent is a visitor or guest and the parent
is readily available (such
as a service provided by a gym);
(vi) a service that primarily provides an early educational program to children
in the year that is 2 years before grade 1 of school
(such as a preschool or
kindergarten); and
(b) the provider of the service holds any approvals or licences required to
operate the service under the law of the State or Territory
in which the service
is situated; and
(c) each person who is responsible for the day‑to‑day operation of
the service (whether or not the person is employed
by the provider of the
service) is a fit and proper person to be involved in the administration of CCS
and ACCS; and
(d) each person who will be responsible for the day‑to‑day operation
of the service (whether or not the person is employed
by the provider of the
service) on the day that the provider’s approval in respect of the service
takes effect is a fit and
proper person to be involved in the administration of
CCS and ACCS; and
(da) the provider of the service has arrangements in place to ensure that the
following persons comply with the family assistance
(i) the persons mentioned in paragraphs (c) and (d);
(ii) each person that a person mentioned in subparagraph (i) is responsible for
managing; and
(e) in the case where the service is covered by allocation rules—if the
provider of the service were to be approved, child
care places would be
allocated to the service under section 198B; and
(f) the Secretary is satisfied that it is appropriate for the provider to be
approved in respect of the service having regard to
the following:
(i) if the provider is already an approved provider—any conditions imposed
on the provider’s approval;
(ii) any non‑compliance by the provider with a law of the Commonwealth or
a State or Territory;
(iii) the provider’s record of administering payments under the family
assistance law;
(iv) the provider’s record of administering of Commonwealth, State or
Territory funds;
(v) the capacity for staff working at the service to use the electronic system
for managing child care payments under the family
assistance law;
(vi) any other matter prescribed by the Minister’s rules;
(vii) any other matter the Secretary considers relevant; and
(g) the service satisfies any other criteria prescribed by the Minister’s
matters to which the Secretary must have regard in determining whether a person
is a fit and proper person are set out in s 194E
of the Administration Act.
However as will be explained in the judgment at [15]–[16] it differs from
the legislation in force
at the time of the internal review decision.
194E Fit and proper person considerations
(1) The Secretary must have regard to the following matters in determining
whether a person is a fit and proper person for the purpose
of paragraph
194C(b), (c) or (d) or 194D(c) or (d):
(a) any non‑compliance by a relevant person with a law of the Commonwealth
or a State or Territory;
(b) any proceedings currently before a court or tribunal that involve a relevant
(c) any decision made under a law of the Commonwealth or a State or Territory
relating to child care which adversely affects a relevant
(d) subject to Part VIIC of the
Crimes Act 1914
, any conviction, or
finding of guilt, against a relevant person for an offence against a law of the
Commonwealth or a State or Territory,
including (without limitation) an offence
against children, or relating to dishonesty or violence;
(e) any order for a relevant person to pay a pecuniary penalty for the
contravention of a civil penalty provision of a law of the
Commonwealth or a
State or Territory;
(f) any act of a relevant person involving fraud or dishonesty;
(h) the record of administering of Commonwealth, State or Territory funds of a
relevant person;
(i) any debts to the Commonwealth incurred by a relevant person (whether or not
the debt has been discharged);
(j) the record of financial management of a relevant person, including any
instances of bankruptcy, insolvency or external administration
involving the
(k) any other matter prescribed by the Minister’s rules;
(l) any other matter the Secretary considers relevant.
(2) For the purposes subsection (1), a
relevant person
(a) the person; and
(b) another person or body in respect of which the person is or has ever been a
person with management or control.
Note: See section 194F for the definition of
person with management or
194F provides the definition of “person with management or control”,
as follows:
194F Meaning of
person with management or control
(1) A person is a
person with management or control
of a body, if
the person is any of the following:
(a) a member of the group of persons responsible for the executive decisions of
(b) a person who has authority or responsibility for, or significant influence
over, planning, directing or controlling the activities
of the body;
(c) a person who is responsible for the day-to-day operation of the body
(whether or not the person is employed by the body);
(d) a person who is responsible for the day-to-day operation of a child care
service in respect of which the body is approved or
is seeking to be approved
(whether or not the person is employed by the body).
(2) Without limiting paragraph (1)(a), the following persons are taken to be
members of the group referred to in that paragraph:
(a) if the body is a body corporate—an officer of the body corporate
(within the meaning of the
Corporations Act 2001
(b) if the body is a partnership—a partner;
(c) in any other case—a member of the body’s governing body.
phrase “authorised person” was used in the internal review decision
and by the Tribunal. The Tribunal also used the
term “integral staff
member”. Neither are statutory terms. The statutory question is whether a
person is a “person
with management or control”, as defined in s
194F(1) of the Administration Act, and set out above.
the internal review decision was made, s 194E(1) also included an additional
mandatory consideration as follows:
194E Fit and proper person considerations
(1) The Secretary must have regard to the following matters in determining
whether a person is a fit and proper person for the purpose
of paragraph
194C(b), (c) or (d) or 194D(c) or (d):
(g) the arrangements the person has:
(i) to ensure the person
complies with the family assistance law; and
(ii) to ensure anyone the person is responsible for managing complies with the
family assistance law; ...
the time of the making of the Tribunal’s decision that section had been
amended by the
Family Assistance Legislation Amendment (Cheaper Child Care)
Amendment Act
Explanatory Memorandum
the legislation relevantly states:
Item 3: Paragraph 194E(1)(g)
149. Item 3 repeals paragraph 194E(1)(g). This paragraph was the obligation to
have arrangements in place to ensure compliance with
the family assistance
150. This obligation has been moved into sections 194C and 194D. This is because
it is an indispensable requirement for providers
that must be met. Implementing
this obligation through the fit and proper person test was less effective, as
there are many fit and
proper person considerations that must be weighed against
each other to determine compliance. Providers must have appropriate arrangements
in place to ensure the family assistance law is complied with, regardless of
whether they meet the other fit and proper person criteria
the primary Judge, the applicable law on merits review before the Tribunal was
thought to be that which “applied to the
decision-maker at the time of the
original decision”:
Frugtniet v Australian Securities and Investments
[2019] HCA 16
266 CLR 250
) at [14] (per
Kiefel CJ, Keane and Nettle JJ).
on 3 September 2025, the High Court delivered
Khalil v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
). The High Court specifically
and determined, at [20]:
Frugtniet v Australian Securities and Investments Commission
authority contrary to the proposition stated by Brennan J in
case did not involve a repeal or amendment of the law applied by the original
decision-maker, but rather the different question
of whether the
Tribunal’s powers extended to considering spent convictions that the
original decision-maker was prohibited
from considering. The
statement by three of the Justices in
the Tribunal
“should ordinarily approach its task as though it were performing the
relevant function of the original decision-maker
in accordance with the law as
it applied to the decision-maker at the time of the original
”, is not replicated in the judgment of the other four
is incorrect
(Emphasis added and footnotes omitted.)
[21], the High Court stated:
The principle that the Tribunal was to apply the laws governing the exercise of
powers and discretions in force at the time of the
Tribunal’s decision may
be displaced by a provision of an enactment excluding or modifying s 43(1) of
the AAT Act, as contemplated
by s 25(6) of that Act. If not displaced,
principle requires the Tribunal to apply all relevant laws in force at the time
of the Tribunal’s decision including any
relevant saving or transitional
(Emphasis added.)
Consequently,
at [20]–[21] has a direct bearing upon the present
proceedings. Unless the relevant enactment purports to modify or exclude
of the AAT Act, as envisioned by s 25(6), then the Tribunal is obliged to
consider the law at the time that it makes its
decision. It is not bound to
consider the law at the time that the original decision-maker made their
amendments to the Administration Act contained within Sch 4 to the Amendment Act
are relevant. They are as follows:
1 After paragraph 194C(d)
(da) the provider has
arrangements in place to ensure that the provider and the following persons
comply with the family assistance
(i) the persons
mentioned in paragraphs (c) and (d);
(ii) each person that the provider, or a person mentioned in subparagraph (i),
is responsible for managing;
2 After paragraph 194D(d)
(da) the provider of the service
has arrangements in place to ensure that the following persons comply with the
family assistance
(i) the persons
mentioned in paragraphs (c) and (d);
(ii) each person that a person mentioned in subparagraph (i) is responsible for
managing; and
3 Paragraph 194E(1)(g)
Repeal the paragraph.
parties were invited to make written submissions with respect to the following
(a) the decision in
Khalil v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant
Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] HCA 33
(b) the proper construction of the transitional provisions in clause 4 of Part 1
of Schedule 4 of the
Family Assistance Legislation Amendment (Cheaper Child
Care) Act 2022
(c) any consequences for the appeal,
the additional matters
(Emphasis in original.)
12 September 2025, the appellant filed further submissions (
appellant’s
further submissions
19 September 2025, the Secretary filed further submissions (
Secretary’s
further submissions
29 September 2025, the appellant filed further submissions in reply
appellant’s further reply submissions
appellant accepts that the result of the High Court’s decision in
was that the relevant amendments made to the Administration Act by
way of Part 1 of Sch 4 to the Amendment Act “applied at the
time of the
Tribunal’s decision on 8 February 2023”. It contends that,
The Tribunal
asked the incorrect question with respect to s 194E(1)(g) of the Administration
Act which was repealed;
The Tribunal
should have addressed the criterion in s 194C(da) of the Administrative Act
instead; and
The remaining
grounds of appeal remained unaffected in light of
Secretary takes a different approach. He submits that the application of the
amendments in the Amendment Act is informed by the
transitional provisions,
being cl 4 of Sch 4 to the Amendment Act. Clause 4 reads:
4 Application of amendments
Application for approval of a provider
(1) The amendments of the
A New Tax System (Family Assistance)
(Administration) Act 1999
made by this Part apply in relation to an
application for approval of a provider under Division 1 of
of that Act if
the application:
(a) is made on or after the commencement of this item; or
(b) was made before the commencement of this item but had not been determined
before that commencement.
Application for variation of a provider’s approval to add a service
(2) The amendments of the
A New Tax System (Family Assistance)
(Administration) Act1999
made by this Part apply in relation to an
application by an approved provider under subsection 196A(1) of that Act for a
of the provider’s approval to add a child care service to the
approval if the application:
(a) is made on or after the commencement of this item; or
(b) was made before the commencement of this item but had not been determined
before that commencement.
Continued satisfaction of eligibility rules
(3) For the purposes of applying
subsection 195A(1)
A New Tax System
(Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
on or after the commencement
of this item in relation to an approved provider that was approved under
Division 1 of
of that Act before that commencement, or an approved child
care service of the approved provider in respect of which the provider
approved under that Division before that commencement:
(a) the reference in paragraph 195A(1)(a) of that Act to the provider
eligibility rules in section 194C of that Act is a reference
to the rules in
that section as amended by this Part; and
(b) the reference in paragraph 195A(1)(b) of that Act to the service eligibility
rules in section 194D of that Act is a reference
to the rules in that section as
amended by this Part.
(4) Subitem (3) is enacted for the avoidance of doubt and is not intended to
limit the operation of
subsection 195A(1)
A New Tax System (Family
Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
apart from that subitem.
2 of the Amendment Act provides that the date of commencement for Part 1 of Sch
4 to the Amendment Act is “[t]he day
after this Act receives the Royal
Assent”, being, relevantly, 30 November 2022.
Secretary contends, consequently, that the proper question is “whether a
decision which had been made but which was subject
to review by the Tribunal had
‘not been determined before [the] commencement’ of the Amendment
that end, the Secretary notes that the Amendment Act does not define the term
“determined” for the purposes of an application.
He relies upon
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) for the proposition that
“determined” should be interpreted by considering:
(a) The word’s “ordinary meaning”; and
(b) The “context and purpose” of the section.
to (a), the Secretary submits that “determined” means
“decided; settled; resolved” as per the
Macquarie Dictionary
definition. As to (b), the Secretary contends that cl 4 of Sch 4 to the
Amendment Act is intended to indicate “the law applicable
determination of an application”.
light of those submissions, the Secretary submits the following further
propositions:
The original
decision of the delegate dated 1 April 2020 “resolved the
application” and was “legally operative”;
If no review was
sought with respect to that decision, it would have remained;
Despite the
possibility of review, internally and by the Tribunal, the delegate’s
decision did not bear an “incomplete
or provisional” character.
that basis, the Secretary argues that the Amendment Act did not apply and,
therefore, the Tribunal made no error in applying the
previous version of the
Administration Act which was in force prior to amendment.
appellant opposes this contention. It submits that it “overlooks the
context and purpose of the relevant provisions of the
Amendment Act as well as
[the] applicable general principle” that “[t]he AAT and the primary
decision-maker exist within
an administrative continuum”, quoting
general principle is, in the appellant’s submission, inconsistent with the
position advanced by the Secretary.
appellant also points to the Explanatory Memorandum at [139] and [150], and in
particular, to the indication at [150] that s 194C
of the Act is “an
indispensable requirement for providers that must be met”. Thus, it
contends that “Parliament’s
intention should not be construed as the
requirement only being ‘indispensable’ for applications that are yet
to be determined
by a first-level delegate, but are otherwise dispensable where
a review delegate or the Tribunal could still make the dispositive
appellant also submits that the operation of cl 4(3) of the Amendment Act
undermines the Secretary’s contention. In the
appellant’s
submission, cl 4(3) of the Amendment Act insofar as it applies to s 195A(1) of
the Administration Act, could cause
“incongruity” in circumstances
where an applicant is granted an approval under the unamended law and thereafter
to meet the conditions required for the continued provision of child care
services as per the amended law. It further submits that
the relevant provisions
in the Amendment Act cannot be characterised in the terms used at [21] of
, namely, “a provision of an enactment excluding or modifying
s 43(1) of the AAT Act, as contemplated by s 25(6) of that Act”.
submissions of the Secretary are to be preferred. An operative decision was made
by the delegate on 1 April 2020 in respect of
the appellant’s application
for approval. Accordingly, the Amendment Act did not apply and the Tribunal did
not make an error
in applying the version of the legislation in force at the
time of the making of the delegate’s decision.
approach expressly limits the application of the Amendment Act such that it will
only apply to applications filed on or after
the commencement of Part 1 of Sch 4
to the Amendment Act, or applications brought prior to the commencement of Part
1 of Sch 4, and
in respect of which no determination has been made at any level:
Amendment Act, Sch 4, cl 4. An application for approval under the
Administration
Act, once “determined” at any level prior to the commencement of the
Amendment Act, is therefore to be
determined according to the legislation in
force at the time of the initial determination. This approach promotes legal
and is consistent with the principle that a successful party should
not be deprived of the benefit of a decision in their favour.
It also avoids the
inherent unfairness of the retrospective application of the amendments to the
Administration Act to applications
brought prior to their introduction by
applicants already within the administration review continuum.
Ultimately,
all providers holding an approval to provide child care services under the
Administration Act will be required to comply
with the amendments in order to
maintain their ongoing approval. Under s 195A(1) of the Administration Act, it
is a condition of
an approved provider’s continued approval
(a) the provider continues to satisfy the provider eligibility rules in section
(b) each approved child care service of the provider continues to satisfy the
service eligibility rules in section 194D.
way of cl 4(3) of Sch 4 to the Amendment Act, the amendments in cl 4(1) and cl
4(2) are incorporated into s 195A(1) of the Administration
irrespective of whether the amendments to the Administration Act commence prior
to the time when an applicant makes an
application, all approved providers are
required to comply with the amendments should they wish to maintain their
to the appellant’s arguments with respect to “incongruity” and
indispensability, those arguments are artificial.
As explained above, an
approved provider’s obligation under s 195A(1) of the Administration Act
to comply with ss 194C and
194D, as amended by cl 4(1) and cl 4(2) of the
Amendment Act, is made clear by cl 4(3). Although a provider may be granted an
under the Administration Act, prior to the commencement of the relevant
provisions in the Amendment Act, this does not alter the
provider’s ongoing obligation to comply with the amended ss 194C and 194D
of the Administration Act. This is not an
incongruous outcome. It is the
practical effect of the Amendment Act. For the same reason, it cannot be said
that a decision to grant
an approval to a provider prior to the commencement of
the relevant provisions in the Amendment Act has dispensed with the importance
of the amendments either. To maintain their approval, an approved provider must
comply with the amended ss 194C and 194D of the Administration
the basis of the above the primary Judge applied the correct version of the law,
being the law in force at the time of the delegate’s
the Administration Act has, since both the hearing before the primary Judge and
the hearing of the appeal, been further amended,
none of those further
amendments effect provisions relevant to this matter.
appellant, Precious
Family Day Care Pty Ltd (
approved family day care provider pursuant to s 48 of the
Education and Care
Services National Law Act 2010
(Vic). Ms Muna Abdi was the sole director of
the appellant and the only identified person with management or control of the
when it applied to be an approved child care service provider pursuant
to the family assistance law, as defined in s 3(1) of the
Administration Act.
family assistance law comprises the Administration Act, the
A New Tax System
(Family Assistance) Act 1999
(Cth), instruments including regulations made
under those acts, and Schedules 5 and 6 to the
A New Tax System (Family
Assistance and Related Measures) Act 2000
(Cth): Administration Act, s 3(1).
1 April 2020, a delegate of the Secretary refused to grant the appellant
approval to administer the family assistance law on the
basis that the delegate
was satisfied that the appellant and Ms Abdi, as the person with management or
control of the appellant,
were not fit and proper persons to administer the
Child Care Subsidy (
) and Additional Child Care Subsidy (
The delegate found that the appellant’s governance arrangements were
“not of sufficient detail” to demonstrate
that the appellant had
arrangements to ensure compliance with the family assistance law. The delegate
also considered Ms Abdi’s
performance in a written assessment regarding
“key obligations under the family assistance law” and noted, in
particular,
Ms Abdi’s inability to respond satisfactorily to questions
regarding “fraud, reporting sessions of care and enrolments”.
seeking internal review of the delegate decision on 15 April 2020, an authorised
review officer approved the delegate decision
on 3 June 2021. The authorised
review officer considered information additional to that which was considered by
the delegate, that
is, information in relation to the conduct of Ms Abdi as it
related to another childcare provider, Golden Heart
Family Day Care Pty
Golden Heart
). The findings of the authorised review officer are
summarised in the decision of the primary Judge at [7]. There was no challenge
to her Honour’s summary and we therefore gratefully adopt it as follows:
On 15 April 2020, the applicant sought internal review of the delegate’s
decision. On 3 June 2021, an authorised review officer
affirmed the
delegate’s decision. In summary, the authorised review officer found:
(1) Ms Abdi was the person with management or control of the applicant.
(2) Ms Abdi was also a person with management or control of
Golden Heart
Family Day Care Pty Ltd and, therefore, Golden Heart was a “
” for the purposes of s 194E of the Administration Act. This was
because the authorised review officer was satisfied that Ms
Abdi was an
authorised person for Golden Heart for the purposes of accessing the Child Care
Management System (
) and, as a result, was a person who was
responsible for the day-to-day operations of a child care service in respect of
Golden Heart.
(3) On 13 February 2017, Golden Heart was issued a “
” which found that there had been instances of non-compliance
between 1 January 2015 to 19 June 2016. The authorised review
officer was
satisfied that Ms Abdi had sufficient influence over Golden Heart, and was not
satisfied that she was not at least aware
of the non-compliant practices at
Golden Heart. The authorised review officer found that this non-compliance
weighed heavily against
finding that Ms Abdi and the applicant were fit and
proper persons.
(4) The applicant’s “
inadequate governance documents combined
with the [applicant’s] failure to report accurately to ASIC
weighed heavily against a finding that Ms Abdi and the applicant were fit and
proper persons.
(5) Ms Abdi’s performance in the written assessment was concerning. That
factor, together with inaccurate and inconsistent
information provided in the
applicant’s governance documents, “
weigh[ed] moderately against a
finding that Ms Abdi and the [applicant were] fit and proper persons to be
involved in the operation
of CCS and ACCS
(6) Ms Abdi and the applicant were not fit and proper persons to be involved in
the administration of CCS and ACCS.
(Emphasis in original.)
Subsequently,
on 1 July 2021, the appellant applied to the Tribunal for review of the internal
review decision. On 8 February 2023,
the Tribunal affirmed the internal review
decision. The Tribunal extensively traversed the evidence before it and the
submissions, much of which went to Golden Heart and Ms
Abdi’s role whilst in its employ.
is clear from the statutory framework set out above, the relevance of Golden
Heart relates to its status as a “relevant person”
pursuant to s
194E(2)(b) which includes “another person or body in respect of which the
person is or has ever been a person
with management or control”. Were Ms
Abdi a person with management or control of Golden Heart then Golden
Heart’s non-compliance
and the matters giving rise to the cancellation of
its provider approval were matters to be considered in determining the fitness
of the appellant and of Ms Abdi to be an approved provider under s 194B(1).
Tribunal’s consideration principally proceeded by reference to
“Golden Heart”, “Little Beginners”
and “Governance
Issues”, culminating in the final heading “Fit and Proper
Person”. Little Beginners Family
Day Care Pty Ltd (
) is another family day care provider with which Ms Abdi was
associated. The Tribunal concluded that Ms Abdi’s role as director
Little Beginners weighed neither for, nor against, the appellant being granted
CCS approval: TD at [166]. With respect to Golden
Heart, at [161], the Tribunal
considered Ms Abdi’s “confused” evidence that she entered
“various records
onto the CCMS system whilst employed at Golden
Heart” but still denied she was an “authorised person”. The
was “unable to determine whether Ms Abdi was an authorised person
at Golden Heart”: TD at [162]. That notwithstanding,
it did find that Ms
Abdi’s “role at Golden Heart should be considered as a moderate
factor for refusing Precious FDC’s
approval for CCS as she was an integral
staff member at the service during its period of significant
non-compliance”: TD at
to the governance issues, the Tribunal concurred with the Department’s
findings that there were “significant deficiencies
in the policies and
procedures” submitted by the appellant: TD at [171]. It concluded
“that Precious FDC’s governance
documents are poorly designed,
poorly presented, created uncertainty and confusion, and did not provide
accessible or comprehendible
guidance to staff, educators and/or parents”:
TD at [172]. The Tribunal noted that the documents remained in that state
notwithstanding
that the appellant had been given opportunities to correct them
(at [172]) and stated that “the documentation does not demonstrate
there are robust policies and procedures in place to ensure Precious FDC would
comply with its obligations” as per the
family assistance law: TD at
[177]–[178] the Tribunal made the following findings:
Tribunal finds that this documentation exemplifies the lack of clarity and
understanding by Precious FDC of its obligations in
administering the FAL. The
Tribunal found these documents difficult to navigate and interpret. These
policies and procedures were
contradictory, and this was compounded by Ms
Abdi’s contradictory evidence to the Tribunal. The Tribunal could not find
clear concise document to assist staff, educators and parents to comprehend
their requirements under the FAL.
The Tribunal finds this lack of clarity and
understanding is sufficient enough to warrant the refusal of Precious
approval, as it is this very lack of guidance to staff,
educators and parents that leads to human error and fraudulent activity
in overpayments and subsequent debts to the Commonwealth.
Tribunal concurs with the original decision maker’s determination that
Precious FDC’s governance documents exhibit
the same lack of detailed
understanding of its FAL obligations that Ms Abdi demonstrated in her written
assessment. The Tribunal
was not persuaded by Precious FDC’s counsel that
Ms Abdi had demonstrated sound knowledge of her obligations under FAL during
evidence in chief and her written assessment. Ms Abdi demonstrated an
understanding at a basic level of the requirements of the
day-to-day running of
a family day care centre but was not able to persuade the Tribunal that she had
sufficient knowledge for Precious
FDC to be granted approval for
(Emphasis added.)
Tribunal also made findings with respect to Ms Abdi at [179]–[180], as
Tribunal was concerned by Ms Abdi’s inability to clearly demonstrate her
knowledge of the requirements of the FAL as she
is and has been a co-director of
an existing service for the past three years. Given Ms Abdi’s involvement
at Little Beginners,
the Tribunal considers that Ms Abdi should have had no
difficulty in completing the written assessment, providing concise policies
procedures for Precious FDC, and demonstrating knowledge of FAL obligations in
her evidence before the Tribunal. The Tribunal
appreciates that the law has
changed since Little Beginners was registered, however part of a
provider’s obligation under the
FAL is to be current with existing
legislation.
Tribunal finds that Ms Abdi did not demonstrate a sound knowledge and
understanding of the FAL and this weighs against granting
CCS approval to
Precious FDC.
[181]–[183], the Tribunal concluded:
Fit and Proper Person
Tribunal finds that Ms Abdi had a genuine desire to provide a much-needed child
care service to the ethnically diverse, lower
sociodemographic families within
her community. The Tribunal finds that there is no evidence that Ms Abdi had
been involved in any
fraudulent activity or mismanagement in her role as a
director of Little Beginnings [sic].
Tribunal accepts the Respondent’s contention that governance arrangements
are of vital significance in determining whether
a provider is a fit and proper
person to be involved in the administration of CCS and ACCS. On this basis, as
the Tribunal has found
that Precious FDC’s governance arrangements are
inadequate, this weighs heavily against a finding that Ms Abdi and Precious
are fit and proper persons to be involved in the administration of CCS and
Tribunal, having determined that Ms Abdi and Precious FDC are not fit and proper
persons to be involved in the administration
of CCS and ACCS, affirms the
decision under review.
(Emphasis in original.)
PRECEDING DECISION
the primary Judge were three grounds of appeal substantially similar to those
raised in the present appeal before the Court.
At [8] of the PJ, her Honour
considered, with respect to the TD, that:
... there were three central issues in relation to whether the applicant and Ms
Abdi were fit and proper persons which the Tribunal
considered, namely:
(1) was Golden Heart a “
relevant person
” for the purposes of
s 194E of the Administration Act and what weight, if any, should be given to
Golden Heart’s non-compliance
with the family assistance law;
(2) what weight, if any, should be given to considerations relating to
Family Day Care as a “
relevant person
(3) what weight, if any, should be given to the “
”, being whether the applicant’s governance documents
were adequate to ensure compliance with the family assistance law
Abdi’s knowledge of the family assistance law.
(Emphasis in original.)
primary Judge summarised the relevant questions of law at [16] as follows:
The notice of appeal raises three questions of law:
(1) Whether the Tribunal denied the applicant procedural fairness and/or
constructively failed to exercise jurisdiction by making
an adverse finding that
Ms Abdi’s “
role at Golden Heart should be considered as a
moderate factor for refusing [the applicant’s] approval for CCS as she was
integral staff member
at the service during its period of significant
non-compliance
” (at [163]; emphasis added), on the grounds that:
(a) whether Ms Abdi was an “
integral staff member
” of Golden
Heart and the consequence of such a finding was not in issue before the Tribunal
and the applicant was not put on
notice or heard on this issue; and
(b) whether Ms Abdi was an “
integral staff member
” of Golden
Heart did not arise on the Secretary’s case and was not relevant to the
question under s 194E(2) for the purposes
of considering the matters in s
194E(1) of the Administration Act.
(2) Whether the Tribunal failed to have regard to and make findings upon the
” prescribed by s 194E(1) of the Administration Act
in determining whether the applicant (and any person with management or
of the applicant) was a fit and proper person.
(3) Whether the Tribunal failed to perform and/or misunderstood its statutory
task in making findings by reference to factors for
or against the applicant
being granted provider approval rather than having regard to the specific
matters in s 194E(1) for the purposes
of the criteria in s 194C of the
Administration Act.
(Emphasis in original.)
to the first ground of appeal advanced by the appellant in the preceding
decision, the primary Judge made the following findings:
(1) There was a focus on whether Ms Abdi was an “authorised person”
at Golden Heart before the Tribunal. It was common
ground that there was a focus
before the Tribunal “on whether Ms Abdi was a person with management or
control of Golden Heart
on the basis that she was an authorised person”:
PJ at [27]–[30];
(2) The question of whether Ms Abdi was a person with management or control of
Golden Heart “by its nature” involved
the question of Ms
Abdi’s role at Golden Heart. So much is evident from the affidavit and
oral evidence before the Tribunal:
PJ at [31]–[33];
(3) The Tribunal’s findings that Ms Abdi’s role at Golden Heart did
not rise to the threshold of being an authorised
person, but could be
characterised as that of an integral staff member and considered as a moderate
factor for refusing approval,
were “open to the Tribunal on the evidence
before it”: PJ at [37]–[38];
(4) The Tribunal’s characterisation of Ms Abdi’s role as an integral
staff member of Golden Heart did not raise a “new
issue” such that
natural justice required the Tribunal to put the parties on notice. The nature
of Ms Abdi’s role “lay,
in the Tribunal’s assessment,
somewhere in the middle between” the ends of the spectrum advanced by the
Secretary and
the appellant. The Tribunal was not required to “invite
comment” as doing so would require the Tribunal to provide a
“running commentary” of its “evaluative thought
processes”: PJ at [39]–[40];
(5) Even if there was a breach of procedural fairness, that error was not
material. To that end, the primary Judge considered that,
even if the Tribunal
had afforded the appellant the opportunity to comment upon the Tribunal’s
“proposed finding”
with respect to Ms Abdi’s role as an
“integral” staff member at Golden Heart, the “most favourable
which the appellant may have sought was the allocation of neutral
weight. Further, the Tribunal gave “determinative weight”
findings regarding governance issues. This was an “independent and
sufficient basis” to conclude that Ms Abdi
and the appellant were not fit
and proper persons: PJ at [45]–[50]; and
(6) With respect to materiality at [44]–[46] of the PJ:
(a) Two factors exist which “cumulatively” establish that any breach
of procedural fairness cannot be considered material.
(i) Even in circumstances whereby the applicant was “afforded an
opportunity to respond” to the Tribunal’s apparent
finding that Ms
Abdi was an “integral” staff member at Golden Heart, and the
applicant had “led further evidence”
with respect to that proposed
finding, the “most favourable finding” which may have been sought by
the appellant would
not have exceeded a denial that Ms Abdi was an
“integral” staff member at Golden Heart such that it constituted a
with “no weight”; and
(ii) The Tribunal’s findings with respect to the governance issues
“constitute an independent and sufficient basis for
the Tribunal’s
decision that Ms Abdi and the applicant were not fit and proper persons”,
such that “any failure
to comply with the natural justice hearing rule
with respect to the Golden Heart issue was not material”, relying upon
Hossain v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] HCA 34
264 CLR 123
[47] of the PJ, her Honour set out the matters the Tribunal had considered in
assessing whether the “applicant (as a new
service seeking registration)
has the capacity to comply with these complex obligations” under the
family assistance law and
quoted [177] of the TD. Her Honour at [48] of the PJ
In other words, the Tribunal found that the lack of clarity and understanding by
the applicant of its obligations in administering
the FAL alone was fatal to the
applicant’s application for approval, even though it did not limit its
consideration of whether
the applicant and Ms Abdi were fit and proper persons
to that factor. This is plain from the Tribunal’s description of its
finding as “
sufficient enough
” to warrant refusal of the
(Emphasis in original.)
Honour then rejected the appellant’s submission that the Tribunal’s
statement that “inadequacies in the applicant’s
arrangements ‘
weighs heavily against a finding that Ms Abdi and [the
applicant] are fit and proper persons
’” suggested that TD at
[177] should not be considered determinative: PJ at [49]. Her Honour stated that
the TD at [182]
should not “be read as effectively ‘watering
down’ its findings at [177]” and concluded:
Furthermore, a matter which is given determinative weight would clearly weigh
heavily in favour of the conclusion reached by the
Tribunal. Thus, read
together, [177] and [182] make it clear in my view that the Tribunal attributed
determinative weight to the
governance issues.
[50] of the PJ, her Honour stated:
In these circumstances, even if the applicant had been afforded procedural
fairness and persuaded the Tribunal to give neutral weight
to the Golden Heart
issue, I consider that there was no realistic possibility that this would have
led to a different outcome. As
such, any such error would not be
to the primary Judge’s expression at [44] that “[t]wo factors in my
view cumulatively make it clear that any breach
of procedural fairness was not
material”, at the hearing of the appeal it was accepted by the parties
that the two conclusions
are independent of one another such that the use of the
word “cumulatively” was merely infelicitous use of language.
Therefore, despite an indication earlier in the appeal by counsel for the
Secretary that he might seek leave to amend the notice
of contention in that
regard, such leave was ultimately not sought.
to ground two, namely whether the Tribunal failed to make findings about
relevant matters pursuant to s 194E of the Administration
Act, the primary Judge
found that while there was an obligation on the Tribunal “to consider each
of the matters in s 194E(1)”
(PJ [59]), the Tribunal was not required to
provide written reasons on each of those matters: PJ at [64]. At [65]–[80]
PJ, the primary Judge dismissed that ground of appeal on the following
There is no
requirement for the Tribunal to structure its reasons in a formulaic way;
inferred that where the Tribunal made no findings it did so because it did not
consider the matters to be relevant in circumstances
where the parties had made
no submissions to that effect;
requirement is couched in terms of, for example, “any non-compliance with
the law or of any convictions” and
there is no evidence of this, the
Tribunal is entitled to consider those matters as “neutral and therefore
not a material consideration”.
Relevant to this, the primary Judge noted
that, despite there being no submissions made to the Tribunal about whether Ms
undertaken any fraudulent actions or mismanagement as a director of
Little Beginners, the Tribunal made a finding that there was
no evidence to that
As Ms Abdi was
considered by the Tribunal not to be a person with management or control of
Golden Heart, the Tribunal was not required
to “expressly attribute no
weight” to matters arising under ss 194E(1)(a), (c), (h), (i) and (j) of
the Administration
Act with respect to Golden Heart;
Tribunal’s failure to make a finding with respect to s 194E(1)(c) of the
Administration Act, while that may have been
an error, it was not material, as
the finding could only have been adverse or neutral;
With respect to
ss 194E(1)(g) and (k) of the Administration Act, the Tribunal considered the
submissions of the parties and made findings;
As to Little
Beginners, it was clear that findings were made by reference to a number of
paragraphs in the Tribunal’s reasons
such that findings were made in
substance in relation to ss 194E(1)(a) and (h)–(j) of the Administration
primary Judge also found that ground three, namely whether the Tribunal
misunderstood its statutory task and failed to consider
probative material,
could not be upheld: PJ at [83]. Ground three dealt with the following parts of
the TD in which the Tribunal
drew its conclusions by reference to whether the
appellant should be granted CCS approval rather than as to whether it was a fit
and proper person, being the test required by ss 194C(b)–(d) of the
Administration Act. The relevant paragraphs of the TD are
as follows:
The Tribunal does find that Ms Abdi’s role at Golden Heart should be
considered as a moderate factor for refusing
Precious FDC’s approval for
CCS as she was an integral staff member at the service during its period of
significant non-compliance.
Tribunal considers that Ms Abdi’s role as director of Little Beginners
weighs neither for nor against Precious FDC being
granted CCS
Tribunal finds that this documentation exemplifies the lack of clarity and
understanding by Precious FDC of its obligations in
administering the FAL. The
Tribunal found these documents difficult to navigate and interpret. These
policies and procedures were
contradictory, and this was compounded by Ms
Abdi’s contradictory evidence to the Tribunal. The Tribunal could not find
clear concise document to assist staff, educators and parents to comprehend
their requirements under the FAL. The Tribunal finds
this lack of clarity and
understanding is sufficient enough to warrant the refusal of Precious
FDC’s CCS approval, as it is
this very lack of guidance to staff,
educators and parents that leads to human error and fraudulent activity
resulting in overpayments
and subsequent debts to the
Commonwealth.
Tribunal finds that Ms Abdi did not demonstrate a sound knowledge and
understanding of the FAL and this weighs against granting
CCS approval to
Precious FDC.
primary Judge found that the TD, “read as a whole”, demonstrates
that the Tribunal did understand its task and did
consider the question of
whether the appellant and Ms Abdi were fit and proper persons: PJ at
[84]–[86]. The primary Judge
concluded that if the Tribunal had erred in
this regard, the error would have been material: PJ at [87]. This is because
Tribunal’s finding was framed by reference to refusal of the
CCS approval”: PJ at [87].
CONSIDERATION
Ground 1: Denial of Procedural Fairness
principles regarding the obligation to accord procedural fairness are
well-established. They were set out by the primary Judge
at [18]–[19] and
are not in contention, although further statements of principle have emerged
since the primary Judge made
the relevant decision.
principles relevantly are:
The particular
“content” required to ensure procedural fairness depends upon the
facts and circumstances of each case:
SZBEL v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2006] HCA 63
228 CLR 152
) at [26] (Gleeson CJ, Kirby, Hayne, Callinan and Heydon
procedural fairness, the Tribunal need not disclose its mental processes, the
decision it is minded to make or give a commentary
with respect to evidence
at [48] (Gleeson CJ, Kirby, Hayne, Callinan and Heydon
JJ), also quoting
F Hoffmann-La Roche & Co AG v Secretary of State for
Trade and Industry
[1975] AC 295
Rather, the
Tribunal is required to put any adverse conclusion to the appellant if it is not
“obviously ... open on the known
Commissioner for
Australian Capital Territory Revenue v Alphaone Pty Ltd
[1994] FCA 1074
at [29]–[32], [38];
A person must be
provided an opportunity to address relevant matters which are adverse to his or
her interests, which the decision-maker
intends to consider in its exercise of
AB (a pseudonym) v Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption
[2024] HCA 10
278 CLR 300
The Tribunal
must “put a party on notice of critical issues on review in circumstances
where ... the issues were not considered
dispositive by the primary
decision-maker”:
Wills v Chief Executive Officer of the Australian
Skills Quality
[2022] FCAFC 10
289 FCR 175
) at [119] (Logan, Griffiths and Perry JJ), referring to
appellant refers to
Korat v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and
Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCAFC 59
303 FCR 261
setting out the framework which the Court must apply to identify the
requirements of procedural fairness.
concerned an application for
judicial review of a decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to affirm a
Ministerial delegate’s
decision pursuant to
(Cth) not to revoke the cancellation of the applicant’s visa.
[33], the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia stated, in part:
The issues before the Tribunal are framed by the statutory scheme, by the course
of the anterior administrative decision-making process,
and by the course of the
proceeding on review. The content of what is required to ensure procedural
fairness is necessarily framed
by those matters because they form the factual
context within which the decision is made.
appellant contends that the primary Judge erred by failing to find that the
Tribunal had denied the appellant procedural fairness,
with respect to its
finding at [163] of the TD that Ms Abdi was an integral staff member at Golden
Heart such that her role should
be considered a moderate factor for refusing the
appellant’s approval for the CCS. Although the appellant’s arguments
with respect to procedural fairness are interconnected, they may be broadly
described as going to three main issues:
(1) Although the appellant accepts that Ms Abdi’s role as an
“integral staff member” at Golden Heart could feasibly
fall within s
194E(1)(l) of the Administration Act, as “any other matter the Secretary
considers relevant”, it was not
framed or presented in that way by the
(2) Consequently, the appellant was not put on notice as to the relevance of the
Tribunal’s characterisation of Ms Abdi’s
“integral” staff member at Golden Heart, nor was the appellant
provided an opportunity to respond, adduce
further evidence or make submissions
relevant to that; and
(3) If the appellant had been afforded an opportunity to respond to the
contention that Ms Abdi’s role was as an “integral
member” at Golden Heart, and that factor was weighed as a neutral or
adverse consideration under s 194E of the Administration
Act, the appellant
would have been in a position to make submissions with respect to the weight to
be attributed to other factors
under s 194E such that the governance issues were
not necessarily dispositive of the matter.
terms of how Ms Abdi’s role was framed the appellant points out that the
question of whether Ms Abdi was an “integral
staff member” at Golden
Heart was not analysed as a relevant consideration in the delegate decision or
the internal review
decision nor presented as such by the parties in their
respective cases before the Tribunal.
appellant submits that no issues arose in relation to s 194E(1)(l) of the
Administration Act before the Tribunal, and that the
Secretary’s Statement
of Facts, Issues and Contentions specifically stated in relation to s 194E(1)(l)
that “[t]he respondent
does not contend that any further matters are
relevant”. The appellant contends that its position before the Tribunal,
closing address, was that any consideration with respect to s 194E(1)(l)
would be in terms that were “highly positive”
and given favourable
weight because Ms Abdi “sought to operate a much-needed childcare service
in North Melbourne, in the city
of Whittlesea, in the suburb of Epping”.
the appellant notes that the parties had agreed before the Tribunal that if Ms
Abdi was not a person with management or control
of Golden Heart then that issue
appellant also submits that the statutory scheme distinguishes between the
consideration of the conduct of a “relevant person”
consideration of “any other matter the Secretary considers
relevant”. When this distinction is considered, along
course of the anterior administrative decision-making process” (which
indicates that s 194E(1)(l) was not raised
as a particularly pertinent factor in
the delegate decision or internal review decision) and “the course of the
on review” (which includes the parties’ presentation of
their respective cases on review), the statutory framework establishes
194E(1)(l) cannot be relied upon to contend that the appellant was afforded
procedural fairness.
Contrastingly,
the Secretary frames the question on appeal as whether the appellant was denied
an opportunity to address the issue
specifically by reference to s 194E(1)(l),
on the basis that the appellant does not contend that the question of Ms
role was an irrelevant consideration and concedes that s 194E(1)(l)
may be applicable. The Secretary argues that it was not necessary
for there to
be specific reference to s 194E(1)(l) of the Administration Act, because it
arose as a result of the way in which the
review was conducted.
respect to the appellant’s contention that it was not put on notice as to
the relevance of the Tribunal’s characterisation
of Ms Abdi’s role
as an “integral staff member” at Golden Heart, nor provided an
opportunity to respond or adduce
further evidence, the appellant points to the
fact that at no stage were its witnesses questioned in that context. Rather the
cross-examination
focussed on whether Ms Abdi was an “authorised
person” and those questions were framed by reference to the internal
canvassed at [47] above, the authorised review officer found that, with respect
to Golden Heart, Ms Abdi was a person with management
or control, rendering
Golden Heart a “relevant person” under s 194E of the Administration
Act. The expression an “authorised
person” was adopted by the
authorised review officer at the internal review stage, in seeking further
information from Ms Abdi
with respect to her role at Golden Heart.
the appellant submits that whether Ms Abdi was an “integral staff
member” was not raised specifically by either
party before the Tribunal.
In that regard the primary Judge accepted that the Tribunal’s findings
departed from the way the
parties put their respective cases before the Tribunal
on this issue: PJ at [40]. The appellant seeks to rely upon
particularly [35] thereof, to establish that a person “is entitled to
assume that the issues the delegate considered dispositive
are ‘the issues
arising in relation to the decision under review’”.
Secretary acknowledges that the conduct of Golden Heart itself was not relevant,
but submits that the evidence before the Tribunal
plainly related to Ms
Abdi’s role at Golden Heart and its characterisation, and that the
appellant had had an opportunity to
be heard in that regard. Procedural
fairness required only that the Tribunal disclose that Ms Abdi’s role at
Golden Heart
was relevant, unless it was so obvious that disclosure was not
required. In the Secretary’s submission Ms Abdi’s role
Heart was obviously relevant and the description of her as an integral staff
member by the Tribunal was a “label
used to describe the nature of the
tasks and the scope of the tasks and the importance of the tasks
performed”.
The Secretary further submits that Ms Abdi’s conduct at Golden Heart and
the finding that she was an integral staff member
bears upon both whether she is
a fit and proper person herself, and whether she was a person with management or
control of Golden
Heart. The Secretary acknowledges that Ms Abdi’s role at
Golden Heart was not clearly articulated but argued that during cross
examination before the Tribunal it was clear that it included entering records
into the system: See TD at [161]. As such, the description
of Ms Abdi’s
role as an “integral staff member” was a relevant evaluative
conclusion to be considered within the
continuum of the review. In this regard,
the Secretary argues that the Tribunal’s finding that Ms Abdi’s role
Heart was a moderate factor, without specifically placing her on
notice of that fact, is not a denial of procedural fairness because
from the Tribunal’s examination of the functions she undertook at Golden
Heart. The Secretary submits that this case
was not like
was a case where the party was not on notice as to the
issues – here the appellant was aware from the time of the decision
authorised review officer, and throughout the Tribunal hearing, that the nature
of Ms Abdi’s role at Golden Heart was
Ultimately,
the Secretary contends that the primary Judge’s findings that the
Tribunal’s characterisation of Ms Abdi as
an integral staff member was a
“middle point” between the competing contentions put by the
appellant and the Secretary
before the Tribunal. As such, they simply support
the live dispute between the parties as to the facts regarding that issue.
Secretary contends that any further evidence proffered by the appellant which
would have been relevant to Ms Abdi’s role
as an integral staff member at
Golden Heart, and its possible weight, would also have been relevant to whether
Ms Abdi was a person
with management or control of Golden Heart.
respect to the appellant’s argument that the failure to put it on notice
and afford it an opportunity to respond constitutes
a material error, namely
that the weight attributed to the numerous factors under s 194E(1) of the
Administration Act may have been
altered by its response, the appellant argues
that as the issue was not a matter which was raised in the delegate decision or
internal review decision, it therefore could “not [be] considered
dispositive by the primary decision-maker”:
appellant’s position is that if it had been aware that Ms Abdi’s
role as an “integral staff member” of
Golden Heart could be a
moderate adverse factor then it would have put on additional evidence and
submissions. Then, on the appellant’s
case, if s 194E(1)(l) of the
Administration Act was relied on as the basis upon which the conclusion as to an
“integral staff
member” was reached, it could have submitted that
any weight given to Ms Abdi’s role at Golden Heart was “far
eclipse[d]”
by the weight which should be afforded her willingness to
provide much-needed childcare at Epping. As such, the appellant submits,
denial of procedural fairness was material.
response to the appellant’s submission that had it known that s 194E(1)(l)
was relevant to the Tribunal’s deliberations,
its evidence regarding Ms
Abdi’s willingness to open a childcare centre in Epping could have been
given specifically in that
context and would have outweighed the finding that Ms
Abdi’s role at Golden Heart was a moderate factor against granting
the Secretary points to [181] of the TD, which he argues makes clear
that that evidence was before the Tribunal and taken into account.
the Secretary submits it is difficult to see how any such argument could
realistically have made a difference.
Additionally,
the Secretary opposes the appellant’s contentions on materiality more
broadly, arguing that pursuant to the provider
eligibility rules in ss 194C(b)
and (c) of the Administration Act, it is a requirement for both the appellant
and Ms Abdi to be fit
and proper persons, and that this is “a
precondition” to “approval of the appellant as a provider”
to s 194B(1)(a). Therefore, any such error by the Tribunal
realistically could not have affected the finding that the appellant was
fit and proper person on the basis of governance issues as per s 194E(1)(g) of
the Administration Act.
support of this argument, the Secretary makes the following submissions. The
finding as to Little Beginners was a neutral factor,
relying upon the TD at
[166]. The Tribunal’s findings regarding governance, particularly as to
the adequacy of the appellant’s
documentation as set out at [171] of the
TD concur with those of the Department, that is, that they contain
“significant deficiencies”.
The findings at [180] of the TD are that
Ms Abdi “did not demonstrate a sound knowledge” of the family
assistance law
which weighs against granting approval. At [182] of the TD the
crucial importance of governance arrangements “weighs heavily
finding” that Ms Abdi and the appellant are fit and proper persons.
the Secretary submits, there is no error in the primary Judge finding that the
governance issues were an independent and sufficient
basis for refusing
approval, in light of the Tribunal finding that the “lack of clarity and
understanding is sufficient enough
to warrant the refusal of Precious
FDC’s CCS approval”: TD at [177]. Accordingly, had there been any
denial of procedural
fairness there was no realistic possibility that the
outcome could have been different.
appellant, however, contends that the Court should not accept the findings at
[46] of the PJ that the governance issues constituted
an independent and
sufficient basis for the TD. The appellant directs the Court to the
Tribunal’s finding at [177] that the
“lack of clarity and
understanding” regarding requirements under the family assistance law was
“sufficient enough
to warrant” refusal of the appellant’s CCS
approval, as well as the Tribunal’s finding at [180] that the governance
issues “weighs against” granting CCS approval to the appellant. It
contends that those findings do not indicate that
the governance issues alone
were dispositive, but that they were adverse factors to be weighed against other
relevant factors.
appellant argues that the Tribunal was obliged to have regard to all the matters
in s 194E(1) of the Administration Act, not just
s 194E(1)(g). To that end the
appellant submits that the error is the same as that found in
that “[e]ach particular of the error contributed to the evaluative and
discretionary decision which the Tribunal made”.
In the context of the
negative finding made by the Tribunal with respect to s 194E(1)(g), the
appellant submits that this must be
weighed against all the other findings made
with respect to matters in s 194E(1) consistent with the approach of the High
at [35]–[36].
for the appellant points to the repeal of s 194E(1)(g) of the Administration
Act, which included the obligation to have arrangements
in place to ensure
compliance with the family assistance law, and the Explanatory Memorandum,
referred to at [16] above. Counsel
submits that by the Explanatory Memorandum
the legislature was acknowledging that the previous version of the legislation
for the numerous fit and proper person considerations, including those
as to governance, to be weighed against each other. This was
particularly
pertinent with respect to the submission regarding s 194(1)(l) of the
Administration Act. In developing this submission,
the appellant argues that
this was a separate point from that made by the primary Judge at [45] of the PJ
that, at its highest, Ms
Abdi’s role at Golden Heart could be weighed as a
neutral factor. The appellant contends that this approach was consistent
that set out by the High Court in
at [29] and [39].
appellant further submits that while the primary Judge’s finding at [46]
relied upon
at [41], this is not a case where such an approach is
appropriate. The criteria that the appellant failed to satisfy in
was entirely objective and one in respect of which it was essential that it be
met. At the time of the Tribunal’s decision
in this matter, the
legislation did not provide that the governance arrangements were an essential
statutory criterion to be independently
assessed, as is the case now under the
new s 194C of the Administration Act; rather it was but one of a number of
factors to be weighed.
answer to the appellant’s argument regarding
, the Secretary
contends there was a clear, separate finding as to the governance arrangements
of the appellant at [182] of the TD
which weighed heavily against both Ms Abdi,
and crucially the appellant, being considered fit and proper persons. In the
Secretary’s
submission, the appellant’s status was separate from Ms
Abdi’s conduct at Golden Heart. The question to be answered is
whether the
primary Judge erred in finding that the Tribunal’s characterisation of Ms
Abdi’s role was not a new issue
which, as a matter of procedural fairness,
ought to have been put to the parties. The question is not one concerning the
evaluative assessment of the evidence before it.
to this appeal is the role of materiality in an appeal pursuant to s 44 of the
AAT Act. Unlike judicial review pursuant to
s 75(v) of the
Commonwealth of
Constitution
Act (The Constitution) 1977
(Cth) whereby relief is
only available if jurisdictional error is established, and the denial of
procedural fairness only goes to
applicant was deprived of the realistic possibility of a different result,
error is not a necessary requirement under s 44 of the AAT Act.
Accordingly, to the extent that materiality is an essential aspect
to s 44 of the AAT Act:
Haritos v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
233 FCR 315
to how materiality is relevant under s 44 of the AAT Act, s 44(4) states that
the Federal Court “may make such order as it
thinks appropriate”.
The use of “may” and “appropriate” means that it is
discretionary. If the error
is not material, in that it is not one which could
have realistically affected the outcome, then the Court is very unlikely to
its discretion to grant relief:
Stead v State Government Insurance
[1986] HCA 54
; 161 CLR 141 at 145.
a failure to provide procedural fairness is a question of law for the purposes
of s 44 of the AAT Act was the subject of discussion
by the Full Court in
Clements v Independent Indigenous Advisory Committee
[2003] FCAFC 143
). After surveying the applicable case law,
Gray ACJ and North J concluded at [8] that “[g]iven the state of the
authorities,
this Court should accept the principle that a denial of procedural
fairness is an error of law and that, therefore, an appeal from
a decision of
the Tribunal on the ground of such a denial raises a question of law”.
determining whether an error is material Edelman J in
explained that procedural fairness is concerned with the concept of practical
injustice, which “can be assessed by
asking whether an irregularity could
involve unfairness, which is sometimes understood as whether it was an
irregularity of a type
that was ‘capable’ of affecting the
Comptroller-General of Customs v Pharm-A-Care Laboratories Pty Ltd
270 CLR 494
, the High Court (per Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane and
Gordon JJ) observed at [40], in the context of an appeal under s 44 of the
However, it does not follow that the Comptroller-General’s appeal to the
Federal Court from the decision of the Tribunal ought
to have succeeded. That is
because, for an error of law on the part of the Tribunal identified in an appeal
on a question of law
to the Federal Court to result in an order setting aside
the decision of the Tribunal, the error must be shown to be material to
decision of the Tribunal in the sense that the decision which was in fact made
by the Tribunal might have been different if the
error of law had not occurred.
(Citations omitted.)
in a case on appeal under s 44 of the AAT Act, where the question of law is
whether there has been a denial of procedural fairness,
one aspect of
determining that appeal will be to consider whether the procedure which was
adopted was capable of giving rise to practical
injustice and an attendant
impact or possible impact upon the decision. As stated by Emmett, Kenny and
McKerracher JJ in
3D Scaffolding Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2009] FCAFC 75
It follows from this that, even if the alleged breach of procedural fairness
were established, the error could not have affected
the result. It is well
accepted that an immaterial error of law will not vitiate a Tribunal’s
decision: see
BTR PLC v Westinghouse Brake and Signal Co (Australia) Ltd
(1992) 34 FCR 246
at 253-254 per Lockhart and Hill JJ and
Australian Postal Corporation
(1992) 16 AAR 86
at 92 per Hill J. It is
apparent that the Tribunal would have reached the same result, whether or not an
error of the kind alleged
were made by it: compare
Stead v State Government
Insurance Commission
(1986) 161 CLR 141 at 145 per Mason, Wilson, Brennan,
Deane and Dawson JJ.
a denial of procedural fairness in circumstances where there arises an
obligation to so afford will amount to an error
The Court will consider the materiality (or otherwise) of the error in
determining whether to exercise its discretion to
grant relief.
test is that as now expressed by the High Court in
. Relevantly,
at [14] reads as follows:
The question in these cases is whether the decision that was in fact made
, “realistically” have been different
had there been no error. “Realistic” is used to distinguish the
of the possibility of a different outcome from one where the
possibility is fanciful or improbable. Though the applicant must satisfy
court that the threshold of materiality is met in order to establish that the
error is jurisdictional, meeting that threshold
is not demanding or onerous.
(Emphasis in original and citations omitted.)
the circumstances of this case, I consider that the appellant was denied the
opportunity to be heard with respect to s 194E(1)(l)
of the Administration Act
as it relates to Ms Abdi’s role at Golden Heart and the weight to be
attributed thereto. While the
matter of Ms Abdi’s role and involvement in
Golden Heart was before the Tribunal, I do not consider that it was put to the
appellant, or Ms Abdi, that Ms Abdi’s role was that of an “integral
staff member” and that that would operate as
an adverse factor against her
in any context. To the extent that the Tribunal was entitled to take that factor
into account the appellant
should have been on notice as to that factor so that
it could lead evidence and make submissions in response.
as set out above, procedural fairness is concerned with practical injustice,
which involves a consideration of whether the
irregularity was capable of
affecting the decision. In this case, the Tribunal made separate findings
regarding the appellant’s
governance issues, which it regarded as
“sufficient enough” to warrant refusal of the appellant’s CCS
TD at [177]. I do not agree with the appellant’s contention that
the Tribunal’s findings do not indicate an independent
and dispositive
basis for refusing the approval. That is so notwithstanding the
appellant’s submission that the Explanatory
Memorandum, which speaks to
the legislative change which has occurred since the making of the
Tribunal’s decision, whereby
ss 194C and 194D of the Administration Act
now make compliance with governance arrangements an imperative, demonstrates
compliance was but one factor to be weighed the outcome could have
been different. As reasoned by the primary Judge at [49] of the
Tribunal’s reasons must be read fairly. When read fairly, it is
unrealistic to interpret the Tribunal’s findings
at [177] of the TD in a
way which does not denote a determinative finding against the appellant based on
the governance issues. At
[182] of the TD, the Tribunal made a finding that the
appellant’s governance arrangements weigh very heavily against the
being granted CCS approval, which is a separate finding from any
finding made as to Ms Abdi’s role at Golden Heart. The Tribunal’s
finding earlier at [177] that the appellant’s governance arrangements are
“sufficient enough to warrant the refusal of
Precious FDC’s CCS
approval”, when read with [182] are determinative.
circumstances where the irregularity could not have affected the decision, on
the basis that the law which applies is that which
was in force at the time of
the making of the delegate’s decision, it is not the case that there has
been a denial of procedural
fairness giving rise to an error that warrants the
Court’s intervention in this appeal. However, had the applicable law been
the amended version of the Administration Act, thus absent the transitional
provisions of the Amendment Act, I respectfully agree
with the views of His
Honour Justice Wheelahan, whose judgment I have had the considerable advantage
of reading, that the error of
law would be material in that the Tribunal did not
form and never could have formed the requisite degree of satisfaction with
to the amendments made by the Amendment Act.
one should not succeed.
Ground 2: Failure to make findings about relevant matters in s
ground two, the appellant contends that the primary Judge erred by not finding
that the Tribunal failed to have regard to or consider
the prescribed matters in
s 194E(1) of the Administration Act. The appellant refers to the structure of
the Tribunal’s reasoning,
noting that it made findings regarding three
issues, namely “Golden Heart”, “Little Beginners” and
the “Governance
Issues”. However, the appellant submits that the
Tribunal had not regarded each matter separately nor “the overall balance
of circumstances” which included the required considerations under s
194E(1) of the Administration Act:
Li v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2008] FCA 902
102 ALD 354
. The appellant also contends
that the Tribunal failed to have proper regard to the “way that both
parties put their respective
the appellant contends that the Tribunal’s failure to expressly connect s
194E(1) of the Administration Act with its
findings with respect to
“Golden Heart”, “Little Beginners” and “Governance
Issues” reveal the
“same type of error” as in
He v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCAFC 206
appellant refers to
at [79], which concerned a
different statutory scheme, as follows:
... If the written statement does not set out a finding concerning any of the
prescribed matters ... it may (but will not necessarily)
lead to an inference
that the Tribunal member made no such finding as part of his or her mental
process when making the decision.
In such a case, the Tribunal will not have
complied with its obligation ... to “consider” all of the
circumstances ...
do not consider that there was any error in the PJ with respect to ground two
for the following reasons.
is clear from the words of the relevant subsections set out at [12] above which
are couched in terms of, for the most part,
incidences, that there
need only be findings made if any such incidents arise or have occurred. The
words of the subsection are not
whether or not there are any such incidences.
There is no suggestion in the statutory scheme that the absence of certain
such as proceedings or the like, are a positive factor. This is the
case despite the appellant’s observation that the primary
Judge commented
upon the making of a finding by the Tribunal that there was “no evidence
that Ms Abdi had been involved in
any fraudulent activity or mismanagement in
her role as a director of Little Beginners” (at TD [181]), in
circumstances where
there were no submissions made by the parties.
to the appellant’s reliance on
He v Minister
, that case must be
read and understood in full as it relates to a statutory scheme which requires
findings in relation to relevant
mandatory considerations. In its analysis of
the meaning of “considerations” the Full Court in
states at [53] as follows:
In statutory provisions, the expressions “have regard to” and
“take into account” can usually be regarded
as synonyms for
“consider”. In most statutory contexts, expressions such as these
may merely require the decision-maker
to bring active intellectual process and
give proper, genuine and realistic consideration to a relevant matter. Other
statutory provisions
may, by their terms or their manner of operation, require a
determination to be made, or a conclusion to be formed, upon a relevant
consideration. For example, in
Nweke v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
(2012) 126 ALD 501
[2012] FCA 266
, Jagot J observed that
procedural fairness required the Minister to ordinarily treat the best interests
of the visa holder’s
children as a primary consideration when deciding
whether to cancel a visa under s 501 of the Act. Her Honour held that the
was required to make a determination as to what was in the best
interests of the children in order to be able to assess whether their
interests were outweighed by other relevant factors: see also
Lesianawai v
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(2012) 131 ALD 27
Tauariki v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(2012) 135 ALD
[2012] FCA 1408
Paerau v Minister for Immigration and Border
(2014) 219 FCR 504
[2014] FCAFC 28.
These cases assist to
demonstrate that what the word “consider” requires a decision-maker
to do must depend upon the
particular statutory context in which that word is
this statutory scheme the considerations are expressed quite differently, and
the use of “any” makes plain that not
considerations may be relevant. As submitted by the Secretary, in this case, a
number of the considerations outlined in s
194E(1) of the Administration Act are
not engaged, and further, pursuant to s 43(2B) of the AAT Act, the Tribunal is
not required
to set out findings of fact that it does not consider
two should not succeed.
Ground 3: Misunderstanding the Tribunal’s task and
failure to consider probative material
this ground the appellant complains about the Tribunal’s propensity to
refer to the ultimate question as to whether approval
should be granted to the
appellant when considering subsections requiring an evaluation of the fit and
proper person test. Examples
of this may be found at [163], [166] and [177] of
the TD. The appellant submits that the primary Judge at [85]–[86] of the
PJ erred in failing to find that in so doing the Tribunal made an error of law
in that it failed to perform and misunderstood its
statutory task.
appellant submits in this regard that the Tribunal’s task was to assess
the provider eligibility rules. Rather than weighing
the prescribed matters set
out in s 194E(1) of the Administration Act in order to be satisfied pursuant to
ss 194C(b)–(d) and
s 194B, the Tribunal conflated the statutory
requirements by weighing only the conclusion. The appellant contends that the
consideration
of prescribed circumstances and the ultimate state of satisfaction
are conceptually different parts of the decision-making process.
is in relation to this ground that the Secretary has filed a notice of
contention, by which he asserts that the primary Judge erred
in failing to hold
that if the Tribunal made the error the subject of ground three of the notice of
appeal, such an error would not
be material, and further that even if the
Tribunal had made the error the subject of ground three of the notice of appeal,
would not exercise its discretion to grant relief under s 44 of the
do not consider that there was any error in the PJ with respect to ground three
for the following reasons.
Tribunal’s reasons are to be read fairly, as a whole and without an eye
keenly attuned to the perception of error:
Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
[1996] HCA 6
185 CLR 259
at 271–272,
cited with approval in
Plaintiff M1/2021 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 17
275 CLR 582
194B of the Administration Act provides that the Secretary has a discretion as
to whether he may grant the approval, but as
part of the provider eligibility
rules in s 194C(c) a person with management or control of the provider must be a
fit and proper
person. It is clear that the fit and proper person test is
applied in relation to the governance arrangements discussed at [182]
and again at [183]. It would therefore seem that this ground seeks to rely on an
unfortunate use of language rather than
errors of law and a misunderstanding of
the statutory scheme.
3 should not succeed.
the reasons above, the appeal is dismissed. It is accordingly not necessary to
deal with the notice of contention:
Boensch v Pascoe
[2019] HCA 49
–[8] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler and Keane JJ), [101] (Bell, Nettle,
Gordon and Edelman JJ). Costs should follow the event.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and twenty-one (121) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 24 October 2025
RTF format (1.35 MB)
Signed PDF/A format