Kathy Dinh v Telstra Corporation Limited - re s.643 Termination of employment - motion to dismiss application - genuine operational reasons or not [2009] AIRC 941; (16 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Termination of employment
Telstra Corporation Limited
(U2009/3438)
COMMISSIONER RAFFAELLI
SYDNEY, 16 DECEMBER 2009
Termination of employment – motion to dismiss application – genuine operational reasons or not.
On 21 April 2009, Ms Kathy Dinh (the Applicant) made an application pursuant to
section 643
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(the Act) alleging that her termination by her former employer, Telstra Corporation Ltd (the Respondent) was harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
The reaction to the application by the Respondent was to file a notice of motion to dismiss the application on the basis that the
Applicant’s employment was terminated for genuine operational reasons. Pursuant to
section 643(8)
of the Act, it said that the Commission had no jurisdiction to hear the application.
That motion became the subject of proceedings which occurred on 22 June 2009. At the conclusion of those proceedings, the parties
provided written submissions. This decision concerns the Respondent’s motion for dismissal of proceedings.
It is convenient to commence with the Respondent’s view as to the circumstances concerning the Applicant’s termination.
Mr Anthony Harold, a Human Resources Manager for the Respondent gave evidence (Exhibit Telstra 1) which included that:
In March 2009, he was made aware that the Applicant’s substantive job of records management using the Telstra Records and Information
Management System (TRIMS) had been diminishing and she had been working on a national archive project but that this was progressively
ending from mid 2008. The Applicant’s supervisor, Ms Sandra Hinchey had raised with the Applicant the possibility of her job
being declared redundant. This had been followed by the Applicant proceeding on to sick leave. She was still on sick leave in March
He had spoken to Ms Hinchey who had informed him that prior to January 2008, the Applicant’s role primarily involved routine,
low-level record management tasks. This work had diminished significantly as a result of changes in the way records had come to be
managed and that only about 20% of the Applicant’s standard job tasks remained. As a result she was allocated to the national
archives project. Up until July 2008, the Applicant had spent around 80% of her time on the project.
After the Applicant became ill the remaining work on the national archive project was completed by agency staff or some other employees.
After considering the situation he determined that the Applicant’s job was genuinely redundant.
In his report of 19 March 2009 (Exhibit Telstra 1 / AH10) he found:
“Approximately 20% of the role performed by Ms Dinh prior to her commencing leave in July 2008 is now performed elsewhere within
Telstra. The remaining functions of the role are no longer being undertaken within Telstra. As a result, I believe the role is redundant.”
Ms Hinchey, the National Corporate Records Manager and supervisor of the Applicant gave evidence (Exhibit Telstra 2) which included
By mid 2007, a large amount of the processing work the Applicant had been doing was either no longer required to be done or would
be unlikely to be needed by the Group in the near future.
On 22 August 2007, she had discussions with the Applicant regarding her objectives for the next financial year which resulted in
a Performance and Development Plan for 2007/8 being agreed to on that day.
As a result of her diminishing workload she decided, and the Applicant agreed, that the Applicant would be involved in a major project
which was taking place, which was called the National Archives of Australia Project (NAA Project).
Between August 2007 and July 2008, the Applicant performed work on the NAA Project. Approximately 80% of her time was spent working
on the NAA Project. The remainder of her time (about 8 hours per week) was spent on a range of routine management tasks, such as
producing and distributing the monthly record lodgement report and checking the TRIMS database.
On 3 July 2008 she had a monthly one-on-one meeting with the Applicant. She raised the fact that the work on the NAA Project was
coming to an end. As only about 20% of the Applicant’s substantive job remained, she indicated to the Applicant that her job
might be redundant.
The applicant had been surprised at this and enquired as to alternative work opportunities.
Through early July 2008, the potential redundancy of the Applicant’s position was discussed on several occasions.
On 15 July 2008, the Applicant sought details of her estimated redundancy benefits.
Soon after, the Applicant was absent on sick leave.
She forwarded to the Applicant details of her estimated redundancy benefit.
On 23 July 2008, the Applicant lodged a worker’s compensation claim. Over the following several months, the Applicant lodged
a second worker’s compensation claim and also lodged various internal and external complaints alleging that she, Ms Hinchey,
had bullied and harassed the Applicant and discriminated against her.
The Applicant’s involvement in the NAA project was fundamentally completed by 29 October 2008. At that stage, what remained
of the duties that the Applicant had originally been performing in her substantive role had been further streamlined and were easily
absorbed by the two remaining members of the team.
Because of the obligation to explore redeployment opportunities it was decided to have the Applicant undertake vocational assessment
to assist in identifying what jobs the Applicant might be able to perform.
On 25 March 2009, the Applicant was given formal notification of redundancy.
The correspondence forwarded to the Applicant gave her several options and which included being retrenched effective 1 April 2009
or a range of redeployment and job search processes with retrenchment from 29 April 2009 if no other job was found.
She understood that the Applicant elected to be retrenched with effect from 1 April 2009.
She denied that the redundancy was in any way a sham or device used to victimise, bully, harass or otherwise discriminate against
the Applicant. The Applicant’s employment with the Respondent ended because, for operational and structural reasons, it was
no longer necessary for the work she was doing to be done.
In cross-examination, Ms Hinchey said that she was unaware that the Applicant had difficulty in performing the work at the NAA Project
including as to having any physical difficulties with lifting boxes.
The written evidence of the Applicant (Exhibit Dinh 1) included that:
She had been employed with the Respondent for 15 years.
She commenced work with Ms Hinchey in August 2005.
She found Ms Hinchey unapproachable and generally unfriendly.
In August 2007. Ms Hinchey had allocated the NAA Project to her. It involved lifting heavy boxes.
The timeframe for completion of the work was unrealistic and it required additional personnel, yet Ms Hinchey declined to provide
Ms Hinchey often yelled at her for being behind in the project and frequently said that she was not working fast enough.
In mid-November 2007, she informed Ms Hinchey that her heavy physical work was causing her neck and back pain. Ms Hinchey showed
no sympathy. In fact she berated the Applicant.
On returning to work after 2 days’ break, Ms Hinchey continued to totally ignore her request for help. Ms Hinchey continued
to harass her to meet the deadline and insisted that she must finish the project by June 2008.
Throughout the NAA project she persisted with the physical pain and received physiotherapy treatment fortnightly at her own expense.
In June 2008, Ms Hinchey had informed her that her job had now become redundant.
At a meeting on 4 July 2008, Ms Hinchey reiterated that she was redundant.
She realised that there was no chance of continuing to be employed by Telstra.
At a meeting one week later, Ms Hinchey offered to send her a retrenchment benefit estimate.
On 22 July 2008 she lodged a worker’s compensation claim with Telstra and it was immediately approved and she was paid worker’s
compensation for 5 weeks.
She lodged a complaint of bullying and harassment by Ms Hinchey with Telstra’s whistle blower “Stopline” on 12
August 2008. The investigation failed to be thoroughly and fairly conducted.
She lodged a complaint with The Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission (HREOC) on 13 August 2008 following a failure by the
Telstra Whistle Blowers to properly investigate and address her complaints of bullying and harassment.
The Respondent later engaged Mr Harold from Telstra’s Human Resource department to determine if her position was redundant.
She was sent for a vocational assessment. By this time she had become too ill to go back to work for Telstra and the only job that
was offered to her at this time was to go back to work for Ms Hinchey. The Respondent did not give her a legitimately viable option,
other than accept a redundancy package or return to an unacceptable situation of working with Ms Hinchey.
In her oral testimony, the Applicant put that:
In talking with the vocational assessment people she made it clear that she would be happy to go back but not to work with Ms Hinchey.
She agreed that the NAA project had ended.
She denied that only 20% of her substantive work remained. She felt it was more than that.
She denied asking for a redundancy benefit estimate. It was Ms Hinchey who proposed it.
She agreed that up until lodging her worker’s compensation claim in July 2008, she had not raised Ms Hinchey’s bullying
and harassment with the Respondent.
This was because she was scared to do so.
She agreed that HREOC had terminated her complaint.
She agreed that she was informed that her position was redundant on 25 March 2009.
She agreed that the correspondence referred to a vacancy that existed but had disregarded it as it would have meant working with
Ms Hinchey.
Ms Eastman of counsel, who represented the Respondent, put written submissions which included that:
The evidence established that by mid 2007 a large amount of the Applicant’s work as Business Administrator (Records Storage)
was no longer required.
In August 2007 the Applicant began working on the NAA Project. Between then and July 2008 the Applicant spent about 80% of her time
on the project with the remaining time occupied on those functions related to Business Administrator (Records Storage).
By July 2008, it was clear to the Respondent that the NAA Project was coming to an end.
Ms Hinchey informed the Applicant that her position could be declared redundant.
The evidence of Ms Hinchey was that by the time it was clear to her that with the NAA Project soon completed and with only about
20% of her substantive job remaining, the applicant’s position would be redundant.
Following conciliation in the Australian Human Right Commission (AHRC) it became apparent to the Respondent that the Applicant was
contesting that her job was redundant.
The Respondent asked Mr Harold to review the situation. On 19 March 2009 he determined that the Applicant’s job was redundant.
The Applicant in her evidence was unable to provide any details as to why the 20% of work remaining (Ms Hinchey’s assessment)
The Applicant was given options to explore redeployment. She chose not to.
In any case, provided that the position was truly redundant, and not a sham, issues such as fair treatment and exploration of redeployment
are irrelevant considerations to the motion to dismiss the application.
The submission of Mr Booth who replaced the Applicant’s advocates who had represented her during proceedings, included that:
To the extent that the Applicant’s former representative made concession or failed to fully cross-examine the Respondent’s
witnesses, this should not be held against the Applicant.
Ultimately the evidence of the Applicant should be viewed as her position and not any concessions or conduct by her representatives.
There was no documentary evidence, before Mr Harold’s determination, that the Applicant’s position was redundant.
Nor is it clear who the decision-maker as to the Applicant’s redundancy was.
Mr Harold provided no independent analysis of the Applicant’s position. He relied on what others told him or by looking at
an organisational structure.
Mr Harold was misled in thinking that the Applicant was the only person performing the duties described in the local job descriptions.
The core duties of the Applicant and her colleague, Ms Toth were almost identical.
The Respondent had not discharged its onus that there was a genuine redundancy.
Ms Eastman in reply put that:
There is no basis to bring into question the result of Mr Harold’s assessment nor his integrity.
There is no evidence that Ms Hinchey engaged in a sham.
While the Respondent is clear in its assessment that only 20% of the Applicant’s work remains, the Applicant contention that
it was more than 20% is vague and imprecise.
As to the contention that no documentary evidence existed that the position was seen by the Respondent as redundant prior to Mr Harold’s
report, the preliminary estimate of retrenchment benefits had been produced in July 2008.
In a matter such as this the relevant statutory provisions are found at
sections 643
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Subsection 643(8)
of the Act provides:
“(8) An application under subsection (1) must not be made on the ground referred to in paragraph (1)(a), or on grounds that
include that ground, if the employee’s employment was terminated for genuine operational reasons or for reasons that include
genuine operational reasons.”
Subsection 643(9)
of the Act defines ‘operational reasons’ as:
“… reasons are reasons of an economic, technological, structural or similar nature relating to the employer’s undertaking,
establishment, service or business, or to a part of the employer’s undertaking, establishment, service or business.”
Section 649
649 Dismissal of application relating to termination for operational reasons
(a) an application is made, or is purported to have been made, under
subsection 643(1):
(i) on the ground referred to in paragraph 643(1)(a); or
(ii) on grounds that include that ground; and
(b) either:
(i) the respondent has moved for the dismissal of the application on the ground that the application is outside the jurisdiction of
the Commission because the employee’s employment was terminated for genuine operational reasons or for reasons that include
genuine operational reasons; or
(ii) it appears to the Commission, on the face of all the materials before it, that the employee’s employment may have been
terminated for genuine operational reasons or for reasons that include genuine operational reasons;
the Commission must hold a hearing to deal with the operational reasons issue before taking any further action in relation to the
application, other than dealing with a matter on the papers as provided by
section 645
(2) If, as a result of the hearing, the Commission is satisfied that the operational reasons relied on by the respondent were genuine,
the Commission must:
(a) if subparagraph (1)(a)(i) applies—make an order dismissing the application; or
(b) if subparagraph (1)(a)(ii) applies—make an order dismissing the application to the extent that it is made on the ground
referred to in paragraph 643(1)(a).
(3) Subject to any right of appeal to a Full Bench of the Commission, a finding by the Commission that it is not satisfied that the
operational reasons relied on by the respondent were genuine is final and binding between the parties in any proceedings before the
Commission.
(4) To avoid doubt, this section does not require the Commission to hold a hearing in relation to an application that has been dismissed
subsection 645(5)
(5) In this section:
operational reasons has the meaning given by
subsection 643(9).
The effect of those provisions has been the subject of several Full Bench decisions that have resulted in the case law on “operational
reasons” becoming quite settled.
Carter v Village Cinemas
[2007] AIRCFB 513
, (Village Cinemas) the Full Bench stated:
“[28] … that the operational reason relied upon by the employer need only be a ground or cause for the termination of
the employment of an employee. It need not be something that demands or brings about an obligation to terminate the employment of
a particular employee. The termination of employment of the particular employee does not have to be an unavoidable consequence of
the operational reason for the limitation in
to operate. Consequently, whether the employer could have done something other than terminating the employee’s employment will
generally be irrelevant in deciding whether the termination was for genuine operational reasons, or reasons that include genuine
operational reasons. To pose the question whether the termination was a
“a logical response to”
the employer’s operational requirements will also not necessarily assist in determining whether the termination was for genuine
operational reasons. This may also be an appropriate question to pose in a consideration as to whether or not the operational reason
advanced by the employer for the termination of employment of the particular employee was a sham or not. …
[35] In our view, the expression
genuine operational reasons
should be given its natural meaning, taking into account the context in which the words are used. That context is, that if a termination
of employment of a particular employee was for genuine operational reasons, or reasons that include genuine operational reasons,
no application may be made to the Commission for relief in respect of such a termination. The operational reason must exist but we
do not find it helpful to analyze the expression further or to determine whether the test is subjective, as Mr O’Grady contended,
objective, as Mr Bromberg contended, or somewhere in between as Mr Ginnane contended.”
Cruickshank v Priceline
[2007] AIRCFB 730
(Priceline) the Full Bench observed:
“[4] These provisions have a number of important elements. The first is that an employee is prohibited from making an application
for relief if the employment was terminated for the reasons specified in
or for the reasons that included those reasons. As a matter of practicality, the true reasons for a termination of employment will
usually not be within the knowledge of the employee concerned. Except in a limited number of cases it would be unrealistic to expect
a dismissed employee to ascertain with certainty the reason or reasons motivating an employer in terminating the employment. For
that reason the operation of the prohibition will usually be a matter of controversy. The Act provides for the resolution of the
controversy at an early stage of the proceedings. We deal with that provision, s.649, below.
[5] Another element of ss.643(8) and (9) is that the operational reasons must be
The use of the adjective
serves to indicate that the reasons advanced must be genuinely held and must be capable of withstanding reasonable scrutiny. It would
not be sufficient that an employer had a sincere belief that a termination was for operational reasons unless it could also be shown
that the reasons were
“genuine in the sense that [they were] real, true or authentic, not counterfeit”
as explained in
Village Cinemas Australia Pty Ltd v Carter (Village Cinemas)
[6] The third element of the provisions which should be emphasised is that where the exclusion operates it is a complete bar to the
application. It follows that it is impermissible, in the course of examining whether the reasons for the termination are genuine
operational ones, to inquire whether the termination was harsh, unjust or unreasonable. The two inquiries must be kept separate.”
Boeing Australia Limited
[2007] AIRCFB 730
), the Full Bench said:
“When a respondent employer moves for the dismissal of an application pursuant to s.649(1)(b)(i), s.649(2) requires the Commission
to examine the operational reasons relied on by the respondent employer and to decide whether those reasons were genuine. It follows
that the focus of the inquiry is two-fold. It requires the identification of the reasons relied upon by the employer and an evaluation
of their genuineness. In a forensic sense reasons relied on by the employer might not be genuine because they were not real reasons
for the termination or, while being genuine reasons, they may not be operational ones.”
The Bench in Boeing went on to draw particular attention to Priceline:
“In considering whether a termination was for genuine operational reasons the employer’s reasons for dismissal are the
critical consideration. In Cruickshank v Priceline (Priceline) the Commission drew attention to the particular importance of the
reasons advanced by the decision-maker. The Full Bench said:
“[10] Speaking generally the reasons for termination of employment are the reasons of the decision-maker. In many cases the
decision-maker will be easily identifiable. In other cases the situation may not be straight forward. For example the decision may
have been taken by a group such as a committee. In any event the evidence of the decision-maker, or decision-makers if there are
more than one, will be pivotal.
[14] … To ascertain the reasons for an employer’s decision to terminate an employee’s employment, it is necessary
to focus on the reasons, if any, advanced by the decision-maker. It is clear that the credibility of evidence given by the decision-maker
may be put in issue in some cases. If this occurs the Commission will be required to evaluate the evidence given by the decision-maker
against the other evidence and the circumstances overall in the usual way.’”
It then went on to say:
“As we indicated earlier in referring to Priceline, the reasons for termination are the reasons of the employer and, in particular,
the reasons of the decision-maker. Where evidence is given by the employer of the reasons for termination, an analysis of the sequence
of events is only relevant to the extent to which it tends to confirm or to undermine that evidence. In this case the starting point
for the analysis should have been Boeing’s evidence as to the reasons for termination.”
In this case Ms Hinchey’s evidence is that at July 2008 the Applicant’s job was effectively 20% of her previous substantive
position and the rest of her work that she had been engaged in for about one year in the NAA Project was about to end.
In respect of the NAA Project work the evidence of the Applicant was that she accepted that the project work was about to end (PN
The issue between the parties was whether the remaining work associated with the Applicant’s substantive role remained at a
meaningful level or not.
That became the subject of an examination by Mr Harold. In determining the matter, Mr Harold accessed a range of documents and spoke
to several managers including Ms Hinchey. On the basis of that he found that:
“(b) it was reasonable to conclude that the daily duties associated with the job of Business Administrator (Record Storage)
had reduced by approximately 80% in the previous 18 months. The fact that Ms Dinh had been spending approximately 80% of her time
on the national archives project without anyone needing to pick up her work evidenced this, as did the fact that no-one had been
required to perform those duties full-time since November 2008 at the latest. On this basis, it appeared that her job was genuinely
redundant as the need for the job to be done had significantly reduced.” (Exhibit Telstra 1 para 27)
Just because his conclusion as to the Applicant’s work having been reduced by 80% was similar to the assessment made and advice
given to him from two managers does not bring into question Mr Harold’s own capacity to assess the situation.
Indeed with the hindsight of experience he could note that no one had been performing the Applicant’s job full-time since November
In my view there is no basis to find that Mr Harold was either incompetent or had been misled or influenced by others.
What is clear is that Mr Harold’s independent assessment at March 2009 accords with that assessed by Ms Hinchey in July 2008.
The Applicant does not dispute the ending of the NAA Project. In challenging the 20% remaining, she at no time identified with any
precision what is the correct amount of work left to her.
Given that, the Respondent’s view that only 20% of the Applicant’s work remained is accepted by me.
It is suggested by the Applicant that this was a sham or “sleight of hand”.
There is no evidence that Mr Harold was part of any sham or adverse (to the Applicant) arrangement. He knew none of the players.
It is said that the Applicant and Ms Hinchey did not get on. The Applicant commenced a range of actions against Ms Hinchey. That occurred
after July 2008 and none of the allegations of bullying or harassment had ever been raised before.
In any case, whatever treatment (or mistreatment) occurred, there was no evidence as to how that impacted on whether 20% of the job
remained or not.
I find that whatever the conduct of Ms Hinchey towards the Applicant, it was not relevant to the assessment in this case as to whether
the job substantially remained or not.
The Applicant questioned the bona fides of the Respondent’s (or Ms Hinchey’s) July 2008 assessment that the Applicant’s
position was redundant on the basis that there was no documentation attesting to that fact.
In my view, whether she accepted it or not, there is no doubt that Ms Hinchey considered that the Applicant’s job was reduced
to 20% and was ripe for treatment as redundant. The Applicant accepted that Ms Hinchey told her so. We also have the written advice
as to the estimated retrenchment benefit. In any case it was not the Respondent’s case that the Applicant was redundant in
July 2008. Rather, it was that at that time the job was (on the ending of the NAA Project) reducing substantially and that the position
could be the subject of the Respondent’s process in commencing the redundancy process. It did not proceed as the Applicant
proceeded on to leave.
Contrary to the suggestion of the Applicant, I find it not surprising that the Respondent took no immediate steps in declaring the
position redundant when faced with the Applicant lodging a worker’s compensation and AHRC complaint.
The Applicant suggested that her job and that of Ms Toth were near identical. The Respondent indicated to the Applicant by letter
from Ms Mulhern (Exhibit Telstra 2 / SH6) that due to the resignation of Ms Toth, the Applicant could be re-assigned to that position.
But this meant reporting to Ms Hinchey. She was asked to consider this option. It was not part of the Applicant’s evidence
that she would have been willing to move to that position. Nor was it her evidence that somehow the existence of Ms Toth’s
vacant position meant that her position was not redundant.
I fail to see any relevance in the situation of Ms Toth’ vacant position and the issue before me.
Ultimately, a number of the points made by the Applicant are, like the Respondent’s submission as to the failure by the Applicant
to seek alternative opportunities through Telstra Jobs Program, irrelevant as to whether or not the Applicant’s position was
redundant and that her termination ended for operational reasons or for reasons that included such.
I have found that Mr Harold came to an assessment in March 2009 that the Applicant’s position was redundant. This was consistent
with a view of Ms Hinchey arrived at in July 2008. The Respondent accepted Mr Harold’s assessment and commenced its processes.
Whatever allegations have been made, there is no evidence that the decision of the Respondent acting on Mr Harold’s assessment
was wrong (in the sense that on the basis of what was before Mr Harold, he should have assessed that the job was greater than 20%
of its former self), was a sham or sleight of hand (in the sense that it was a smoke screen for the real reason for termination)
or some conspiracy (in the sense that several of the Respondent’s employees have acted to contrive the outcome).
I note that the thrust of the key Full Bench decisions, referred to earlier, is that the issue is to be approached by looking at the
reasons given by an employer for its decision and that such decision can be put into question by analysing whether the reasons are
“real, true or authentic, not counterfeit.”
On the evidence before me I am satisfied that the Respondent relied on the severe reduction of the Applicant’s job down to the
order of 20% and that there is an absence of any evidence that this assessment was not real, true or authentic.
On the basis of all that was before me, I am satisfied that the Respondent terminated the Applicant’s employment for genuine
operational reasons and for reasons that included a genuine operational reason and I so find.
I am satisfied that each party has received a ‘fair go all round’ in the making of this Decision.
Accordingly, the Respondent’s motion is granted and the Applicant’s substantive application for relief pursuant to section
643(1)(a) of the Act is dismissed.
An Order reflecting this Decision is in
BY THE COMMISSION:
COMMISSIONER
Appearances
, solicitor the Applicant.
of counsel with
, solicitor for the Respondent.
Hearing details:
Final written submissions:
16 September 2009.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR991307>
No downloadable files available