Application by New South Wales Minerals Council (No 2) [2021] ACompT 3 (16 June 2021)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Application by New South Wales Minerals
Council (No 2)
[2021] ACompT 3
Decision of the Designated Minister under
Competition and
Consumer Act
(Cth) not to declare services at the Port of
Newcastle made on 16 February 2021
File number:
ACT 1 of 2021
O'Bryan (Deputy President)
ABRAHAM (Member)
PROF K DAVIS (Member)
Date of determination:
Date of publication of reasons:
Catchwords:
TRADE PRACTICES
– application by the
New South Wales Minerals Council for the Tribunal to issue a notice under
s 44ZZOAAA(5)
seeking the production of specified documents –
contention that the documents ought to have been produced to the Tribunal by
designated Minister under
s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c)
– relevance of contention
– proper construction of
s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c)
– principles governing the
exercise of the Tribunal’s powers under
s 44ZZOAAA(5)
– unreasonable delay in making application – application granted in
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Competition and Consumer Amendment (Competition Policy Review) Act
Trade Practices Amendment (Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
Cases cited:
AB v Western Australia
(2011) 244 CLR 390
Application by Glencore Coal Pty Ltd
[2016] ACompT 6
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Sara Lee Household & Body Care
(Australia) Pty Ltd
[2000] HCA 35
(2000) 201 CLR 520
K&S Lake City Freighters Pty Ltd v Gordon & Gotch Ltd
[1985] HCA 48
157 CLR 309
Kirkman v Minister Administering the Crown Lands Act (No 2)
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Huynh
[2004] FCAFC 256
139 FCR 505
Pilbara Infrastructure Pty Ltd v Australian Competition Tribunal
[2012] HCA 36
(2012) 246 CLR 379
Polaris Coomera Pty Ltd v Minister for the Environment
Tickner v Bropho
[1993] FCA 208
(1993) 40 FCR 183
Tickner v Chapman
[1995] FCAFC 1726
(1995) 57 FCR 451
Videto v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1985] FCA 449
(1985) 8 FCR
Date of hearing:
Date of last submission:
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for New South Wales Minerals Council:
N De Young QC with D Tynan
Solicitor for New South Wales Minerals Council:
Clifford Chance LLP
Counsel for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd:
C Moore SC with D Roche
Solicitor for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for National Competition Council:
P Crutchfield QC with C Van Proctor
Solicitor for National Competition Council:
Johnson Winter & Slattery
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
ACT 1 OF 2021
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW LODGED BY NEW SOUTH WALES
MINERALS COUNCIL UNDER
SUBSECTION 44K(2)
COMPETITION AND CONSUMER ACT
(CTH) OF THE DECISION OF THE DESIGNATED MINISTER UNDER
SUBSECTION 44H(1)
COMPETITION AND CONSUMER ACT 2010
NEW SOUTH WALES MINERALS COUNCIL
JUSTICE O’BRYAN (Deputy President)
DR D ABRAHAM
PROF K DAVIS (Member)
section 44K(6A)
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Tribunal directs the National Competition Council (
) to provide the
following documents to the Tribunal on or before 17 June
following documents located at the hyperlink
https://ncc.gov.au/application/application-for-declaration-of-certain-services-in-relation-to-the-port-of-newcastle/1
at footnote 11 of the NCC’s Final Recommendation made on 18 December
(i) Application – Annexure A;
(ii) Application – Annexure B; and
(iii) Application – Annexure C,
Pro Forma Long Term Pricing Deeds
section 44ZZOAAA(4)
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
the Tribunal requests the Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd (
provide to the Tribunal by 12 noon on Friday, 18 June 2021 any document that
satisfies the following four criteria:
(a) the document was
submitted to the NCC by PNO for the purposes of the NCC’s Final
Recommendation made on 18 December 2020;
(b) the document relates to any of the Pro Forma Long Term Pricing Deeds;
(c) the document is relevant to an understanding of the operation of the Pro
Forma Long Term Pricing Deeds or the extent to which
PNO has entered into Pro
Forma Long Term Pricing Deeds with Port users; and
(d) PNO wishes to rely on the document in the review.
Tribunal will provide a copy of the documents referred to in directions 1 and 2
to the participants in the review and the NCC.
4 and 5 of the Hearing Book filed by the New South Wales Minerals Council
) are not part of the Hearing Book for the review.
is to file and serve a supplementary volume of the Hearing Book containing the
documents referred to in directions 1 and 2 by
4pm on Friday, 18 June 2021 which
is in electronic form and:
(a) is produced in a text-recognised PDF
(b) is paginated sequentially throughout; and
(c) contains electronic bookmarks to each document in that volume.
is to file and serve any revised outline of submissions by noon on Friday, 18
15 of the directions of the Tribunal made on 8 April 2021 be varied to require
PNO to file and serve an outline of submissions
not exceeding 20 pages by 12
noon on Sunday, 20 June 2021.
16 of the directions of the Tribunal made on 8 April 2021 be varied to require
the NCC to file and serve an outline of submissions
not exceeding 10 pages as
soon as possible on Monday 21 June 2021, but no later than
REASONS FOR
DETERMINATION
Introduction
this proceeding, the New South Wales Minerals Council (
) has applied
to the Tribunal under
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
) for a review of the decision of the designated Minister, the
Hon Josh Frydenberg MP, Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Australia
), made under
of the Act on 16 February 2021
Treasurer’s Decision
), not to declare a service at the Port of
Newcastle (
) provided by Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd
). The service comprises the provision of the right to access and use
all the shipping channels and berthing facilities required for
the export of
coal from the Port, by virtue of which vessels may enter a Port precinct and
load and unload at relevant terminals
located within the Port precinct, and then
depart the Port precinct (which, for convenience, we will refer to as the
relevant services
”). The Treasurer’s Decision was
consistent with the final recommendation of the National Competition Council
) made under
of the Act on 18 December 2020 (
Recommendation
8 April 2021, following a directions hearing on 7 April 2021, the Tribunal made
directions timetabling the proceeding to a hearing
commencing on 22 June 2021.
Amongst other things, the directions required NSWMC to file a Hearing Book
containing the documents to
be relied upon at the hearing by 24 May 2021.
3 June 2021, NSWMC filed a Hearing Book which included all documents that NSWMC
contended were before the NCC when it made its
Recommendation. At the same time,
NSWMC notified the Tribunal that the parties were in dispute as to the contents
of the Hearing
Book. NSWMC stated that, in light of the dispute, it intended to
file an application under
s 44ZZOAAA(5)
of the Act for the
Tribunal to issue a direction or request for the disputed documents to be
provided to the Tribunal and to seek
a half-day hearing for the determination of
that application.
7 June 2021, NSWMC made an application for the Tribunal to issue a direction to
the NCC under
of the Act. The proposed direction was narrower than
foreshadowed and was limited to provision of the following five documents to
(a) three pro forma deeds currently offered by PNO to
Port users being the Port User Pro Forma Long Term Pricing Deed, the Producer
Pro Forma Long Term Pricing Deed and the Vessel Agent Pro Forma Long Term
Pricing Deed (
Pro Forma Pricing Deeds
(b) a report by Synergies Economic Consulting dated July 2020 titled “Port
of Newcastle Operations ability and incentive to
exercise market power and its
impact on competition in Newcastle catchment coal tenements market”
Synergies 2020 Report
(c) a report by Synergies Economic Consulting dated 8 August 2018 titled
“Port of Newcastle Assessment of revocation application
Newcastle Operations” (
Synergies 2018
also filed written submissions supporting the application and an affidavit of
David Poddar (a solicitor representing NSWMC)
affirmed the same day.
11 June 2021, PNO filed written submissions opposing NSWMC’s application
and an affidavit of Bruce Lloyd (a solicitor representing
PNO) affirmed the same
14 June 2021, NSWMC filed reply submissions and a further affidavit of David
Poddar affirmed the same day.
Tribunal heard the application on 15 June 2021. At the hearing, the NCC took no
position on NSWMC’s application. However,
it made an informal application
for the Tribunal to issue a direction under
of the Act for the NCC to
provide to the Tribunal a copy of the NCC’s recommendation dated 22 July
2019 in respect of the revocation
of the declaration of the shipping channel
services at the Port (
2019 Revocation Recommendation
16 June 2021, PNO filed and served a supplementary submission responding to
certain new issues raised by NSWMC in its reply submissions.
16 June 2021, the Tribunal made directions, allowing NSWMC’s application
in part and refusing the NCC’s informal application.
The Tribunal
determined to:
(a) issue a notice pursuant to
section 44K(6A)
Act directing the NCC to provide to the Tribunal the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds;
(b) issue a notice pursuant to
section 44ZZOAAA(5)
of the Act requesting PNO to
provide to the Tribunal any document that satisfies the following four
(i) the document was submitted to the NCC by
PNO for the purposes of the NCC Recommendation; and
(ii) the document relates to any of the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds; and
(iii) the document is relevant to an understanding of the operation of the Pro
Forma Pricing Deeds or the extent to which PNO has
entered into Pro Forma
Pricing Deeds with Port users; and
(iv) PNO wishes to rely on the document in the
Tribunal also made timetabling directions to enable the hearing to proceed on 22
are the Tribunal’s reasons for making those determinations.
Factual background
channel services at the Port were first declared by a decision of the Tribunal
on 16 June 2016.
26 July 2019, the NCC recommended to the Treasurer
that the 2016 declaration should be revoked (referred to earlier as the 2019
Recommendation). This recommendation followed amendments made to the
declaration criteria in Division 2 of
of the Act by the
Competition
and Consumer Amendment (Competition Policy Review) Act 2017
(Cth). As the
Treasurer did not publish a decision on the 2019 Revocation Recommendation
within 60 days of receiving it, he was deemed
by s 44J(7) of the Act to have
made a decision that the declaration be revoked.
23 July 2020, NSWMC applied to the NCC under s 44F(1) of the Act
the NCC to recommend that the relevant service at the Port provided by PNO be
18 December 2020, the NCC provided its Recommendation to the Treasurer,
recommending that the relevant service not be declared
on the basis that the
criteria in paragraphs 44CA(1)(a) and (d) of the Act had not been satisfied. In
accordance with s 44GC, the
Recommendation set out the NCC’s reasons for
its recommendation. The reasons were substantial, comprising some 96 pages.
A to the Recommendation contained a list titled “List of
application materials and submissions”. The list included the
application
made by NSWMC and its annexures, the submissions made in response to the
application and the submissions made in response
to the NCC’s draft
recommendation. The list also contained a significant number of previous
declarations and determinations,
reports, texts, Tribunal and court decisions
and legislation which, we infer, were considered by the NCC in making the
Recommendation.
As would be expected, the Recommendation referred to and
considered the submissions and information that had been provided to the
connection with its statutory task to make a recommendation to the Minister. In
footnotes, the Recommendation contained hyperlink
references to the submissions
and information that were considered. At the time that the NCC provided its
Recommendation to the Treasurer,
the NCC also provided a link to a hyperlinked
electronic index to Appendix A to the Recommendation. The Tribunal infers that
hyperlinked index would have enabled the Treasurer to consider any of the
documents listed in Appendix A if he elected to do so.
16 February 2021, the Treasurer decided under s 44H(1) of the Act not to declare
the relevant service on the same basis, namely
that the criteria in paragraphs
44CA(1)(a) and (d) had not been satisfied. In accordance with s 44HA, the
Decision set out the Treasurer’s
reasons for his decision. The Decision
stated that:
In making this decision, I
have had regard to:
the objects of
the declaration
criteria in section 44CA of the CCA; and
Recommendation provided to me on 18 December 2020.
I have considered the findings and reasoning in the
NCC's Recommendation, including the NCC's consideration of the submissions it
received, and I accept the conclusions reached by the NCC in the Recommendation.
Having considered those conclusions, I have independently
decided that I am not
satisfied that either paragraph 44CA(l)(a) or (d) are met.
8 March 2021, NSWMC applied to the Tribunal under s 44K(2) of the Act for a
review of the Treasurer’s Decision.
directions hearing before the Presiding Member of the Tribunal was held on 7
April 2021. Following the directions hearing, on 8
April 2021, the Presiding
Member gave directions timetabling the proceeding to a hearing to commence on 22
June 2021. Amongst other
things, the directions required the following steps to
(a) By 21 April 2021, the Treasurer was directed to
provide the Tribunal with a copy of all of the information that he took into
in connection with the making of the Decision in accordance with s
44ZZOAAA(3)(c) of the Act.
(b) By 14 May 2021, NSWMC was to serve a draft index for the Hearing Book
listing all documents proposed to be relied upon at the
hearing. By 19 May 2021,
PNO and the NCC were each to serve a list of any additional documents to be
included in the Hearing Book.
By 24 May 2021, NSWMC was to file and serve a
Hearing Book containing the documents proposed by the participants (NSWMC and
and the NCC.
(c) The participants and the NCC were to file and serve an outline of
submissions by the following dates: NSWMC by 24 May 2021; PNO
by 9 June 2021;
and the NCC by 16 June 2021.
the directions hearing, PNO proposed that the Tribunal issue a notice under s
44K(6A) of the Act directing the NCC to provide to
the Tribunal all of the
information and documents that the NCC took into account in connection with
making its Recommendation. The
Presiding Member indicated that:
(a) the Tribunal was not persuaded that it should issue
a notice as proposed by PNO having regard to the statutory review task of
Tribunal as explained by the High Court in
Pilbara Infrastructure Pty Ltd v
Australian Competition Tribunal
[2012] HCA 36
(2012) 246 CLR 379
), which is to review the Treasurer’s Decision;
(b) the Tribunal and the participants would shortly be informed of what the
Treasurer took into account in making the Decision when
the Treasurer provided
that information under s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c), which would be expected to be the NCC
Recommendation and may or may
not include the information provided to the NCC in
connection with its Recommendation;
(c) the participants could consider at that time, in light of the
Treasurer’s response, whether there was any further information
be produced before the Tribunal.
Ultimately,
PNO did not press any application for such a notice to be issued by the Tribunal
and NSWMC confirmed that it was not making
an application for such a notice to
be issued. The Presiding Member also indicated that the Tribunal would not set a
time by which
an application for the Tribunal to issue a notice under ss 44K(6A)
or 44ZZOAAA(5) must be made, and the Tribunal would not assume
that any such
application would be made. However, the Presiding Member informed the parties
that the later any such applications
were made, the more difficulty there would
be for the application.
21 April 2021, the Australian Government Solicitor (
), on behalf of
the Treasurer, provided the Tribunal with a PDF file containing the information
that the Treasurer took into account
in connection with the making of the
Decision together with an index, pursuant to s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c). On 22 April 2021,
that information
was provided by the Tribunal to the participants and the NCC.
That information comprised the NCC Recommendation and various Departmental
communications. The information did not include the submissions and information
provided to the NCC in connection with its Recommendation
(which were listed in
Appendix A to the Recommendation).
17 May 2021, NSWMC (by its solicitors, Clifford Chance) wrote to the AGS asking
whether the Treasurer took into account in connection
with the making of the
Decision the materials listed at Appendix A to the Recommendation and any of the
materials referred to within
the materials listed at Appendix A. NSWMC’s
letter was sent more than 3 ½ weeks after the Minister had provided the
with a response under s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c) identifying the information that
he had taken into account. The only explanation offered by
NSWMC for the delay
in making that enquiry was that it had expected, from previous reviews of
declaration decisions, that the Minister
would have taken into account all
information that the NCC had considered in making the Recommendation. That is
not a satisfactory
explanation. The issue of what information was taken into
account by the Minister in making the Decision, and any application to
supplement that information in order to conduct the review, was the subject of
consideration at the directions hearing on 7 April
2021. Further, the
Minister’s response on 21 April 2021 made it clear that the Minister had
taken into account the NCC’s
Recommendation but not the underlying
material considered by the NCC. In light of those matters, and having regard to
the timetable
that was set for the hearing of the review, the Tribunal considers
that there was unreasonable delay in NSWMC addressing the issue
information that it sought to have before the Tribunal on the review. A
preferable approach would have been for NSWMC to approach
the Tribunal and make
the application that was ultimately made. Indeed, acting prudently, such an
application could have been made
by the end of April 2021, rather than 7 June
2021 (which was the date that the application was finally made). As discussed
NSWMC’s prosecution of this issue occasioned further unreasonable
delay in the resolution of the issues ultimately agitated
by NSWMC. One other
aspect of NSWMC’s conduct requires comment. When writing to the AGS, the
solicitors for NSWMC did not provide
a copy of the letter to PNO or the NCC.
That was both discourteous and unhelpful in the context of the proceeding.
the same time as writing to the AGS, NSWMC served a draft index for the Hearing
Book on PNO and the NCC. A copy of the draft index
was not in evidence, but the
Tribunal infers from the course of correspondence that the draft index was
materially the same as the
index to the Hearing Book that was ultimately filed.
The index contained a large number of documents that were listed in Appendix
to the Recommendation, as well as other documents.
19 May 2021, the AGS replied to NSWMC stating that:
We confirm that the material
filed on 21 April 2021 comprised the entirety of the material which the
Treasurer took into account in
connection with the making of the decision under
The Treasurer did not look behind the recommendation
of the National Competition Council (NCC), including by considering the
listed in Appendix A of the NCC’s recommendation, consistently
with the High Court’s comments in
Pilbara Infrastructure Pty Ltd v
Australian Competition Tribunal
[2012] HCA 36
(2012) 246 CLR 379
on 19 May 2021, PNO (by its solicitors, Clayton Utz) replied to NSWMC stating
that it objected to the inclusion of documents
9 to 55 in the draft Hearing Book
index on the basis that the Tribunal is not permitted to have regard to those
documents. PNO invited
NSWMC either to confirm that it did not press the
inclusion of the documents or to make an application to the Tribunal to issue a
notice under s 44K(6A) or s 44ZZOAAA(5).
the responses received from the AGS and PNO which were clear in their terms,
NSWMC still did not approach the Tribunal to
make the application that was
ultimately made. Nor did NSWMC immediately respond to the AGS or PNO. Indeed,
NSWMC did not respond
to PNO until 30 May 2021 and did not respond to the AGS
until 2 June 2021 (seeking to debate the question of what the Minister took
account in making the Decision). The delay in responding was unexplained.
Further, NSWMC failed to file its submissions by
the due date of 24 May 2021.
Perhaps understandably in the circumstances, it did not file a Hearing Book by
24 May 2021.
was not until 30 May 2021 that NSWMC wrote again to PNO and the NCC. NSWMC
stated that it disagreed
that the documents
identified in its draft index for the Hearing Book are not before the Tribunal
in the proceeding. It said that,
with limited exception, the documents were
those identified at Appendix A to the NCC's Recommendation. NSWMC asserted that
the documents
“plainly form part of the Final Recommendation, which was
taken into account by the Treasurer, and are before the Tribunal
pursuant to s
44ZZOAAA(3)(c)”. NSWMC stated that it intended to file an application
under s 44K(6) and/or s 44ZZOAAA(5) and
to seek a half-day hearing for the
determination of that application. It also sought agreement on the form of
communication with
the Tribunal about the dispute.
responded the next day, requesting a modest addition to the proposed
communication to the Tribunal. There were then some back
communications between the parties. The end result was that, on the afternoon of
3 June 2021, NSWMC filed the disputed
Hearing Book and notified the Tribunal of
the dispute and NSWMC’s intention to make an application under s 44K(6)
44ZZOAAA(5) in respect of the disputed documents in the Hearing
2 June 2021, the solicitors for NSWMC sent a further letter to the AGS asserting
that the Treasurer’s response to the Tribunal
under s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c)
“contains a number of irregularities”. The substantive assertion was
that footnotes within the
NCC’s Recommendation contained hyperlinks to
various documents which had not been produced by the Treasurer in his response
to the Tribunal. NSWMC asserted that those documents should have been produced
because they formed part of the NCC Recommendation.
4 June 2021, the AGS replied advising that it was taking instructions. On 11
June 2021, the AGS wrote to the solicitors for NSWMC
reiterating that the
Treasurer took into account the NCC Recommendation, and that the underlying
documents did not form part of the
specific information taken into account by
the Treasurer.
7 June 2021, NSWMC made its foreshadowed application to the Tribunal. In terms,
its application asked the Tribunal to issue a notice
under s 44K(6A) (rather
than a notice under s 44ZZOAAA(5)). Despite that, the application was argued
under both sources of power
and nothing turns on that point. More significantly,
the scope of the application was greatly reduced from that foreshadowed. NSWMC
no longer sought production of documents 9 to 55 in the draft Hearing Book
index. It only sought production of five documents referred
to earlier, being
the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds, the Synergies 2018 Report and the Synergies 2020
application documents
application was heard on 15 June 2021. As noted earlier, towards the end of the
hearing, the NCC made an informal application
for the Tribunal to exercise its
powers under s 44K(6A) to direct the NCC to provide the Tribunal with the 2019
Revocation Recommendation.
The application and submissions of the participants
The application documents
application documents comprise the three Pro Forma Pricing Deeds, the Synergies
2018 Report and the Synergies 2020 Report.
three Pro Forma Pricing Deeds contain terms and conditions, including prices,
that PNO is willing to offer various categories
of Port users for the relevant
services on a long term basis (10 years). The deeds were provided to the NCC by
NSWMC in connection
with its application for the NCC to recommend declaration of
the relevant services. In its Recommendation, the NCC summarised certain
terms of the deeds and the existence, scope and terms of the deeds were a
material consideration by the NCC in the Recommendation.
The deeds were listed
in Appendix A to the NCC Recommendation.
Synergies 2018 Report is a report prepared by Synergies Economic Consulting in
August 2018. The report was prepared on behalf
of NSWMC and was submitted by
NSWMC to the NCC in connection with the NCC’s consideration of whether to
make the 2019 Revocation
Recommendation. The report was not formally submitted
by NSWMC to the NCC in connection with its 2020 application to the NCC for
declaration recommendation. Instead, as referred to below, NSWMC submitted the
Synergies 2020 Report. However, in its 2020 application
to the NCC (at [9.6]),
NSWMC made (slight) reference to the Synergies 2018 Report as follows:
As rightly predicted by
Synergies in its report which was submitted to the Council in August 2018
together with Glencore’s submission,
following revocation of
the declaration of the Port in 2019:
materially increased access prices at the Port, once again demonstrating its
propensity to unilaterally materially increase
prices without regard for
industry circumstances;
this will lead
to reduced investor confidence and higher cost of capital for new coal mining
projects in the Newcastle catchment
smaller coal
producers or producers with relatively high marginal costs in the Newcastle
catchment areas have been most affected.
49 of NSWMC’s application, referred to in the above passage, contained a
hyperlink to the Synergies 2018 Report.
its Recommendation, the NCC did not refer to the Synergies 2018 Report. Nor was
the report listed in Appendix A to the Recommendation.
We infer that the NCC did
not take the document into account in making its decision. NSWMC noted that the
NCC Recommendation, in
a footnote, contained a hyperlink to that part of the
NCC’s website that contained the 2019 Revocation Recommendation and
submissions
made to the NCC in connection with that recommendation, including
the Synergies 2018 Report. NSWMC submitted that, through that hyperlink,
Synergies 2018 Report formed part of the NCC Recommendation. We reject that
submission. Read in context, it is apparent that
the footnote hyperlink was
merely referencing the 2019 Revocation Recommendation, not the underlying
submissions made in connection
with that recommendation.
Synergies 2020 Report is a report prepared by Synergies Economic Consulting in
July 2020. The report was prepared on behalf of
NSWMC and was submitted by NSWMC
to the NCC in connection with the NCC’s consideration of the application
to recommend declaration
of the relevant service. In its Recommendation, the NCC
summarised the economic arguments advanced in the Synergies 2020 Report.
report was listed in Appendix A to the NCC Recommendation.
2018 and 2020 reports were different in nature and content. The 2018 report was
a lengthy document, of some 100 pages, which contained
substantial factual
information in support of economic arguments that were advanced. In contrast,
the 2020 report was a relatively
brief report of 16 pages. While it contained
some factual assertions, it contained no substantial factual information. The
principally advanced a number of economic arguments.
NSWMC submissions
primary submission advanced by NSWMC was that, properly construed, the
application documents were within s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c) and
the Treasurer should have
given the documents to the Tribunal in accordance with that section. The
Tribunal would then have been
permitted (indeed required) to take the documents
into account (by force of ss 44K(4) and 44ZZOAA). As that had not occurred,
submitted that the Tribunal should issue a notice to the NCC under s
44K(6A) to provide the relevant documents to enable the Tribunal
to take them
into account.
submitted that, in s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c), the information that the designated
Minister “took into account” means the
information that was
“before” the Minister in making the decision. It argued that this
construction is compelled by the
High Court’s decision in the
and is also supported by relevant extrinsic material and principles of
administrative law.
respect of the
Pilbara case
, NSWMC submitted that the High Court
repeatedly characterised the review required by s 44K
as concerning the material before the Minister (referring to the reasons of
plurality at [60], [65] and [73] and Heydon J at [130], [131], [152] and [153]).
NSWMC also submitted that the approach stated
Pilbara case
followed by the Tribunal in
Application by Glencore Coal Pty Ltd
Glencore Coal
respect of extrinsic material, NSWMC noted that s 44K(4) was amended, and ss
44ZZOAAA and 44ZZOAA were introduced, by the
Trade Practices Amendment
(Infrastructure Access) Act 2010
2010 Amendment Act
). It noted
the Explanatory Memorandum to the
Practices Amendment (Infrastructure Access) Bill 2009
identifies the purpose
of those amendments as follows (at [1.107] and [1.126]):
1.107 Under limited merits review...the Tribunal may
only consider information
the original decision-maker. The
Tribunal may make a written request that a person provide information within a
specified time period
for the purpose of clarifying the information before the
original decision-maker” (emphasis added).
1.126 In reviews of decisions under
the Tribunal will be limited to
the information that was
the original decision-maker. The Tribunal
may only seek additional information in two circumstances: for the purposes of
information that was before the original decision-maker; and from the
ACCC or NCC in their role of assisting the Tribunal (emphasis
submitted that its construction of s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c) is also supported by
principles of administrative law which form part of
the context in which the
section must be construed (relying on
AB v Western
(2011) 244 CLR 390 at [10];
K&S Lake City Freighters Pty
Ltd v Gordon & Gotch Ltd
[1985] HCA 48
(1985) 157 CLR 309
CIC Insurance Ltd
v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384
Commissioner of Taxation v Sara Lee Household & Body Care (Australia) Pty
[2000] HCA 35
(2000) 201 CLR 520
). The “principles” of
administrative law identified by NSWMC were:
(a) First, a decision maker
such as the Minister is entitled to rely on a departmental summary to reach his
or her decision (relying
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend
(1986) 162 CLR 24
Peko-Wallsend
) at 30-31 (Gibbs CJ)).
However, if a summary fails to bring to the Minister’s attention a
material fact which he or she is
bound to consider, the decision will not have
been made according to law (relying on
Peko-Wallsend
(b) Secondly, a decision maker such as the Minister is taken to have
constructive knowledge of information contained on a departmental
file (relying
Peko-Wallsend
at 31 (Gibbs CJ) and 45 (Mason J) and
Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Huynh
[2004] FCAFC 256
(2004) 139 FCR 505
(Kiefel and Bennett JJ)). Material in the possession of the department is
treated as being in the possession of the Minister. Even
if the department in
fact withholds information from the Minister, that material remains before the
Minister (relying on
Peko-Wallsend
Videto v Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
[1985] FCA 449
(1985) 8 FCR 167
(c) Thirdly, a reference to a hyperlinked document is sufficient for that
document to be considered to be in the possession of the
Minister. This includes
a document hyperlinked in a primary document and also a hyperlinked document
within the hyperlinked document
(relying on
Kirkman v Minister Administering
the Crown Lands Act (No 2)
[2020] NSWSC 1494
(at [42]) and
Coomera Pty Ltd v Minister for the Environment
[2021] FCA 254
submitted that s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c) does not (on a proper construction) contemplate
a factual enquiry about what information the
Minister in fact took into account
in making the decision. It argued that such a construction would be contrary to
the afore-mentioned
“principles” of administrative law and would
also lead to unworkable and impractical outcomes as illustrated by this
where there is no evidence before the Tribunal as to what material the Minister
in fact took into account. NSWMC argued that
in order for the Tribunal to make
any finding as to these matters, the Tribunal would need to receive evidence
from the Minister
and it would be possible that any such evidence would be
challenged under cross-examination. NSWMC contended that Parliament would
have intended such an unworkable or impractical result.
the present case, NSWMC submitted that the Treasurer had constructive knowledge
of the application documents and they were “before”
him. As such,
they were part of the information that the Minister “took into
account” on a proper construction of s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c).
relation to the relevance of the documents to the Tribunal’s review, NSWMC
advanced the following submissions.
respect of the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds, NSWMC submitted that they formed an
important part of the Minister's analysis. It argued
that the Deeds were
summarised in the NCC's Final Recommendation but the summary was not
comprehensive. NSWMC wished to refer to
the full terms and effect of the
documents in order to gainsay the Minister's analysis. In that regard, NSWMC
submitted that the
Deeds contain unreasonable terms and conditions, particularly
the dispute resolution terms and the purported application of the 'pricing
principles'. NSWMC disputes the NCC's finding that the documents "include
elements consistent with those the ACCC must take into
account when making an
arbitration determination under Part IIIA of the CCA" and "non-discriminatory
pricing provisions". NSWMC also
disputes the NCC's characterisation of the
arrangements as an “open access” regime.
respect of the Synergies 2018 Report, NSWMC submitted that the report provided
important market facts and economic analysis as
to competition in the tenements
market. It argued that the Treasurer’s competition analysis in that regard
was entirely theoretical
and ignored the facts. NSWMC further argued that the
NCC Recommendation failed to grapple with any of the analysis in the report
respect of the Synergies 2020 Report, NSWMC acknowledged in argument that it
“builds” on the 2018 Report but does not
itself contain factual
information. Rather, the report advances economic argument. While NSWMC
submitted that the report contained
important economic analysis of competition
in the tenements market, it acknowledged that the arguments advanced in the 2020
had been fairly summarised by the NCC in its Recommendation.
PNO submissions
advanced the following primary submissions.
PNO submitted that the Tribunal was required by s 44K(4) to review the
Treasurer’s Decision based on the information,
reports and things referred
to in s 44ZZOAA. In turn, s 44ZZOAA relevantly required the Tribunal to have
(a) information that was given to the Tribunal under s
44ZZOAAA(3)(c);
(b) any information given to the Tribunal in accordance with a notice given
under s 44ZZOAAA(5);
(c) any thing done as mentioned in s 44K(6); and
(d) any information or report given to the Tribunal in relation to the review
under s 44K(6A).
observed that the first category is fixed by reference to the information that
was given to the Tribunal under subs 44ZZOAAA(3)(c)
(not, we interpolate, by the
Tribunal’s assessment of, or enquiry into, what was taken into account by
the Treasurer).
PNO submitted that NSWMC’s proposed construction of s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c) was
not correct and was inconsistent with the statutory
scheme as explained in the
Pilbara case
. In that respect, PNO relied on the observations of the
plurality at [46] and [47]. PNO argued that, within the statutory scheme,
Treasurer was entitled to rely on the NCC’s Recommendation and was not
required to take into account all of the submissions
and information given to
the NCC. Further, in relation to the “principles” of administrative
law relied on by NSWMC in
aid of its construction of s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c), PNO
submitted that
the authorities referred to by NSWMC
turn on their particular factual and statutory contexts and do not identify
general principles
of administrative law. While the modern approach to statutory
interpretation uses ‘context’ in its widest sense to include
things as the existing state of the law, that is not a reference to the sorts of
specific administrative law principles NSWMC
seeks to invoke.
even if it were relevant to consider whether the application documents were
“before” the Treasurer, it is tenuous
to suggest that the Synergies
2018 Report was before the Treasurer.
in relation to the relevance of the documents to the Tribunal’s review,
PNO submitted that it was unnecessary for the
documents to be before the
Tribunal. It argued that the NCC Recommendation had considered the Pro Forma
Pricing Deeds and the Synergies
2020 Report and NSWMC had not demonstrated that
the NCC’s consideration of those documents was deficient. The NCC had not
the Synergies 2018 Report because that document was not before
PNO submitted that there had been unreasonable delay in NSWMC making the
application. The production of additional documents
would require PNO to make an
application for production of other material that was before the NCC that was
responsive to or contextualised
the application documents. That outcome was
likely to necessitate an adjournment of the commencement of the hearing which
scheduled since 8 April 2021.
NCC submissions
NCC took no position on NSWMC’s application. However, during the hearing,
the NCC advanced the submission that the Tribunal
should issue a notice under s
44K(6A) directing the NCC to provide the 2019 Revocation Recommendation to the
Tribunal. In support
of that application, the NCC referred to criticism that had
been made in the course of argument as to whether the NCC Recommendation
contained detailed analysis. The NCC submitted that the NCC Recommendation
referred to the 2019 Revocation Recommendation at [7.146]
and thereby
incorporated it by reference, and the 2019 Revocation Recommendation was listed
in Appendix A.
PNO nor NSWMC supported the NCC’s informal application.
Consideration
The Tribunal’s review power
Tribunal is empowered by s 44K to review a decision of the “designated
Minister” to declare or not to declare a service
under s 44H. By s 44K(4),
the review is defined as, and limited to, a “re‑consideration of the
matter based on the information,
reports and things referred to in section
44ZZOAA”. Four aspects of s 44K(4) should be noted.
the “matter” to be reviewed by the Tribunal is the Minister’s
decision to declare or not to declare the service,
not the NCC’s
recommendation to the Minister. In the
Pilbara case
, the plurality stated
The “matter” referred to in s 44K(4) was
identified in s 44K(1) and (2). In a case where the Minister has declared a
the “matter” is “the declaration” made by the
Minister. In a case where the Minister decided not to declare
a service, the
matter is “the designated Minister’s decision” not to make a
declaration. In both cases, the hinge
“matter” turns is what the Minister has done, not what the NCC did
when it made
its declaration recommendation. The requirement of s 44K(4) –
that the Tribunal review the matter and that the review be “a
re-consideration of the matter” – necessitates identification of the
Minister’s task. It is that task, and the
result of its performance, which
is to be subject to “re-consideration” by the
the Minister’s decision, which is the subject of review by the Tribunal,
is defined by s 44H(1). Upon receiving a recommendation
from the NCC, the
Minister is required to “either declare the service or decide not to
declare it”. In that respect,
the plurality in the
Pilbara case
described the Minister’s decision-making task as follows (at
[45]-[47]):
45 The Minister had only a short time to decide how to
respond to a declaration recommendation. While the NCC could extend (s 44GA)
time for making its recommendation about an application for a declaration, the
Minister was given sixty days after receiving
the NCC’s declaration
recommendation to decide whether to declare the service. Section 44H(9) provided
that, if the Minister
did not publish his or her decision on the declaration
recommendation within sixty days after receiving it, the Minister was taken,
the end of that period, to have decided not to declare the service and to have
published that decision. In such a case, the Minister
would publish no reasons
for decision but the NCC’s reasons for recommending a declaration would be
published pursuant to s
44GC. If the Minister made a decision, the Act obliged
(s 44HA(1)) the Minister to publish that decision and the reasons for it.
46 There is one other aspect of the Act’s treatment of the
Minister’s task to which attention should be drawn. The Minister,
the Tribunal (s 44K(6)), was given no express power to request any further
information, assistance or report from the NCC.
The statutory supposition
appears to have been that the Minister could and would make a decision on the
NCC’s recommendation
without any need for further information from the
47 The content of those provisions of Pt IIIA to which reference has been made
suggests that it was expected that, armed with a recommendation
from an expert
and non-partisan body (the NCC), the Minister would make a decision quickly and
would do so according to not only
the Minister’s view of the public
interest but also the expert advice given by the NCC about the more technical
criteria of
which the Minister had to be satisfied before a declaration could be
made. And it is the Minister’s decision, not the NCC’s
recommendation, that was the matter that was to be reviewed by the
a review which is a “re-consideration” is a more limited form of
review than a “re-hearing” (as might
be conducted by the Tribunal
under Part IX of the Act). The plurality in the
Pilbara case
the two forms of review as follows (at [60] and [65]):
60 When s 101(2) of the Act used
“re-hearing” to describe the task of the Tribunal reviewing a
determination of the Commission,
it was using “re-hearing” in a
context wholly divorced from the exercise of judicial power. And when s 44K(4)
to “re-consideration”, it too used that word in a context
divorced from the exercise of judicial power. Nonetheless,
some different
meaning must presumably be intended by the use of the different words in
identifying the review to be undertaken by
the Tribunal. The contrast is best
understood as being between a “re-hearing” which requires deciding
an issue afresh
on whatever material is placed before the new decision maker and
a “re-consideration” which requires reviewing what the
decision maker decided and doing that by reference to the material that was
placed before the original decision maker (supplemented,
in this kind of case,
only by whatever material the NCC provides in answer to requests made by the
Tribunal pursuant to s 44K(6)).
65 As has already been noted, the Tribunal treated its task as being to decide
afresh on the new body of evidence and material placed
before it whether the
services should be declared. That was not its task. Its task was to review the
Minister’s decisions by
reconsidering those decisions on the material
before the Minister supplemented, if necessary, by any information, assistance
given to the Tribunal by the NCC in response to a request made under s
noted earlier, NSWMC placed emphasis on the plurality’s statements that
the Tribunal’s task was to review the Minister’s
decision “on
the material before the Minister”. The emphasis was misplaced. That aspect
of the plurality’s decision
was affected by amendments to the Act made by
the 2010 Amendment Act, in particular the amendment to s 44K(4), as will now be
fourth aspect of s 44K(4) to be noted is the requirement, introduced by the 2010
Amendment Act, that the re-consideration of the
Minister’s decision is to
be based on the information, reports and things referred to in s 44ZZOAA. That
section (which was
also introduced by the 2010 Amendment Act) relevantly
provides as follows:
44ZZOAA Tribunal only to consider particular
For the purposes of a review under this Part, the Tribunal:
(a) subject to paragraph (b), must have regard to:
(i) information that was given to the
Tribunal under subsection 44ZZOAAA(3); and
(ii) any information given to the Tribunal in accordance with a notice given
under subsection 44ZZOAAA(5); and
(iii) any thing done as mentioned in subsection 44K(6) ...; and
(iv) any information or report given to the Tribunal in relation to the review
under subsection 44K(6A) ... within the specified
(b) may disregard:
(i) any information given to the Tribunal
in response to a notice given under subsection 44ZZOAAA(5) after the period
specified in
the notice has ended; and
(ii) any information or report of the kind specified in a notice under
subsection 44K(6A) ... that is given to the Tribunal after
the specified period
the context of a review under s 44K, the effect of s 44ZZOAA, in conjunction
with subs 44K(4), is that the Tribunal may only have
regard to the information
given to the Tribunal under subs 44ZZOAAA(3), together with any thing done as
mentioned in subs 44K(6)
and any information obtained by the Tribunal in
response to a notice given under subs 44K(6A) and/or subs 44ZZOAAA(5).
is convenient to consider subs 44ZZOAAA(3) before considering ss 44K(6A) and
44ZZOAAA(5).
Section 44ZZOAAA(3)
44ZZOAAA is titled “Information to be given to the Tribunal”.
Subsection (3) obligates the “decision-maker”
to give certain
defined information to the Tribunal within the period specified by the Tribunal.
In the context of a decision under
s 44H, the “decision-maker” is
the designated Minister that made the decision (in this case, the Treasurer)
(see subsection
Relevantly,
and again in the context of a decision under s 44H, s 44ZZOAAA(3) addresses the
means by which a decision is taken to
have been made by the Minister under s
44H: the first is by publication of the Minister’s decision and reasons
for decision
under s 44HA; the second is by not publishing a decision under s
44HA, in which case the Minister is taken to have made a decision
in accordance
with the NCC’s recommendation and to have published that decision under s
44HA (see s 44H(9)). If the Minister
publishes a decision under s 44HA, s
44ZZOAAA(3)(c) requires the Minister to give the Tribunal “all of the
information that
the [Minister] took into account in connection with the making
of the decision to which the review relates”. If the Minister
publish a decision under s 44HA, s 44ZZOAAA(3)(a) requires the Minister to give
the Tribunal “all of the information
that the [NCC] took into account in
connection with making the recommendation to which the decision under review
the present case, the Treasurer published a decision under s 44HA and,
accordingly, s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c) applied. As noted earlier,
the Tribunal specified
the date of 21 April 2021 for the Treasurer to give the required information to
the Tribunal. The Treasurer
focus of NSWMC’s submissions concerned the meaning and effect of the words
in s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c) “all of the information
that the [Minister] took into
account”. NSWMC submitted that those words mean all of the information
that was “before”
the Minister when the Minister made the relevant
decision. NSWMC argued that, in the present case, that meant all of the
information
provided to the Treasurer by the NCC when the NCC gave the
Recommendation to the Minister (including, particularly, the documents
Appendix A to the Recommendation which the Minister was able to access through a
hyperlinked electronic index provided
by the NCC).
the Tribunal’s view, the proper construction of s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c) is not
relevant to the determination of NSWMC’s application.
The Tribunal’s
review task is defined and limited by s 44K(4). The Tribunal is to re-consider
the Treasurer’s Decision
based on the information, reports and things
referred to in s 44ZZOAA. That section defines the information, reports and
which the Tribunal is to have regard in objective terms. The section
does not require the Tribunal to undertake any evaluative exercise
in order to
identify the information, reports and things. Relevantly, subparagraph
44ZZOAA(a)(i) requires the Tribunal to have regard
to “information that
was given to the Tribunal under subsection 44ZZOAAA(3)”. The focus of that
subparagraph is the information
that was given to the Tribunal. The subparagraph
does not import the language of s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c) into s 44ZZOAA(a)(i) and
the Tribunal to have regard to “all of the information that the
[Minister] took into account”.
follows that the legislative framework does not require the Tribunal to
determine what was the information that the Treasurer took
into account. The
determination of that issue is a matter for the Treasurer. Indeed, within the
legislative framework, there is no
scope for the Tribunal to review the
Treasurer’s determination of the information that was taken into account
in making the
relevant decision.
it is unnecessary to decide the point of construction raised by NSWMC, in case
it becomes relevant we record that the Tribunal
does not accept the construction
advanced by NSWMC. We will state our reasons briefly.
the ordinary meaning of the phrase “took into account” in an
administrative decision-making context is “considered”.
refers to the information with which the decision-maker engaged intellectually
(or brought their mind to bear upon) in
making the relevant decision: see for
Tickner v Chapman
[1995] FCAFC 1726
(1995) 57 FCR 451
at 462 (Black CJ), 476-477
(Burchett J) and 495-496 (Kiefel J).
the fact that information is available to (or “before”) a
decision-maker is not synonymous with a conclusion that
the information was
taken into account by the decision-maker. Indeed, the authorities relied on by
NSWMC, such as
Peko-Wallsend
, stand for the opposite
conclusion. Information may be available to a decision-maker (including by being
in possession of the Minister’s
Department, in respect of which the
Minister may have constructive knowledge) and may be of a kind that the
decision-maker is obliged
to take into account, but the decision-maker may
erroneously fail to take the information into account: see for example
Peko-Wallsend
at 30-31 (Gibbs CJ), 45 (Mason J) and
Tickner v Bropho
[1993] FCA 208
(1993) 40 FCR 183.
For that reason, the
so-called “principles” of administrative law identified by NSWMC are
of no assistance to the proper
construction of the phrase “took into
account”. In any event, it is doubtful that the propositions can be
described as
“principles” of administrative law; they are factual
conclusions on the question whether information was available to
the relevant
decision-maker, the fact being relevant to the issue whether the decision-maker
failed to take into account a mandatory
relevant consideration.
and as observed earlier, the plurality’s description of the
Tribunal’s review task in the
Pilbara case
, being to review the
Minister’s decision “on the material before the Minister”,
must now be read in light of the
statutory amendments made to s 44K(4) by the
2010 Amendment Act. The review task is to be based on the information, reports
referred to in s 44ZZOAA. While the Tribunal in
Glencore Coal
referred to the Tribunal’s task under s 44K(4) (as amended) as being
“a reconsideration based on the material before the
Minister” (at
[32]), the reference was descriptive only and no issue as to the meaning of s
44ZZOAAA(3)(c) arose in that matter.
the passages from the Explanatory Memorandum to the
Trade Practices Amendment
(Infrastructure Access) Bill 2009
relied on by NSWMC do not assist. The
statutory text in s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c) is clear and unambiguous and there is no
warrant to substitute
the language of the Explanatory Memorandum for the
statutory text.
the ordinary meaning of the phrase “took into account” is consistent
with the apparent purpose of the provision,
which is to require the Minister to
identify and provide to the Tribunal the information that was actually taken
into account by
the Minister. If a person affected by the Minister’s
decision considers that the Minister failed to take into account certain
information as a mandatory relevant consideration, such person may seek a remedy
from the Court. Otherwise, the Tribunal’s
statutory task is to re-consider
the Minister’s decision based on the information that the Minister
identifies and gives to
the Tribunal.
it should be observed that the Treasurer’s approach in the present case to
take into account only the NCC’s Recommendation,
and not to have regard to
the underlying material that had been given to the NCC for the purposes of its
Recommendation, is consistent
with the plurality’s description of the
Treasurer’s task in the
Pilbara case
. As the plurality observed (at
[46] and [47]), the statutory supposition appears to be that the Treasurer could
and would make a
decision on the NCC’s Recommendation without any need for
further information from the NCC and that it was expected that, armed
NCC Recommendation, the Treasurer would make a decision quickly and would do so
according to not only the Treasurer’s
view of the public interest but also
the expert advice given by the NCC about the more technical criteria of which
the Treasurer
had to be satisfied before a declaration could be made.
Section 44K(6A)
central question that arises on this application is whether the Tribunal should
exercise its power under s 44K(6A) to give a written
notice requiring the NCC to
give to the Tribunal the application documents. If the Tribunal exercises that
power, the information
provided by the NCC becomes information that the Tribunal
must have regard to under s 44ZZOAA, and information upon which the
reconsideration of the Treasurer’s Decision is to be
based (by operation of s 44K(4)).
already noted, NSWMC primarily based its application on the proposition that it
is appropriate for the Tribunal to issue such a
notice to overcome a deficiency
in the Treasurer’s compliance with s 44ZZOAAA(3)(c). For the reasons
explained above, the Tribunal
rejects the contention that any asserted
deficiency is relevant to the Tribunal’s functions or that there was any
such deficiency.
Nevertheless,
it is necessary to consider whether NSWMC has established a proper basis for the
Tribunal to exercise its power under
s 44K(6A) to require production of the
application documents. To date, there has been little examination of the power
in s 44K(6A)
and the principles that should guide its exercise.
aspects of the power are immediately obvious. First, the exercise of the power
is at the discretion of the Tribunal. Second, the
discretion is subject to an
express statutory requirement that the Tribunal may only exercise the power
“for the purposes of
the review”. In the
Pilbara case
plurality referred to the same expression that appears in s 44K(5) (which gives
the Tribunal the same powers as the Minister)
and observed that the phrase
requires consideration of the nature of the Tribunal’s review task under s
44K (at [63], and to
similar effect at [131] per Heydon J). As set out earlier,
the review task is to reconsider the Minister’s decision based on
information taken into account by the Minister. The power under s 44K(6A) is to
be exercised for the purpose of the Tribunal
undertaking that review. It may be
that the statutory limitation that the power in s 44K(6A) be exercised
“for the purposes
of the review” is synonymous with the usual
statutory implication that a discretionary power is to be exercised having
to the nature, scope and purpose of the power.
follows that the primary consideration for the Tribunal in exercising its
discretion under s 44K(6A) is whether the information
to be obtained from the
NCC would be relevant to, and likely to assist the Tribunal in performing, the
task of reconsidering the
Treasurer’s Decision. It is unwise to attempt to
define the circumstances in which the Tribunal might exercise the power given
s 44K(6A). No doubt, principles and guidance will emerge on a case by case
basis. However, the circumstances of the present case
highlight three
considerations relevant to the exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion.
and perhaps at one end of the spectrum, the Tribunal considers that there is
likely to be a proper basis for requiring the
NCC to produce information
(a) the information was before the NCC when making its
recommendation;
(b) a contention is proposed to be advanced, with some basis, that the
information was either not referred to, or was not fairly
summarised or
considered, by the NCC in its recommendation; and
(c) the information is material to the Minister’s decision (in the sense
that the decision might have been different if the
Minister was aware of the
information).
Essentially,
that is the basis on which NSWMC seeks production of the Pro Forma Pricing
and perhaps at the other end of the spectrum, the Tribunal considers that there
will not be a proper basis for requiring the
NCC to produce information if the
information could have been, but was not, put to the NCC before it made its
recommendation. In
such circumstances, the Tribunal considers that it would be
inconsistent with its statutory review task, as explained in the
, to undertake a re-consideration of the Minister’s decision on
the basis of information that was neither before the NCC nor,
through the
NCC’s recommendation, the Minister when the relevant decision was made,
but which could have been put to the NCC.
the Tribunal considers it relevant to take into account the procedural
implications of any exercise of power under s 44K(6A),
particularly any adverse
impact upon the efficient and fair conduct of the proceeding. Such
considerations are made relevant by the
express requirement that the power is to
be exercised for the purposes of the review and by the requirement that the
Tribunal conduct
the review and make its decision within the 180-day timeframe
specified by s 44ZZOA. While the Tribunal is permitted to “stop
clock” under s 44ZZOA if a notice is given under s 44K(6A), stopping the
clock may not necessarily overcome inefficiency
and unfairness in the conduct of
Application of the principles
the present case, on 8 April 2021 the Tribunal set the proceeding down for
hearing on 22 June 2021 and, at the same time, informed
the participants that
the Tribunal would determine any application under s 44K(6A) when it was made,
but the later the application
the more difficult it would be for the applicant.
As stated earlier, the Tribunal considers that NSWMC engaged in unreasonable
in making the present application causing considerable inconvenience close
to the hearing. The Tribunal considers that NSWMC’s
conduct is relevant to
the exercise of the Tribunal’s discretion. In the circumstances, the
Tribunal is disinclined to issue
a notice under s 44K(6A) that would disrupt the
hearing scheduled to commence on 22 June 2021 where that consequence will have
caused by unreasonable delay on the part of NSWMC.
the delay in making the application, the Tribunal is persuaded that there is a
proper basis to issue a notice under s 44K(6A)
requiring the NCC to produce the
Pro Forma Pricing Deeds. In substance, NSWMC has advanced an argument that the
NCC Recommendation
misstated the effect of the Deeds and that the effect of the
Deeds, and the NCC’s summary of them, were material to the
Treasurer’s
Decision. Without expressing any view on the merits of the
arguments NSWMC wishes to advance, the Tribunal considers that there is
sufficient basis to the contention to require the NCC to produce the Deeds.
Further, the Tribunal is satisfied that the late production
of the Deeds will
not cause the scheduled hearing to be vacated or otherwise cause prejudice to
PNO. As discussed below, to avoid
prejudice to PNO, the Tribunal will also issue
a notice to PNO under s 44ZZOAAA(5) requesting PNO to produce to the Tribunal
responsive material that it wishes to rely upon.
Tribunal is not persuaded that there is a proper basis to issue a notice under s
44K(6A) requiring the NCC to produce the Synergies
2018 Report. The report was
in existence prior to the NCC’s Recommendation, but NSWMC did not provide
the report to the NCC
in connection with its application to the NCC to recommend
declaration. The Tribunal does not accept NSWMC’s submission that
provided the report to the NCC when it made reference to the report in its
application at [9.6]. While the NSWMC made reference
to the Synergies 2018
Report, the reference was not to any factual material in that report but was
only to a prediction made in the
report. The prediction was that, if declaration
were revoked, PNO would increase its prices, investor confidence in new coal
projects would reduce and smaller coal miners with high marginal costs
would be most affected. The substance of the submission by
NSWMC was that, after
the declaration was revoked in 2019, those events had eventuated. Accordingly,
the focus of NSWMC’s submissions
was the assertion that those events had
occurred, not the earlier prediction in the Synergies 2018 Report. By
definition, NSWMC’s
assertion that those events had occurred could not be
supported by the Synergies 2018 Report because that report pre-dated the
events. In those circumstances, the Tribunal does not accept that the
Synergies 2018 Report was put to the NCC for the purposes of
its decision
whether to recommend declaration. The Tribunal does not consider it appropriate
to re-consider the Treasurer’s
Decision on the basis of a report that was
not put to the NCC and formed no part of the NCC’s Recommendation.
is the Tribunal persuaded that there is a proper basis to issue a notice under s
44K(6A) requiring the NCC to produce the Synergies
2020 Report. That report was
put to the NCC by NSWMC and was referred to by the NCC in its Recommendation.
However, as discussed
earlier, NSWMC acknowledged that the Synergies 2020 Report
does not contain factual information but advances economic argument. NSWMC
acknowledged that the arguments advanced in the Synergies 2020 Report had been
fairly summarised by the NCC in its Recommendation.
In those circumstances, and
having regard to the unreasonable delay by NSWMC in making the application, the
Tribunal does not consider
that it is necessary or appropriate in conducting the
review to require production of that report.
the Tribunal is not persuaded that there is a proper basis to issue a notice
under s 44K(6A) requiring the NCC to produce
the 2019 Revocation Recommendation.
In its Recommendation, the NCC made many references to the 2019 Revocation
Recommendation. The
fact that an earlier declaration of shipping channel
services at the Port had been revoked was relevant background information to
NCC’s Recommendation. However, the Tribunal does not accept the contention
advanced by the NCC that, in its Recommendation,
it incorporated by reference
parts of the competition analysis contained in the 2019 Revocation
Recommendation. Rather, the Tribunal
considers that, in the Recommendation, the
NCC expressly summarised, or reproduced, matters stated in the 2019 Revocation
Recommendation
that the NCC considered were relevant to the Recommendation. For
that reason, there is no proper basis, for the purposes of the present
to take account of the earlier 2019 Revocation Recommendation.
Subsections 44ZZOAAA(4) to (7)
the hearing of this application, NSWMC referred to s 44ZZOAAA(5) as an
alternative basis for its application. The Tribunal does
not consider that any
different conclusion should be reached under that power. However, it is
appropriate to address some general
observations to subss 44ZZOAAA(4) to (7),
not least because the Tribunal has determined to issue a notice to PNO under s
44ZZOAAA(5)
to ensure procedural fairness in the conduct of the review.
noted earlier, s 44ZZOAAA is titled “Information to be given to the
Tribunal”. Subsections (4) to (7) provide as follows:
Tribunal may request further information
(4) The Tribunal may request such information that the Tribunal considers
reasonable and appropriate for the purposes of making
its decision on a review
under this Part.
(5) A request under subsection (4) must be made by written notice given to a
person specifying the information requested and the
period within which the
information must be given to the Tribunal.
(6) The Tribunal must:
(a) give a copy of the notice
(i) the person who applied for
review; and
(ii) if the application is made under section 44K, 44L, 44LJ, 44LK or 44O
— the Council; and
(iii) if the application is made under section 44PG, 44PH, 44ZP, 44ZX or 44ZZBF
— the Commission; and
(iv) any other person who has been made a party to the proceedings for review
by the Tribunal; and
(b) publish, by electronic or other means,
the notice.
(7) Without limiting the information that may be given
in accordance with the notice, information may include information that could
not have reasonably been made available to the decision maker at the time the
decision under review was made.
following aspects of those subsections can be noted.
subsection (4) empowers the Tribunal to “request such information that the
Tribunal considers reasonable and appropriate
for the purposes of making its
decision on a review under this Part”. The Explanatory Memorandum to the
Trade Practices Amendment (Infrastructure Access) Bill 2009
that the word “request” takes its ordinary meaning and a recipient
of a request is not obligated to comply
with it. At [1.109], the Explanatory
Memorandum stated:
A request for information
under a written notice does not mandate the provision of information. Persons
may refuse to provide information
in response to a request from the
should be noted that the clauses of the
Trade Practices Amendment
(Infrastructure Access) Bill 2009
were in a slightly different form to the
provisions ultimately enacted by the 2010 Amendment Act. In particular, ss
44ZZOAAA and
44ZZOAA as ultimately enacted were combined into the single clause
44ZZOAA in the Bill. However, that does not affect the above discussion
word “request”.
the Tribunal’s power in subsection (4) is confined by the requirement that
the Tribunal must consider the request to
be “reasonable and appropriate
for the purposes of making its decision” on the review. That criteria is
similar in nature
to the criteria governing s 44K(6A), but it is presently
unnecessary to explore whether there is any material difference.
subsections (5) and (6) govern the manner in which the Tribunal is to make a
request under subsection (4), which is by written
notice to a specified person
and copied to the participants in the review and the NCC.
subsection (7) provides that the information requested may include information
that could not have reasonably been made available
to the decision maker at the
time the decision under review was made. The subsection makes plain that the
information requested may
go beyond information that was put to the NCC for the
purposes of the Recommendation, at least in circumstances where the information
could not have reasonably been made available to the NCC at the time of its
decision. However, subsection (7) must be read in conjunction
with subsection
(4), which requires any request to be reasonable and appropriate for the
purposes of the review.
foreshadowed above, having determined to issue a notice under s 44K(6A)
requiring the NCC to provide to the Tribunal the Pro Forma
Pricing Deeds, the
Tribunal formed the view that it is reasonable and appropriate to issue a notice
under s 44ZZZOAAA(5) requesting
PNO to give the Tribunal documents that were
submitted by PNO to the NCC for the purposes of its Recommendation and which
were relevant
to an understanding of the operation of the Pro Forma Pricing
Deeds or the extent to which PNO had entered into Pro Forma Pricing
Port users. The Tribunal considers that, in circumstances where NSWMC wishes to
rely on the Deeds to contend that the
NCC had misstated their effect or extent,
procedural fairness requires that PNO be afforded an opportunity to rely on
information
that was before the NCC and which addressed those matters.
Accordingly, the Tribunal determined that it was reasonable and appropriate
issue a notice to PNO requesting it to produce any document that satisfies the
following four criteria:
(a) the document was submitted to the NCC by PNO for the
purposes of the NCC’s Recommendation;
(b) the document relates to any of the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds;
(c) the document is relevant to an understanding of the operation of the Pro
Forma Pricing Deeds or the extent to which PNO has entered
into Pro Forma
Pricing Deeds with Port users; and
(d) PNO wishes to rely on the document in the review.
Tribunal considers that the production of such documents is fair to both PNO and
NSWMC (in circumstances where the participants
will have seen the documents in
the course of the application to the NCC) and would not cause the hearing to be
conclusion, for the reasons given above, the Tribunal has allowed NSWMC’s
application in part and determined to issue a notice
to the NCC under s 44K(6A)
requiring it to give the Tribunal the Pro Forma Pricing Deeds. To ensure
procedural fairness, the Tribunal
also determined to issue a notice to PNO under
s 44ZZOAAA(5) requesting it to give the Tribunal documents that were submitted
PNO to the NCC for the purposes of its Recommendation and which were relevant
to an understanding of the operation of the Pro Forma
Pricing Deeds or the
extent to which PNO had entered into Pro Forma Pricing Deeds with Port users.
The Tribunal refused the NCC’s
informal application. The Tribunal also
gave consequential directions.
I certify that the
preceding one hundred and six (106) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the
Reasons for Determination herein
of the Honourable Justice O'Bryan, Dr D Abraham
and Prof K Davis
Dated: 21 June 2021
RTF format (629 KB)
Signed PDF/A format