Taylor v Killer Queen LLC & Ors [2025] HCATrans 61 (9 September 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 061
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Sydney No S49 of 2025
B e t w e e n
KATIE JANE TAYLOR
KILLER QUEEN LLC
First Respondent
KATHERYN ELIZABETH HUDSON
Second Respondent
KITTY PURRY INC
Third Respondent
PURRFECT VENTURES LLC
Fourth Respondent
GORDON A-CJ
BEECH‑JONES J
TRANSCRIPT OF
PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA ON TUESDAY, 9 SEPTEMBER 2025, AT 10.00
____________________
MR C. DIMITRIADIS, SC
May it please
the Court, I appear with my learned friend
MR R.W. CLARK
for the appellant. (instructed by S&A
MR M.J. DARKE, SC
May it please the
Court, I appear with my learned friends
MS E. BATHURST
MR S.J. HALLAHAN
for the respondents. (instructed
by Corrs Chambers Westgarth)
GORDON A‑CJ:
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Your Honours, this case raises
important questions of principle concerning the construction and application of
three provisions
Trade Marks Act
. Relevantly in the proceedings
below, the respondents sought cancellation of Ms Taylor’s trade mark
on two grounds, being
those in section 60 and section 88(2)(c) of the
In our submission, the primary judge correctly held that neither
ground for rectification was made out in this case, and it followed
her Honour did not need to consider the application of the third provision
in issue, being section 89 of the Act, which confers
a discretion not to
grant an application for rectification in certain circumstances. The Full
Court, on the other hand, adopted
a different approach.
Our respectful
submission is that their Honours’ reasoning involved errors of
principle in relation to each of the two grounds
for rectification, which
their Honours held were made out, as well as the discretion in
section 89. In short, we submit that the
effect of the
Full Court’s approach is to up‑end the balance struck by these
three provisions of the Act and others by
giving an overly‑broad operation
to the grounds for rectification in both section 60 and
section 88(2)(c) and, at the same
time, undermining the utility of the
discretion conferred by section 89 not to cancel a trade mark if a ground
is made out.
Your Honours, before coming to the issues, may I say
something briefly about the statutory context. Sections 60, 88(2)(c)
had no direct counterparts in the previous trade marks legislation,
which was the
Trade Marks Act 1955
. They arose from recommendations made
in the report of a working party that preceded the current Act, which I will
come to later.
In particular, sections 88(2)(c) and 89 stem from
recommendations which were made in the context of what was then conflicting
as to whether or not a ground of rectification in 28(a) of the
1955 Act had a continuing operation after the date of application,
priority date, and after registration.
That conflicting authority had
led to the development of a concept of blameworthy conduct in the cases as being
relevant to the exercise
of the court’s discretion not to cancel the trade
mark under section 22 of the 1955 Act. Those debates were later resolved
by this Court’s decision in
, which held that
section 28(a) of the 1955 Act did not have a continued operation. I will
come to those matters and
in due course, but for present
purposes we would emphasise two matters that arise out of that statutory
, the Court explained by reference to
the provisions of the 1955 Act that the trade marks legislation sanctions a
degree of deception
or confusion in various respects. I will take
your Honours to the paragraphs of
in due course. That was
important to this Court’s decision in
not to give
section 28(a) of the 1955 Act a broader interpretation that would encompass
a continuing operation after the date of
application.
In our submission,
a similar consideration applies under the current Act and weighs against an
overly‑broad interpretation
of the grounds which are now in issue.
Secondly, it was clear under the 1955 Act that there was a general discretion,
22 of the 1955 Act, not to cancel a trade mark where a ground
for rectification is made out, including the ground in section 28(a)
1955 Act. That discretion was generally expressed by the word “may”
and was at large.
In fact, the High Court in
that discretion so as to allow one of the trade marks there in suit to remain on
the register despite a ground under section
28(a) being made out. We
submit that that context suggests a need for caution against adopting too broad
a construction of the grounds
now in issue under the current Act and at the same
time too narrow a construction of the discretion which is conferred by
So, your Honours, might I move to the first of the
three issues, which is the section 60 issue. Section 60 appears in
of Part 5 of the Act and sets out grounds for opposing the
registration of a trade mark – so, prior to registration –
but it is picked up, as your Honours know, by section 88 of the Act as
a ground for rectification, among other grounds. Might I
ask your Honours
to look at section 60. It appears in the joint bundle of authorities,
GORDON A-CJ:
Most of us are working off a working copy of the legislation.
DIMITRIADIS:
Thank you. I will not give the references to that, then,
your Honour. Thank you. So, section 60, as picked up by
section 88(1)(a),
provides for a ground for rectification where, as
your Honours can see, two requirements are satisfied. Firstly:
another trade mark had, before the priority date for the registration of
challenged mark:
in respect of those goods or services –
those are the goods or services of the challenged mark:
acquired a reputation in Australia; and –
because of the reputation of that other trade mark, the use of
challenged:
trade mark would be likely to deceive or cause confusion.
So, in this case the question that arises is whether or not what we
will call the singer’s mark had, before the priority date,
reputation in Australia.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour. In
particular ‑ ‑ ‑
GORDON A-CJ:
And then, the second question is, because of the reputation of that
singer’s mark, the use of what we will call the designer’s
be likely to deceive or cause confusion.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is right, your Honour.
Is there not another
element on your argument, which is it has to be a reputation in respect of goods
and services of a particular
of the registered mark.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
We would accept,
your Honour, the reputation does not necessarily need to be of this in
relation to the same goods and services
as the registered mark, but it must
be – because we are talking about a registration reputation in a
trade mark – a reputation
in relation to particular goods and
services, and it is important to be precise about what that reputation is. The
primary judge
made findings about that which are important for the assessment of
this ground.
GORDON A-CJ:
In other words, when you are
identifying what is the reputation in Australia of a singer’s mark, one is
inquiring about what
is that reputation of that mark in
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour.
And what are the elements that one
looks at to work out what is the reputation?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Your Honour, reputation, as the section says, is reputation in a trade
mark, and that is something, of course, that this Court emphasised
which I am going to come to shortly.
Section 17 of the
Trade Marks Act
provides that:
is a sign used, or intended to be used, to
distinguish
goods or services dealt with or provided in the course of
As such, in our submission, reputation in a trade mark
is acquired through and can only be acquired through use of the trade mark
trade mark in relation to particular goods or services, and so, any reputation
in a trade mark must necessarily relate to particular
goods or services in
respect of which it is being used as a trade mark. That is our
submission.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Just so I am clear, just in
answer to Justice Steward’s question, for 60(a), do you say in this
case “those goods or
services” is class 25 clothes, so that it
had to be established that Ms Hudson’s trade mark had a reputation in
of clothes?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Not quite, your Honour.
We do not say that it had to be shown that Ms Hudson’s trade mark had
a reputation for clothes to
make out part (a). It had to be a reputation
in a trade mark, and that must be a reputation referable to particular goods or
Of course, whether or not it was a reputation in relation to clothes
would be highly significant to the resolution of this ground,
and the primary
judge found that there was no reputation in relation to clothes in
It is highly relevant to (b).
DIMITRIADIS:
That is right. Yes, your Honour.
So, once you get – you could have a reputation in a trade mark other
than for clothes satisfying (a), but the fact that it
is not in respect of
clothes would be very factually relevant to whether it “would be
likely” or would not be likely
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour. We respectfully submit that.
I just want to understand, what do you say is the work that is being done in (a)
in the phrase:
in respect of those goods or services –
What are they are requiring?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes. There is arguably an ambiguity in the section,
Which you are going to resolve now.
DIMITRIADIS:
‑ ‑ ‑ I will
explain how we say it is to be understood, your Honour. Your Honour
will see, reading the section
in full, it refers to:
The registration of a trade mark in respect of particular goods or services
may be opposed –
at the beginning. Now, that is clearly referring to the goods or
services in respect of which the trade mark being challenged is
registered.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes. And the reference
in respect of those goods or services –
is referring back to those goods or services, and it is identifying the
priority date of the challenged mark in respect of those goods
or services. One
could read it differently, but the punctuation supports the first way that I put
it to you, your Honour.
You are saying
the priority date for the registration of the first‑mentioned trade
MR DIMITRIADIS:
So, the reputation is not a reputation in respect to those
goods and services of the second mark.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
It would need not be.
It is any reputation in
a trade mark – (a), the comma referring purely back to the
first‑mentioned trade mark –
the one that registration is
sought. But then you have to have (b).
DIMITRIADIS:
That is right, your Honour. That is how we
GORDON A-CJ:
Is that because the purpose of
section 60 is, in turning – this time, the point at which we are
looking is the priority date,
so in – not the facts of this
case – one is looking at whether or not to register a mark, and one
is looking to see whether
or not it is likely that, by registering a mark, it is
going to cause confusion.
So, that is why the reputation analysis
in (a) is broader than it would otherwise be, because one is looking to see
whether or not
there is another mark – whether registered or
not – that has a reputation in Australia.
DIMITRIADIS:
That is right, your Honour. That is
limb (a), and then limb (b), of course,
GORDON A-CJ:
And then limb (b) is a separate, second question, saying, having identified
what the nature is of that reputation in Australia,
the question that then
arises is: because of that reputation in Australia of that other
mark – whether registered or not –
the use of the
registered mark would be likely to deceive. So, one is undertaking this
hypothetical inquiry about whether or not
confusion exists or is likely to exist
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is right,
your Honour.
GORDON A-CJ:
And that confusion is at a level
of likely that people would think that there was some connection between the
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour. So, the two matters
I was going to refer to that are important in relation to this section have been
in the exchanges with the Bench. The first is there needs to be a
reputation in a trade mark, which we submit requires attention
to be given to
the particular goods or services in respect of which that registration exists.
They need not be the same as the goods
or services of the challenged mark, but
that is important.
The second requirement, of course, is
that – in (b) – the likelihood of deception or
confusion must occur because of
the reputation in the other trade mark. In that
respect, as we have pointed out in our written submissions, the inquiry directed
by (b) is different to the assessment of deceptive similarity under the
Act, which requires one to ignore reputation as part of the
inquiry. In fact,
reputation must be the cause of the deception or confusion when one is
considering section 60(b).
Can I just go back
to – you were saying something about the elements of section 17,
the definition of a trade mark.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour.
So, in relation
another trade mark had . . . acquired a
reputation –
In this case, the relevant trade
mark – the singer’s trade mark – is a sign, and a
sign includes a name. Is there
anything more that needs to be satisfied
for 60(a) in finding that the name had acquired a reputation in Australia
apart from the
name, whether used in writing or over the radio?
DIMITRIADIS:
In our respectful submission, yes, your Honour, and that
is that it must be reputation in that name as a trade mark, and the inherent
nature of a trade mark, as set out in section 17 of the Act, is that
is a sign used, or intended to be used, to distinguish goods or services
dealt with or provided in the course of trade –
So, it must be a reputation referable to particular goods or services in
respect of which that sign has been used, in our respectful
submission, as a
trade mark.
So, you are looking for some kind of
mercantile, commercial use of the name in Australia prior?
DIMITRIADIS:
Or a promotion, but yes, your Honour.
Or a promotion, yes.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
The ways in which
one can establish reputation have been referred to in the cases included in
: sales, distribution, promotion – but
referable to particular goods or services.
goods or services of some kind.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour.
I see. Thank you.
So, do you accept that the inquiry under (a) is a comparison
between the reputation of what I will call the singer’s mark,
actual use of that mark, against a notional normal and fair use of the
designer’s mark?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
For section 60, yes,
GORDON A‑CJ:
I am sorry, we are just talking about
section 60 at the moment?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour, that is right.
GORDON A‑CJ:
So, that is
the inquiry?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is right. And when
your Honour says the “actual use” of the singer’s mark,
of course it is the reputation
in the singer’s mark that results from that
GORDON A‑CJ:
I meant – sorry, you are
right to correct me.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour.
There may be some reputations
under (a) that are of such a nature, on the facts, that they would cover
broader than the immediate
goods and services in which a reputation has been
applied, but that would be – you would, I assume, accept that, but
be fact‑dependent.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour, and it is important to have regard to
Because it could be an overwhelmingly
well‑known name, you would say different facts from
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, that is right, your Honour.
Your Honours, could I go at this point to
because there are a number of aspects of the Court’s reasons which are of
assistance on this point. That is in the
joint bundle,
tab 16. Could I ask your Honours to look first at paragraph 7 of
the Court’s reasons, where the Court referred to section
Act that I have referred to, and the definition of:
A “trade mark” . . . “a
intended to be used,
to distinguish
” one trader’s goods or
services from those of another –
And then, the third
The concept of “use” of and as a trade mark is central to the
operation of the TM Act.
Then moving down to
paragraph 9:
A person may apply for registration of a trade mark in respect of
goods in one or more of the classes of goods specified in
Sch 1 . . . if the person claims to be the owner of the
trade mark, and
the person is using or intends to
the trade mark in
relation to those goods. The particular goods in respect of which it is sought
to register the trade mark must
be specified in the application.
there is a particularity there involved in specifying particular goods or
services. In paragraph 13, the Court referred to section
Relevantly, registration of a trade mark in respect of particular
goods . . . may be opposed under s 60 on the ground
that another
trade mark had, before the priority date for the registration
of the applicant’s trade mark in respect of those goods, acquired
reputation in Australia and that, because of that reputation, the use of the
applicant’s trade mark would be likely to deceive
And then, passing over the next sentence:
Opposition must be based on a
having a reputation in
Australia, not on reputation alone. And, if the requisite reputation has been
established, the likelihood
of deception or confusion must also be demonstrated.
Put in different terms, proof of reputation alone in a trade mark in
in respect of the same goods is not sufficient; s 60(b) requires
the person opposing registration to show that use of the applicant’s
trade mark would be likely to deceive or cause confusion.
two limbs of the inquiry are both important. Then, your Honours, could I
go to paragraph 23, under the heading of “Sign
used as a trade
mark”, where the Court said:
Use of a trade mark in relation to goods means use of a trade mark upon, or
in physical or other relation to, those goods, and so
can include use of the
mark on product packaging or marketing such as on a website. There is a
distinction, although not always
easy to apply, between the use of a sign in
relation to goods and the use of a sign as a trade mark. A trade mark is a sign
or intended to be used, to distinguish goods dealt with by one trader from
goods dealt with by other traders; that is, as a badge
of origin to indicate a
connection between the goods and the user of the mark.
That is the
concept of use as a trade mark. Then, in paragraph 26, dealing with
deceptive similarity and the inquiry that is required
by that, section 10
of the Act is referred to and the test that is specified there, which depends on
resemblance between two trade
marks – the essential task is one of
comparison.
GORDON A‑CJ:
We have no dispute about that
here, though, have we, because it is common ground that both of the marks were
deceptively similar?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is, they were both two‑word words making aurally
identical – and they differ only by one letter.
DIMITRIADIS:
That is a different spelling, yes, your Honour. That is
right. The point of us raising this is that the Full Court in its criticism
the primary judge’s approach criticised her Honour for undertaking a
comparison between the two marks. We accept that the
similarity or otherwise of
the two marks is of course relevant to the section 60 inquiry.
basis on which the Full Court criticised the primary judge for doing that was
that there had been a finding – or, indeed,
it was common
ground – that the two marks were deceptively similar. But deceptive
similarity, as the Court goes on to explain
different form of inquiry to one that involves assessing reputation. In fact,
it requires one to ignore reputation. That
is the point of us raising this,
your Honour.
GORDON A-CJ:
DIMITRIADIS:
Without spending a lot of time on it, that emerges from the
Court’s reasons in paragraphs 28 and 29 in
where the approach to assessing deceptive similarity is discussed in more
detail, as is set out in the beginning of 28. It:
is artificial – it is an objective question based on a
That is described. Then in 29, the test is one of
“imperfect recollection” – that is in the third line
and there is a discussion of the artificiality of that
approach, of assuming that consumers have an imperfect recollection of the
registered mark, and conducting the inquiry on that basis and:
“[t]hat degree of artificiality can be justified on the ground that it
is necessary in order to provide protection to the proprietor’s
monopoly to its full extent”.
As your Honours know, the Court
goes on to find in terms that in conducting that inquiry of deceptive
similarity, reputation –
if any exists – in relation to
the trade mark is to be ignored, is to be put aside. That finding, in relation
to reputation
not being taken into account, appears in a number of paragraphs,
particularly 36 – the last two sentences of 36:
Reputation should
be taken into account when assessing deceptive
similarity under s 120(1). That conclusion is compelled by the structure
and purpose
of, and the fundamental principles underpinning, the
Then there is a more detailed discussion of that, including in
paragraphs 41 and 42, drawing a distinction between an assessment based
reputation and an assessment of deceptive similarity. Then in 46 –
just to note – the Court refers to reputation
being taken into
account in specific circumstances under the Act – not deceptive
similarity.
One of those, which has already been referred to as
section 60, that is referred to again by the Court in paragraph 48.
paragraph, the Court also refers to the manner in which it has been held
that reputation has been proved in cases. That is, inferring
it from sales,
advertising and the like, as we would emphasise in relation to particular goods
or services.
Your Honours, at that point, might I go to the primary
judge’s reasons on the section 60 issue. Her Honour’s
relevantly, start at paragraph 713. This is after
her Honour’s discussion of the principles. That is at core of appeal
page 244, at the bottom of the page. Your Honours will see that
the primary judge said – after setting out an extract of the
principles from the case – correctly the two matters that would need
to be established in order to make out the ground:
first, that the Katy Perry Mark –
that is, Ms Hudson’s trade mark:
had acquired a reputation as a trade mark in Australia before the Priority
Date . . . and secondly, that, because of the
. . . the use of the Applicant’s Mark would be
likely to deceive or cause confusion.
Her Honour then went on to deal with those two matters in turn. On
the first matter, which her Honour dealt with from paragraph 714
following, there was a debate before her Honour as to whether the evidence
established reputation in Ms Hudson’s trade
mark as a trade mark at
Her Honour held that it did, but not in relation to clothes,
and that is not in dispute before your Honours. Her Honour dealt with
those issues from 714, and her key findings on this issue appear at 725
through to 727, that is core of appeal book 248 to
Without going through her Honour’s findings in detail,
the effect of them is that by the priority date of Ms Taylor’s
mark, Ms Hudson had established a reputation in Australia in her trade mark
as a trade mark in respect of music and entertainment
services, but not in
relation to clothes. That becomes explicit in her Honour’s later
reasoning, which I will come to shortly,
at paragraphs 740 to
It is notable, looking at her Honour’s findings here at
this part of the reasons – that is, 725 to 727 – that the
reputation that her Honour found had been acquired in
Ms Hudson’s trade mark, as at the priority date of
Ms Taylor’s
trade mark, had arisen over a period of about three or
four months before the priority date. One can tell that from the list of
in 723 – particularly subparagraph (3) and
following – referring to Ms Hudson’s “One of the
album and some tracks that were released from that, and looking
at 724 and 725 through to 727, which relies on those events as
rise to the reputation on Ms Hudson’s part in her name as a
trade mark at that time.
GORDON A‑CJ:
Do you accept that
723 is an accurate description of that chronology?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour.
GORDON A‑CJ:
Both in terms of
content and time?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
I think that is right,
your Honour. If it is not, we will let your Honours know, but what we
do emphasise is that it is really
from 723(3) onwards that those
findings – that is, the release of the “One of the Boys”
album in June 2008 –
gives rise to the primary judge’s
findings of reputation.
Your Honours can see that, as I have said,
from 725 to 727. In 728, her Honour made certain findings
which reflect on the significance
or otherwise of the particular facts in
section 723 that her Honour really referred to. So, all of that needs
to be taken into account.
Now, her Honour dealt with the second matter
required to be ‑ ‑ ‑
Can I just clarify that. Paragraph 728 is rejecting
submissions in part that your client had made.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
In part, that is right, your Honour.
GORDON A-CJ:
is a response.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
GORDON A-CJ:
But that does not detract – any of that does not detract, does it, or
add to what is said in 723 about the reputation of
the singer both
nationally and internationally by around July 2008?
DIMITRIADIS:
Not July 2008. I am not disputing that. It is really the
earlier periods which are referred to in 728(1), Mr Jensen’s
was irrelevant; (2), an earlier single – so, (1)
and (2) is accepting criticisms or limitations that we pointed out on the
evidence, as is (4), in relation to the “Warped Tour”. The key
point, your Honours, is that the reputation was recently
acquired in the
three or four months before the priority date. That is the effect of
her Honour’s findings. The primary judge
then dealt with the second
matter required to be established under section 60.
Sorry to be difficult about
MR DIMITRIADIS:
No, not at all, your Honour.
GORDON A-CJ:
‑ ‑ ‑ is that the extent of the inquiry that is
necessary? I mean, does one not have to ask what is the reputation
MR DIMITRIADIS:
GORDON A-CJ:
is that what we take from 723 in its entirety?
DIMITRIADIS:
We would emphasise – that is part of it,
your Honour, but 725 through to 727 and 728, and
her Honour comes back to consider
this in conducting the inquiry under
section 60(b) in some later paragraphs I am going to go to, which reflect
on what her Honour
made of this.
That second inquiry
her Honour dealt with from paragraph 729 onwards, that is core appeal
book 251, and her Honour recognised the
nature of that inquiry
in 729. After discussing some principles, her Honour’s key
findings on the issue appear from 740 and
following, that is at core appeal
In 740, her Honour summarised her conclusion
that she was not satisfied that the requisite likelihood of deception or
confusion arose
because of the reputation that she had found had been
established in Ms Hudson’s trade mark, and her Honour then
set out her
reasons for that conclusion. First, as your Honours can see
in 741, her Honour correctly noted that the question:
is to be resolved as at the Priority Date.
That is the
priority date of Ms Taylor’s trade mark,
September 2008:
At that time the reputation in the Katy Perry Mark was in relation
to entertainment and music. True it is that there is evidence
Ms Hudson’s intention to use the Katy Perry Mark in
relation to clothes.
As her Honour sets out. And then, at the end
of the paragraph:
But that does not alter the fact that Ms Hudson’s reputation in
the Katy Perry Mark as at the Priority Date was limited in the
way described.
We would interpolate, it did not extend to clothes. At 742,
her Honour said:
In my opinion, clothes are not related to entertainment and music as the
respondents contend. It may be that popular music stars
such as Ms Hudson
lend their names (and trade marks) to be used in connection with clothes and
sell merchandise at their concerts
but that does not make a reputation in one
thing, i.e. entertainment and music, related to another, in this case clothes.
As a matter
of fact, at the time Ms Hudson had not launched her clothing
brand and the Katy Perry Mark had no reputation in
Those findings bring together the threads of what
her Honour had earlier found. Then,
your Honours ‑ ‑ ‑
Could I just ask – that last finding, is that challenged in
the Full Court, or is it simply the Full Court took a different
MR DIMITRIADIS:
The effect of the
Full Court’s reasons, in our submission, which of course I will come
to, is that their Honours effectively
challenged or seek to expand the
scope of the reputation beyond clothes. That is the effect of
their Honour’s reasoning, which
we respectfully submit is flawed and
not open on the primary judge’s findings or the
Beyond clothes or beyond entertainment and
MR DIMITRIADIS:
I am sorry,
your Honour?
You say that the Full Court
expanded the reputation as found – to what,
MR DIMITRIADIS:
To clothes.
To clothes.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is the effect of
their Honour’s reasons.
That could only be
because of the acceptance that it was inherently likely that the singer would
commercially exploit her name
in clothes.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is the so‑called common practice of celebrities doing that. That was
the expressed basis for the Full Court’s
Yes. Can I ask you about that. Were there findings of fact made by
the primary judge that gave us more detail about that, or
is it just at that
level of generality?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
It is at that level of
generality, and the Full Court – which I will come to,
your Honour – refers to three matters
as supporting that. They
are not findings of the primary judge as such, they are pieces of
MR DIMITRIADIS:
One is Ms Taylor’s
acceptance in cross‑examination that that can occur at a general level by
reference to some very
famous celebrities who had done that.
I am not sure what the relevance of her subjective evidence on that
MR DIMITRIADIS:
We make that submission,
your Honour. Secondly, there is a reference to an affidavit of
Mr Jensen, who gave some very general
evidence about it. And thirdly,
there is a hearsay statement in a newspaper article where someone refers to that
occurring as a
general proposition.
BEECH‑JONES J:
have characterised those reasons as the Full Court expanding the reputation, but
is not the other way of looking at what they
have said is they have picked up
what Justice Jagot put to you earlier, they have said: here is this
reputation, the notional and
fair use of your client’s trade mark, and let
us get right to a shirt that said “Katie Perry”, would be likely
deceive or cause confusion. So, it is all about the inquiry, which does involve
a degree of speculation, at 60(b), was it not?
Was that not really what they
were saying?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
In my respectful submission,
your Honour, that is not what they say. That might be another way of
approaching the matter, but
it is not, we respectfully submit, the way in which
the Full Court reasoned.
GORDON A‑CJ:
Can we ask a direct
question. If the question is posed in the way in which
Justice Beech‑Jones put to you, that is the nature
of the inquiry
that should have been undertaken.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
And we would
submit the answer to that, as the primary judge found, is that there is not the
requisite likelihood of deception
or confusion, and a number
GORDON A‑CJ:
So, we have notional – I mean, there is a number of concepts here.
Notional and fair use by your client includes labels on
clothes and extends to
names on fronts of shirts.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
As I understand, that is your case. So, the question is, as
identified by the primary judge, and arguably identified by the Full
you read it in a particular way, is whether or not that notional and fair use by
the designer is likely to cause confusion,
given the accepted reputation of the
singer in Australia at July 2008, or September – at the priority
date, I meant to say.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, that is a way of
framing the inquiry, your Honour, yes, we agree. We do respectfully submit
the Full Court did not approach
it in that way and their Honours’
reasons involved error, and we submit the answer to that inquiry is as the
primary judge
answered it, for the reasons that her Honour is giving in
this part of the judgment, that the requisite likelihood of deception or
confusion did not arise on a proper assessment of the evidence in this
BEECH‑JONES J:
So, would it extend to this, then,
that if your client was at a booth outside a Katy Perry concert, handing out or
was selling shirts
with the words “Katie Perry” on a
T‑shirt – or is that getting too
fact‑specific?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is too far, with
respect, your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
understand.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
This concept of notional
use – also called “normal and fair use” – it
has limits. Notional – the
expression that is usually used in the
cases is “normal and fair”. “Fair” has a content to it.
In our respectful
submission, notional use or normal and fair use of a trade
mark would comprehend bona fide use by a trader seeking to build their
reputation or their own brand and avoid confusion with others in the market. It
would not comprehend use that would be knowingly
misleading such as the example
that your Honour Justice Beech‑Jones put to me.
But it would, as I understand your argument – just
explain to me, maybe I have this wrong – the normal and fair use
designer of a mark in relation to clothes would include labels with the name on
it and, as I understand it, fronts of shirts
with names on it.
DIMITRIADIS:
It could, yes.
GORDON A‑CJ:
can stand back, and we know since 2008 that there are a number of
brands – named, marked things – that have
their names on
the – it is a way of using the mark.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
It is, your Honour.
GORDON A‑CJ:
So, that is a
notional use, which is normal and fair, of a registered mark in relation to
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes. My word of caution in
answer to Justice Beech‑Jones’ observation was that one does
not extend that to having
the trade mark owner outside a Katy Perry concert
with a both selling clothes in that environment. That is not within the
BEECH‑JONES
You do not have that detail.
DIMITRIADIS:
That is right,
your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
But it would
extend to the sale of shirts with the name on it.
DIMITRIADIS:
BEECH‑JONES J:
And if that happened to coincide with a Katy Perry tour, then so be
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour.
Why is that –
in this case, we have a label that does not have a large degree of exposure. Is
it obvious that normal use
involves putting a name that does not already have a
degree of celebrity on the front of a shirt as a use of a trade
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Your Honour, the cases
dealing with notional use, I think it is fair to say, do not fully explore the
metes and bounds of the extent
of that concept. I put to your Honours what
we say about it ‑ ‑ ‑
But you are prepared to go on the assumption, which might be
unfavourable to you, that that might be a normal use.
DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, we say that would not undermine the result,
for the reasons given by the primary judge.
Can I ask you a very basic question about this issue?
DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, of course, your Honour.
We are looking at section 88(2)(a). Are we bound to
exclude from any consideration what happened after registration? I mean,
use hindsight at all, given that we are not a pure section 60 case, we are
a section 60 case after the event?
DIMITRIADIS:
That is true. We submit that the inquiry is
conducted as at the priority date in the sense that the conclusion that is
is that there is the requisite likelihood of deception or confusion
because of the reputation at the priority date.
I only ask you that because that because, I think, one of the
important parts of your case is an absence of evidence of any actual
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour. That is relevant as a piece of evidence which tends to show,
because one can point to circumstances that
in fact occurred after the priority
date, where there was a long period of use. And yes, Ms Taylor’s use
was relatively small
compared to Ms Hudson, but it was continuous use over
a period of many years, including on a website where clothes were made available
and sold in Australia and promoted online.
That is relevant as a piece
of evidence that tends to suggest that the use that she was making –
and we would extend that to
that being notional and fair use, because she was
using the mark in an ordinary way that a designer would on clothes –
not tend to give rise to the requisite likelihood of deception or
confusion, because none emerged.
short answer is we can take that into account?
DIMITRIADIS:
You can, as a piece of evidence.
As a piece of evidence.
DIMITRIADIS:
GORDON A‑CJ:
Sorry, I do
not quite understand that answer. If that is in relation to section 60,
which is looking at the priority
MR DIMITRIADIS:
GORDON A‑CJ:
So, where you started in terms of
the statutory structure was to identify – properly, I
think – that section 60 is
looking at, ordinarily, a situation
where the mark has not been registered, so there can be no evidence of actual
confusion, because
we are looking at it at a hypothetical. And what
section 88(2)(a) does, does it not, is it in effect imposes the same
restrictions
on that inquiry.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
I am not drawing a distinction because of the operation of section 88.
What I am submitting, your Honour, is that although
the inquiry is
conducted as at the priority date, evidence as to what occurred after the
priority date when the marks were in fact
used at the same time and no instances
of confusion were established in the evidence, that is a piece of evidence from
can draw an inference that the use as at the priority date was not
likely to deceive or cause confusion.
You would say
that it would be a very odd conclusion if you excluded evidence of actual use up
to the date of the application for
rectification?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes. We submit it is – and there are cases that have adopted
this line of reasoning – only as a piece of evidence from
can infer that the use of the two marks at the same time in the market is not
likely to deceive or cause confusion because
they did not in fact give rise to
instances of confusion.
At some point, could you give
us the references to those cases.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
We can turn
that up, yes, your Honour.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Her Honour certainly relies on that in
her Honour’s reasoning.
Well, it is orthodox.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
A form of reasoning that things that happen
after, if they are the kind of things that could be in contemplation at the
relevant time
– in this case, the priority date – can
rationally be used for that purpose.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour,
process of inference about likelihoods at the relevant date, being the priority
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is our submission, your Honour.
And indeed, in a timely way, the second point that the primary judge made, the
second reason
her Honour gave for not finding that the requisite likelihood of
deception or confusion was made out, was precisely that. That is,
paragraph 743 of her Honour’s reasons, there was:
no evidence of any confusion as at Priority Date or since that time.
There was discovery which was sought seeking to uncover that, no evidence
was tendered, and:
Ms Taylor has continued to use the Applicant’s Mark
. . . without a skerrick of evidence of any confusion on the part of
member of the public –
as her Honour said.
And she had in fact been
using prior to the priority date.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
It is not a case of no use, registration; it is a
case of use, then registration.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
particular case, that is right, your Honour. And her Honour deals with
that in some detail and addresses some submissions
which were made by the
respondents below, after 743. Then the third matter referred to by her
Honour is at paragraph 750.
Here, her Honour made it clear she
was considering the notional use or “notional and fair use”, as her
Honour put it,
“of the Applicant’s Mark” that could be made
across the scope of the registration. However, as her Honour reasoned,
we respectfully submit this reasoning was correct, that factor did not lead to a
finding of a likelihood of deception or confusion.
In part, that was
because Ms Taylor had in fact sold clothes of a kind which were similar to
those sold by touring pop stars such
as Ms Hudson, such as
T-shirts – her Honour deals with that in 750
and 752 – and the effect of that was to underscore
significance of the second matter that her Honour had referred to, being
the absence of any evidence of confusion arising from
Ms Taylor’s trade mark.
Now, in the context of that third
reason, her Honour acknowledged, as was appropriate, the similarities
between the two marks. That
is in paragraph 751. And, as I pointed out
earlier, the Full Court criticised her Honour for this – I will
come to their Honours’
reasons on that front – on the basis of
the common ground that the marks were deceptively similar.
that criticism was not apt, and that her Honour was required to and
appropriately did have regard to a comparison between
the marks in the context
of section 60, which is a different inquiry. We submit
her Honour’s reasoning was apt. Her Honour
noted that the
are the same aurally, they differ, albeit slightly, visually –
but made a finding that:
The difference in spelling of “Katie” is immediately
Her Honour’s reference to:
The more conservative appearance of the Applicant’s Mark
is a reference to that spelling, as the Full Court accepted.
There is another finding made by her Honour in this paragraph which
worth noting. It is in the last two lines, where her Honour said:
the clothes offered for sale by the respondents rarely bear only the Katy
Perry Mark on them. Usually it is accompanied by graphics
or photos of
Now, the Full Court also criticised her Honour for
that observation on the basis that the respondent’s use after the priority
date was not relevant to the inquiry. Now, of course, that is true; in a direct
sense, it is not relevant.
It is not the inquiry, but we submit the
point made by her Honour is relevant indirectly as a piece of evidence,
having regard to
the argument that was being made by the respondents which was
later accepted by the Full Court, and that was that it was enough –
or this was the respondent’s case – that Ms Hudson had a
reputation in relation to music or entertainment for the use
of a similar name
in relation to clothes to give rise to the requisite likelihood of deception or
Now, that argument being put, it raised a question as to how
consumers might expect a celebrity such as Ms Hudson to use her name
trade mark – if that is what she was going to do – in
relation to clothes. How would that in fact occur? What
would be the nature of
the use by a celebrity? This finding of the primary judge reflects on that by
looking at what Ms Hudson actually
did. Usually in the way that one sees
on celebrities’ merchandising where they do it, the name is accompanied by
other indicia;
graphics or photos, in this case of Ms Hudson.
is relevant as a piece of evidence in informing the assessment of whether or not
the use of a similar name by Ms Taylor on a
piece of clothing without
indicia of that kind is going to give rise to the requisite likelihood or
confusion. Using Katie Perry
with an “i-e” alone, but without any
graphics or photos of Ms Hudson, it is a different character of use. We
was a legitimate observation by the primary judge relevant to
her Honour’s conclusions.
GORDON A-CJ:
There are two
points being made in that paragraph. One is the distinction between the
spelling, which is existence of facts as
at the time in you are undertaking the
statutory comparison required.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
GORDON A-CJ:
The last sentence is post‑priority date
MR DIMITRIADIS:
GORDON A-CJ:
do not need it.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Well, it is not necessary, but
it is a relevant finding, and the evidence about that is relevant. What it
informs is that –
one can infer from it – consumers
understand that when a celebrity, such as a pop star like Ms Hudson, uses a
name on clothes,
it is usually going to be accompanied by graphics or photos or
other indicia of the pop star in question: perhaps an album, a
Is this an argument about the meaning of the
reputation that has been acquired?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
This is going
to inform the understanding of whether or not the reputation which was found,
which was for entertainment and music,
causes or gives rise to the likelihood of
deception or confusion if the mark is used in relation to clothes. It is
informing that
assessment.
BEECH-JONES J:
Is your submission,
well, you cannot assume it, but if they do, they will put their face on
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, because of course to assess whether or
not Ms Taylor’s use is going to give rise to deception or confusion,
rely on indicia such as the photographs or graphics referrable to
Ms Hudson being on the shirt. It is “Katie Perry”
Is this similar to an argument that whilst it
may have been expected that the singer would exploit her reputation in other
MR DIMITRIADIS:
If it was, yes.
is not necessarily the case that the singer would have done so by using her
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is one point, your Honour,
which emerges from some of the evidence that the Full Court relies on,
I mean, I understand, for example, there is a
celebrated actor in Hollywood who does not use her name but uses the word
to sell merchandise.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour, and one of the examples in evidence here was of a
celebrity who used a different name for their
going back to that finding about what is expected, was it expected that she
would use her name, particularly, or expected she
would use her
reputation?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Well, we would submit that
there was no expectation in relation to her at all on the evidence, because the
evidence is at such
a level of generality that it does not support that finding.
Even if there was, it would not necessarily be that she would merchandise
Still, even if she did merchandise using her name, one would
expect it usually to be accompanied by other indicia referable to her
star or celebrity, such as photographs of her, graphics or album covers’
references to singles that she had released
and the like. All of that tends
against a finding that there was a requisite likelihood of deception or
confusion arising from only
the use of Ms Taylor’s trade mark,
without all of those other elements, on clothes. That is what the primary judge
Your Honours, could I go to the Full Court’s reasons
on this part of the case. That is in their Honour’s reasons from
paragraph 271, that is core of appeal book 406. Now, in discussing
section 60 and the approach to be applied, their Honours did
acknowledge ‑ ‑ ‑
Sorry, what was the paragraph again?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Paragraph 271, your Honour. Their Honours acknowledged the
requirements of section 60, and they deal with those in the following
paragraphs, but our submission is that they misapplied the principles and those
requirement in the way that they dealt with the section.
Both at the stage 1 and the stage 2
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, both, your Honour. Yes.
Particularly – yes, both.
Can I just ask
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour.
It is one thing to find error in a primary judge’s –
for an appellate court to find error in a primary judge’s
reasoning, this the Full Court seems to do for four reasons that take you up to
paragraph 301. Then, having found error,
one assumes the Full Court goes
on. Am I right that the entirety of the Full Court’s reason, on the
conclusion it reaches,
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, it is,
your Honour. I think that is right.
that issue that it seems to be disconnected to the priority date, in any express
way, at least.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour, we
would respectfully submit that.
And you are saying that
this has a series of assumptions – in fact, I am actually drawn out
here – in it.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour.
It is assuming that Katy Perry would
expand into clothing, it is assuming she would, if she did so, use the name
“Katy Perry”
as the trade mark to distinguish that clothing, and
then it is assuming that – if she did use it – there would
other indicia connecting the name and the clothing with the entertainment
reputation. At least those three things are in
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour, and if I
could ‑ ‑ ‑
is all to be foreseen at the – sorry, that is all part of what has
been foreshadowed in that compressed paragraph
as a form of reasoning tied to
the priority
MR DIMITRIADIS:
I think that is fair, your Honour. Yes.
‑ ‑ ‑ from the reputation of Katy Perry in
music and entertainment at that point as
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour.
Is that effectively because the reputation that has
been identified in relation to the trade mark is referrable to the fact that
is a pop star?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
I think that underlies
their Honours’ statement in that paragraph that Justice Jagot
referred to, yes, your Honour. One
can look at the four matters that
their Honours identified as informing an assessment of error on the part of
the primary judge and
perhaps gain some understanding of what their Honours
were considering. We submit those four matters disclose error on the part
the Full Court, and if I
could ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
I just stop you there. You embrace those three assumptions. The second was an
assumption that she would use her name.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour.
BEECH-JONES J:
Is not the unregistered
trade mark, which is the whole postulate of section 60, the name
“Katy Perry”?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour,
BEECH-JONES J:
that is not an assumption, that is what the statute says: the reputation in
that mark as in the name. So, it is not an assumption,
it is the inquiry that
you have to undertake, is it not?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
an assumption in this sense, your Honour. That is that the name is the
trade mark, but the findings of the primary judge
were the reputation in that
trade mark was for entertainment and music services. So, yes, she is using her
name as a pop star for
entertainment and music, the assumption that arises here
is that if she was going to merchandise and sell clothes, she would use
to do that rather than some other label such as “goop”
I am saying
as an assumption because section 60(a) is given, but when you come to (b),
which is what this is what this all about,
you have to say because of the
reputation of that other trade mark, i.e. as found, Katy Perry in
music and entertainment, that reputation:
of the one to be registered:
would be likely to deceive or cause confusion.
That has to then take you on to, okay, now we have to be in the realm of
clothing, because nothing else is going to cause it. So,
that is why I framed
it as an assumption.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
We would respectfully
agree, your Honour.
So, there is definitely an
expansion of the found reputation.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
but that is the effect of it, your Honour.
not saying that that is wrong. I am just saying that is rolled up in 302,
accepting, as I of course do, that the earlier
reasoning gives you clues as to
what 302 means. I am not suggesting against
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour.
Your Honours, could I deal with the
GORDON A‑CJ:
There is two aspects to it, though, is there not? That is, one is the fact that
you have not got a reputation, in relation to
the goods, the subject of either
the application for the registered mark or the registered mark might be a factor
against deception
and confusion, but it is not a complete
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Correct, your Honour. I would
have to accept that.
GORDON A‑CJ:
So, we are still back
in the 60(b) inquiry, notwithstanding that fact.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is true. Could I deal with the four
matters that the Full Court identified as reflecting error on the primary
part here, which lead up to the paragraph that we had been
considering. Those four matters – we emphasise their Honours
it was the four matters combined that led their Honours to intervene.
That is in 301.
If I could ask your Honours to go back to 288,
where this part of their Honours’ reasons commences. That is at core
book 409, where their Honours identify the four matters. The
first one is dealt with in 289, and this was that:
the primary judge unduly confined the reputation –
in the Katy Perry trade mark, and this is where we submit the Full Court
was effectively seeking to expand the reputation beyond clothes
am sorry, to clothes beyond music and entertainment. Firstly,
their Honours said that it was:
artificial to excise and disaggregate the reputation of Katy Perry, the
entertainer, from the reputation in the Katy Perry Mark –
That is in 290. We respectfully submit, as a matter of principle, that
is wrong. One needs to find reputation in a trade mark, not
reputation in a
celebrity. One has to consider what goods or services the reputation relates
Secondly, your Honours, their Honours relied on the
so‑called common practice of celebrities to seek to expand the reputation
beyond music and entertainment to clothes, and one can see that that is what the
Full Court was doing here, in particular from the
first sentence of 289, where
their Honours said:
the primary judge unduly confined the reputation of the Katy Perry
as well as the last sentence of 290:
To confine ‑ ‑ ‑
GORDON A‑CJ:
So, just pausing on 289, that last
The reputation in her name was of necessity a reputation in her name as a
is incomplete, is it not, because it does not then say what the mark
relates to, whether it is goods or services or both?
DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, it is incomplete. Yes, your Honour. We also
submit it is wrong, because the reputation in a celebrity’s name is not,
of necessity, reputation in it as a trade mark. One has to consider the
particular goods or services in relation to which the trade
mark is being
Well, is it not correct in relation to her
trade as a singer?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Not at that level of
abstraction with which the Full Court has put it in the last sentence of
paragraph 289. There were many references
to Ms Hudson in the
evidence doing different things, being seen as a celebrity, but that did not
necessarily establish reputation
on her part in relation to music and
entertainment services. One needs to consider
those ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
But was she not only seen as a celebrity insofar as she was a
GORDON A‑CJ:
“International
entertainer” is the way it is described in the third line.
DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, our point is that a use of the name
“Katy Perry” in relation to Ms Hudson was not invariably
used as a trade mark
and did not invariably inform that there was a reputation
in that name as a trade mark.
Do you mean at a level of
principle or abstraction?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
On evidence it might have been.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
But, for example, Einstein – back in
time, you would not – a world‑famous physicist, internationally
famous, not
every use of the name “Einstein” would be –
or even perhaps any use of the name “Einstein” would be
trade mark, is your point.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour.
Certainly, some uses would follow
here, music and – music, effectively pop music.
DIMITRIADIS:
That is right, your Honour, and the Court in
did say one needs to have a reputation in trade mark, not reputation
alone, that is the point.
GORDON A‑CJ:
I understand that
principle. Here, is there any international entertainer who uses a name as a
mark – but not even this
case – which does not use it as a
trade mark, as a mark? That is how they – that is what their
reputation is.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
It depends on the
particular use, your Honour – that is our answer to that. Every
use is not necessarily use as a trade
Not every use might be, but the name is the thing which is
registered or sought to be registered. Or, in this case, the name is
which is identified as the mark, because that is what the singer uses as the
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour. But our
point is at ‑ ‑ ‑
There is no dispute about that.
DIMITRIADIS:
level of principle ‑ ‑ ‑
I understand the principle.
DIMITRIADIS:
‑ ‑ ‑ it is
not correct. And perhaps the more significant point here is this is not a basis
for expanding the
reputation beyond music and entertainment to clothes, which is
what, in our respectful submission, the Full Court was seeking to
I have referred to the first sentence of 289. One can also see that from
the first sentence of 291:
In concluding that the Katy Perry Mark did not have a reputation in clothes,
the primary judge ignored the common practice of pop
stars to sell merchandise
including clothing at concerts and to launch their own clothing labels.
That reasoning, your Honours, we respectfully submit is incorrect.
It is seeking to substitute, for the sorts of evidence which can
establish a
reputation such as use of the mark in relation to particular goods or services,
something else, which is what was said
to be evidence of a common practice, at a
level of generality, for pop stars to sell merchandise.
Can I ask you this question. At 291(a) –
Mr Jensen’s evidence – the way it is summarised there, it
he is giving opinion evidence rather than evidence of an actual
intended future commercial exploitation by the singer. Is that what
evidence was?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
It was not directed at
Ms Hudson, if that is what your Honour is pointing out. Yes, he gave
some examples, and it was not tied
to any particular time at all. The
particular celebrities that he referred to were of a particular order of
magnitude of celebrity
– Rihanna, Jennifer Lopez, Beyoncé
and Gwen Stefani, examples that he gave – not a singer who had
acquired fame
within a short space of time and potentially was on the rise. But
one was not to know that at the priority date.
I do not think Rihanna uses her name to exploit her
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is another point,
your Honour. If I could deal with those matters that the Full Court
refers to on the common practice –
so, we say it is not something
that can substitute for the inquiry that is required by section 60. One
needs to identify a reputation.
A common practice that things might occur does
not establish a reputation that existed at the priority date on
Ms Hudson’s
trade mark in relation to clothes when she had never used
it in Australia in relation to clothes and, as the primary judge found,
reputation in relation to clothes.
The Full Court has referred to
three things in this part of their reasons as supporting the common practice.
Firstly, in the second
sentence and following of 291,
Ms Taylor’s evidence accepting that:
it was commonplace for musical artists to put out items of clothing bearing
their names –
and some of the same examples that we have
referred to.
Again, what are we to make of
that evidence?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Is it intended to be a concession
DIMITRIADIS:
We submit, nothing. It does not establish
anything, your Honour. Her personal knowledge – subjective
understandings of
such matters – is not to the point, it does not
establish a reputation on the part of Ms Hudson’s trade mark in
to clothes.
BEECH-JONES J:
Sorry, is there a dispute
items of clothes bearing
their names and likeness? That is not in dispute, is
MR DIMITRIADIS:
The evidence of it as at the level that
your Honour sees here, in 291, and at that level, that evidence was
BEECH-JONES J:
I am sorry – I know, but was
the answer – that is, you do contest that, or do not?
DIMITRIADIS:
We contest it as a general proposition that celebrities do
BEECH‑JONES J:
MR DIMITRIADIS:
There are examples of celebrities who
have done that, that is correct.
Your point is that
this evidence is insufficiently specific and, indeed, there is another
assumption in this evidence, and that is
that the singer would continue to have
such an enhanced reputation in the future that they would be able to use their
on clothing.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes. That is right,
your Honour. It could not have been known at the time what would
eventuate. She was only recently gaining
fame – Ms Hudson.
Rapid fame can be fleeting, it can be ephemeral. As events have happened, it
has not been that way for
Ms Hudson, her fame has been durable, but that
could not have been known at the time. So, Ms Taylor’s acceptance of
some general
examples does not provide support for those
Your Honours, in paragraph 41 of our written
submissions – I will not go there because of the time – we
make some points
was not, in fact, aware of Jennifer Lopez’s label; she was aware
Gwen Stefani’s label, but it was not in Gwen Stefani’s name, it
was called “L.A.M.B”. So, it was not
an example that assists, and
she was not aware of Rihanna’s label.
accept that it is a legitimate way of reasoning that Ms Hudson had acquired
a reputation as a pop star and, therefore, the
trade mark had acquired a
reputation in Australia as the kind of trade mark that might be used on the kind
of products that might
be merchandised by pop stars?
DIMITRIADIS:
We do not, your Honour. We submit one has to have
regard to the reputation that had been acquired, which was only in relation
music and entertainment. There is then an inquiry as to whether that would give
rise to the requisite degree of deception or
confusion, which does require an
assessment of whether, because of the trade mark in relation to music and
entertainment, use of
a similar mark would be likely to give rise to confusion
if it is used in relation to clothes. So, that is part of the assessment.
say the evidence does not get there in this case, given all of the matters that
I have referred to, and that is what the primary
Your Honours, just to tie off the last – I think
I have already referred to Mr Jensen’s evidence that the Full Court
relied on in 291(a). In 291(b), that is the hearsay statement in the
newspaper article that I referred to, which we say does not
take matters any
further. Your Honours, we say all of those matters do not substitute for
the inquiry in section 60 which must be
conducted as at the priority
The reputation at the priority date is what must give rise to the
likelihood of deception or confusion. It is not an inquiry about
occur in the future if the celebrity extends their brand into other areas and
then there might be a likelihood of deception
or confusion.
matter that the Full Court referred to as reflecting error on the part of the
primary judge is dealt with in 292 and following.
This is where
their Honours criticise her Honour for conducting her own assessment
of the similarity between the two marks. Your
Honours can see that
criticism particularly in 293.
We submit that was not
warranted – that criticism. Her Honour was appropriately
considering the extent of the similarity between
the two marks, noting the
differences, not making an assumption based on the fact that there was an
agreement that the marks were
deceptively similar, because that is a different
inquiry which requires reputation to be ignored, and we have explained that in
detail in the written submissions.
The third matter that the Full
Court referred to as one of the contributing reasons for finding that the
primary judge had erred
is in 296 and following, which was
her Honour’s reliance on, as a “powerful factor”:
the absence of evidence of actual confusion at and since the priority
For the reasons I have already submitted, that is a conventional form of
reasoning and an appropriate form of reasoning particularly
in circumstances
such as the present case, where the types of clothes on which Ms Taylor had
in fact used her trade mark are of a
similar kind to those sold by pop
stars – T-shirts and the like – or include those, and she
had used the trade mark over
a period of more than 10 years, including
through a website and online.
So, are you saying the
common position was only that they are deceptively similar as per 121, not
that they, because of the reputation
of the Katy Perry mark, would be likely
to – there is
obviously ‑ ‑ ‑
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Absolutely, your Honour, and section 60 was always in dispute, and
still is, has been in dispute, and deceptive similarity was never
in dispute,
because that is purely a comparison between the
marks ‑ ‑ ‑
MR DIMITRIADIS:
‑ ‑ ‑ imperfect recollection, et cetera.
And then, the final matter that the Full Court relied on – the fourth
matter, your Honours – was the primary judge’s treatment
of or reference to the evidence as to how the Katy Perry mark,
Ms Hudson’s mark, had in fact been used after the priority date with
other indicia or photos. I have already made submissions
legitimate point for her Honour to advert to. That is dealt with by the
Full Court in paragraph 300. We say
that also reflects error on the part
of the Full Court.
And then finally, your Honours, the Full Court
draws those threads together in 302, and I think, for the reasons I have
I will need to move on to the next issue. Your Honours understand why
we say the Full Court’s conclusions are incorrect.
We submit the primary
judge’s assessment of the evidence was correct, had regard to matters as
they stood at the priority date
and the findings her Honour had made about
the limitations of the reputation in Ms Hudson’s trade
BEECH-JONES J:
Can I just take you back to 258, just
on that point that was just raised with you.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
BEECH-JONES J:
At 258, at 751. What is the
difference between the reasoning in that paragraph and the application of
the deceptively similar test?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Sorry, what
paragraph is your Honour referring to?
BEECH-JONES J:
Paragraph 751 of the primary judge at page 258 of the core appeal
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Thank you, your Honour. Yes. What
her Honour did there was simply to compare the similarities or differences
between the marks as
part of her assessment of whether or not the reputation of
one of them was likely to give rise to deception or confusion in
BEECH-JONES J:
Well, I understand that, but what is the
matter of substance of the difference?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
that the Full Court made was to criticise her Honour for doing that because
the marks had been agreed to be deceptively
similar. So, in effect, their
Honours said: you are already starting from the point that they are deceptively
similar, so you should
not even be looking at the extent of the differences
between the two marks.
BEECH-JONES J:
But your criticism, you
point it out by saying, well look, the test for deceptively similar does not
take into account reputation.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
BEECH-JONES J:
But I do not see reputation entering
MR DIMITRIADIS:
It is part of
her Honour’s assessment, in our respectful submission. She is noting
the similarities and the differences between
the mark as one of the factors that
goes towards her overall assessment of whether or not the reputation is likely
to give rise to
deception or confusion.
BEECH-JONES J:
paragraph 751, which is the core of the reasoning adopted here, that is not
looking at reputation, is it?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Not in and of
itself, it is part of her Honour’s chain of reasoning. The problem
arises, in our respectful submission, your
Honour, in the Full Court,
where their Honours seek to use the agreement – common ground
to put aside this reasoning of
her Honour. The last two sentences of that paragraph, we would submit, do
talk about reputation,
when one understands them properly.
Are you talking about
paragraph 751?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Paragraph 751.
GORDON A‑CJ:
Is that an appropriate
time for the Court to take its morning
adjournment?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour. That
is convenient.
GORDON A‑CJ:
The Court will adjourn for 15
AT 11.15 AM SHORT
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT
GORDON A‑CJ:
We finished
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour.
GORDON A‑CJ:
We are moving
to 88(2)(c)?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is correct,
your Honour, and I will endeavour to be briefer on this one, because I also
need to deal with the section 89 issue,
GORDON A‑CJ:
We will ensure that you get
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Thank you, your Honour.
Section 88(2)(c), as your Honours know, establishes a ground for
rectification that has a so‑called
continuing operation after the date of
application and, as your Honours have seen, it states that the ground is
because of the circumstances applying at the time when the application for
rectification is filed, the use of the trade mark is likely
to deceive or
cause confusion –
Now, a threshold issue that arises, as
your Honours know from the written submissions, is whether or not that
ground is to be assessed
having regard to the concept of notional use, as the
grounds of opposition are, or by reference to the registered owner’s
use of the challenged trade mark as at the relevant time, which is
our submission. We say there are several reasons, having regard
to the text,
context and purpose of this provision, which indicate that that is the correct
construction. The first one relates
to the wording:
the circumstances applying at the time when the application for rectification
They must be the case of the likelihood of
deception or confusion. It is “because of the circumstances” that
of the challenged mark must be:
likely to deceive or cause confusion –
It is calling
attention to specific circumstances applying at a particular time, being the
time of the application for rectification,
including the trade mark
owner’s actual use at that time. Secondly, the provision asks whether, in
those circumstances:
the use of the trade mark is likely to deceive or cause
confusion –
not it would be likely, as the grounds of
opposition do. And also, your Honours will note that
subsections (2)(a), (b), and (e),
the other limbs of section 88(2),
use different language which is referrable to events that have already occurred
in the past, unlike
Thirdly, your Honours, we submit
that, as this Court explained in
in relation to the
1955 Act, a feature of the trade marks legislation is that it sanctions a
measure of deception or confusion in
various respects. Your Honours, given
the time, I will not go to
itself, but I would note that the
paragraphs on which we rely are listed at point 6(d) of our outline of oral
propositions. So,
40 through to 61 in particular.
of those paragraphs of the Court’s reasons in
undertake an inquiry into the nature and scope of the provisions under the 1955
Act, to recognise that, in various respects,
it sanctioned a measure of
deception or confusion in marks. That included provisions relating to
licensing, assignment without goodwill,
honest concurrent use of two marks and
provisions contemplating that two different persons may register similar
All of that contributed to the Court’s finding, which is at
paragraph 56, that that proposition, that the Act sanctioned a
deception or confusion in various respects meant that the text of
section 28(a), which was then under consideration, should
not be strained
beyond its text to give the ground a continuing operation where that was not
required by the language used. So,
their Honours in fact used that
analysis to find that there was no continuing ground of rectification that
applied after the priority
Your Honours, in the current Act
there are similar provisions that deal with licensing, assignment, registration
of similar marks
and honest concurrent use. We have listed them in
point 6(b) of our outline of oral propositions. It can be accepted, of
that with the current Act there is a continuing ground of
rectification – section 88(2)(c) – but the question
as to the scope of that ground and the nature of the use that is relevant
to be considered.
We say similar considerations to those relied on in
inform this approach. The operation of section 88(2)(c)
should not be strained so as to give it a broader application than its text
requires by importing into it the concept of notional use across the scope of
the registration instead of looking at the circumstances
at the time of the
application for rectification.
why do not the – sorry.
My question was
going to be about how you reconcile that with the scope of the trade mark being
for clothing rather than for loungewear,
MR DIMITRIADIS:
One can understand it in this way, your Honour. The grounds of opposition
remain available through 88(2)(a). So, section 60 is
available as a
ground for rectification. As are other grounds that are given life as a ground
of rectification through 88(2)(a).
They incorporate the concept of
notional use across the scope of the registration, and we accept that that is
the analysis for section
Section 88(2)(c) introduces a
so‑called continuing ground for rectification which applies at any time
after that, and it can
be the subject of multiple applications. It is expressed
to be directed to particular circumstances existing at the time of the
application for rectification. We submit it makes sense as a matter of policy,
even aside from the wording, that that ground would
be referrable to what is in
fact occurring at that time.
If the trade mark owner’s actual use
is likely to deceive or cause confusion, then the ground would be made out. If
not, then the ground is not made out. A ground under section 60
might be made out for another reason but, if not, if the trade mark
owner’s use changes over time, then there might be another application
down the track under 88(2)(c) and that ground might
then be made
So, in short, because it is introducing a ground for rectification
that has a continuing operation after the date of registration,
understandable that it would be more confined in scope than the grounds that
apply at the outset as grounds of opposition.
If a trade mark is validly
registered, no ground of opposition applies, and it gets onto the register. It
makes sense as a matter
of policy why the provision of the continuing ground of
rectification might be more narrowly confined. That is our submission in
relation to that, your Honour.
BEECH-JONES J:
condition that could be imposed under 88(1)(a), (c), would that be a
condition saying: well, you can stay on, but we are going
to limit you to what
you have actually been doing?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
I would need to
consider whether that is – I do not know the answer to that off the
top of my head, your Honour.
BEECH-JONES J:
Because if that
is not right, on this scenario, if your client expanded the use of the clothes
to which it was applied in the future,
she would be liable to lose the lot, the
whole thing.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
It may be that there could be a
condition of that kind imposed. I have not considered that, your Honour,
and I am not sure what
the cases say about it.
BEECH-JONES J:
am just trying to see how this works, because you are contemplating, I think, a
circumstance where what we have been doing so far
is not likely to deceive or
cause ‑ ‑ ‑
MR DIMITRIADIS:
BEECH-JONES J:
But you accept that if you did expand,
another application could come along, on this approach, a year later and say,
well, actually,
now the actual use is likely to deceive or cause
MR DIMITRIADIS:
BEECH-JONES J:
As opposed to it simply having the same level of operation as a statutory
monopoly in section 20.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour.
So, can I just
understand – a basic question – is the source of the
confusion said to be, here, the potential expansion
of use of the mark by your
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Your Honour, the point of this
question ‑ ‑ ‑
then its expansion into what?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Your Honour, the point of raising this issue of construction is our
submission is the appropriate inquiry under 88(2)(c)
is to look at
Ms Taylor’s use in fact as at the time of the application for
rectification, which was use which had not, in
fact, given rise to any instances
of confusion, on the evidence, over a period of more
than 10 years.
Your point is that if there
was, in fact, to be a change in use or a change expanding the use of the mark,
you would then apply
88(1)(c) ‑ ‑ ‑
MR DIMITRIADIS:
On the circumstances at that time.
premature at the moment.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is right,
your Honour. That is right.
BEECH-JONES J:
By the way, do
you accept that if your construction is rejected, that you fail on this limb of
cancellation?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
No, we do not accept that,
your Honour. We do respectfully submit that the primary judge’s
approach, her Honour applied
a notional use test and found that for two
reasons, essentially, section 88(2)(c) was not made out. I accept, of
course, on the
construction that we contend for, the position is much clearer
for us. That is true, but we do respectfully support the primary
approach, if a notional use test is applied under
section 88(2)(c).
The two reasons her Honour gave were the
absence of any evidence of confusion over a period of more than 10 years,
having regard
to the length of that use and the fact that it extended to the
the like, and
secondly, the strength of the reputation by 2019 in Ms Hudson’s trade
mark, which her Honour had found to be
very strong.
understood that meant that this case was one in which even a small difference
between the two marks is something that
would be noticed by persons familiar
with Ms Hudson’s trade mark, given the strength of the reputation,
and it would be immediately
apparent that they are different things –
Katie with an “i‑e” is not Katy with a “y”. We
emphasise, in addition to that, this is not a channel in which all use is
of particular significance, the visual appearance of the
trade mark is
It would be very odd if you could
not – assume there was evidence of an intention to broaden the scope
of the use, of the actual
use, to other uses across the scope of the
registration. That is a circumstance existing, that intention is a circumstance
at the time.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
If there was, yes,
your Honour.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
you take that step and accept that, that that would be within (c), it
becomes then very odd to not accept that a circumstance
– it may not
be of much weight – is the scope of the registration. It may not
carry the day in terms of actual use or
evidence of intended use, but you are
saying you would be prohibited from taking it into account.
DIMITRIADIS:
Our primary submission is “the circumstances”
refers to what is occurring in the world, in terms of the use that is
and the nature of the market, but, your Honour, I accept that one could
read “circumstances” in 88(2)(c) more
broadly, on another
approach, as encompassing a consideration of the scope of the trade mark
registration, which is what your Honour
is putting to me.
Can I ask you one more question?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour.
In this question of confusion,
likely to deceive, is the source of the confusion, on the Full Court’s
reasons, the use by the
singer’s mark in entertainment and in music, or
does it include the use by the singer’s mark of her mark on clothes,
notwithstanding that she was not registered for that use in
MR DIMITRIADIS:
It is the latter, your Honour, I
think that is the effect of their Honours’ reasoning, and it was
clear that by 2019, Ms
Hudson had used the trade mark in relation to
So, is the effect, then, of the reasoning
that someone can use a mark contrary to the
Trade Marks Act
unregistered, and do it so blatantly that the person who is registered then has
to be taken off?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Well, that perhaps goes more or
in addition to the discretion at section 89,
your Honour ‑ ‑ ‑
I understand that, but is that the bottom line here?
DIMITRIADIS:
‑ ‑ ‑ but, yes. It is
a harsh outcome, your Honour, we respectfully submit that is –
All right. Okay.
DIMITRIADIS:
So, your Honours, we do support the primary
judge’s reasoning on section 88(2)(c) if a notional use test is
applied, but
our primary submission is that it is to be construed in the way
that we advance, which required attention to be given to Ms Taylor’s
actual use which, on the evidence, did not give rise to any instances of
confusion over a period of more than 10 years.
Could I now turn,
your Honours, to the section 89 issue. As your Honours know,
this provides an independent basis, regardless of
the outcome on the other two
issues, for upholding this appeal, because if we are right, section 89
confers a discretion which would
allow Ms Taylor’s trade mark to
remain on the register, even if the grounds or either of them are properly made
Your Honours, could I ask the Court to look at
sections 88 and 89 in the Act. It is important to consider
sections 88 and 89 in
their full context for the purposes of understanding
the discretion in 89. Now, section 88, as your Honours have
seen, provides
for the amendment or cancellation of trade marks on specified
grounds. Your Honours will notice that 88(1) says:
Subject to subsection (2) and section 89, a prescribed court
make certain orders, which include cancelling a trade mark. The use of
the word “may” in the first line of subsection
(1) has been
held to confer a discretion. That was recognised by the Full Court in this case
by reference to the
decision of the Full Court.
there is a general discretion in the cases referred to as being “at
large” under section 88(1) not to cancel a trade
mark if a ground is
made out, however, that is subject to section 89. Subsection 88(2),
of course, sets out the grounds for rectification.
In section 89, there is
a more confined discretion that is conferred. It says that:
The court may decide not to grant an application for rectification
on certain bases – not all of them that are available, but on
certain bases. Then, after setting those out:
if the registered owner of the trade mark satisfies the court that the ground
relied on by the applicant has not arisen through any
act or fault of the
registered owner.
So, the position is that is a general discretion
conferred by 88(1), but that is qualified by the fact that there is a more
discretion under section 89 which is applicable to certain grounds
or certain cases. And it is common ground that this is a section
That is because the two grounds in issue – grounds of
rectification – were, firstly, section 60, which arose
section 88(2)(a), that is referred to in section 89(1)(b); and also
the section 88(2)(c) ground, which is referred to in section
Your Honours can see that section 89 is applicable to those. Now,
focusing more directly on the language of section 89,
it provides
The court may decide not to grant an application for rectification
on those grounds which are listed. Subparagraph (a) refers to
section 87. That deals with grounds that involve a trade mark becoming
generic – not relevant for present purposes. Subparagraph (b),
of course, refers to section 88(2)(a), but only some of the
grounds, those
that deal with deception or confusion – they include section 60.
Then subparagraph (c) refers to section 88(2)(c).
subsection (2) refers to matters the court may or must take into account,
which includes the matters that are prescribed in
the regulations, which I will
GORDON A-CJ:
So, one of the critical issues
here is what does “act or fault of the registered owner” mean? That
is the critical
issue in this section.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes. I think it is the critical issue, your Honour, that is right. Can I
say this about it. The task of statutory construction,
of course, requires
attention to be given to the text as well as the context and purpose of the
legislation. In our submission,
the starting point is, in considering
section 89, it is necessary to bear in mind that its purpose is to confer a
discretion.
That is clearly what it is doing, what it is intended to
do – a power on the part of the court to decide not to grant an
application
for rectification if the circumstances warrant this –
and it is relevant to recognise that it is a discretion conferred in
the context
of what would otherwise be a more general discretion conferred by
section 88(1), which is at large.
In that sense, section 89 is
a remedial provision – a beneficial or remedial
provision – and it is established that provisions
of that kind should
be given a liberal or beneficial construction if it is open, and not an
unreasonable or unnatural construction.
An authority for that proposition is
IW v City of Perth
, which is referred to in our outline of
propositions at 8(c), and there are other cases referred to in that
Focusing on the text of section 89, the critical
issue – as your Honour Acting Chief Justice Gordon has
noted, is what is meant
by “any act or fault”, more particularly,
what is meant by:
the ground relied on by the applicant has not arisen through any act or fault
of the registered owner.
One has to read that in context, in our
submission, including in the context of section 88, which is referred to in
section 89. We
would make several points. Firstly, that phrase cannot
comprehend, on a sensible construction of this provision, the registered
owner’s act of applying to register the challenged trade mark in the first
place, in our submission.
One reason for that is that the existence of a
ground for rectification of the kind that is referred to in
section 89(1)(a) to (c),
and in the language that follows (c),
necessarily entails that there has been an application to register the
challenged trade mark,
otherwise one would not be in this territory. If that
act were sufficient to constitute a relevant act or fault for this purpose,
discretion would not never apply.
In addition, your Honours, we
submit that it is not apt to describe a ground for rectification as having
arisen through the trade
mark owner’s act of applying to register the mark
in the first place. A ground for rectification can only arise after an
application
is on foot, and the language that is used suggests that some other
kind of act or fault is required. “Act” suggests
some position, act
or conduct on the part of the trade mark owner. In our submission, it does not
comprehend an omission or inaction
and nor does it turn upon any actual or
constructive knowledge of the trade mark owner.
“fault”, on the other hand, imports some notion of blameworthiness.
We submit it is necessary to understand
this in light of the pre‑existing
law under the 1955 Act which prevailed at the time this Act was
passed – the current
Act – where a concept of blameworthy
conduct on the part of the trade mark owner had been developed as informing the
of the discretion under what was then section 22 of the
. It might be a reason to decline to exercise the
discretion not to cancel the mark.
Can I ask you this
question. Do you say that the phrase at the end – the phrase
“of the registered owner” –
directs attention to acts or
matters of default in your capacity as registered owner?
DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, that is fair, your Honour.
So that it necessarily is directed at what has happened after you are
registered.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, your Honour, that is
consistent with what I have been putting to your Honours.
All right, thank you.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, we would
respectfully adopt that. And we would submit in relation to
“fault”, when one understands the law as
it stood under the
1955 Act, particularly under the
Moo-Moove Case
New South Wales
Dairy Corporation v Murray Goulburn
– I am not going to go
to it, but it is in the joint bundle of authorities at tab 14 –
the effect of the majority reasoning
in that case was that blameworthy conduct
for the purposes of the provisions of the 1955 Act meant conduct that would
an applicant to protection in a court of
BEECH-JONES J:
Can I ask you, just about the answer you
just gave, in circumstances where 88(2)(a) is invoked – that
is, 89(1)(b) –
what is an example – which, as I
understand it, relates to what happened, which relates to time of
registration ‑ ‑
MR DIMITRIADIS:
BEECH‑JONES J:
What is the act or fault subsequent to
that that could have led to the ground relied on arising?
DIMITRIADIS:
Your Honour, in our
submission ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
As opposed to something about not just the mere fact you applied, but something
that happened or you knew about or that
accompanied
MR DIMITRIADIS:
There could have been – there can be cases where there has been use
before the trade mark has been applied for – that
might be an
example, use before the priority date of registration.
BEECH-JONES J:
Used by who?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
By the person who ultimately
applied for registration of the trade mark. That is once circumstance that
could occur. Something that
they did to render the mark misleading or deceptive
might be a relevant act or fault in those circumstances.
considering the operation of this section, one would not strive to find cases
where the discretion would be denied according
to each limb of this section.
Rather, the starting point should be this section is plainly intended to confer
a discretion on the
part of the court, it should be liberally construed, and if
it may be the case that it would not be very common for an act or fault
registered owner to arise that would negate the availability of the discretion
for particular grounds, then that just means
that the discretion is available
and can be exercised by the court in relation to – having regard to
the usual principles that
GORDON A-CJ:
I speak only for
myself, I do not know whether that kind of analysis is very helpful. I mean,
the question is: what are the facts?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
GORDON A-CJ:
What are the acts or faults, as I read
89 – or are there acts, or “any act or fault of the registered
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour referring to this case, or
GORDON A-CJ:
No, I am referring to it as a question of
construction.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Rather than a prism, one looks to the text of the statute and
says: listen, I have an application for rectification; I have decided,
gone through the requisite analysis under one of these limbs – and
you only have to have one of them – and I would
have to then ask
myself if the registered owner of the trade mark satisfies the
MR DIMITRIADIS:
GORDON A-CJ:
there is a level of satisfaction required, that the ground relied upon by the
applicant, which has been successful, has not arisen
through any act or fault of
the registered owner.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
So, the onus is on the registered owner to satisfy the
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is true.
GORDON A-CJ:
So, there is factual inquiry about what has caused or brought about, in
effect, the event, and are they caused by the act or the fault
of the registered
owner, and have you, the registered owner, satisfied the court that that is the
MR DIMITRIADIS:
We accept that, your Honour, but
the effect of the Full Court’s reasoning was to rely on
Ms Taylor’s act of applying for
registration of her trade mark as an
act that gave rise to the likelihood of deception or confusion. The Full Court
also referred
to Ms Taylor doing that with knowledge of certain matters
that gave rise to the grounds for rectification in due course.
that is not an act or fault of the registered owner on the proper construction
of section 89 that can be relevant. For
the reasons I have indicated, it
would mean that if it was enough that the registered owner applied for the trade
mark as being an
act or fault that gave rise to a ground for rectification, the
discretion would never be exercised.
BEECH-JONES J:
just noted, there were other things, it is not just the bare fact of
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is true.
BEECH-JONES J:
There is knowledge that accompanies it. Why would that not be embraced by
“act or fault”?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
It may be embraced
by “fault”. Knowledge may be relevant to fault, but the Full Court
did not rely on fault. There is
no notice of contention, and we submit that is
not open to this
Court ‑ ‑ ‑
GORDON A-CJ:
But the act might bring with it, might have attached to it, an act done in
certain circumstances.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
We would submit one has
to focus on an act of the registered owner. Fault is potentially a broader
inquiry which could take account
of circumstances and knowledge, but in our
submission, an act has to be a positive act of the registered owner, and the
owner’s application to register the trade mark cannot possibly
be that, is our respectful submission.
BEECH‑JONES J:
you strip all questions of knowledge out of the word “act” so there
is no differentiation between a deliberate act
or a reckless act or a negligent
act or anything else.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
We do say knowledge is not
relevant to act. Fault is there; we accept knowledge is relevant to
GORDON A‑CJ:
Is there a different inquiry under
which part of 89 you are in, in terms of what can be taken into account in
terms of act or fault?
So, in answer to Justice Steward, I think you said
it has to be everything post‑registration, and I think we have identified
that is different, possibly, for section 60.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
It may depend on the ground that one
GORDON A‑CJ:
It must depend upon the ground, I think. Is that right? Do you accept that, or
am I not right about that?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
No, I do accept that,
your Honour,
because ‑ ‑ ‑
There is a distinction to be drawn between each of the limbs
upon which you are dealing if rectification got up under one rather
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is right, your Honour, and that
is really required by the words, because the “act or
fault” – the language
the ground –
did not arise:
through any act or fault of the registered owner.
So, one needs to understand what the ground is and when it is considered
to make that assessment. So, I am going to agree with
GORDON A‑CJ:
Can I also ask in relation
to that, the Full Court identified, I think, two further factors which arguably
might have been looked
at in terms of discretion, but I wonder whether or not
they are also relevant at the act stage. One of them was, at least in relation
to one of the rectification grounds and possibly not the 60 ground, the delay in
the proceedings being issued. The
DIMITRIADIS:
Yes, I am going to deal with that.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
I am sorry to interrupt
your Honour.
GORDON A‑CJ:
That is all right. The
other one was that the designer at times had sought to align herself with the
singer to obtain a commercial
benefit. Then the third was the rejection of what
was described as a coexistence agreement.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
GORDON A‑CJ:
Are they part of the factual inquiry on
the fact section, or do they just go to discretion?
DIMITRIADIS:
On the Full Court’s reasoning, they are only
discretion, that is
I am asking what your submission is.
DIMITRIADIS:
Yes. Well, we say a number of things, your Honour.
First, one needs to start with what the Full Court found was the relevant
which was the act of applying with knowledge, and we say that is not a relevant
act for the reasons we have gone into in the
submissions.
Secondly, we say there is no notice of contention and it is
not open to the respondents to rely on any other act or fault of the
owner. Thirdly, we would say if that is not accepted, each of the three
circumstances that your Honour referred to on
proper analysis do not
constitute an act or fault of the registered owner through which the ground for
rectification arose, and I
will address that.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Could I just say this. Say you succeeded on your first ground,
section 60, but you failed on the second – so, one bases still
exists in 89 – what do you say then? This Court has to
re‑exercise it?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
We respectfully submit
yes, your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
The issue of what
the act or fault of – would be alive at that stage, would it
MR DIMITRIADIS:
If it is established that there was no act
or fault of the registered owner that gave rise to the ground for rectification,
the court would simply exercise the discretion.
BEECH‑JONES
Well, no, but it is either reasoning – the reasoning of the
Full Court is to identify the act as the application for registration.
would appear to be referable to the section 60 grounds. It would not
appear to be referable to the other grounds. So, if
that was the surviving
ground, and this Court came to re‑exercise or look at section 89, the
question of what the act or fault
was would be a matter for the court, would it
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Our submission is,
your Honour, that the only act or fault found – and there is no
notice of contention – was the act
of applying to register. The
Full Court relied on that for 88(2)(c) as well as 60. We submit
BEECH‑JONES
And what I am suggesting is that is not a question of a
notice of contention.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Then that was my
second point. If that is not accepted, then we submit, on proper analysis, each
of those acts or conduct are
not acts or faults that gave rise to the ground for
rectification, which I will address now if that is convenient,
your Honours.
Just to deal with the Full Court’s reasons
briefly, their Honours deal with this from paragraph 305 and
following. That is
at core appeal book 413. Your Honours,
at 312, their Honours discussed the language of “act or
fault”, including that
it indicated that the threshold was:
broader than just the “blameworthy” conduct –
under the old law. That is relevant because their Honours draw a
distinction between “act or fault” in that paragraph,
which informs
an understanding of the fact that their Honours relied on the act limb, not
the fault limb, of section 89.
The critical finding of the
Full Court in relation to the act of Ms Taylor that was relied on as
negating the availability of the
discretion is in 315 to 317. I will
not go through them in detail, but your Honours will see if it was
Ms Taylor’s act of
applying to register her trade mark with knowledge
of matters that ultimately gave rise to the grounds for rectification
BEECH‑JONES
Sorry, was that a particular paragraph you are
MR DIMITRIADIS:
It is 316 and 317 where that is
made clear, your Honour – the last sentence of 316, and
then 317 sets it out more fully.
GORDON A-CJ:
this makes the point that Justice Beech‑Jones put to you –
315 and 316 are dealing with the section 60 case?
DIMITRIADIS:
They are, and the Full Court’s reasoning
on 88, the exercise of the discretion in relation to 88(2)(c), is in
paragraph 342,
later – that is at core appeal book
420 – where their Honours refer back to the same act,
for her mark with knowledge –
BEECH‑JONES
Sorry, what
paragraph ‑ ‑ ‑
DIMITRIADIS:
Paragraph 342,
your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Paragraph 342?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Their Honours rely on the same act, in our submission.
That is (2)(a), though, is it not? That is a (2)(a)
MR DIMITRIADIS:
That is. Sorry, this in
relation to ground 4. Your Honour can see a heading above 340. So,
ground 4 was the section 88(2)(c)
ground. I think their Honours
do say section 88(2)(a), but this is dealing with the 88(2)(c) ground as
part of their Honours’
reasons. Their Honours declined to
exercise the discretion in relation to 88(2)(c) here.
I am sorry. Paragraph 341 identifies
additional factors in her appeal in relation to the discretion. You say they
are not acts
or facts, they are just dealing with the discretion
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Their Honours recount some
matters that were relied on in 340 – paragraph 341 in
particular. Paragraph 342, that is their
Honours’ finding as to
the act that Ms Taylor did, which meant that the discretion did not arise.
The discretion is not enlivened.
That is in relation to section 88(2)(c).
I think their Honours, perhaps – the reference to 88(2)(a)
I think is an error;
it should be 88(2)(c). Their Honours accept here, in
the last sentence of 342, that Ms Taylor’s conduct was not
“blameworthy”.
So, they are not relying on
BEECH-JONES J:
This may be helpful to you, but on the
scenario I was giving to you earlier, if 88(2)(a) was not established, it would
– do you say it would be hard to see how that can be the act
for the purposes of 88(2)(c)?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
right, your Honour. I think that is right, yes, but that is what
their Honours find.
BEECH-JONES J:
Well, their Honours
found that 88(2)(a) was established, so that
MR DIMITRIADIS:
think that is true, your Honour. I think I have made submissions as to why
we say the act of applying for registration
cannot be a relevant act or fault,
and we have made submissions about knowledge not being relevant. I would rely
on our written
submissions for those.
We have also submitted that the
Full Court’s language of the act contributing towards or contributing to
the ground arising
is an overly‑broad concept that does not reflect what
section 89 refers to, which is that the ground has arisen through the
or fault of the registered owner. A contributing cause is not
Can I then deal with the submissions that our friends make in
writing, relying on additional conduct of Ms Taylor – and this
addresses your Honour Justice Gordon’s observations
earlier – as constituting as disentitling act or fault. Our primary
submission is it is not open, for the reasons I have addressed, but if it is
considered, we say those matters do not constitute a
relevant act or fault that
would disentitle or mean that the discretion is not enlivened.
none of them can be relevant to section 60. They are all
post‑priority date matters, so they cannot have even contributed
alone caused, the section 60 ground to arise. So far as
section 88(2)(c) is concerned, there were three matters that I need
with. The first one is that Ms Taylor sought to align herself with
Ms Hudson to gain publicity. That is something the Full
Court referred to,
not as a relevant act or fault but as one of the factors in the exercise of the
discretion. That is in 319 of
the Full Court’s reasons, at core
appeal book 416.
That refers back to paragraph 220 of the
primary judge’s reasons. That paragraph refers to Ms Taylor
referring, in social
media and the like, to Ms Hudson. It contains no
finding that the events referred to would increase the likelihood of deception
or confusion, or involved any confusion at all, let alone gave rise to the
relevant ground. To the contrary, in our submission,
when that evidence is
understood, the events drew attention to Ms Taylor and Ms Hudson being
two different people having similar
names, and that would have the opposite
effect. It would not give rise to the ground under section 88(2)(c).
The second matter that is relied on is that Ms Taylor refused an
offer of a coexistence agreement. That is referred to by the Full
Court again
in the context of exercising the discretion, not as a relevant disentitling act
or fault. That is at paragraph 322 of
the Full Court’s reasons, at
core appeal book 416. That offer – it is dealt with by the
primary judge in paragraph 160
of her reasons – was made by
Ms Hudson in order to facilitate Ms Hudson’s trade mark becoming
registered for clothes.
That was the purpose of that coexistence offer.
Her trade mark had apparel specified as one of the categories of goods;
subsequently
it was deleted when the coexistence agreement did not happen. If
that had been accepted, it would have entailed both marks being
registered and
Ms Hudson’s mark being used in relation to clothes, as it in fact
So, the counterfactual that would have arisen, if the coexistence
arrangement had been accepted, would not have led to any relevant
from what in fact occurred. Ms Hudson’s fame would have increased,
as it did, and on the assumption that the section
88(2)(c) ground is made
out, it would have arisen anyway. So, the refusal to accept a coexistence
agreement cannot be seen as an
act or fault that gave rise to the
section 88(2)(c) agreement occurring. It just does not follow.
third matter that is referred to is that Ms Taylor failed to object, or did
not take action, against the respondents for more
than 10 years. That
is not referred to at all by the Full Court in this part of
their Honour’s reasons on the exercise of
discretion.
Their Honours did not rely on it as an act or fault; our friends have
raised it. In that context, the primary judge
made findings about this, and I
will give your Honours the references: 262 to 265 of
her Honour’s reasons, and 261.
Ms Taylor explained the
timing with which she brought proceedings. Proceedings were commenced in 2019
after she became aware of
litigation funding as a means of enabling her to
proceed. Before that, she did not consider that she was in a position to take
because of the cost. The primary judge accepted that.
respondents had a laches defence, where they sought to avoid an injunction.
That is dealt with by the primary judge at paragraphs
819 to 826 of
her Honour’s reasons. Her Honour there rejected that defence
and did not find that Ms Taylor’s conduct
was such to disentitle her
to protection in a court of justice, rather an injunction was
appropriate.
What occurred, as her Honour explained –
and this is at paragraph 826 of her Honour’s
reasons – Ms Taylor’s
trade mark became registered for
clothes, Ms Hudson’s trade mark was not registered for clothes; there
was no coexistence agreement.
Ms Hudson’s manager accepted that. In
those circumstances, the respondents took a calculated risk in proceeding. In
oral evidence, a “significant risk”, as we have referred to in
the written submissions.
The respondents went ahead and used
Ms Hudson’s trade mark on clothes in Australia despite knowing that
it was registered and
that there was no coexistence agreement, and that risk
existed. In those circumstances, Ms Taylor’s conduct can hardly be
said to have given rise to the ground for rectification. We say it is not an
act on her part not doing anything for 10 years, but
even fault is not an apt
description, given all of those circumstances that the primary judge
It would be wrong, in our respectful submission, given the
findings made on the laches defence to conclude that, nevertheless, that
of Ms Taylor was a fault through which this ground for rectification arose.
We submit it arose from Ms Hudson’s conduct
respondents’ conduct in proceeding in the face of Ms Taylor’s
registration selling clothes in Australia, which
gave rise to the findings of
infringement and flagrancy that the primary judge
Your Honours, that is what we say about “act or
fault”. The Full Court went on – after finding an act that
disentitled
Ms Taylor to the discretion – to say, in obiter, how
their Honours would have exercised the discretion, had it arisen. Our
first submission there is that the dispositive aspect of
their Honours’ reasoning was the finding that there was a
disentitling
act or fault, and so their Honours never actually got to the
point of exercising the discretion.
In those circumstances, if this
Court considers that there was no disentitling act or fault, the court should
simply proceed to exercise
the discretion. In any event, we submit that
their Honours’ approach was undermined by
House v The
errors. One of them was its misconstruction of section 89. We
submit the section is to be construed in the way that we have contended
we have dealt with that in our written submissions. Their Honours
proceeded on the wrong principle.
We have identified specific
House v The King
errors in our written submissions, from
paragraphs 72 to 75, in relation to each of the particular matters dealt
with by the Full
Court in the exercise of the discretion. They include some of
the matters that I have already dealt with in the context of there
relevant act or fault: the coexistence agreement, Ms Taylor seeking to
align herself with Ms Hudson, and the like.
GORDON A-CJ:
you want to say anything about the other factors the Full Court identified about
public interest considerations?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
GORDON A-CJ:
MR DIMITRIADIS:
I do, your Honour.
GORDON A-CJ:
I think they are
paragraphs 321, 323 and 344.
MR DIMITRIADIS:
your Honour, thank you. The Full Court referred to one aspect of the
public interest, in our submission, but not others,
which are also important and
material. The Full Court referred to the public interest in the integrity or
purity of the register,
in 321. That ignores other public interest
considerations which I will come to in a moment, including enabling trade mark
to protect their valuable intellectual property rights, not rewarding
infringers for their wrongdoing by cancelling a trade mark.
Also in 321,
that reasoning fails to take account of the fact that the Act sanctions a degree
of deception or confusion, as held
by the Court in
. Indeed, in
that case it was sufficient to enable the Court, under the 1955 Act, to
conclude that there was in fact no continuing
ground for rectification at all;
trade marks would remain on the register.
Health World
that is referred to in paragraph 321 is a case about the
construction of person aggrieved and not really relevant to this point.
Anchorage Case
that is referred to in 321 is a case about ownership. In
that case, the Full Court of the Federal Court declined to exercise the
discretion to allow a mark to remain on the register in circumstances where the
person who had the registration had been found not
to be the owner of the mark.
They were not the owner through first use, and the Full Court, in those
circumstances, regarded that
as an important consideration.
something briefly on the public interest a little further to those matters.
Public interest is, of course, one of the
relevant mandatory considerations
under the regulations that are referred to in Section 89(2). It is
regulation 8.2(a):
the extent to which the public interest will be affected if registration of
the trade mark is not cancelled –
We say there are various aspects of the public interest which are
relevant and that, as a whole, they strongly favour allowing
Taylor’s trade mark to remain on the register.
there is a recognised public interest in allowing trade mark owners to protect
their intellectual property rights against
infringement. That was referred to
by the Court in
, at 42. Secondly, there is a recognised
public interest in not rewarding infringers by allowing them to take advantage
wrongdoing. That is a corollary of the first one. That is referred to
in other cases.
Thirdly, it is in the public interest that
Ms Taylor, as the true owner of her trade mark – and that
was established in the
proceedings – be the person entitled to
registration of it on the register. She is entitled, as the first person to use
mark and the owner of the mark, to that. Fourthly, there is a public
interest in ensuring that the rights of ordinary traders are
protected and not,
in our respectful submission, made subservient to the
rights of famous or
notorious people who have not actually used the trade mark at the relevant
time in relation to the relevant goods
or services.
respectfully, the Act should not be applied in a way that would require an
ordinary trader such as Ms Taylor, who innocently
adopted her
trade mark, used it first on the relevant goods, to move aside for a famous
person such as Ms Hudson on the footing that
that person was or might
become famous and might, in the future, wish to use a similar name on those
goods but had not actually done
Is that not the
very purpose of 88(2)(c)?
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Section 88(2)(c) has a much broader application than the facts of this
case, and what I am putting to your Honours is that the
circumstances of this case provide very good reasons, if the ground is made out,
for exercising the discretion not to
cancel. There may be many other cases
where the conduct of the trade mark owner has contributed in some direct
way to the ground
arising or there are not the same considerations of an
ordinary trader’s rights being protected vis‑à‑vis
powerful and famous person.
Finally, your Honours, it may be
accepted that there is a countervailing public interest in ensuring that the use
of a trade mark
which has been found to be likely to deceive or cause
confusion should not be registered. That is the purity of the register point.
That is a fact, we accept that, but it is not the only public
interest – it was the only one referred to by the
Full Court.
It is not the only one, and it is outweighed by those
previous public interest aspects that I have already addressed, and we say,
combination, all of those very strongly favour the exercise of a discretion in
this case to allow Ms Taylor’s trade mark
to remain on the
register. She ought not have been required to move aside for Ms Hudson
because Ms Hudson was more famous, which
is really the effect of the
Full Court’s reasoning on the issue of discretion.
time, your Honours, I will finish there.
GORDON A‑CJ:
Thank you, Mr Dimitriadis. Mr Darke.
If your Honours please. May I begin with our ground 1, that is,
paragraph 2(i) of the notice of appeal, that the Full Court erred
finding the grounds in sections 60 and 88(2)(a) were established:
Section 60 involves a two‑stage enquiry.
your Honours appreciate. First, whether before the priority date of the
opposed mark – here, that is the
mark – another trade mark – in
this case, the singer’s mark:
had acquired a reputation in Australia. Second, whether because of that
reputation, the use of –
the opposed mark:
would be likely to deceive or cause confusion.
This Court recognised
that two‑stage enquiry in
Self Care v Allergan
paragraph 13 – there is no need for the Court to go to
it – and the Full Court below expressly acknowledged and applied
that two‑stage enquiry. I will not ask the Court to go it now, but that
is at paragraph 274 on core appeal book 406.
appellant’s attack on the Full Court is directed to the four reasons
the Court gave for concluding that the primary judge
was in error on
section 60. The first of those, and the primary focus of the
appellant’s attack, is the Full Court’s
finding that the
primary judge erred in unduly confining the reputation of the Katy Perry
Before I come to the appellant’s criticisms of that finding,
may I just ask your Honours to go to page 243 of the core appeal
in the reasons of the primary judge, paragraph 712, just to pick up on a
question your Honour Justice Gleeson asked of my learned
friend, there
is set out in paragraph 712 a helpful explanation of reputation in the
context of section 60. If I can just draw two
features to attention.
First, as your Honours will see in paragraph [14], it is said that
reputation:
connotes the “recognition of [the mark] by the public generally”
and includes the credit, image and values –
protected by the trade mark. And can I draw your Honours’
attention down to ‑ ‑ ‑
“Projected” rather than
“protected”.
I am sorry,
“projected”. I apologise, your Honour:
projected by the trade mark –
And then if your Honours
pass down to paragraph [16], your Honours will see reference there
the “recognition” component of reputation.
the “esteem” component –
What is being explained is that reputation is ordinarily thought of as
comprising those two components: recognition, which is really
how extensively
the mark is recognised by the public; and the esteem component, which is about
the standing in which the mark is
held by the public. So, that is the concept
of reputation in section 60, in our submission. It is the recognition of
mark by the public generally and it includes both the extent of that
recognition and the quality of it, that is, the esteem in which
the public holds
But do you disagree with [18], that:
The relevant comparison is between the reputation of the prior mark derived
from actual use of that mark, and a notional normal and
I do say, your Honour, that the reputation need
not be derived exclusively from actual use.
disagree with the first part of [18]?
I do disagree
with that statement, yes
As we understand the argument, there appear to be four interrelated
criticisms of the finding that the primary judge erred in unduly
confining the
reputation of the Katy Perry mark. The first is a submission that the Full
Court erred in not distinguishing between
the reputation of Katy Perry the
musical artist and the reputation of the Katy Perry mark.
submission is made at paragraph 38 of our friends’ written
submissions in the third sentence. In our respectful
submission, no such
distinction was required. The findings, of which both the Full Court and the
primary judge made, make clear
that as the priority date – which was
29 September 2008 – Ms Hudson was famous under her Katy Perry
stage name and trade
mark as a pop star for her music.
If I can go first
to the primary judge’s reasons and just deal with those briefly. Turning
to paragraph 723 in appeal book
page 247, can I just draw
your Honour’s attention to subparagraph (2). My learned friend
effectively submitted that that paragraph
could be put to one side in
considering Katy Perry’s reputation in Australia as at the priority date.
In our submission, it
cannot be. If your Honours go over to
paragraph 728 at page 249, subparagraph (3), the primary judge
dealing with the single “Ur
So Gay”, which was referred to
in 723(2), noted that there was
GORDON A-CJ:
Sorry, where are we reading now?
I am so sorry,
your Honour, paragraph 728(3). The primary judge says:
I do not accept that there was no evidence that the single “Ur So
Gay” received publicity in or was known to Australians.
true that in the balance of the subparagraph, her Honour refers to media
reports from 2008, but in the first sentence of
the paragraph she rejects the
contention that that single, which was released in November 2007, was a
single that did not receive
publicity or was not known to
Australians.
Would you accept that Katy Perry’s
reputation in mid‑2008 was more or less equivalent to the reputation of
at that time?
Yes, something of that
order, I would accept, your Honour. So, when one considers the speed with
which Katy Perry’s reputation
developed, one does not just start from, in
our respectful submission, mid‑2008, but one starts from back in
November 2007,
when the single referred to, “Ur So Gay”, was
released. And so, the reputation built up over a period of around 10 months
so leading up to the priority date. That is not to say it was not a rapid
increase in reputation, but that is, in our submission,
the relevant temporal
GORDON A-CJ:
As I understand your submissions when I
read them, it was that one has to start in November 2007, when the song goes
GORDON A-CJ:
And that is
the launching pad for what then follows and underpins the balance of the next
few months.
That is so, your Honour, up to the
priority date in September 2008. Your Honours have been taken –
this is on page 248 of the
core appeal bundle – to
paragraphs 724 and 725. We rely on them as further evidence of the extent
of the reputation of the
Katy Perry mark in the period leading up to the
priority date.
Then can I draw your Honours’ attention to
paragraph 727, which refers to the media coverage on which the respondents
at first instance. We say – and I will come to develop
this – that that evidence was also relevant to both the recognition
component and the esteem component of the Katy Perry mark in Australia as at the
priority date. And your Honours will see that the
media coverage was
substantial.
But whatever it is, it is not a
reputation in a mark used to differentiate clothing.
Well, in our respectful submission, it is not a reputation in a mark that is
being, at that time, used to differentiate clothing,
but the references to Katy
Perry the pop star are, of course, references to her by her stage name and trade
mark, and they necessarily
increase the reputation of trade mark when they
Trade mark as a pop singer.
Yes, I would accept that, your Honour, at that time. If I can
then go to the reasons of the Full Court at core appeal bundle at
just beginning at paragraph 256, the last two sentences, if I can invite
your Honours to note what is said there. And
then paragraph 282 on
core appeal book 408.
GORDON A-CJ:
What paragraph was that,
Paragraph 282, your Honour,
page 407 going over to 408.
What do you say
perceptions?
Your Honour, we say – and
I am going to come to this, but they are more than just the appellant’s
subjective impressions.
They are evidence by the appellant in supporting a
factual finding that was made as to the existence of the common practice. I
will come to develop that, if I may, shortly. But it was not just evidence
evidence from a designer in Sydney about a perception of how the music industry
works and then exploits itself is probative evidence,
in your view?
Yes, it is some evidence of the common practice, in my respectful
submission. The designer was a person with an interest in fashion.
person who was particularly likely to notice what celebrities – pop
stars – did in relation to clothing.
She was perfectly capable of
saying that there existed a practice of the kind we described.
could, in answer to the questions that were put to her in
cross‑examination, have said: I know of no such practice, I
heard of it, but she accepted that she did know of the practice, and she
accepted that it was a common practice. That
is all evidence, in our respectful
submission, supporting the submission and supporting the fact found by both the
primary judge
and the Full Court that there was indeed such a
Your Honours, in the Full Court’s reasons, I have
taken your Honours to 256, then 282. Next, if I can just draw
the Court’s
attention to paragraph 289 on page 409. Those
findings, both of the primary judge and of the Full Court, make clear, in our
submission, that as at the priority date, Ms Hudson was famous
under her Katy Perry stage name and trade mark.
When Ms Hudson then
appeared at events and was referred to in news reports and other media as
“Katy Perry”, that necessarily
increased the public’s
awareness or recognition of her, her music and her trade mark as a sign used to
distinguish her goods
or services from those of others. And in our respectful
submission, that was so as a matter of fact, whether or not the individual
of “Katy Perry” in the media were, in a technical legal sense, uses
of that sign as a trade mark.
There is no requirement in section 60
or elsewhere that the reputation of a trade mark can only be derived from its
use as such.
It is not uncommon for businesses to be referred to in news
reports and other media by their trade marks. Your Honours can think
lots of examples – IBM, Qantas, Coca Cola, Apple. The same is true
of individuals and groups – the Rolling Stones
are an example of
that, designers like Armani and Versace are other examples. Taylor Swift is a
pop star example.
References in news reports and other media to
businesses, groups and individuals by their trade marks are not, we accept,
use as such – they do not involve the use of the mark as a
badge of origin of any particular goods or services – but
references quite plainly, in our submission, can and do contribute to the
reputation of the trade marks of those persons, both
the recognition and esteem
components, even though they do not constitute trade mark use.
in our submission, one cannot sensibly distinguish between the reputation of a
business or any person known by a trade mark
and the reputation of the trade
mark. The position is no different with respect to the singer’s mark.
The references to “Katy
Perry” in the media, even though they were
not themselves trade mark use, contributed to the reputation of that mark. So,
the Full Court
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Darke, are we dealing in absolutes here, or are we dealing with the
particular case? Because, I mean, I have not seen anything
that suggested there
was any occasion when Ms Perry was being mentioned anywhere other than in
her capacity as an entertainer to
facilitate entertaining. That is at a factual
BEECH‑JONES J:
I can quite conceive of other people who have fame in one area who are also
mentioned in different contexts because they do something
else where that may
not be true. Are you pitching this at a factual level or a level of
I am pitching it at the moment at the level
of principle.
BEECH‑JONES J:
The reputation of a trade mark can be contributed to not only by
its use as a trade mark but also by media references and the like
to the trade
mark owner by reference to their trade mark. So,
those ‑ ‑ ‑
GORDON A-CJ:
This is to make good the point that is set out in the reasons of
Justice Stewart, that one can look at the two aspects of
reputation.
Yes, indeed, that one can look at the two
aspects of reputation, and to make the point that the Full Court was, in our
submission, correct to say, as it did in paragraph 290, that the
reputation of the pop star in her name was, of necessity, a reputation
name as a trade mark.
That does not necessarily answer
the question that you need answered, though. That does not mean that it was a
reputation in or extending
to clothing.
No, I accept
that. But the first submission our learned friends make is that the reputation
of the trade mark – the singer’s
mark – could only
come from its use as a trade mark, and I am submitting at the level of principle
that that is incorrect.
One can have regard to media references or news reports
that use the trade mark not as a trade mark but that, by reference to it,
enhance the reputation of the trade make. That is the only point I am seeking
to establish in addressing that first criticism of
the Full Court’s
reasons. That criticism, for the reasons I have given, is, in our respectful
submission, unsound.
The appellant’s second criticism of the Full
Court’s reasons was that, under section 60, the reputation of the
mark – here, the Katy Perry mark – cannot extend
beyond the particular goods or services on which it has been used.
submission is made in their written submissions at paragraph 38. That is,
the submissions in chief. It is made in the
last two sentences.
learned friend did not adhere to that position in response to a question from
your Honour Justice Jagot. My learned friend accepted
mark’s reputation can extend beyond the particular goods or services on
which it has been used and, in our respectful
submission, he was quite correct
to make that concession. If I can just take your Honours to
paragraph 17 of the
Trade Marks Act
You mean section 17?
section 17. I am sorry, your Honour.
GORDON A‑CJ:
That is all right. This is a definition of “What is a trade
Precisely. Your Honours will see
is a sign used, or intended to be used, to distinguish goods or services
dealt with or provided –
by one person from those:
dealt with or provided by any other person.
While it is, of course, true that a trade mark is used in relation to
goods or services, its function is to distinguish between trade
sources – different trade sources, that is to say, different persons
supplying those goods or services, so it is entirely natural
that the reputation
of a trade mark as distinguishing one person’s goods or services from
those of others might extend beyond
the particular goods or services on which
the mark has been used.
GORDON A-CJ:
Is that because the inquiry
is looking to see whether or not a person would determine that they are from the
same source, or run
the risk of thinking they are from the same
Exactly, it is about trade source. And
that is the function of the mark: to act as a badge of origin or as an
indicator of the
source of the goods or services. So, the reputation of a trade
mark can extend, in our respectful submission, to any goods or services
public generally might expect the person to apply the mark in
That might be too low a bar, “generally
might expect” – where do you get that from? “Would be
likely to expect”
would be a higher bar.
could accept “would be likely”.
What we are talking about, obviously,
is the test for a likelihood of deception or confusion.
In which event it would be, in all the circumstances, likely to
Likely to cause consumers to
wonder ‑ ‑ ‑
‑ ‑ ‑ whether
it might not be the case that the goods come from the same source. That is the
BEECH-JONES J:
So, if you have got a reputation as a
company producing personal computers, you might say, well, your trade mark would
extend to printers.
You might, if there was a
recognised practice of computer manufacturers extending into manufacturing
BEECH-JONES J:
Would it depend on that, or would it
depend on some notional assessment?
No, it would
depend on the evidence in that particular case.
question still is: what is the reputation?
accept that, but our friends start by saying there are these two errors of
principle in the Full Court’s reasons.
withdrew from the second one.
They withdrew from
the second one ‑ ‑ ‑
Well, they pitched it lower.
They withdrew
from its characterisation as an error of principle and they accepted that it was
just a question of fact in the particular
case, and they were right to accept
that, so, I do not want to spend a great deal more
Because it does come down to the evidence in this particular
I accept that it does,
your Honour. But just to complete the point, if your Honours then go
to the Full Court’s reasons
at core appeal book 409,
paragraph 290 at the foot of that page, we say it follows that there is no
error of principle in the Full
Court holding that the primary judge erred
in confining the reputation of the singer’s mark to music and
entertainment services
simply because it had not been used in relation to other
goods or services such as clothes.
language of confining the reputation in the mark is a little bit unhelpful, is
it not, because what you are just trying
to do as a matter of fact is to
determine what the reputation was?
what the Full Court has said is that the primary judge unduly constrained
the reputation of the mark – did not consider
the full ambit of the
reputation of the mark.
But that has got an
assumption built into it. It depends on your starting point, which is you start
with the reputation. If you
are assuming – and this might be the
so‑called error of principle – that the reputation applies,
potentially, to
everything and anything, because then it is an unduly confining.
But you have to start by finding what the reputation is. That is
appellant says it is unduly expanding.
So, let me then turn to the third criticism, which is the Full Court’s
finding that the primary judge – the Full
Court’s reliance
on the common practice of pop stars selling clothes bearing their names or marks
at concerts and elsewhere,
and finding on that basis that the primary judge
unduly confined the reputation of the singer’s mark to music and
entertainment
The existence of that practice was not merely
put to the Court by way of submission or a matter that it was said the Court
have regard to purely as a question of notional inquiry. It was
established by the evidence. If I can ask your Honours to go to
appeal book page 56, paragraph 136, your Honours will see on that
page an article from
The Australian
of 16 June 2009. The
appellant put that article into evidence and it was received without
limitation.
If your Honours would go over to page 57,
your Honours will see, at paragraph 137(1) at the top of the page, a
quote from the article
referring to the practice in question. If I can just
invite your Honours to read that. So, that was some evidence of the
Not the only evidence.
But it does not
say – it says – you could read it as saying: if they are
already a celebrity, then they capitalise on
their celebrity, if you are already
a pop star, you capitalise on your – the issue here is one of timing
at the priority date.
That is why I started with
the findings of both courts below. It was well established that as at the
priority date, the appellant
was a famous pop star – nationally and
internationally – sorry, not the appellant.
I was going to say, I think it is your client, rather than the
The singer – my
GORDON A‑CJ:
It might be better just to call them
“the singer” and “the
I will try to do that,
your Honour – I will no doubt fail. But it was clear on the
evidence – and there are findings
by both the primary judge and the
Full Court – that as at the priority date, the singer was famous
as a pop star internationally
and nationally, she was a celebrity. What is said
in paragraph 137(1) – extracted from
The Australian
article – was evidence of the common practice of what such persons
Our friends point out that that article was published some eight or
so months after the priority date. But it refers, in terms,
to fashion being a
common area into which celebrities launch brands. That language indicates, in
our submission, that the practice
was one which was well known and had existed
for some time prior to the date of the article. It was evidently not a practice
had sprung up just in the last eight months or so.
evidence in the article was corroborated by the appellant’s own evidence,
part of which is referred to in paragraph 138
of the primary judge’s
reasons, a bit further down the
GORDON A‑CJ:
Mr Darke, how long will you be on this point?
I was going to go through the findings and the evidence on this
GORDON A‑CJ:
We might take the luncheon
adjournment and then come back to this after lunch.
am so sorry. If your Honour pleases.
GORDON A‑CJ:
Adjourn the Court.
AT 12.45 PM LUNCHEON
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT
GORDON A‑CJ:
Thank you, your Honour. Can
I just take the Court back to page 57 of the appeal book. Before lunch, I
had taken your Honours
to paragraph 138 of the primary judge’s
reasons. I just wanted to emphasise, in respect of that paragraph, that
found, in effect, that the appellant not only knew of the
practice in question but that she knew of it so well that, had she turned
mind to it, it would have been readily apparent to her that the singer would use
her mark on clothes. Your Honours will see
the reference to “readily
apparent” in the final line of 138.
Mr Darke, what is the common practice relevant to? Is it to the fact of
the reputation, or the likelihood of the confusion?
It can be relevant to either. There are two
different modes of reasoning – I will come to this shortly, but they
are effectively
the same. Let me come to that shortly, if I may,
your Honour. Your Honours, I will not, in the interest of time, take
your Honours
through the evidence of the appellant below. I think it is
sufficiently summarised in the findings of the courts below. What I
do is to take ‑ ‑ ‑
Do you want to give us the references? They do not seem to be
in your outline of oral argument. Do you want to give up them to
us, or were
you happy to rely on your written submissions?
Yes, I am content to rely on my written submissions and one further reference in
our supplementary book of further materials:
page 5 at lines 20 to
40, page 6 at lines 16 to 26 and page 7 at lines 15 to
Mr Darke, can I ask you, apart from the last
sentence of paragraph 137, which I think you have just taken us to, does
the evidence
demonstrate that the common expectation of a commercial practice
whereby people like your client commercialise their reputation,
did it extend to
doing two things: commercialising it in relation to apparel and commercialising
it by reference to her stage name?
As distinct from commercialising it for perfume,
rosé, wine and that sort of thing.
did, your Honour. There is the appellant’s own evidence to that
effect. There is the evidence of the article at
paragraph 136 and there
was the evidence of Mr Jensen, who was the agent of the singer, which the
Full Court summarised at paragraph
291 to which I am going to come
Paragraph 291(a), is that a summary of
Mr Jensen’s evidence which is too generalised? Do you say it was in
fact more specific?
No, I think it was as sufficient
No more specific than that, I think it is fair to
say, your Honour, but it was evidence that merchandise associated with
performances and so on were the source of goods to which artists
licensed their name or another brand they owned, and your Honour
the reference, in particular in (a), to:
as a brand for merchandise, including clothing –
So, there was evidence of celebrities, pop stars and the like using their
names on clothing.
Can I ask you this as a related
sufficient for your case, in terms of testing the likelihood of confusion, that
they might do that, or that they would do that?
not necessary for me to say that all celebrities would do that. It is
sufficient for my purposes that there was a common
practice of some celebrities
to do that.
When you say to put it on clothing, the
evidence has two strands. One is about the knowledge that it would –
well, insofar
as had subjective knowledge is relevant anyway, but leaving that
aside – be on clothing sold at concerts. That is one sort
that may even be in the kind of common knowledge basket as at that time. Then
there is having your own fashion label.
Clearly, one of the differences
between that is if you are selling a T‑shirt, the object of which is
to demonstrate that this
person has been to the concert or is a fan of this
person, it will be the name under which the singer or band brands itself as a
singer or band.
are going to go more generally, that is not necessarily so.
It is not necessarily so, but in some cases it is so, and that is
sufficient for my purposes. There is a practice, which is very
celebrities having fashion lines. Some of those celebrities use their own names
as marks, others ‑ ‑ ‑
When you say a practice – this is what I am trying –
there is an identification that some pop singers have their own fashion
one that was mentioned not being under their name but under a different brand,
and then there is an acceptance that they sell
merchandise, caps or clothing or
whatever, at concerts, but that is as far as it goes, right, as at that
I think that is fair, your Honour, but the
selling of clothes at concerts branded with the artist’s name is, in a
sufficient for my purposes, because what your Honours need to
consider when it comes to the likelihood of deception and confusion
ordinary consumer seeing, for example, a T‑shirt with the designer’s
trade mark across the front. An ordinary
consumer seeing that may well be
caused to wonder whether or not it did not have some association with the
Except the difficulty with that is why on
earth would a brand of this kind be built with that kind of
Well, there are two things to say in respect
of that, your Honour. The first is, that is not the relevant question
because the
registration was just in respect of clothes generally. So, one has
to consider the use of the designer’s mark on all sorts
of clothes,
including the sorts of clothes sold by pop stars at concerts. The second answer
is that, as my learned friend indicated
before, the primary judge in fact found
there was not much difference between the sorts of clothing the appellant in
fact sold and
the sorts of clothing that a pop star might sell at a
Notional and fair use cannot require
consideration of merchandising in every case, can it, if it is a trade mark for
It can, in my respectful submission,
consider ‑ ‑ ‑
it could, but does it really have to?
your Honour says “merchandising”, your Honour is
considering, for example, the use of the designer’s brand
T‑shirt or something of that kind? Yes, in my submission, notional and
normal and fair use certainly encompasses that.
That is a common way in which
designers use their brands.
Your Honour would have experience of
seeing “Armani” across a T‑shirt or something of that
kind. So, when one
considers what is a notional, fair and normal use that the
appellant might make of her brand on clothes, it most certainly includes
of a brand on the front of the T‑shirt.
GORDON A-CJ:
As I understand your submission on this, it is one takes the evidence of common
practice that you have identified. One then says
both in terms of reputation as
well as confusion, one asks whether a consumer – a member of the
public, general public –
would look at a T‑shirt with the
designer’s mark on it and ask themselves whether or not it is likely that
reach the conclusion or ask themselves is that attached to the
Yes, exactly, your Honour.
Your Honour, that is the way we put it.
ask just one more question in this area.
Given that it is a prospective test –
we are making a prediction – and given that your client’s
reputation had only
recently been acquired in this jurisdiction, did you need to
lead evidence that it was likely that her reputation would be maintained
would grow?
The short answer to
your Honour’s question is no.
For these reasons. As both the primary judge
and the Full Court found, the singer had a substantial reputation as a pop star
Australia at the priority date, and both the primary judge and the Full Court
found that the common practice, to which I have referred,
existed as at that
date. If I can just give your Honours a reference at that point rather
than taking your Honours to it, your Honours
will see the Full
Court’s summary of the primary judge’s findings at
paragraph 281, appeal book 407.
be right, can it, to say that every trade mark that is registered for clothing
would have to be assessed against a notional
use of it being emblazoned in the
way of merchandise. If the trade mark was Best&Less, for example, there
would be no reason
why Best&Less would ever deploy its trade mark in that
One does not get down to that level of
particularity in a notional fair and normal use test. The test operates at a
higher level
of abstraction. One just asks how are trade marks normally and
fairly used on clothing?
But the answer is
it has to depend on the trade mark, does it not? And maybe you might say, well,
if the trade mark is a name,
then it needs to be tested against the idea that it
will be emblazoned across a T‑shirt. This is why I am still waiting
hear why it is that common practice has anything to do with reputation or
likelihood of confusion, because it could surely only feed
into the question of
what the general public might think about what a trade mark owner would
Do we have evidence that the general public both knew about the
existence of Katy Perry in 2008, and knew that people like her would
be inclined
to set up fashion labels?
Absolutely. That
is the point, your Honour, of the evidence that the Katy Perry mark had a
substantial reputation in Australia
in relation to music and entertainment
services as at the priority date. A lot of people knew of the pop star and of
her trade mark.
That is the
first ‑ ‑ ‑
You would think it probably would be people who knew things
Yes, but a lot of people know pop
stars and a lot of people shop for clothes. It is really people of those kinds
that we are talking
singer’s mark – that is the first part of it – and
was a common practice found by both the primary judge and the
Full Court about the way in which pop star singers use their brands
amongst other things, clothes.
does not mean that the public knew that there was that common
No. I mean, the fact of the
common practice is a matter that – both the primary judge and the
Full Court proceeded on the
footing – would be known to the
public, because it is a public common practice. When the Rolling Stones put
“the Rolling
Stones” on a concert T‑shirt, that is something
that members of the public see. Likewise with
We cannot infer from a Trevor Choy trade mark lawyer saying:
“A lot of US popstars are moving into all sorts of
merchandising” –
that the general public knew that.
Not from that alone, although do not forget, your Honour, that was in an
article published in
The Australian
that many people would read.
So, it does assist to establish what the public would have known, but that is
not the entirety of the
evidence. There is also the evidence of the appellant
herself and there is the evidence of Mr Jensen, which is summarised in
Her evidence is quite particular
because she is a fashion designer. She is not a representative, surely, of the
general public.
She is a member of the
general public and she is a person who shops for clothes, but inherent in the
practice that I am talking
use by pop stars and celebrities of their marks on, amongst other things,
There is a difference between the
kind of clothing you get at a – I am prepared to accept that there is
common knowledge
that as at the priority date pop singers would have sold
clothing‑style items. They are directly related to the tour –
you know, would be X Australian tour dates – we are all familiar
with that kind of stuff.
We are not as familiar, are we –
back in September 2008, even Ms Taylor did not seem to be as familiar,
other than with one
singer, maybe, in the L.A.M.B label. Having a fashion label
which just had their name on it, that seems to me – where does
evidence – other than some people did do it – is that not
as far as it goes?
Well, there was Mr Jensen’s
evidence, and he had been a talent manager in the music industry since
But it is a bit hard to tell what he really meant
by his evidence. As I say, because there is a difference between, you know,
your own fashion label that is unconnected to your tools or your music,
just as your own label and, you know, your T-shirts and your
caps that you sell
I can accept there is a difference between
those two things, your Honour. Your Honour is absolutely right about that,
but even if
one just considers the merchandise that might be sold at a concert,
the consumers would not necessarily expect it all to have the
details of the
concert tour or anything on it.
Obviously, some merchandise of that kind
does but not all of it. There certainly was no evidence of that kind. And Mr
evidence was unchallenged, there was no cross-examination of him
limitations on the practice that your Honour is just raising with me, but
it was not.
That may be due to the generality of
the evidence and to how far you can
Well, it is
possible ‑ ‑ ‑
mean, you cannot make the evidence more specific than it really is.
No, but the evidence was of a practice of celebrities and pop stars
putting their names ‑ ‑ ‑
But not general. There was no evidence that it was a general practice,
A general practice certainly in respect of
concerts and tours and the like.
Well – I am
sorry ‑ ‑ ‑
will accept the general practice of concerts and tours and the like. That, to
me, seems obvious. It is the wider one that I am
having ‑ ‑ ‑
No, no, I cannot say your Honour that there was evidence of a general
practice of the wide one.
No, that is what I
I am not trying to go that far, but in my
respectful submission, I do not need to go that far. The general practice in
relation to
concerts is sufficient for my purposes.
know, but then you get to the question of, you know, by reason of the reputation
in the mark, it would be likely to mislead or deceive
and confuse, and that is
when you start to – well, what is exactly the reputation? It is
person as a singer, their concert tour, you
know, their T‑shirt to advertise, their concert tour,
their T‑shirt as a
memento of their concert tour.
to become a question as to, as I say, the Full Court saying the primary judge
confined something and the appellant saying,
well, actually what the Full Court
is doing is expanding something beyond its capacities as at the priority
Yes, but, in my respectful submission, the
evidence on which the Full Court acted was sufficient for the finding that it
the conclusion that it reached. The practice, your Honour, was
accepted not only by the Full Court but by the primary judge. If
your Honour goes to paragraph 281 of the Full Court’s decision
at page 407, your Honour will see the second sentence, that
acknowledged by the primary judge . . . that popular
music stars such
as Ms Hudson lend their names (and trade marks) to be used in connection
with clothes and sell merchandise at their concerts.
And then, this is
still ‑ ‑ ‑
would read that “at their concerts” as qualifying
everything.
Well, I would not accept that
qualification, but even if that qualification is
applied ‑ ‑ ‑
GORDON A-CJ:
The next sentence.
Yes, that Ms
Taylor – that is, the appellant:
accepted such conduct as a common practice.
GORDON A-CJ:
No, no, no, it is the next one:
There was also evidence before the primary judge that fashion is “a
common area into which celebrities launch brands”.
GORDON A‑CJ:
So, it seemed
to be dealing with that topic separately.
Well – I take your Honour’s point. That may be so. But
insofar as they are doing that, there is still evidence, and
they refer to it,
GORDON A-CJ:
I mean, the point that is
being made there is a point which we often hear about, and that is “brand
extension”, which
is the next sentence.
GORDON A‑CJ:
In other words, that there is
a – which is, I understand, what Mr Jensen was
explaining.
That is exactly right.
The question is one of timing, is it not? I mean, had Katy Perry the
singer launched a fashion brand in Australia pre‑ the
priority date, that
would be one thing. The question is one of timing, here. Is it to be taken
that every celebrity has in their
back pocket a capacity for brand extension
that will automatically include clothing and accordingly, no matter what, nobody
can use the same name if it is any item that a celebrity reasonably might
want to brand extend into? Which was the point, I guess,
raised at the special
leave application ‑ ‑ ‑
I understand
‑ ‑ ‑ get the George Foreman grill, and
‑ ‑ ‑ but one does not need a finding that every
celebrity behaves in that way. One just needs to find that
there is a practice
of celebrities doing that often
enough ‑ ‑ ‑
point, though, is that means that any celebrity’s name, provided they are
a celebrity, internationally famous, if it
is an area where they could
rationally, reasonably be expected to do brand extension – clothing
automatically being one of
them – you would say, okay, it does not
matter – it does not matter that somebody else has acquired a
reputation here.
Your Honour, it all depends on
the evidence in the particular case. There is no general principle that can be
extracted from this,
as I have already sought to persuade your Honours.
There is no evidence of principle in the Full Court’s approach. The
is just one of fact. And here there was evidence of the practice that
I have referred to. I cannot say much more about it.
But that must be a practice that – this is my point. If this is
right, this must apply to every celebrity.
your Honour, I would not accept that at all. I mean,
clothes ‑ ‑ ‑
pop star celebrity, I should say.
Yes. So, it might
apply to many pop star celebrities. There might be some to whom it does not
apply. I cannot immediately think
of the sort, but there might be some artists
who are not very commercial and in respect of
they are not a pop star, by definition.
might reason that way. Better not get too bogged down on those sorts of
categorisations.
I am just using “pop” as
“popular”, the meaning there.
but it certainly does not apply to all sorts of goods. I mean, clothes and pop
stars are obviously closely connected,
because everybody knows that pop stars
sell clothes with their brands on them, at least at concerts, and that others do
concerts, and that concert merchandise is not just sold at the
concert venue, but it can be sold in other places as well. So, in
my respectful
submission, there was a sufficient basis in the evidence for the Full Court to
find as it did.
But can I ask you this. It is a
consequence of your argument that your client got, if you like, de facto trade
mark protection for
her mark not just for clothing but for all other classes of
goods for which celebrities such as her market their name – so,
example, perfume, wine.
She certainly did not get
that, your Honour. She could not have sued anybody for trade mark
infringement because she did not have
a registered trade mark. So, she did not
get trade mark protection.
But if there was a Katie
Perry perfume that had just been registered at that time, on your case, she
could have stopped the registration
of that mark.
that is so. And likewise – I mean, if I were to apply for
“Taylor Swift” in make‑up, one might expect
that Taylor Swift
would have something to say about it, even if she has not yet launched
make‑up, and that is not at all surprising,
because that is what consumers
But that will come down to the question of
likelihood and how much evidence is needed to demonstrate a likelihood that, in
your example,
Taylor Swift
would ‑ ‑ ‑
Well, it is not specific to Taylor – well, sorry, I accept that there
may be some variability amongst celebrities, but the
point here was that there
was very substantial evidence as to the size of the singer’s reputation as
a pop star as at September
2008 and that was, coupled with the practice,
sufficient, in my respectful submission, to lead to one of two
conclusions.
Either, by reason of her use of the singer’s mark in
relation to entertainment and music services and the evidence of the practice,
the reputation of the singer’s mark had extended into clothes –
that is one process of reasoning, that is all focused
on section 60(a), and
if one follows that process of reasoning, then when one gets to
paragraph (b), one says if the designer were
to use her mark on clothes,
because of the reputation of the singer’s mark which extends to clothes,
consumers would be likely
to be deceived or confused.
So, just coming back to the first one, you have said that there are two aspects
to reputation, which are recognition and esteem.
If you are saying that the
reputation in some way extends into clothes, it cannot be recognised in relation
to clothes, because
it has not been used in relation to clothes. How could
esteem be a way that it could extend the reputation in relation to
It can be recognised in relation to clothes
because of the practice, because there is a
substantial ‑ ‑ ‑
I do not know what it means, “recognised in relation to
clothes”. A reputation has these elements of recognition and
recognition is that you go to a supermarket, you hear the name “Katy
Perry” and you think that is a singer, but
it is not in relation to
particular products at this point.
Well, but you see
the mark of Katy Perry, you think that is the pop star, and you know that pop
stars quite commonly apply their
marks at least to concert clothing and, in
other cases, to other sorts of clothing, and so the reputation of the mark on
extends into clothes. That is one process of
But what you are describing is a
hypothetical state of reasoning of a member of the general public who might be
caused to think
mark and an item of clothing.
So, the other way of
looking at it, which is more consistent with what your Honour is putting to
me, is to say for the purposes
of section 60(a) that the singer’s
mark has a reputation in music and entertainment services, and then when one
gets to section
60(b), to say because of that reputation, in light of the
common practice, there is a likelihood of consumers being
I think what I am suggesting is that is
really the only way you can do it.
Well, I would
not go so far as to embrace that suggestion. That certainly is a way you could
do it and it is not inconsistent
with the Full Court’s mode of
reasoning, in my respectful submission. There are those two routes to the
conclusion that the
Full Court reached.
GORDON A‑CJ:
One of the reasons why that second route is not only another way but a better
way of looking at it is because it depends upon the
way in which you look at
reputation in the first bit. If you are right, in that the singer has a
reputation at the priority date,
which is as an international
pop star – come out of the current facts, assume
someone – I do not know, something just
took off and it was on the
lips of everybody, then it is likely, it seems to me, that the second form of
analysis is not only open
but one does not need to even think about this common
One can say: they have this substantial reputation, I have
suddenly found I have got a piece of clothing with this name on it, the
question I am going to ask as a member of public is, is that connected in some
way to the pop star?
Yes. It may be a
simpler approach and a cleaner approach.
GORDON A‑CJ:
Well, it might be more principled, by reference to what is the reputation in
I certainly embrace the approach,
your Honour. We do
BEECH-JONES J:
approach does not require or does not mandate the identification of an existing
reputation in particular goods or services.
and section 60 does not mandate that at all.
And that is consistent with the
authorities.
So, I do not quite understand where the first way of putting
it comes from.
Well, the first way of putting it
is to say that although section 60(a) does not require the reputation to be
in respect of any
particular goods or services, where the reputation is in
particular goods or services such as clothes, the section 60(b) analysis
more straightforward. But, your Honour, I do not want to get hung up on
the distinction between the two approaches, because they
both lead to precisely
the same outcome.
I accept what your Honours are putting to me
that, intuitively, it makes more sense to adopt the second approach than the
It may be, as your Honour says, that it is more consistent with
principle as well, but either approach leads to the same result,
entirely open to the Full Court, in my respectful submission, on
BEECH-JONES J:
think one of the arguments against you is it might have been open, but they did
not do that.
Well, your Honour, all their
findings leave open that process of reasoning. I accept, in paragraph 291,
that they say that the
judge erred in:
concluding that the Katy Perry mark did not have a reputation in
but they might just as easily have said that the
primary judge erred in not concluding that the reputation the Katy Perry
in relation to music and entertainment services was liable to give rise
to deception or confusion if the designer’s mark was
How do you deal with 180?
Mr Jensen’s evidence, he seemed to have not been worried at all that
there was this potential
for deception or confusion. He did not think anybody
was going to confuse Katy Perry’s branded tour merchandise with the
appellant’s
Is your Honour
referring to paragraph 180 of the primary judge?
Paragraph 180 of the primary judge, page 74 of the appeal book. That
may be relevant to (a) and (b) of section 60, but
What Mr Jensen is saying
there is that he did not think there would be confusion caused by people
associating the singer’s
mark with the designer. He is not saying he did
not think that there would be confusion with people associating the
mark with the singer. The reason for the difference, at least
in Mr Jensen’s mind, was that the singer had a massive reputation
the designer did not.
Now, I should add that at that point in the
process, in that point in the factual chronology, there had been –
and the findings
of the primary judge recorded a lot of adverse publicity
directed at the singer in respect of the position she had taken regarding
designer’s application for a trade mark, and there was plainly, on the
evidence and on the findings of the primary judge,
a desire to put the dispute
to one side and move on, if that were possible, and no doubt those remarks were
prompted by that.
But principally, what I would say to your Honour
by reason of the singer’s mark being used, rather than confusion
by reason of the designer’s mark being used.
if that is the case, then is it not the case that the primary judge’s
findings about how the designer’s mark is in
fact used compared to how the
singer’s mark is used is relevant, as opposed to irrelevant, as the Full
Court seemed to say?
No, those findings are
irrelevant because they concerned conduct of the singer after the priority
No, but why can you not use the same method of
reasoning? It is a singer, you can make and infer choices that are likely, the
that it is going to be connected to their singing
Your Honour, the evidence of what the
singer did subsequently, was no part of the evidence of the practice which both
the primary
judge and the Full Court found. I mean, the evidence of what one
individual pop star or celebrity does, does not demonstrate what
is done by the
broader number of pop stars or celebrities.
does go to the point that, in the case of the pop star, the brand that is being
sought to be built is the brand as a pop star,
whereas in the case of the
fashion designer, the brand that is sought to be built relates to fashion or, in
this case, clothing.
I mean, this is the esteem bit. If I built a Hills hoist,
I would be building the brand to show my capacity to build structures
It may indicate that, your Honour,
it may indicate that, but that does not detract from the analysis of the
likelihood of deception
or confusion on a notional or fair use assessment of the
designer’s mark on clothes.
I think what it
goes to is the need to tease out a bit more the concept of a notional use. Is
it that the notional use has to be
the kind of use that Ms Hudson would
have, or is it the kind of use – the kind of different
use – that Ms Perry would
The notional use is just the notional use of a trade mark on clothes. It is not
more specific than that. So, one does not get
in to those sorts of
But we know that trade marks are used in
such different ways. We know that there are trade marks which are built by
using them boldly
and we know that there are trade marks that are built by using
them very discreetly in relation to quality products.
Yes. And the notion of normal and fair use covers the full range of ways in
which a mark might normally and fairly be used. So,
it spans the range of types
of use that your Honour has just articulated. Can I just briefly, because
I do need to move on ‑
I think we have kept you on – so, what is left on the
section 60 argument?
Well, I need to deal with
deceptive similarity. I did want to come back to a question that
Justice Steward asked me just briefly.
Your Honour was asking me, I
think, in effect, why is there not in a sense an assumption built into the Full
Court’s reasoning
that the singer would ultimately use her mark on
And continue to be famous.
And continue to be famous. The reason there is no assumption on
that kind is this. The process of reasoning is to say that, given
practice, consumers were likely to be caused to wonder whether the singer had
used her mark on clothes if they encountered
the designer’s mark. That
does not depend upon any assumption about what the singer might do in the
future. It depends on
two things: the reputation of the singer in the
present – that is, at the priority date – and the common
practice which
exists at the priority date.
Given those two things,
whether or not the singer would in fact have gone on to use her mark on clothes
in the future is not the
relevant inquiry. The relevant inquiry is: would
consumers who saw the designer’s mark on clothes be caused to wonder
they might not come or be associated with the singer?
the way in which the Full Court reasoned. It did not draw any – make
any assumption as to the future or as to the
continued fame of the pop star. It
looked at the position on the evidence as at the priority date and assessed the
likelihood of
deception or confusion by reference to that.
That approach is, as I understand your argument – just so
I am clear – that one is looking at the notional and fair
the designer’s mark on clothes.
GORDON A-CJ:
And one is then asking whether that notional use,
given the two things you identified – the reputation of the singer at
priority date plus the common practice – the question which then
arises is: would consumers, if they saw that mark on the
clothes, think they were somehow connected with the singer?
That is correct, your Honour.
you say that common test of wonderment – wondering –
applies equally under 60(b), for testing likelihood of
Yes. I do. There is no issue that the
test under section 60(b) is a notional inquiry of the kind that
Justice Gordon has put
BEECH-JONES J:
And that is
the test that Justice Stewart identified in that passage?
I think that is correct, your Honour, yes.
Well, it is
Except that his Honour did say and did refer to use as a trade mark, and we
would not accept that one has to focus only, in terms
of assessing reputation,
only on use as a trade mark.
Your Honours, on deceptive similarity,
let me try to be reasonably brief. The appellant says that deceptive similarity
is the wrong
frame of reference under section 60 because it requires
reputation to be ignored and section 60 is an inquiry about the effect of
reputation. That criticism really does not do justice to the Full Court’s
The point of the Full Court’s reference to the marks
being deceptively similar was to emphasise that the sole difference between
them, whether Katy was spelt with a “y” or an
“i‑e”, was vanishingly slight, and that was certainly
to the section 60 ground. The greater the similarity between the opposed
mark and the other mark under section 60, the
greater the likelihood that,
because of the reputation of the latter, the use of the former will be likely to
deceive or cause confusion.
The Full Court referred at
paragraph 275 of its reasons to a number of authorities to that effect.
Moreover, the Full Court did
not disregard the relevance of reputation to its
analysis. That is apparent from paragraphs 294 and 295 of the Full
reasons, if I can ask your Honours to turn to those on
page 411 of the appeal book. Paragraph 294, in the fourth sentence,
the Full Court saying:
Whilst some die‑hard fans of Ms Hudson may recognise the incorrect
Your Honours will see the reference to some “some
die‑hard fans”, that was the Full Court taking reputation into
account. That is, that there were fans out there of Ms Hudson, there were
some of them who would have identified the incorrect spelling
designer’s mark, but the court continued, having regard to reputation,
that nonetheless:
the ordinary consumer –
would have:
an imperfect recollection –
notwithstanding, we would
infer, the reputation of the singer if confronted with the designer’s mark
on clothes, and might:
be confused as to the source –
That was not an analysis that disregarded reputation. The reference to
“die‑hard fans” shows that it encompassed
reputation. The
same follows from the last sentence of paragraph 295, which made clear that
the Full Court was having regard to
reputation in its analysis of the similarity
between the two marks.
Moreover, there was no evidence before the
primary judge that the reputation of the singer’s mark was such that the
consumer would have a precise recollection of whether Katy was spelt
with a “y” or an “i‑e”, and it
was inherently
likely, in our submission, that many consumers would have some level or
awareness of the singer’s mark –
those on the periphery of
fandom – but not such a clear recollection of it as to immediately
apprehend the minor difference
in spelling.
Your Honours, on the
issue of actual confusion, that was the Full Court’s third reason for
finding the primary judge to be
in error, that is, that she:
placed undue weight on the absence of evidence of actual
confusion –
after the priority date. Now, the Full Court
addressed that at paragraphs 296 to 299, and at 297 to 299
the court advanced, in our
submission, cogent reasons for its finding that the
primary judge placed undue weight on that factor. In paragraph 297, as
Honours will see, the Full Court explained that an absence of evidence
of confusion may be explained:
for example, by the small extent to which the mark has been used.
At 298 ‑ ‑ ‑
That is, the designer’s mark.
Quite. At 298, they say, in respect to the designer’s mark, they
refer there to the findings of the primary judge about
the small size of the
designer’s business and the small extent to which her mark had been
Just to give your Honours the reference, we have gathered
further references to the primary judge’s findings to that effect
written submissions at paragraph 26. They recognise –
correctly, in our submission – that the limited extent
extent of the designer’s use of her mark was a powerful reason for
thinking that – capable of explaining the
absence of evidence of
actual confusion.
Then, at 299, they make the point that the test
for section 60 is “the notional normal and fair use” test in
which means that the absence of evidence of confusion was even less
significant. Those reasons for finding that the judge attributed
weight to the absence of evidence of actual confusion are perfectly sound, in
our respectful submission, and no error has
been shown in them.
Honours, just finally, penultimately on this topic of section 60, at
paragraph 300 of the Full Court’s reasons the court
identified a
further basis for finding that the primary judge was in error on
section 60, namely that she had regard to the actual
singer’s mark after the priority date at which the section 60 ground
was to be assessed. That is the finding the
primary judge made in the last
sentence of paragraph 751 of her reasons, at appeal book
I think I have already addressed this in exchanges with
your Honours, but in our respectful submission, the submissions that were
put about that finding this morning that was relevant as evidence of how
consumers would expect a celebrity to use their mark on
clothes are not founded
in the evidence whatever. The way in which the singer herself used her mark was
just evidence of what the
singer had done and not evidence of the conduct of pop
stars or other celebrities generally.
BEECH-JONES J:
conclusion in paragraph 302 does not refer to a reputation in clothes, does
No, it does not, it does not. It is entirely
consistent with the second of the two processes of reasoning that I have
addressed your
Honours on, and I accept what your Honour says about
Just finally, in response to a matter raised by
Justice Jagot, the reasoning in paragraph 302, in our submission, is
not disconnected
from the priority date. It draws on the Full Court’s
analysis of the primary judge’s reasons which refer repeatedly
priority date. So, in the Full Court’s reasons, your Honour will see
the priority date referred to in paragraph 289.
paragraph 291 there is a reference to September 2008, which of course
is the month of the priority date. In paragraph 298 there
is a further
reference to the priority date. And in paragraph 300, in the last
sentence – indeed, in the second line and in
sentence – there are references to the priority date. So, we
respectfully submit the Full Court did not lose sight
of the priority date in
its analysis on section 60. Your Honours, that is what I wanted to say to
your Honours about section 60.
Can I move to
section 88(2)(c), that is, ground 2. Your Honours, that ground raises
first, an issue as to the proper construction
of section 88(2)(c), namely,
whether the words of the section refer to the notional normal and fair use of
the mark across the breadth
of the goods and services in respect of which it is
registered – that is, the notional use test – or whether
refer only to the actual use which has been made of the mark,
including, apparently, the limited extent of its use as at the date
application for rectification is filed – that is, the actual use
The second thing ground 2 raises are issues of application,
those being whether the Full Court erred in finding the 88(2)(c)
made out, whether a notional use or actual use test is applied. I should
flag now, in relation to the actual use test, there is
a particular issue as to
whether the limited extent to which the mark had been used – in terms
of the limited number of persons
who had actually encountered it –
can be taken into account under 88(2)(c) even on an actual use test
approach. I am going
to leave that issue aside in addressing construction and
deal with it when I come to application, but I just wanted to put a
place‑holder
Before I address construction, may I
just ask your Honours to turn to appeal book page 264, which is where
your Honours will find
paragraph 776 of the primary judge’s
reasons. Your Honours will see there and going over the page that
her Honour sets out
the notional use test under section 88(2)(c) by
reference to what Justice Nicholas had said in
Dunlop Aircraft Tyres
. Your Honours will see at the foot
of page 264, going over to the top of page 265, a reference to
Justice Kitto in
Southern Cross Refrigerating v Toowoomba
Your Honours will appreciate from that that the test,
although not specifically in the contest of section 88(2)(c), is a test of
long standing in trade mark law, it has been applied for many, many years.
May I just, by reference to the extract from
Dunlop Aircraft Tyres
a couple of features of the test to attention. First, paragraph 177,
your Honours will see that the test requires that:
all the surrounding circumstances must be taken into account including the
circumstances in which the goods will be bought and sold
and the character of
the probable purchasers of the goods.
Then, down at paragraph 181,
your Honours will see a description of what notional normal use involves,
and your Honours will see it
normal and fair use for all goods or services covered by the trade mark
registration in question and that . . . it is necessary to
have regard to all legitimate uses to which the mark might be put by its
So, that is the concept of normal and fair use.
Your Honours, I wanted to go from there directly to the text of
section 88(2) in
its current form, if I could ask your Honours to turn
to that. As your Honours will appreciate, section 88(2)(a) makes
as grounds for rectification of the register:
the grounds on which the registration of the trade mark could have been
and that includes grounds like section 60,
which operate by reference to whether the mark was likely to deceive or cause
in the circumstances applying at the priority date.
grounds in sections 43 and 61 of the
Trade Marks Act
grounds of that kind that operate by reference to the likelihood of deception or
confusion at the priority date. And by
those grounds, section 88(2)(a)
permits a likelihood of deception or confusion in the circumstances applying at
the priority date
to be relied on as a ground for an order that the register be
rectified under section 88(1). In contrast to 88(2)(a), 88(2)(c)
the Court to assess whether:
because of the circumstances applying at the time the application for
rectification is filed, the use of the trade mark is likely
to deceive or cause
confusion –
So, like the grounds of opposition picked up by
section 88(2)(a), that involves, in our submission, a prospective
test – that
is, a test of what is likely to occur based on the use of
the trade mark – but it requires that test to be carried out by
to the circumstances applying at the time of the application for
rectification rather than the priority date.
Now, in our submission,
nothing in the text of section 88(2)(c) indicates that “the use of
the trade mark” in the second
part of that provision is to be limited to
the manner in which the trade mark has actually been used to date. The use of
“is likely” in 88(2)(c) as opposed to “would be
likely”, which is used, for example, in grounds of opposition
section 60, simply reflects the fact that the grounds of opposition are
dealing with a mark which has not been and may never
be registered, whereas
section 88(2)(c) is dealing with a mark which has been
registered.
So, under section 60 and like grounds of opposition,
the question is whether, if registered, any notional, fair and normal use of
mark would be likely to deceive or cause confusion such that the application for
registration should be refused, whereas under
section 88(2)(c), because the
mark is already registered, the question is whether any notional, fair and
normal use of the mark is
likely to deceive or cause confusion such that its
registration should be cancelled.
That difference in language picks up
on a point Chief Justice Mason identified in
New South Wales Dairy
Corporation v Murray Goulburn Co‑Operative
[1990] HCA 60
(1990) 171 CLR 363.
I will not ask your Honours to turn to
it, but can I just give your Honours the reference, it is at the foot of
page 379. There,
the Chief Justice made the point that the words
“would be”, in section 28(a) of the 1955 Act:
suggests that the section had its focus on the act of entry in the
that is, the time of registration. One can well
imagine that in section 88(2)(c), which is intended to apply
post‑registration,
the present tense “is likely” was used to
avoid giving that impression.
The next point to make on the
text – and this is staying with the words “is
likely” – is that other provisions
of the Act demonstrate that
those words “is likely” still require a notional use test. Could I
ask your Honours in the
Act to go to section 10, which is the
definition of “deceptively similar”. Your Honours will see
that it uses the words:
is likely to deceive or cause confusion.
Nonetheless, your Honours, the assessment of deceptive similarity
under the Act has been held to require a notional use test. If
I could ask
your Honours to go briefly to joint authorities bundle tab 24, the
decision of
Vivo International v Tivo
[2012] FCAFC 159
(2012) 294 ALR 661.
If I can ask your Honours to
turn through in that decision to paragraph [112], page 681. At
paragraph [112] and following Justice
Nicholas, with whom
Justice Dowsett agreed, addressed deceptive similarity under
section 44 of the Act. If your Honours would look
paragraph [113], your Honours will see the quote in that paragraph,
and can I draw your Honours’ attention to the
end of the third line,
the sentence beginning “In fact, you must consider” and so
Your Honours will see there a description of a notional normal
and fair use test being applied in relation to the deceptive similarity
section 44. Then, paragraph [114], your Honours will see,
particularly from the third line, of particular importance to this
case, down to
the citation of authorities at the end of that paragraph. So, although the
definition of “deceptive similarity”
uses the language of:
is likely to deceive or cause confusion.
Nonetheless, when that test
is applied in section 44 of the Act it requires a notional normal and fair
use test. This Court dealt
with deceptive similarity in the context of
section 120 in
, to which my learned friend
Mr Dimitriadis, went this morning. I will not ask your Honours to
and 29 of that
decision ‑ ‑ ‑
I just missed ‑ ‑ ‑
am so sorry, your Honour, it is the
, sorry, I just missed
all, your Honour. I apologise for not being clear enough. It is in joint
authorities bundle tab 16. I will not ask
your Honours to go back to
it now, but the citation is
[2023] HCA 8
277 CLR 186.
At paragraphs 28
and 29 your Honours describe a notional, fair and normal use test for
the assessment of deceptive similarity in
the context of
section 120.
So, deceptive similarity, which asks whether a mark is
likely to deceive or cause confusion, requires a notional use test. It would
not be correct to attribute to those same words a different meaning in
section 88(2)(c), and that is effectively what the appellant
your Honours to do.
It makes sense to have a
notional use test for a section 44 case, because you are preventing the
registration of a trade mark here,
so you need to predict what is going to
happen by reference to notional and fair uses of the trade mark.
With 88(2)(c), however,
it seems to be – you would still ask
that question, I would suggest, but it is also anchored in “the
circumstances applying
at the time”, and that must be an indication that
one could look at past use to see what has happened, at least as part of
things that one would look at in trying to make the prediction.
In my submission, no, your Honour. In my submission, the
reference to the ‑ ‑ ‑
It cannot be relevant – it cannot be a purely abstract question
when you have, say, 10 years of past use.
Your Honour, in my submission, reference to “the circumstances”
at the start of section 88(2)(c) is a reference to
the surrounding
circumstances that are always taken into account in the notional, fair and
normal use test. So, the circumstances
of the trade
generally ‑ ‑ ‑
Except that the difference here is that this is happening after a period
where the person, who is the registered owner, has used the
That is right, but the registered owner has a range of rights, a
broad range of rights, that are completely unencumbered by the
particular the
way in which it has used the mark.
I am not disputing
the relevance of your notional use test, I am just saying that there may be more
to look at here.
In my respectful submission, there is
not. One does not ask how the mark is actually being used as part of
the 88(2)(c) inquiry.
One asks: what are the circumstances of the trade
as at the date of the application for rectification? And then, considering
circumstances, one asks the standard notional normal and fair use
Can I ask you this question – I am
sorry, Mr Darke – we will only get to 88(2)(c) if we do not
find in your favour under
succeeded on both before the Full Court, and the appellant challenges both, so I
would ask your Honours to uphold the Full
Court on both.
But you do not need both?
Well, I do not need
both, but I seek to maintain both, given that I have the benefit of the Full
Court’s findings on that.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Mr Darke, on any view in this case, the circumstances applying at the
time were the circumstances of your client’s use up until
that point in
time, were they not?
They formed part of those
circumstances, I accept that, yes.
BEECH‑JONES J:
that is what brought it all there.
That is right, and
that is why the case on 88(2)(c) was even stronger than the case on
section 60, because by that time the singer
had actually used her mark on
BEECH‑JONES J:
Extensively.
Yes, extensively, quite, and there is
evidence of that, that is so, your Honour. Just on the text, I also wanted
to give your
Honours a reference to section 89(1)(b) of the Act.
Your Honours will appreciate that refers back to section 88(2)(a),
and 88(2)(a)
picks up grounds like section 60, which use the words
“would be likely”. But your Honours will see 89(1)(b)
the ground that the trade mark is liable to deceive –
or cause confusion. That is a further indication in the text of the Act
that no significance is to be attributed to the use of “is”
in 88(2)(c) rather than “would be”. I have addressed
your Honours on the meaning of the words:
the circumstances applying at the time when the application for rectification
We say they are just the surrounding circumstances of the trade, but they
do include, as part of those circumstances, the conduct
of the singer or the
respondents more generally as at the date of the application for
rectification.
GORDON A‑CJ:
Do you want to say anything
legislative history in your outline
of oral argument?
I will be very brief on those, your Honours. I will be a little longer on
context and purpose and then very short on legislative
history. On context and
purpose, we say the construction that the text of 88(2)(c) supports is
entirely consistent with the statutory
context and purpose of the
In that regard, first we emphasise that registration gives a
trade mark owner very broad rights. We have identified those rights
written submissions but they include, obviously, under section 20(1) of the
Act, the exclusive right to use and authorise
others to use the mark in relation
to all the goods and services in respect of which it is
registered.
Under section 20(2), the right to restrain others from
not only using the mark but also using a substantially identical or deceptively
similar mark or sign in relation not only to the registered goods or services
but also to goods or services of the same description
as or closely related to
the registered goods and services.
As I have already pointed out in
response to your Honour Justice Steward, those broad rights are not
limited by any actual use the
owner makes of the registered mark. Second, we
would place reliance on what this Court said in
Health World v Shin‑Sun
[2010] HCA 13
(2010) 240 CLR 590
, if I could ask your Honours to
go to that. That is in the authorities bundle at tab 13.
What does this stand as a proposition for?
Your Honours, it stands for the proposition that the integrity of the
register is an important purpose or object of the
Trade Marks Act
relevant paragraphs are from paragraph 22 through to 27. I will not take
up more time with it than to note that.
What is the
integrity issue here?
The integrity issue here is that
the appellant’s mark, the designer’s mark, is on the register but it
does not function
as an accurate badge of origin for the full range of goods and
services in respect of which that registration has been granted, because
were used, at least in ways different from the way in which the appellant has
presently used it in relation to goods or services
– although we say
even in respect of those ways – it would be likely to deceive or
cause confusion.
Third on context and purpose, in circumstances where
the broad rights of registered owners under the Act are not limited by the use
they make of their marks, we do say it is consistent with the purpose of the
legislative scheme of which 88(2)(c) forms part that
it should operate by
reference to any notional fair and normal use which can be made of the
registered mark across the breadth of
its registration.
And although I
did not draw the point out in answer to your Honour
Justice Gordon’s question earlier, I should make clear that
High Court says in
Health World
is that section 88 forms part of a
legislative scheme that is intended to preserve the integrity of the register
and to make sure
that marks that are on the register are capable of faithfully
and accurately acting as a badge of origin for the full range of goods
services in respect of which they are registered.
Does that point not cut both ways? So, the designer would say yes, I wish
to uphold the register by preventing you from using the
mark on your clothes.
She is the registered owner in class 25.
the registered owner, but she is the registered owner of a mark which, if I am
right on 88(2)(c), is liable to deceive or cause
confusion if she
well, she does not agree – that is the case. She says your use of
the mark is causing confusion.
No, but if –
your Honour, I understand.
just cuts both ways, does it not?
Well, in my
submission, it is consistent with the application of the notional fair and
normal use test under 88(2)(c). That is the
point I am seeking to
GORDON A-CJ:
you seek to make is that one looks at the text, one looks at the rest of the
structure of the Act – both in terms
of the other provisions that
deal with this same language, as well as the overall context and purpose in the
maintenance of the register
– and say this is a scheme, it has some
artificial bits about it and it has some unusual ways of dealing with the
of respective interests, but that is the way in which it operates, and
this reinforces your construction that it is a notional use
rather than an
actual use.
Yes, that is so. Your Honours, I
think, given those exchanges and in light of the time, I will not say more
BEECH-JONES J:
Just briefly I will ask, Mr Darke, about 88(1)(c). On the supposition
that somehow, if you could have actual use, thereby there
being no confusion,
from a narrower use of the trade mark, could that be reflected in a limitation
on registration? Which –
it does not sound as though that
That may be able to be done, but that would
not support the use of an actual use test in 88(2)(c). It would be
consistent with
a notional use test, so that one could identify the extent to
which the registration was over broad, in the sense that the use of
the mark in
the manner permitted by the registration would be likely to deceive or cause
BEECH-JONES J:
Right. And just to pick up, maybe,
what Justice Steward was referring to, if the circumstances – in
this case, as I understand
it, there is a period of around 10 years of use,
actual use, by your client, of which only a shorter period is the substance of
infringement action.
BEECH‑JONES J:
And so – that is not the
problem, is it? So, the problem – the circumstances have come about
because, for whatever
good reason or bad, there was no enforcement of the
statutory monopoly.
Yes, that is
BEECH-JONES J:
In a different case, though, where
the – it would appear to be a bit illogical if, say, two years after
your actual use,
the holder of the trade mark comes in to seek infringement
action. Could you then say: well, because our infringing actual use
so intensive over the last two years, this is going to cause
You could say that, but that is where the
application of the section 89 discretion would come into
BEECH‑JONES J:
GORDON A-CJ:
And this comes back to, as I understand your argument, that there is this
structure, and one has to go through these steps before
one takes into account
those kinds of things in 89.
Exactly. Yes. I
think your Honours, with what I have said together with our written
submissions, have our position on context
and purpose. Can I just say something
very briefly about the legislative history – did your Honour
Justice Gordon wish to
raise – I thought your Honour might
have had a question for me.
GORDON A-CJ:
No, I am sorry,
Mr Darke, I do not.
Not at all.
Your Honours, just briefly on the legislative history, we have addressed
that in our written submissions at paragraphs
29 to 31 and 36.
In paragraph 30 of those submissions, I should note – and extend
an apology to the Court – our referencing
in one respect was
incorrect and in other respects it was incomplete, and we have filed with the
Court a marked‑up version
of paragraph 30 of our submissions
correcting those errors. I have hard copies which I can hand up if
your Honours wish it. I was
not going to address on the detail of
paragraph 30, so it may not be necessary, but we have filed that with the
GORDON A-CJ:
short point is, your Honours, that the introduction of sections 88
and 89 in the 1995 Act were intended to address the question
whether section 28(a) of the 1955 Act had a continuing
operation – that is, after registration of the mark in
and, if so, whether there was a requirement of blameworthy
conduct on the part of the registered owner.
There was no uncertainty
1955 Act, and there is no suggestion
in any of the extrinsic materials
regarding the 1995 Act that the notional use test under the 1955 Act
should be replaced with an
actual use test. So, all that is consistent, we say,
with the construction of 88(2)(c) for which we contend as requiring a
use test. That is the extent to which we seek to deploy the
legislative history. Your Honours, can I then move to the question
application on 88(2)(c).
GORDON A-CJ:
point 5 of your outline?
Yes, I think
so, your Honour. As your Honours are aware, on that issue, the
Full Court concluded that the 88(2)(c) ground was
made out whether it
required a notional use or actual use test. That conclusion is in
paragraph 339 of the Full Court’s reasons,
book 419 to 420. We submit that conclusion was correct on either
If your Honours would go to paragraph 785 at
page 267 in the primary judge’s reasons, your Honours will see
that it was not
in dispute below that by 19 December 2019, which is
the date on which the cross‑claim was filed, the evidence made clear that
the Katy Perry mark had acquired “a significant reputation” in
Australia not only in relation to music and entertainment
but also in relation
to clothing. That is the finding in 785.
Then in 750, at
page 258, your Honours will see the finding to which reference has
been made a number of times. This is in paragraph
750 of the primary judge
at the top of page 258, that there was no:
bright line of distinction between the clothes offered for sale
the designer bearing her mark and those which might be offered by a pop
star such as the singer. That finding was not challenged
on appeal or disturbed
by the Full Court.
In those circumstances we say whether one
considers the actual use the appellant made of her mark, in terms of the types
to which she applied it, or the notional normal and fair use she
could make of the mark across all kinds of clothes, there was at
least a real
possibility that the result of that use would be to cause a number of persons to
wonder whether it might not be the
case that the clothes on which her mark was
used were associated with the pop star – the singer – and
confused, therefore,
as to the trade origin of those clothes.
your Honours, it is at that point that the issue arises as to whether even
an actual use test would take into account the limited
extent of the
applicant’s use of her mark. That is, the limited number of persons who
had actually encountered it as at the
date of the cross‑claim. Even on an
actual use test, in our submission, it is clear that 88(2)(c) is concerned
not with whether
use of the mark has actually caused deception or confusion but
with the likelihood of deception or confusion from use of the mark.
to assess that likelihood, as this Court observed in
paragraph 28, the Court puts itself in the shoes of a notional or a
hypothetical consumer as at the relevant date who encounters
this case – designer’s mark. In our submission, it is not easy
to see how that allows for consideration
of the actual number of persons who
have in the past encountered the designer’s mark, even applying an actual
use test. If
the limited extent of the historical use of the mark in that sense
cannot be taken into account under 88(2)(c), then even applying
use test, that test would seem to do nothing to assist the appellant’s
Even if it can be taken into account, the only thing it does
is to allow the appellant to place greater weight on the absence of
any evidence
of actual confusion, the argument being that even though the absence of such
evidence is likely explained by her limited
use of her mark – that
is, the designer’s mark – that limited use is incorporated into
the actual use test anyway,
increasing the chances that the lack of evidence of
actual confusion is a good guide to the likelihood of confusion.
we say, is not a particularly strong argument, even assuming it to be available
in circumstances where, as the primary judge
found, the reputation of the
singer’s mark had increased over the period from 2008 to the filing
of the cross‑claim in
December 2019. That is because the absence of
evidence of actual confusion in the years prior to 2019 would not be good
of the likelihood of confusion in 2019 when the reputation of the
singer’s mark was greater. In other words, one does not
have a long
period comparable with the circumstances prevailing in 2019 in which it can
be said there is an absence of evidence of
Your Honours, beyond that, there are only two other
points on which the appellant relies to challenge the Full Court’s finding
that the 88(2)(c) ground was made out. The first is the argument that,
given the singer’s reputation, ordinary consumers would
have been so
keenly aware of the spelling of her first name with a “y” that there
was no likelihood of deception or confusion
from the designer’s mark,
which is spelt, obviously, with an “i‑e”.
Court was right to reject that point for the same reason as it did on the
section 60 ground. Although the singer’s
mark had a significant
reputation, there is no evidence that, even in 2019, the precise spelling of her
name was so well-known or
notorious as to negate any likelihood of deception or
confusion. The other is the related argument that deceptive similarity is
wrong frame of reference, as the appellant terms it. And again, we have dealt
with that point in the section 60 ground.
Now, that leaves
grounds 3 and 4 regarding section 89 of the Act. Ground 3
and the appellant’s submissions appear to raise
both the proper
construction of section 89(1) and its application in the circumstances of
this particular case. On construction,
could I start with the terms of
section 89(1), which are set out in the Full Court’s judgment at
paragraph 306, but obviously
are also in the Act. The page of the appeal
book is page 413.
As your Honours will see,
section 89(1)(b) refers to the grounds of opposition, such as
section 60, which apply where the trade mark
is liable or likely to deceive
or cause confusion, and make grounds of rectification by section 88(2)(a);
and 89(1)(c) refers to
the ground of rectification under
section 88(2)(c). For present purposes, the critical words are the words
appearing underneath
paragraph (c). The effect of those words is that the
court only has a discretion:
not to grant an application for rectification –
grounds indicated:
if the registered owner of the trade mark –
satisfies the court that the ground relied on . . . has not arisen
through any act or fault of the registered owner.
Can I emphasise two
particular matters at the outset. First is the breadth of the concluding words
“any act or fault of the
owner”. Second is the fact that
section 89 applies not only to rectification of the register by reason of
circumstances which
have arisen post‑registration of the mark –
that is, on the ground in section 88(2)(c) – but also to
rectification
of the register on the:
ground on which its registration could have been
such as section 60. That is, of course, the
effect of 89(1)(b). In that way, section 89 deals with rectification
of the register
in respect of marks which ought never to have been registered in
the first place.
That is different, may I emphasise, from the way in
which the requirement of blameworthy conduct was understood to operate in
to the 1955 Act, which was only, if at all, in the context of
section 28(a)’s operation post‑registration. It suggests,
our submission, that the threshold for enlivening the section 89 discretion
is unlikely to have been intended to be easy to satisfy.
BEECH-JONES J:
you say that to me again? It is not intended to be satisfied
It is because the section 89
discretion deals not only with circumstances that have arisen
post‑registration but also with
marks that should never have been
registered in the first place. In our submission, that suggests that the
threshold for enlivening
section 89 is unlikely to have been intended to be
easy to satisfy. It should not be easy to preserve on the register marks that
should never have been registered in the first place.
Certainly, one
would expect that the threshold requirement under 89(1) to be, in a sense,
higher than the notion of blameworthy conduct
under the 1955 Act, which
only concerned marks which were likely to deceive or cause confusion because of
circumstances arising post‑registration.
ask you, in relation to 89(1)(b), if the word “act” includes
the act of registration – here, the act of
registration – could you ever satisfy this
If it referred to “act”
alone, the sole act of applying for registration, then I think the answer is
But I do not
suggest that it does encompass the act, alone, of applying for registration.
The Full Court did not find that.
But it does
include the act of registration?
In this case,
with knowledge. Let me – I understand your Honour’s
point ‑ ‑ ‑
You do not point – yes, okay.
‑ ‑ ‑ I will seek to deal with
I just observe that the Full Court’s findings on the construction of
section 89(1) are to be found at paragraphs 311
page 414 of the appeal book. I will not take time over them but, in our
submission, the Full Court’s statement
of the relevant inquiry, which
one sees in paragraph 312 in the last sentence, was correct.
move from there to the appellant’s arguments on construction. There
appear, to us, to be three of them. The first concerns
the purpose of
section 89. The proposition put is that that purpose is to provide
protection for trade mark owners against potentially
harsh outcomes under
section 88. Now, in one sense, that is true, but it does not take the
construction of section 89(1) very far,
because it does not say anything
the authorities make clear, the Act seeks to balance a range of different
interests, not only those of registered owners, but
also the public interest
which consumers have in the register remaining an accurate record of marks which
perform their statutory
function of indicating the trade origins of the goods in
respect of which they are registered, and the interests of other traders
being able to use their own marks unencumbered by the marks of others which
would become liable to deceive or cause confusion.
When one appreciates
that the Act seeks to balance those different interests through various
provisions, including section 89, it
is not correct to characterise
section 89 as a remedial or beneficial provision. It is part of a
statutory scheme that is intended
to balance the competing rights and interests
of various kinds.
The appellant’s second argument on construction
is to treat the words “act or fault” in section 89(1) as
limbs of that provision, with the trade mark owner’s state of
mind being relevant to the second limb but not the first. Your
will see that particularly at paragraph 65 of the appellant’s
submissions in chief, in the fourth and fifth paragraphs.
My learned friend was
driven to draw that distinction in exchanges with the Bench this morning. In
our submission, that contention
should not be accepted.
“any act or fault” in section 89(1) should be construed, we
say, as a composite expression. That construction
is indicated by the word
“any” which appears immediately before “act or fault”
and applies to both terms.
Now, “act or fault” are not separate and
distinct limbs of section 89(1). They are intended to cover the full range
of conduct in which a registered owner might engage – not only
positive acts but also omissions and combinations of the two.
“fault” is used, we would suggest, so that insofar as the relevant
conduct includes omissions – such as
failing, over an extended period
of time, to bring proceedings to restrain infringements of the mark with the
result that it becomes
likely to deceive or cause confusion – it does
not include wholly innocent or inadvertent omissions. That is the point of
reference to “fault” – such as where the owner did not
know and could not by reasonable inquiry have found
conduct – but that does not indicate that the owner’s knowledge
or other state of mind is irrelevant
where the relevant conduct is a positive
act of the owner.
It simply means that knowledge or some other adverse
state of mind is not necessary where the relevant conduct is a positive act.
would be surprising, in our respectful submission, if the owner’s state of
mind were irrelevant to section 89(1), which
operates, as the appellant
submits, as a threshold requirement for the exercise of a discretion which is
intended to provide a measure
of benefit or protection to the registered
Picking up on some exchanges between your Honours and my
learned friend this morning, we would also say that the reference to “act
or fault” in section 89(1) cannot be directed only to conduct after
registration because it is concerned, amongst other things,
with grounds which
operate by reference to the priority date – that is,
pre‑registration. And generally – although
there may be
exceptions to this – the only act where a section 88(2)(a)
ground is relied on will be the act of applying for
registration with some
adverse state of mind.
What do you say about the
proposition that was suggested in argument that (b) might cover
pre‑conduct, but that (c) would
necessarily be limited to that which
occurred between registration and the application for
rectification?
I certainly accept that the date for
assessing the grounds covered by 89(1)(b) on the one hand and 89(1)(c)
on the other are different.
Section 89(1)(b) picks up 88(2)(a), and
the grounds there are assessed at the priority date. Section 89(1)(c)
picks up 88(2)(c),
and that is assessed as at the date of the application
for rectification. So, I accept that the grounds are assessed at different
dates, but ‑ ‑ ‑
GORDON A-CJ:
And therefore, the things that go into the mix in the exercise of the discretion
are different.
Certainly, where the relevant ground
is 88(2)(c), there may be additional conduct which is relevant to whether
or not the threshold
has been met – the threshold requirement
in 89(1) has been met.
BEECH-JONES J:
If 88(2)(c) is
the sole basis, the act or event cannot be the application, can it?
Well, if it were an application – as in this case, we
would say – with knowledge of the very matters that ultimately
the 88(2)(c) ground being made out – and I will come to the
detail of this, if I may, shortly – that could still
be a relevant
“act or fault” for the purposes of 88(2)(c),
GORDON A-CJ:
to say any more, though, that when one takes on the inquiry about the
circumstances at the time the application for rectification
is filed, for the
purposes of the discretion in 89, one can look back at what has gone before
it, and that might include conduct
leading up to the registration.
GORDON A‑CJ:
Is that all you seek to
That is absolutely right, your Honour. And
then the question is, well,
GORDON A-CJ:
fact‑specific and fact‑dependent?
fact‑specific – “act or fault” does not have a
different meaning depending on which part of 89(1)
is relied upon. It has
a consistent meaning, and one can take into account, where 88(2)(c) is the
relevant ground for rectification,
events happening at any time prior to the
date of the application for rectification, the relevant question of fact being
the ground of cancellation – or rectification,
rather – whether the registered owner has satisfied the court that
ground in question:
has not arisen through any act or fault on the part of the registered
Your Honours, just finally on construction, the
appellant’s third point is the assertion that the words “arisen
in section 89(1) require some closer causal connection than
the words “contributed to”, which the Full Court used in
paragraph 312 of their reasons. There is, in our submission, no substance
to that contention.
Both expressions describe a causal relationship
which is somewhat less proximate than that required by the words “caused
We have given your Honours reference to authority, albeit in
different contexts, where the analogous expression “arisen from”
been so construed. Certainly, the words “arisen through”
in 89(1) do not indicate that the owner’s act or
fault needs to be
the cause – that is to say, the sole cause – of the
relevant ground for rectification being made out.
Your Honours, can
I then move to our application, and I will deal first with section 60
and 88(2)(a), and then with 88(2)(c). The
crux of the court’s
reasoning on section 60 and 88(2)(a) is in paragraph 316 and 317,
which your Honours find on appeal book
page 415. As your Honours
will see from those paragraphs, their Honours held that the section 60
ground had arisen through the appellant’s
application for her
with knowledge of Ms Hudson –
that is, the
her reputation –
that is, that she was a nationally and
internationally famous pop star – and of the singer’s
mark, and with knowledge:
that popular music stars, such as Ms Hudson, lend their names (and trade
marks) to be used in connection with clothes and sell merchandise
and that that was:
a common practice –
Now, there is no challenge to any of
those factual matters. In substance, what the Full Court held was that the
section 60 ground
had arisen through the appellant’s application for
her mark with knowledge of the very matters which meant that it was likely
deceive or cause confusion, that is, with knowledge of the very matters which
rendered it invalid.
The appellant submits that that holding involved
error because the Full Court could not have regarded her knowledge in
considering
whether the section 60 ground had arisen through her conduct in
making her trade mark application, but for the reasons I have already
addressed, as a matter of construction of section 89(1), that is not
correct. State of mind can be taken into account, whether one
is considering a
positive act or some kind of omission, or a combination of the two.
“Act” and “fault” are,
as I have said, not separate
limbs of section 89(1) and the owner’s state of mind is relevant to
both types of conduct.
The applicant’s knowledge was significant
because, possessed of that knowledge, she could have changed course. She could
modified her mark in such a way that it was not likely to deceive or cause
confusion. She could, for example, have selected the
initials “KP” in a particular stylised form as part of a logo
mark, and a mark of that kind may well not have been likely
to deceive or cause
confusion under the section 60 ground, but she did not take that
She applied for her mark with knowledge of the very matters that
rendered it invalid and in that way the section 60 ground could
said to have arisen, we say, through her conduct. Although the case might be
said to be “an unfortunate one”,
as the Full Court noted in
paragraph 315, their Honours’ construction and application of
the threshold requirement in section
89(1) was, with respect to them, in
our submission, correct.
GORDON A‑CJ:
Could I ask one
question. It is a question about the regulation which must be taken into
account as part of the discretion. So,
(a) is public interest; (b), any
other circumstances which have ceased to exist, (c), the extent to which it
distinguished the relevant
goods with those ones; (d) is:
whether there is any order or other remedy, other than an order for
rectification, that would be adequate in the circumstances.
What is that
a reference to and was it the subject of any submission at all
It was not the subject of any submission
at all below. I was going to submit to your Honour that it may be a
reference to the
variation – the sort of order for rectification that
might be made under 88(1)(c), but, of course, that cannot be right, because
it is talking about an order other than an order for rectification and
an 88(1)(c) order would be an order of that kind. I think
the short answer
to your Honour’s question is that no one suggested that that
provision of the regulations had any relevance
Your Honours,
as to the application of section 89(1) in respect of the 88(2)(c)
ground, the Full Court’s reasons are at paragraphs
to 342 at appeal book 420. We do say that their Honours’
reasoning there is correct, for the reasons I have already
Touching on a matter that your Honour Justice Steward
raised with me, I think, although the section 88(2)(c) ground operated by
to the circumstances existing when the crossclaim was failed in
December 2019, we do say that those circumstances were just the natural
outworking or eventuation of the matters of which the appellant was aware when
she applied for her mark. Namely, her knowledge of
the singer, her reputation
and her mark, and the common practice of popular the music stars lending their
names and marks to be used
in connection with clothes and to sell merchandise at
their concerts and so on.
So, it follows that, as with the
section 60 ground, we would respectfully submit the section 88(2)(c)
ground arose through the appellant’s
application for her trade mark with
knowledge of those matters, they were just the natural outworking. The
likelihood of deception
or confusion as at the date of the application for
rectification was just the natural outworking of the matters of which the
was aware when she applied for her mark.
your Honour, that there are additional acts or faults of the appellant
which mean the discretion is not enlivened in relation
to the ground under
section 88(2)(c). We identify those in our written submissions at
paragraph 45. Our friends say they are notice
of contention points. We
had not viewed them in that way, we had viewed them as points that would arise
for consideration in the
event that the Court found the Full Court to be in
error on 89(1).
In any event, whether they are notice of contention
points or not, there is no prejudice or can be no prejudice, because the
has addressed them today. Can I just deal with those additional acts
or faults. The first is the appellant’s conduct in aligning
herself with
the singer. Now, the Full Court identified that as a reason for not exercising
the discretion in the appellant’s
We rely on it both as an
act which contributed to the 88(2)(c) ground being established and as a
reason for not exercising the discretion
in her favour if the threshold in 89(1)
is passed. Now, as to that matter, the appellant says that the Full Court erred
that her conduct in seeking to align herself with the singer:
would only increase the likelihood of consumers potentially being deceived or
They make that submission in paragraph 72 of their written
submissions. If your Honours would go to the reasons of the primary judge
on page 88 of the appeal book, paragraph 220, your Honours will
see the primary judge’s findings as to the appellant’s
Your Honours will see that the first of them, at the foot of page 88,
was posting “an audio clip” of a radio
presenter mentioning the
designer’s:
“Adelaide pants” when introducing Ms Hudson’s single
“Teenage Dream”.
That was audio material. It did not involve
any use of the words “Katie Perry”. There was a
Facebook – I am sorry,
there was an accompanying message which
referred to the spelling of her name, but the audio obviously did not, and that
was conduct
which was capable of contributing to the likelihood of deception or
confusion, in our respectful submission.
In subparagraph (2), on
page 89, the appellant posted an audio clip on her website of an interview
with a radio presenter on the
radio station Mix 106.5. If
your Honours pass down to the last six or so lines before the start of
paragraph (3), your Honours will
see the primary judge found
While Ms Taylor did not accept that she was invited to participate in
the segment because of her association with Ms Hudson it is
clear, having
regard to the transcript of the interview, that the entire focus of the
interview, the “free ad” and the
presenters’ interest in
Ms Taylor was precisely because of the fact that the two women shared the
same name, albeit with some
differences in spelling –
Then, in paragraph (3), your Honours will see the post that the
designer made on her Facebook page on 3 July 2017, and
your Honours
will see the primary judge’s finding in the
second‑last sentence in that paragraph:
But it is that Ms Taylor –
that is, the designer:
once again took the opportunity to obtain publicity for her label by
reference to –
the singer. In our respectful submission, those findings record a number
of instances over several years in which the appellant plainly
sought to promote
her brand by reference to the singer.
It was open, we say, to the
Full Court to find that for the appellant to seek to promote herself by
reference to the singer had increased
the potential for the likelihood of
deception or confusion. That finding means that the likelihood of deception or
confusion under
section 88(2)(c) arose in part, at least, through the
appellant’s own conduct. Alternatively, it is, we say, a sound reason
refusing to exercise the section 89 discretion in her
Your Honours, the second additional matter we rely upon in
contending that the section 89(1) threshold is not enlivened in respect
the 88(2)(c) ground is a combination of the appellant’s conduct in
refusing an offer of coexistence and – only many
years later, in the
absence of any evidence of actual confusion – objecting to the
respondent’s conduct and then bringing
infringement
proceedings.
Now, so far as the threshold requirement is concerned, the
appellant’s delay in objecting to the respondent’s conduct
bringing infringement proceedings is the key matter. My learned friend referred
to factual findings of the primary judge on
that issue in the appeal book at
page 275, paragraph 820 and following. Your Honours will
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Darke, could you give me that paragraph
Of course – paragraph 820
on page 275.
BEECH-JONES J:
Your Honours will see the finding at the start of
paragraph 820 that:
The evidence does not establish that Ms Taylor knew of the infringing
conduct as far back as 2009.
Then your Honours will see, in paragraph 821, a reference to
That in 2019 Ms Taylor said in her interview with A Current Affair that
she had watched Ms Hudson infringe her mark for ten years
does not alter my
conclusion.
But where that reasoning ends up, your Honours, is at
paragraph 822. The primary judge concludes that it is just:
not clear when Ms Taylor became aware of any allegedly infringing
conduct on the part of the respondents, but it must have been after
so, it might have been 2010:
and before 2018 when she first met –
her solicitor. So, my friend referred to those findings. Can I make two
points about them. The first is that they are findings
we challenged on appeal
to the Full Court in ground 5 of our notice of appeal, at page 311 of
the appeal book, if I could ask your
Honours to go to that.
Your Honours will see paragraph 5 towards the foot of that page. We
contended that:
The primary judge erred in J[820]-[823] in concluding that the first element
of the laches defence had not been established because
the evidence did not
establish that Ms Taylor knew of the infringing conduct as far back
as 2009, in circumstances –
we then proceed to list at
paragraphs a through to k, going over to page 313 of the appeal
book. Now, the Full Court did not determine
ground 5 because it did not
arise on their findings. There was no need for them to decide the appeal from
the laches defence, the
rejection of the laches defence in circumstances where
the designer’s mark was to be cancelled.
Your Honours will
see that at page 421 of the appeal book, paragraph 347, where there is
a reference to ground 5 of the appeal.
There are then references to other
grounds – ground 6 in paragraph 349, ground 7
in 350. And then your Honours will see in
paragraph 351, in the
last sentence:
these grounds of appeal no longer arise and we do not propose to deal with
So, our ground 5 had not been determined, has not been determined by
the Full Court. If your Honours thought there was an error in
Court’s approach to section 89, one course open to your Honours
would be to remit the threshold issue to the Full
Court for redetermination
together with the balance of the appeal, including ground 5 of the notice
of appeal below. That would
be a course that your Honours could
BEECH-JONES J:
Sorry, could you just
reorientate – the significance of the primary judge’s findings
you took us to is precisely what,
the significance is that if the appellant did not know of the infringing
conduct, she could not be blamed for failing to
BEECH-JONES J:
But she had the
Precisely. That was the second point I
wanted to make to your Honour. So, the first point I was going to make was
we challenged
all those findings and that challenge has not been dealt with; if
your Honours thought it was significant, your Honours could remit
threshold issue to the Full Court for determination along with the balance of
the appeal.
But those findings – and this is your Honour
Justice Beech-Jones’ point – do not assist the appellant
in relation
to the section 89(1) discretion, because she bears, as
your Honour has said, the onus of satisfying the court that the ground of
rectification did not arise through any act or fault of hers – for
example, delay. And if the evidence does not establish
when she became aware of
the conduct, then she cannot make that out, she cannot establish that
Now, another thing she says is that she lacked the means to
commence the infringement proceedings until she found litigation funding
in 2019. But that does not address her failure to raise any objection
whatever to the respondent’s conduct, whether by email
or letter, prior to
that time. So, for those reasons we do say
GORDON A-CJ:
mean by that that she could have written a letter?
could have written a letter. She could have sent an email. She could have,
without incurring very much expense at all, got
a solicitor to write a letter
for her. She did not have to commence the infringement proceedings. She simply
had to do something
to object, and she did nothing in all that time.
your Honours, we do say that another ground on which it could be found and
ought be found that the threshold in 89(1) is not
satisfied in respect of
the 88(2)(c) ground for rectification is the appellant’s delay in
objecting to or bringing proceedings
in respect of the respondent’s
infringement. That is what I wanted to say, your Honours, on the threshold
In relation to the exercise of discretion, which is
paragraph 4 of the notice of appeal, that attacks the Full Court’s
not to exercise the section 89 discretion in the appellant’s
favour, assuming the discretion to be enlivened. Now, my learned
submitted earlier today that the Full Court simply did not exercise the
discretion.
In our respectful submission, it did. Both at
paragraph 318 in respect of the section 60 ground and in
paragraph 343 in respect
of 88(2)(c) the court made it clear that it
was proceeding to exercise the discretion on the assumption that the threshold
was enlivened.
So, the court simply proceeded to exercise the
discretion.
It was not determinative of the result because of their
findings on the threshold, but they did exercise it. The attack on that
exercise of the discretion raises several points, but none of them should be
accepted and none of them amounts to
House v The King
One of the appellant’s submissions is that the Full Court’s exercise
of the discretion is undermined by asserted
errors of principle in its reasoning
on the section 89(1) threshold.
Now, we say there were no such
errors of principle. Certainly, none are identified, nor is it said how they
affected the Full Court’s
exercise of discretion, assuming the threshold
to have been cleared. Even if the Full Court misapplied section 89(1),
which we would
not accept, no part of its reasoning on that issue, in our
respectful submission, can be shown to have affected its exercise of the
discretion.
A further matter on which the appellant relies at least in
relation to the 88(2)(c) ground is her claim that the respondent’s
conduct, the singer’s in particular, was that of an “assiduous
infringer”. That is referred to at paragraph 76
friends’ submissions and again at paragraph 79. The Full Court
correctly rejected that characterisation of the respondent’s
paragraph 344 of their Honours’ reasons, at page 420 of the
appeal book.
The characterisation was based on the notion that the
respondent’s conduct – I withdraw that, I have not put that
The contended‑for characterisation that the conduct was that of
an assiduous infringer was based on the notion that the respondent’s
conduct, that is, their use of the singer’s mark on clothes, was not
honest conduct. Your Honours will see that reflected
in the submission
which the Full Court summarised at paragraph 341, particularly in the
third‑last line:
Ms Hudson’s use was not honest concurrent
The Full Court in fact overturned the primary
judge’s finding that the use was not honest. If your Honours would
go to appeal
book page 392, your Honours will have, on that page,
paragraph 204. If I could draw your Honours’ attention to the
last sentence.
GORDON A-CJ:
Did you say
Paragraph 204, your Honour,
correct, on page 392:
we consider that the primary judge’s finding that the appellants could
not demonstrate, in any event,
use . . . was
So, they reject the primary judge’s finding that the use was not
honest. Then, at paragraph 214, on page 394, your Honours
see the findings of the Full Court:
We consider that the Katy Perry Mark –
that is, the singer’s mark:
was honestly adopted and used by –
the singer:
in Australia on clothes and other merchandise.
So, an express finding of honest use. Those findings have not been
challenged on this appeal. Having regard to those findings, there
simply was no
error in the Full Court’s rejection of the appellant’s
assiduous infringer submission or in the Full Court’s
paragraph 344 of its reasons that:
There was no deliberate “swamping” of:
the designer’s mark. The Full Court did refer – I
should just add, for completeness – in paragraph 344 to the use
being honest in 2002, that is, to the singer honestly adopting:
her name as a mark in the United States in 2002.
But they plainly found that the use of the mark continued to be honest
thereafter in the paragraphs to which I have taken the
Your Honours, next, in relation to the integrity of the
register, the appellant also contends that the Full Court erred in having
regard to the public interest in the integrity of the register.
Your Honours, that submission is made at paragraph 74 of our
written submissions and the relevant paragraph of the
Full Court’s reasons is paragraph 321 on
In our submission, the Full Court did not err in
having regard to that matter. Indeed, it would have erred if it had not done
That was a mandatory consideration for the Full Court to consider
under regulation 8.2(a) of the Trade Marks Regulations. Insofar
the court gave too much weight to that consideration, even if that were so, it
would not be a
House v The King
Further, the
effect of the section 60 ground being established was that the appellant
was never entitled to the mark of which she
obtained registration. In those
circumstances, the public interest in ensuring that trade mark registrations
only be made in favour
of those entitled to obtain them was a particularly
significant consideration.
My learned friend did refer to a number of
other objects or purposes of the trade marks legislation. One of them was the
desirability
of owners being able to protect their trade mark rights. But in
respect of that, on the section 60 ground, of course, the appellant
had such a right – her mark was never validly registered in the first
place. There is no public interest in preserving
a right she should never have
got in the first place.
In respect of 88(2)(c), which does not
depend on the mark being invalid when registered, we would say that the interest
mark owners being able to protect their trade mark rights is trumped by
other considerations; not only protecting the integrity of
the register,
although that is part of it, but also the conduct of the appellant in aligning
herself with the singer and her delay
in bringing proceedings.
Mr Darke, I notice the time, how much time have you got
left in your submissions? Mr Dimitriadis is entitled to a
Yes. I accept that entirely,
your Honours. I have two or three sentences to go.
Another of the relevant
purposes to which he referred was not rewarding infringers. Now, I have
addressed that in the context
of the assiduous infringer point. It does not
run – the use was honest. The final submission was not privileging
over ordinary persons.
That was not the basis on which the
Full Court refused to exercise discretion in favour of the appellant. Every
case depends on
its facts and here there were good reasons not to exercise the
discretion in the way that the Full Court decided not to
Your Honours, unless there is anything further, those are our
submissions.
GORDON A‑CJ:
If your Honours
GORDON A‑CJ:
Mr Dimitriadis, the
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Thank you, your Honour.
Your Honours, I will not say anything about section 60 in reply. I
rely on our submissions that we have
made in relation to that issue. In
relation to section 88(2)(c), our friend, in making some submissions
seeking to draw a comparison
between 88(2)(c) and 88(2)(a) insofar as it
refers to the grounds of opposition, used the language of “the
circumstances applying
at the priority date” to refer to the grounds of
opposition.
Now, that is not the statutory language. The grounds of
opposition have their own language. Section 60 directs attention to
matters: whether there is a prior trade mark that has a reputation in
Australia at the priority date and whether there is a likelihood
of deception or
confusion because of that reputation. It does not use the same language
as 88(2)(c).
Therefore, our friend’s argument that that
supports a reading of 88(2)(c) that would incorporate notional use, because
other grounds do, does not assist them, in our respectful submission. We
do not rely only on the language “is likely”
in 88(2)(c) to
support the submission we make about notional use. It is the wording as a
whole, including the reference to “the
circumstances applying at the
time” of the application for rectification.
We would accept that
another reading of section 88(2)(c), which perhaps lies somewhere between
the reading we have put on actual
use and our friend’s notional use
reading, is that one takes account of notional use but also gives particular
attention to
the circumstances applying at the time of the application for
rectification, including the actual use of the registered owner’s
mark, and that should be given particular weight in relation to that
ground – that is what the section directs attention
effect of our friends’ case is that one cannot take account of the trade
mark owner’s actual use but can take account
of the circumstances of other
use in the market, including, in this case, Ms Hudson’s use of her
trade mark. We respectfully
submit the language of “the circumstances
applying at the time” of the application for rectification clearly
comprehends
all circumstances, including the trade mark owner’s actual use
at that time, and one can take account of that in the way that
we submit the
Full Court ought to have.
Either way, on the construction of
section 88(2)(c), that supports the reached by the primary judge, albeit
that her Honour was applying
a notional use test, but emphasising the
significance of the fact that, over a period of more than 10 years of
continuous use by
Ms Taylor of her trade mark – including
online – to promote her business and clothes, there were no instances
of confusion
that were revealed in the evidence. The extrinsic material does
not shed light one way or another on whether there was intended
to be a test of
notional use in section 88(2)(c), to respond to a point that our friends
On section 89, your Honours, the section that confers a
discretion, it is important to bear in mind – as we have
– that under the 1955 Act there was a general
discretion under section 22 which was applicable in relation to the grounds
opposition that were made available as grounds of rectification, so,
section 28(a). Our friend’s submission is that because
section 89 in the current Act applies not only to the continuing ground of
rectification but the grounds of opposition that are given
life as grounds of
rectification, that supports a reading which there it is a difficult or not an
easy threshold to satisfy to enliven
the discretion.
That should not be
accepted bearing in mind the context, which is that there was a discretion at
large under the 1955 Act in relation
to those very grounds, that is, the
grounds that were given life – grounds of opposition that were given
life as grounds for
rectification under that Act. That is the discretion that
was exercised by the High Court in the
Campomar Case
there is nothing in the extrinsic material to suggest that there was any
intention to very significantly curtail the availability
of a discretion under
the current Act compared with the 1995 Act in relation to the grounds of
opposition that are available as grounds
of rectification or, indeed, in
relation to the new continuing ground of rectification
in 88(2)(c).
Indeed, just to give your Honours the reference,
the working party report that both parties have referred to in their
submissions
– the reference is given in point 8(d) of our
outline of oral propositions – that working party report recommended
different terms some provisions to go into the legislation. They included a
limitation. Firstly, it recommended a continuing ground
of rectification, it
recommended that that be subject to a limitation that it would not apply if the
trade mark owner established
that the ground did not arise through its fault,
and it recommended a discretion.
It did not make those recommendations
in relation to what became section 88(2)(a), that is, the grounds of
opposition that are given
life as grounds for rectification. So, there is
nothing in that extrinsic material to suggest that the discretion was intended
be very significantly curtailed in that respect. Your Honour, in
relation to the applications, would your Honour permit me a couple
minutes to address that?
GORDON A‑CJ:
MR DIMITRIADIS:
Thank you. In relation to the
application of the section 89 discretion, our friends, in the course of
their submissions, referred
to the various matters which have been proposed:
giving rise to, or the grounds arising in part through, or those matters
contributing
to the grounds arising. That is far too a broad a reading of the
language in section 89, which requires attention to be given to
whether the
ground has “arisen through” the conduct or “any act or
fault” of the trade mark owner.
It is not enough that a particular
conduct or act contributed to, in some way, or that the ground arose in part
through – that
is not the language used in section 89, it is a
higher threshold. Indeed, if our friends relied on the act of applying for
registration
of a trade mark as a relevant act that can be taken into account,
then in every case that contributes to the ground arising, because
have an application for registration of a trade mark before one can ultimately
have a ground for rectification arising.
Your Honours, in relation
to the three additional matters proposed as acts or faults on the part of
Ms Hudson, I addressed those
this morning. Can I say something briefly in
reply. The first two were that Ms Taylor aligned herself with
Ms Hudson and refused
the coexistence agreement. We do submit on proper
analysis they cannot be said to have been acts through which the ground for
rectification
under 88(2)(c) arose. Neither of them caused that ground to
arise, for the reasons I addressed this morning. The ground arose through
acts of the respondents in proceeding to sell clothes in the face of the
registration.
In relation to the third additional matter that is
referred to – that is, reliance on Ms Taylor not objecting or
action for a period of 10
years as a relevant act or
fault – there are real difficulties in the respondents relying on
this particular ground, this particular
act or fault, given the way it has been
put orally, which was to observe that there was a challenge to the primary
findings on these issues, which were made in the context of the
laches defence, that that was not addressed by the Full Court.
respondents wish to point to the fact that they challenged those findings. That
plainly did require a notice of contention in
this Court, because the primary
judge’s findings are extant on those matters. Those are the findings on
the laches defence,
paragraphs 819 to 826, and we submit that
your Honours should not go behind them in the circumstances. The
Full Court did not interfere
with them and observed that they were seeking
to “re‑agitate” matters before the primary judge –
in paragraphs 346 to 347.
Additionally, your Honours,
there was evidence led about those matters, about Ms Taylor’s reasons
for not taking action earlier,
including her perception of the costs, and the
explanation is referred to in the primary judge’s reasons that I gave
your Honours
the references to this morning, that she did not find out
evidence is not before your Honours on that.
Our friends say it is
our onus – which, of course, as an act or fault, it is –
but it was incumbent upon them, if they
were going to seek to, in effect,
challenge the primary judge’s findings made on these issues in the context
of the laches
defence, to put it in a notice of contention about it in this
Court. We otherwise rely on the submissions that we have made about
exercise of the discretion in this case, your Honours. Thank
GORDON A-CJ:
Thank you. The Court will reserve its
decision in this matter and otherwise adjourn until 10.00 am tomorrow,
10 September.
AT 4.20 PM THE MATTER WAS
RTF format (1.84 MB)
Signed PDF/A format