URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/SSATACSA/2012/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:17
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Malcolm v Malcolm [2012] SSATACSA 1 (8 February 2012)
Application number: XXXXXX
Applicant: Ms Erica
Second Party: Mr Christopher MALCOLM
Other Party: Child
Support Registrar
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
decision made by an objections officer on 22 November 2011 to allow an objection
to a decision made on 17 September 2011. The objections
officer determined that
Ms Malcolm and Mr Malcolm each had a care percentage of 50% for their daughters,
Linda and Melissa, from
12 September 2011.
The application was heard on 8 February 2012, before XXXXXX,
Ms Malcolm attended the hearing and
gave evidence to the Tribunal.
Mr Malcolm participated by way of
conference telephone.
A representative of the Child Support Registrar was
not in attendance.
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
February 2012 the Tribunal decided to affirm the decision under review. This
means the application for review is unsuccessful.
DATE OF DISPATCH 20
February 2012
REASONS FOR
Malcolm and Mr Malcolm are the parents of Linda, born 2001, and Melissa, born
have advised that they separated September 2011. Registration of assessment for
child support payments for both children was
accepted on 12 September 2011 by
the Child Support Agency (the Agency). At that time Ms Malcolm advised that
they were separated
under the one roof. The Agency recorded Ms Malcolm as
having 100% of the care of both the children at that time and wrote to Ms
Malcolm and Mr Malcolm on 17 September 2011 advising of the acceptance of the
registration and the percentage of care determined.
23 September 2011 Mr Malcolm, as the parent liable to pay child support under
the assessment, lodged an objection to the decision
to calculate his liability
on the basis that Ms Malcolm had 100% of the care of their children. In his
objection, Mr Malcolm noted
that he relevantly cared for both children in
and Ms Malcolm remained living in their house with their
prepared both children for school, took them to school, and cared for them after
school twice a week;
had the care of them every second weekend;
would have care of them for half of each school holiday; and
paid all the household bills and for all the household
Malcolm discussed Mr Malcolm’s objection with a CSA officer. She is
relevantly recorded as agreeing to the list of matters
asserted by Mr Malcolm as
summarised above. However, it was noted that:
did not agree to Mr Malcolm preparing the children for school, taking them to
school, and caring for them after school twice a
Malcolm cared for the children for about three hours Wednesday evenings, which
she agreed would amount to about six days of care
over a year;
had no money of her own and so cannot establish her own household;
Malcolm worked long hours which made it difficult for him to care for the
children to any great extent.
12 November 2011 an objections officer from the Agency allowed Mr
Malcolm’s objection and decided that each of Ms Malcolm
and Mr Malcolm
should be taken to have 50% care of their children until there was a change in
their living arrangements. The objections
officer noted that Ms Malcolm had
effectively agreed that she did not have 100% care of the children, as was the
original decision
but, absent agreement between them, it was impossible to
determine the appropriate percentage of care each should be determined as
having. Relevantly, the objections officer considered that, applying
principles set out in the
, there was a presumption of equally
shared care when parents continued to live in the same household with their
children after separation,
particularly where the parent who had less actual
objections officer did not refer to any law as authority for making the
decision, but referred instead to ‘the
’, which is
described as the Agency’s online guide to the administration of the new
child support scheme.
1 December 2011 Ms Malcolm lodged an application for review of the objection
decision with the Social Security Appeals Tribunal
matter was heard on 8 February 2012.
issue to be decided by the Tribunal is whether the Child Support Agency’s
decision that each of Ms Malcolm and Mr Malcolm
had 50% of the care of their
daughters Linda and Melissa from 12 September 2011 was correct and, if not, what
the correct care percentage
EVIDENCE BEFORE
THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal had available to it to the documents provided by the Agency regarding
the application for review, numbered 1 to 77.
The Tribunal also had available
further documents provided to the Tribunal by Ms Malcolm, numbered A1 to A35,
and by Mr Malcolm numbered
B1 to B16, copies of which were sent to the each
party. At the commencement of the hearing each acknowledged receiving a copy of
those documents.
Tribunal explained to Ms Malcolm and Mr Malcolm that care decisions, though
usually expressed as being for periods of a year,
only have effect until the
Agency is advised of a change to care. In the present circumstances the care
decision reached by the
objections officer is heavily influenced by the fact
that Ms Malcolm and Mr Malcolm remained living in the marital home with their
daughters; thus, one would anticipate a change to the care percentages allocated
once the parties ceased to live under the same roof.
this context, the parties agreed that Mr Malcolm had left the home the Friday
prior to the hearing, being 2 February 2012. The
Tribunal stressed to the
parties the importance of advising of this event and of agreeing what the new
care arrangements were likely
to be now that Mr Malcolm had set up his own
was, in fact, not much to separate the evidence of Ms Malcolm and Mr Malcolm
regarding their circumstances relevant to the care
of the children since their
separation, which they dated formally as September 2011. Ms Malcolm and Mr
Malcolm agreed before the
Tribunal to the following:
have both been involved in the care and decision-making regarding the welfare of
their daughters, and this did not change dramatically
upon them deciding to
separate. This was particularly so as they had had a period of estrangement,
whereby Ms Malcolm left the marital
bed and slept downstairs for around six
months prior to them finally determining to separate.
of them supplied statements from friends, doctors, teachers and others
which indicated that they had both been active
and interested in the lives of
their children. Each indicated that they intended to remain involved and active
in that care and
had done so when separated but living under the same roof.
Each agreed that these documents were insufficient to determine exact
activities undertaken by each of them since their separation.
upon separation, Mr Malcolm remained sleeping in the main bedroom on the same
level as their daughters. This meant that,
until he moved upstairs some time
around mid- October 2011, Mr Malcolm was available to attend and assist their
daughters overnight
– perhaps more so than Ms Malcolm as she was on a
different level of the house. Both their daughters had serious health issues
when young; both need ongoing supervision in that context. Their daughter Linda
often needs settling and calming at night. In the
period from September to
mid-October 2011 both Ms Malcolm and Mr Malcolm assisted her at night –
although Mr Malcolm’s
evidence was that he did so more than Ms Malcolm in
that period given the latter was sleeping on a different level of the house;
Malcolm disputed that she failed to wake and attend to her daughter even though
sleeping on a different level. Both agreed that,
when Mr Malcolm moved out of
the main bedroom in mid- October 2011 and Ms Malcolm moved back in, she was the
only one of them who
attended to their daughters, but primarily Linda, at night.
Mr Malcolm commented that he considered that Linda needed less assistance
night than was being suggested, that maybe it was only one or two nights a week
as opposed to most nights per Ms Malcolm’s
evidence. Regardless, they
both agreed that Ms Malcolm has frequently arisen at night to assist Linda, and
has done this solely
since mid-October 2011.
mornings Linda would spend an hour with Mr Malcolm until her sister and mother
Wednesdays Mr Malcolm has picked up the girls after school and cooked dinner for
them. He would do this on Fridays as well, although
on Friday evenings he would
take Linda to dance and Ms Malcolm would take Melissa to
well as the above, Mr Malcolm prepared the girls for school two days a week,
made their lunches and supervised them getting to
school, which is within
walking distance of their home. Ms Malcolm pointed out this was not per an
agreement between them, but something
Mr Malcolm had done without discussion;
she noted that she was also in the home at those times doing housework and other
was thus relevantly caring for the girls at the same time. It was Ms
Malcolm’s evidence (she referred to folio A6 of the material
she had sent
in to the Tribunal) that Mr Malcolm only had 36 hours per fortnight face-to-face
time with the girls.
Malcolm had the children for half the school holidays. Ms Malcolm pointed out
that for seven nights of the three weeks Mr Malcolm
had them in the last
Christmas holidays, they slept at home in their own beds and she was thus the
main carer overnight. Mr Malcolm
said he looked after the girls up until bed
time on those nights. Mr Malcolm also had to work three to four days in that
he placed the girls with friends during those days.
mortgage on their home has not been paid since they separated in September 2011.
The arrears are anticipated to be deducted from
the proceeds from the sale of
their home. The sale has been delayed as the property settlement orders are not
yet final. Thus, in
this respect it can be said they will have shared the cost
of the mortgage, and thus the cost of putting a roof over their heads,
separation.
Malcolm said that she does not know whether household bills had been paid since
separation as Mr Malcolm had caused the bills to
be sent to his work. Mr
Malcolm said they had been paid and were up-to-date. Regardless, they agreed
that a term in the property
settlement will require Mr Malcolm to pay any unpaid
amounts out of his share – so he will be responsible for any shortfall
they have not been paid to date.
Mr Malcolm did not explicitly acknowledge that he changed access to
bank accounts following the separation, it was
implicitly accepted in his
acknowledgement that Ms Malcolm would have had limited access to money initially
following separation.
The only relevance of this point was whether Mr
Malcolm’s assertions in past submissions that he had relevantly cared for
their children by payment of their daily living needs was valid. He was the
only one working and thus most of the money had to have
come from him, although
Ms Malcolm noted that she sold personal possessions for $1,500 and borrowed
money from a relative, and by
the end of October 2011 she was in receipt of
carer payment from Centrelink. Mr Malcolm was unaware as to whether these
were correct.
superficially disagreeing as to how the cost of household groceries were met,
the parties actually agreed that Mr Malcolm made
himself responsible for buying
groceries and that Ms Malcolm bought extras that she considered were needed.
They agreed that Mr
Malcolm gave Ms Malcolm $150 per week, initially in cash and
thereafter by direct deposit; Ms Malcolm said she was told it was for
although at some point it may have been indicated to have been child
Malcolm said that she had bought the children’s school clothes, shoes and
other things for the 2012 year out of her carer
payment. She said she has only
ever received two payments of child support from Mr Malcolm, given the dispute
over care, and she
was ‘on the poverty line’. Mr Malcolm suggested
he had bought his children some clothes and supplied some stationery
to them; Ms
Malcolm disputed the utility of the clothes acquired.
Tribunal asked the parties about what were the expected care arrangements
following Mr Malcolm leaving the family home and establishing
his own home.
Both indicated that they anticipated every second weekend and half the school
holidays to continue. Mr Malcolm said
he would seek another night per week; Ms
Malcolm was unsure. Ms Malcolm wanted to enter into a parenting plan to
finalise the care.
The relevance to the present dispute, as already discussed,
is that the care arrangements have changed and new care percentages
agreed. The Tribunal cautions against a protracted process in coming to such an
matters set out above in this and the History sections of these Reasons form the
basis of the findings of fact made by the Tribunal
in this matter, as summarised
under the following heading.
FINDINGS OF
the balance of the evidence before it, the Tribunal makes the following
Malcolm and Mr Malcolm are the parents of Linda, born 2001, and Melissa, born
application for a child support assessment for both children was accepted and
made from 12 September 2011.
Malcolm and Mr Malcolm state that they separated from September 2011. There was
no prior registration or assessment for child support.
until 2 February 2012, the parties continued to live in the former matrimonial
parents were actively involved in the immediate care of their children, and
shared responsibility for decision-making regarding
their welfare, prior to
separation. This continued after separation. Mr Malcolm continued to work
full-time, whilst Ms Malcolm
continued to provide primary day-to-day care and
supervision of their children post-separation.
arrangement evolved post-separation whereby Mr Malcolm took care of the children
every second weekend and half of the school holidays,
as well as preparing both
children for school, taking them to school, and caring for them after school
twice a week. Both parents
have participated in arranging for their children to
attend extra-curricular activities.
Malcolm undertook responsibility for buying groceries regularly, but Ms Malcolm
supplemented the groceries from her own resources
as she was able. Mr Malcolm
was responsible for ensuring household bills for utilities and services
were paid. The
mortgage on their home has not been paid since separation,
with the unpaid amount intended to be deducted from the proceeds of sale
house pursuant to property settlement orders which have not yet been
mid-October 2011 Ms Malcolm has primarily been responsible for attending to the
needs of the children overnight.
parenting plan has been formally implemented by the parties to
APPLICATION OF LAW AND REASONS
legislative provisions relevant to this decision are contained in the
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
percentage of care a person has of a child can affect the rate of payment of
child support paid in respect of the child, by affecting
percentage’ deemed under
section 55C
of the Act which is used in the
formula for calculating child support under
an application for child support (amongst other things) is made and there
is no determination in place regarding the percentage
‘responsible person’ has of a child, the Registrar must firstly be
satisfied that there is or is likely to
be a pattern of care for the relevant
child and, if so, then the Registrar must ‘determine the responsible
for the child during the care
period’. This is the effect of
of the Act. This section
applies in the present circumstances as:
Malcolm applied under
of the Act on 12 September 2011 for
administrative assessment of child support for Linda and
Ms Malcolm and Mr Malcolm are, relevantly, ‘responsible persons’
pursuant to
of the Act, being the parents of Linda and
Tribunal is satisfied that there was a pattern of care of Linda and Melissa for
each of Ms Malcolm and Mr Malcolm in the period
since separation in September
2011, as described above in the discussion of evidence and in the findings of
fact made by the Tribunal.
‘care period’ is the period for which it can be considered that a
responsible person ‘has had, or is likely to
have, a pattern of care for a
child ... having regard to all the circumstances’:
section 50(1)(a)
Act. Whilst the Child Support Agency tends to consider percentages of care over
the course of a year that is not a requirement
under the Act; the care period
can be as long or short as is appropriate. In the present case the care period
in question would
run from 12 September 2011 until the Agency is advised of a
change in the care arrangements – a change likely occurred from
2012 when Mr Malcolm moved out of the family home, but it is not relevant for
the Tribunal to determine whether that was
the conditions in
section 50(1)(a)
are satisfied, as the they are,
section 50(2)
requires that the responsible person’s percentage of care for the child
during the care period be determined, which by virtue
section 50(3)
‘must be a percentage that corresponds with the actual care of the child
... that the responsible person has had, or is likely
to have, during the care
does not apply, however, if either of
sections 51
applies. Neither
does in the present circumstances: both provide for interim percentage of care
determinations in circumstances
where action is being taken by a responsible
person to have a care arrangement in respect of a child complied
the Tribunal (on review, standing in the shoes of the Registrar) must determine
the percentage of care Ms Malcolm had, or was
likely to have had, in the care
period running from 12 September 2011. The percentage of care is generally
determined on the basis
of nights spent in the care of a responsible person
section 54A
of the Act. However, such a basis is not mandated by the
provision, as evidenced by the use of the term ‘may be worked out’
in that section. This interpretation is reinforced by the Explanatory
Memorandum to the Bill which introduced this legislation into
Parliament, where
it is stated:
if the number of nights in care does not appropriately reflect the actual
care ... the person has, then the Registrar may use a different
determine the percentage of care. An example of where nights in care may be
shown not to be appropriate would be where
a child does not stay overnight with
a parent because the parent works night shifts but the parent does provide
significant periods
of daytime care.
Tribunal notes that the percentage of care determined is reflected in the costs
of the children under the child support formula.
The Tribunal presumes that
nights in care is adopted as the usual basis because it could be anticipated to
approximate the costs
incurred in caring for children on a proportional basis
– costs reflected in the provision of shelter, food, clothing, education,
activities and the like (see, for example, the decision of the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal in
Plowright and Department of Family and
Community Services
[2000] AATA 840).
poses a difficulty in the present matter because the two children relevantly
remained in the care of
parents at night, post-separation. Both
parents were
, usually, to supervise and assist at night.
Whether both had to get up at night, or whether the home duties were equally
is not necessarily to the point. Both were there and available; both
could exercise their parental responsibilities in an emergency.
This difficulty
is reflected in the
produced by the Agency and relied upon by the
objections officer in this matter: there must be a practical presumption (as
to a legal one) of shared responsibility and care where parties remain
living in the same household. That presumption could be defeated
if there was
evidence that one party took little or no active interest in the needs of the
children, or had little or no interaction
or supervision of them. But that is
not the evidence here.
Malcolm has effectively argued that care should be determined in the
period post- separation on the basis of face-to-face
time with the children, in
which regard she suggested that Mr Malcolm only had approximately 36 hours per
fortnight care of their
children. But such a basis of determining a percentage
of care is inappropriate; for example, it would mean that neither responsible
parent should be taken to have had care of the children whilst they were at
school, at a music lesson, at a friend’s house,
or even asleep. The issue
of ‘care’ is a broader concept than face-to-face responsibility, as
it encompasses notions
of legal parental responsibility (which continues even
when the child is with other people, such as teachers), supervision,
decision-making
and also costs.
Watanabe and Watanabe
[2010] FMCAfam 94
, Slack FM noted with respect to
an earlier form of these provisions (at paragraph 22) that:
The Assessment Act does not prescribe the matters or factors that ought to be
taken into account in how to assess the percentage of
care. The discretion,
though, ought to be exercised within the framework provided by the Act, in
particular, the objects of the Act
(s.4 of the Assessment Act). I do not though
consider that this exercise should become an exercise in mathematical
accounting. The
nature of the consideration is not capable of precision because
the costs of children is not confined to their daily needs nor are
those costs
uniform across the year (and the Assessment Act recognises that fact).
to the Act since the provisions then under consideration do not, in the
Tribunal’s view, disturb the central theme to
the above decision that a
mathematical calculation of nights, days or hours will not necessarily best
reflect the level of care provided
by each parent.
Tribunal considered that Ms Malcolm and Mr Malcolm must be taken to have been
sharing care of their children prior to separation:
Ms Malcolm having more
face-to-face or hands on time with them, and Mr Malcolm having greater
responsibility for earning sufficient
income to support them all. Prior to
separation the evidence shows that they were both active in their
children’s lives, and
this did not change after they agreed to separate.
If they are considered to be equally responsible for the care of the children
prior to separation it is difficult to determine how they should not be
considered to be equally responsible afterwards, as little
changed in terms of
the division of parental responsibility.
Tribunal notes the findings of fact made show that Mr Malcolm remained actively
involved in hands-on care of his daughters, although
he must have had less
hands-on time than Ms Malcolm. The issue regarding the mortgage, household
bills and the costs of groceries
and other things shows, to the Tribunal’s
mind, that they continued to share those costs post- separation, with Mr Malcolm
having greater capacity to meet them than Ms Malcolm. That being the case, the
Tribunal came to the conclusion that the correct
decision on these facts was to
consider that the care of the children was shared equally by Ms Malcolm and Mr
Malcolm whilst the
above arrangements were in place – nights in care being
an inappropriate basis to determine care when they all live together,
other factors pointing to shared responsibility.
the Tribunal determines under section 50(3) of the Act that Ms Malcolm’s
percentage of care of Linda and Melissa in the
period from 12 September 2011 was
care period must be determined. The care period is such period as the Child
Support Registrar considers to be appropriate having
regard to all the
circumstances (section 50 of the Act). The Agency’s policy in this
regard, as set out in chapter 2.2.1 of
, is that a care period
is generally a 12 month period from the day on which the actual care for a child
changed. The Tribunal is
satisfied that is an appropriate care period for
present purposes, although as discussed earlier it is likely that a new care
determination
has been or will be requested given that Mr Malcolm has left the
family home as of 2 February 2012. Such a care determination, when
effectively supersede this determination.
54B of the Act sets out the date of effect of new determinations of percentage
of care. The percentage of care applies
to each day in a child support
period on and from the ‘application day’. The application day
depends on the nature
of the particular application, but in cases involving an
application under section 25 of the Act for an assessment of child support,
is the day that application is made pursuant to section 54B(2)(a). The
application made by Ms Malcolm for child support was registered
on 12 September
2011, so that is the date the percentage of care determination applies
On 8 February 2012 the Tribunal
decided to set affirm the decision under review. This means the application for
review is unsuccessful.
Date: 20 February
The publication of Social Security Appeals Tribunal child support
decisions is authorised under
subsections 16(2AB)
(2AC) of the
Support (Registration and Collection) Act
Personal particulars of parties to an appeal and their children are
removed to protect their privacy. Names used in all published
decisions are
pseudonyms. Reasons for decisions are published in full (with any information
which may identify involved individuals
to a member of the public removed) to
ensure that the full context and basis for the decision can be understood. The
Social Security
Appeal's Tribunal's decisions in relation to child support
matters demonstrate the application of the Child Support legislation to
individual circumstances of the case being decided. Different fact situations
or subsequent changes to legislation may result
in different outcomes.
The CSA reviews all SSAT decisions to identify opportunities to improve
its services and ensure its processes and policies are robust
and accurate. The
CSA publishes further information about SSAT decisions on their website
www.csa.gov.au/publications/1313.aspx#ssat
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.13 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter