Clubs Australia; Intrust Super - re s.576H - Commission may vary modern awards - application to vary the Registered and Licensed Clubs Award 2010 [2009] AIRCFB 991 (30 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Commission may vary modern awards
Clubs Australia
(AM2009/119)
Intrust Super
(AM2009/125)
REGISTERED AND LICENSED CLUBS AWARD 2010
JUSTICE GIUDICE, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT LAWLER
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
COMMISSIONER SMITH
MELBOURNE, 30 DECEMBER 2009
This decision arises from two applications to vary the
Registered and Licensed Clubs Award 2010
(the modern award). The first is an application by Clubs Australia to alter the classification definitions in Schedule C. The second
is an application by Intrust Super to add that fund to the list of default superannuation funds in cl.23.4.
Clubs Australia
The Clubs Australia application has three parts. Firstly, it seeks to include the following new clause in Schedule C :
“C.1.3 Appropriate level of training when used in this Schedule means that an employee:
has completed an appropriate training program that meets the training and assessment requirements of a qualification or one or more
designated units of competency from a Training Package; and/or
has been assessed by a qualified skills assessor to have skills at least equivalent to those attained in an appropriate training
course; and/or
at 31 December 2009, has been doing the work of a particular classification for a period of at least three months.
(Note: The minimum classification level for an employee who has completed AQF Certificate III qualifications relevant to the classification
in which they are employed is the Level 4 rate prescribed in clause 17.2. Any dispute concerning an employee’s entitlement
to be paid at Level 4 may be referred to Fair Work Australia for determination. Fair Work Australia may require an employee to demonstrate
to its satisfaction that the employee utilises skills and knowledge derived from Certificate III competencies, and that these are
relevant to the work the employee is doing).”
The second part of the Clubs Australia application seeks to include a new definition for the classification of food and beverage
attendant grade 3 in Schedule C in place of cl.C.2.3. The proposed definition reads:
“C.2.3 Food and beverage attendant grade 3 means an employee who has the appropriate level of training and is engaged in any
of the following:
assisting in the cellar or bottle department, where duties could include working up to four hours per day (averaged over the relevant
work cycle) in the cellar without supervision;
receipt and dispensing of monies;
the operation of a mechanical lifting device;
attending a wagering (e.g. TAB) terminal, electronic gaming terminal or similar terminal;
full control of a cellar or liquor store (including the receipt, delivery and recording of goods within such an area);
mixing a range of sophisticated drinks;
supervising food and beverage attendants of a lower grade;
training food and beverage attendants of a lower grade.”
The third part of the application seeks to delete the definition of food and beverage attendant level 4 in cl.C.2.4 appearing of
Schedule C.
In a submission filed on 1 December 2009, the Liquor, Hospitality and Miscellaneous Union (LHMU) supported the variation proposed
by Clubs Australia, although the New South Wales Branch of the union (LHMU NSW), in a separate submission, expressed concerns about
the application.
We accept the submission of Clubs Australia that the inclusion of a definition of “appropriate level of training” in
Schedule A is necessary for the effective operation of the classification structure and will assist in the translation of employees
after 1 January 2010 from their existing industrial instrument to the modern award. The modern award will be varied to add the definition.
In relation to food and beverage attendant grades 3
and 4, Clubs Australia submitted that what is proposed is for all intents and purposes what appeared in the exposure draft and which
was agreed between the parties. It submitted that the classifications, as they appear in the award, would create duplication and
confusion as to appropriate classification levels, particularly in relation to gaming and wagering employees.
It appears the food and beverage attendant classifications were changed when the integrated structure proposed by Clubs Australia
was included in the modern award.
The acceptance of the integrated structure was intended only to accommodate ground maintenance classifications into the structure.
There was no intention to change the classification structure in respect of food and beverage attendant grades between the exposure
draft and the making of the final modern award. We will vary the modern award in the terms sought by Clubs Australia to reflect our
intention at the time of the making of the modern award and the continuing agreed position of the parties as to the food and beverage
attendant classifications.
Intrust Super
The application by Intrust Super is supported by the LHMU. Intrust Super submitted in support of its application that it is named
as a default fund in both the
Hospitality Industry (General) Award 2010
Restaurants Award 2010
and that some employees are likely to work across the three hospitality industry awards.
The addition of Intrust Super was opposed by the LHMU NSW and Clubs Australia, on the basis that it is not a named fund in any relevant
current instrument. They submitted that the inclusion of Intrust Super would disturb the agreed position of the major parties during
the consultation process and would be inconsistent with the criteria established by the Commission for the inclusion of a fund to
be prescribed as a default fund in a modern award:
prescription in an existing award or NAPSA applying to the industry; or
consent of the main parties to the modern award.
The LHMU NSW and Clubs Australia also submitted that any employee who wished that superannuation contributions made on their behalf
to be directed to Intrust Super, or any other fund, had a right under federal superannuation legislation to require that the contributions
be so directed.
No one suggested that Intrust Super is a named default fund in any current instrument relevant to the modern award. The application
is opposed by major parties with an interest in the modern award. The inclusion of Intrust Super as a named fund is not consistent
with the approach indicated by the Commission in the 2 September 2009 decision.
The legislative right of an employee to choose into which fund their employer makes superannuation contributions on their behalf
will allow employees to maintain a single preferred fund, if they so choose, when moving between employers. The application by Intrust
Super is refused.
BY THE COMMISSION:
[2009] AIRCFB 826
, at para 117.
[2009] AIRCFB 800
at para 67.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, MA000058 PR992173>
No downloadable files available