Application by ATCO Gas Australia Pty Ltd [2016] ACompT 10 (13 July 2016)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Application by ATCO Gas Australia Pty Ltd
[2016] ACompT 10
Review from:
Economic Regulation Authority
File number:
ACT 10 of 2015
MIDDLETON J (PRESIDENT)
PROFESSOR KT DAVIS
MR R STEINWALL (MEMBER)
Date of Determination:
Catchwords:
ENERGY AND RESOURCES
– application
under s 245 of the National Gas Law (NGL) for review of an access arrangement
decision by the Economic Regulation
Authority – national gas objective
(NGO) – interrelationship of constituent components and preferable
reviewable regulatory
decision by the ERA under s 28(1)(b)(i) and (1)(b)(iii)
– role of the Tribunal on review –limited discretion under r
of the NGR – topics for review – sustaining capital expenditure
– depreciation – corporate support
operating expenditure –
reference tariff variation mechanism – return on equity – gamma
– materially preferable
NGO decision
Legislation:
Economic Regulation Authority (National Gas
Access Funding) Regulations 2009
Gas Standards Act 1972
Gas Standards (Gas Supply and System Safety) Regulations 2000
National Gas (South Australia) Act 2008
National Gas Access (WA) Act 2009
National Gas Access (WA) (Local Provisions) Regulations 2009
National Gas Amendment (Price and Revenue Regulation of Gas Services)
National Gas Rules
Statutes Amendment (National Electricity and Gas Laws – Limited
Merits Review) Act 2013
Cases cited:
Application by ActewAGL Distribution
[2010] ACompT 4
Application by ActewAGL Distribution
[2015] ACompT 3
Application by APA GasNet Australia (Operations) Pty Limited (No 2)
[2013] ACompT 8
Application by ATCO Gas Australia Pty Ltd
[2015] ACompT 7
Application by ElectraNet Pty Limited (No 3)
[2008] ACompT 3
Application by Envestra Ltd (No 2)
[2012] ACompT 3
Application by WA Gas Networks (No 3)
[2012] ACompT 12
Applications by Public Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd and Ausgrid
[2016] A CompT 1
Applications by Public Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd, Ausgrid, Endeavour
Energy and Essential Energy
[2015] ACompT 2
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Australian Competition
[2006] FCAFC 83
(2006) 152 FCR 33
Dates of hearing:
15-18 February 2016; 26-27 April 2016
Western Australia
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for ATCO Gas Australia Pty Ltd:
Mr P Gray QC with Mr D Farrands
Solicitor for ATCO Gas Australia Pty Ltd:
Johnson Winter & Slattery
Counsel for the Economic Regulation Authority:
Mr N O’Bryan SC with Mr E Heenan
Solicitor for the Economic Regulation Authority:
Holman Fenwick Willan
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
ACT 10 of 2015
APPLICATION UNDER SECTION 245 OF THE NATIONAL
GAS LAW FOR A REVIEW OF A FULL ACCESS ARRANGEMENT DECISION MADE BY THE ECONOMIC
AUTHORITY IN RELATION TO ATCO GAS AUSTRALIA PTY LTD PURSUANT TO RULE
64 OF THE NATIONAL GAS RULES
ATCO GAS AUSTRALIA PTY LTD (ABN 90 089 531
MIDDLETON J
(PRESIDENT)
KT DAVIS (MEMBER)
MR R STEINWALL (MEMBER)
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES THAT:
to s 259(2)(c) of the
National Gas Access (Western Australia) Law
Final Decision on Proposed Revisions to the
Access Arrangement Decision for the Mid-West and South-West Gas Distribution
, including appendices published on 10 September 2015
Amended Final Decision
’), and the
Economic Regulation
Authority’s Revised Access Arrangement Decision for the Mid-West and
South-West Gas Distribution System’
, including appendices
Access Arrangement Decision
’), are set aside and remitted
to the Economic Regulation Authority (‘
’) to make the
decisions again in accordance with the following directions:
(a) the ERA is to decide the constituent components of
the Amended Final Decision and Access Arrangement Decision that involve the
estimated cost of corporate income tax (gamma) by reference to a gamma of 0.25;
(b) the ERA is to consider, and to the extent appropriate, to vary interrelated
constituent components of the Amended Final Decision
and Access Arrangement
Decision, having regard to s 28(1)(b)(iii) of the NGL, where necessary in light
of variations made to the
Amended Final Decision and Access Arrangement Decision
by reason of sub-para (a) above.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
THE TRIBUNAL:
INTRODUCTION
is an application by ATCO Gas Australia Pty Ltd (‘
pursuant to s 245 of the
National Gas Access (Western Australia) Law
’), for review of a full access arrangement decision
made by the Economic Regulation Authority (Western Australia)
National Gas Access (WA) Act 2009
’) provides that the NGL, as set out in the Schedule to
National Gas (South Australia) Act 2008
(SA) and modified by
Sch 1 to the Act, applies as a law of Western Australia. Section 26 of the
NGL in turn, gives the
National Gas Rules
force of law in Western Australia.
owns approximately 14,400 km of natural gas distribution networks in Western
Australia, servicing approximately 720,000 consumers
in the Perth greater
metropolitan area and regional centres including Geraldton, Bunbury and
Kalgoorlie and an LPG network in Albany.
ATCO’s application for review
under s 245 of the NGL (‘
Review Application
’) relates to
ATCO’s Mid-West and South-West Gas Distribution Systems network, which
comprises approximately 13,700 km
of pipeline delivering gas to approximately
700,000 customers in the Geraldton, Perth metropolitan, Bunbury, Capel and
ATCO gas distribution network
is a “service provider” within the meaning of s 8 of the NGL, in
that it owns, controls or operates a scheme pipeline.
The NGL defines a
“scheme pipeline” to include a “covered pipeline”. The
ATCO gas distribution network
is a “covered pipeline” within the
meaning of the NGL.
“regulator” is defined in s 9 of the Act to mean the ERA “in
relation to an ERA pipeline”. The ATCO gas
distribution network is an ERA
27 of the NGL prescribes the functions and powers of the ERA. The ERA is
responsible for the economic regulation of pipeline
services provided by service
providers, including ATCO, by means of or in connection with a scheme pipeline.
In particular, under
Pt 9 of the NGR, the ERA is responsible for
determining the total revenue for ATCO for each regulatory year of an access
arrangement
period for the provision by ATCO of pipeline services through the
ATCO gas distribution network.
Decision under review
17 March 2014, ATCO submitted for consideration by the ERA an access arrangement
revision proposal for the access arrangement period
AA4, being 1 July 2014 to 31
December 2019 (‘
AA Revision Proposal
’). On 14 October 2014,
the ERA published a draft decision on ATCO’s AA Revision Proposal
Draft Decision
’). The Draft Decision indicated that the
ERA would publish its own revised access arrangement and access arrangement
information.
Draft Decision included a statement of reasons for the decision and set out 45
amendments to the proposed revised access arrangement
that would be required
before the ERA would be prepared to approve the AA Revision Proposal.
response to the Draft Decision, ATCO submitted additions and amendments to its
AA Revision Proposal and a revised access arrangement
proposal on 27
November 2014 (‘
Amended AA Revision Proposal
1 July 2015, the ERA published its access arrangement final decision entitled
Final Decision on Proposed Revisions to the Access Arrangement for the
Mid-West and South-West Gas Distribution System’
). In its Final Decision, the ERA refused to approve
ATCO’s Amended AA Revision Proposal and indicated that it would publish
its own revised access arrangement and access arrangement information.
and in response to the ERA’s publication of its Final Decision, ATCO made
further submissions and provided further
information to the ERA.
10 September 2015, the ERA published:
(1) an amended Final Decision entitled ‘
Decision on Proposed Revisions to the Access Arrangement Decision for the
Mid-West and South-West Gas Distribution System’
Final Decision
’), in which the ERA again refused to approve the
Amended AA Revision Proposal submitted by ATCO; and
(2) a further decision entitled ‘
Economic Regulation Authority’s
Revised Access Arrangement Decision for the Mid-West and South-West Gas
Distribution System’
for the ATCO distribution network
Access Arrangement Decision
’), in which the ERA decided to
approve the access arrangement drafted by the ERA (‘
Arrangement
decision that is the subject of ATCO’s Review Application is the Access
Arrangement Decision.
29 September 2015, the ERA published minor corrections to the ERA Access
Arrangement.
Application for leave and review
1 October 2015, ATCO filed its application for leave to review and its Review
Application, pursuant to s 245 of the NGL. In support
of its Review
Application, ATCO also filed the affidavit of Simon Harvey Byrne, sworn
1 October 2015 and the supplementary affidavit
of Simon Harvey Byrne, sworn
5 November 2015.
1 December 2015, the Tribunal granted leave to ATCO to apply for a review of the
Access Arrangement Decision made by the ERA, being
satisfied of the relevant
criteria in s 248 and s 249(2) of the NGL:
Application by ATCO Gas
Australia Pty Ltd
[2015] ACompT 7.
applied for review in respect of the following grounds:
Sustaining capital expenditure:
decision by the ERA, in assessing ATCO’s forecast conforming capital
expenditure (‘
’) for the current access arrangement
period pursuant to r 79 of the NGR for use in the calculation of the projected
base pursuant to r 78 of the NGR, not to allow the costs of three
sustaining capex projects in forecast conforming capex;
Depreciation:
the decision by the ERA, in determining the
depreciation schedule pursuant to r 89, to reject ATCO’s proposed
depreciation
schedule and underlying depreciation approach for the current and
subsequent access arrangement periods, and instead to adopt an
indexed straight
line approach to depreciation of the capital base;
Corporate support costs operating expenditure:
the decision by the
ERA, in assessing ATCO’s forecast operating expenditure
’) pursuant to r 91 of the NGR, not to allow any access
arrangement preparation costs for 2015;
Reference tariffs and the reference tariff variation mechanism
decisions by the ERA:
(a) to use forecast (rather than actual)
revenue of ATCO for July to December 2014 in the calculation of the reference
tariffs for
the remainder of the access arrangement period after 1 October 2015;
(b) not to include in the access arrangement a cost pass through event pursuant
to r 97 in relation to certain regulatory and licence
The allowed rate of return on equity
decision by the ERA, in determining the rate of return pursuant to r 87 of the
(a) estimate the return on equity by use of
a single model, the Sharpe-Lintner Capital Asset Pricing Model (‘
(b) adopt an estimate of equity beta of
The value of imputation credits:
the decision
by the ERA, in determining the estimated cost of corporate income tax pursuant
to r 87A of the NGR, to adopt a value
of imputation credits (theta) of
The grounds will be considered below according to the order above.
STATUTORY SCHEME FOR REVIEW
259(4a) of the NGL provides that, in a case where the decision under review is a
“designated reviewable regulatory decision”,
the Tribunal may only
make a determination to vary the designated reviewable regulatory decision
(under s 259(2)(b)), or to set aside
the designated reviewable regulatory
decision and remit the matter back to the ERA (under s 259(2)(c)),
(1) the Tribunal is satisfied that to do so will, or is
likely to, result in a decision that is materially preferable to the designated
reviewable regulatory decision in making a contribution to the achievement of
the national gas objective set out in s 23 of the NGL
materially preferable designated NGO decision
(2) in the case of a determination to vary the designated reviewable regulatory
decision, the Tribunal is satisfied that to do so
will not require the Tribunal
to undertake an assessment of such complexity that the preferable course of
action would be to set
aside the decision and remit the matter to the ERA to
make the decision again.
Access Arrangement Decision that is the subject of this Review Application falls
within the definition of “designated reviewable
connection with the operation of s 259(4a), s 259(4b) of the NGL requires the
Tribunal to:
(1) consider how the constituent components of the
designated reviewable regulatory decision interrelate with each other and with
the matters raised as a ground for review; and
(2) take into account the Revenue and Pricing Principles
’) set out in s 24 of the NGL (in the same manner in
which the ERA is to take into account the RPP under s 28 of the NGL);
(3) in assessing the extent of contribution to the achievement of the NGO,
consider the designated reviewable regulatory decision
as a whole; and
(4) not allow the following matters, in themselves, to determine the question
(a) the establishment of a ground for review
under s 246(1);
(b) the consequences for, or impacts on, the average annual regulated revenue of
a covered pipeline service provider; or
(c) that the amount that is specified in or derived from the designated
reviewable regulatory decision exceeds the amount specified
is important to note at the outset that the Tribunal may perform all the
functions and exercise all the powers of the ERA under
the NGL and the NGR for
the purposes of making a determination: s 259(3) of the NGL. However, the
Tribunal’s function is not
to substitute a decision which the Tribunal may
prefer to make on the material before the ERA, but to consider the
review-related
material in order to determine whether a reviewable error has
been established: see
Application by WA Gas Networks (No 3)
[2012] ACompT
Application by ActewAGL Distribution
[2010] ACompT 4
Application by ElectraNet Pty Limited (No 3)
[2008] ACompT 3
ElectraNet (No 3)
’) at [64] and [69].
follows that, if no reviewable error under s 246(1) of the NGL is made out, the
Tribunal must affirm the decision under review:
ElectraNet (No 3)
The National Gas Objective and the Revenue and Pricing
28(1)(a) of the NGL requires the ERA to make the Access Arrangement Decision in
a manner that will or is likely to contribute
to the achievement of the
NGO is defined in s 23 of the NGL, which provides:
The objective of this Law is to promote efficient
investment in, and efficient operation and use of, natural gas services for the
long term interests of consumers of natural gas with respect to price, quality,
safety, reliability and security of supply of natural
NGO is the overarching objective for economic regulation under the NGL. It
requires the regulator to seek – in its decisions
– to achieve
“efficient investment in, and efficient operation and use of, natural gas
services for the long term interests
of consumers”.
Additionally,
when making those parts of the Access Arrangement Decision relating to a
reference tariff, the ERA is required to take
into account the RPP. The ERA is
also permitted to take into account the RPP when performing or exercising any
other “[ERA]
economic regulatory function or power” if the ERA
considers it appropriate to do so.
RPP set out at s 24 of the NGL are as follows:
24 – Revenue and Pricing
(1) The revenue and pricing principles are the principles set out in
subsections (2) to (7).
(2) A service provider should be provided with a reasonable opportunity to
recover at least the efficient costs the service provider
(a) providing reference services;
(b) complying with a regulatory obligation or requirement or making a
regulatory payment.
(3) A service provider should be provided with effective incentives in order
to promote economic efficiency with respect to reference
services the service
provider provides. The economic efficiency that should be promoted
(a) efficient investment in, or in
connection with, a pipeline with which the service provider provides reference
services; and
(b) the efficient provision of pipeline services; and
(c) the efficient use of the
(4) Regard should be had to the capital base with respect to a pipeline
(a) in any previous—
(i) full access arrangement
decision; or
(ii) decision of a relevant Regulator under section 2 of the Gas
(5) A reference tariff should allow for a return commensurate with the
regulatory and commercial risks involved in providing the reference
which that tariff relates.
(6) Regard should be had to the economic costs and risks of the potential for
under and over investment by a service provider in a
pipeline with which the
service provider provides pipeline services.
(7) Regard should be had to the economic costs and risks of the potential for
under and over utilisation of a pipeline with which
a service provider provides
pipeline services.
a result of amendments made to the NGL following the enactment of the
Statutes Amendment (National Electricity and Gas Laws – Limited Merits
Review) Act 2013
(SA) (the ‘
’), the ERA is
required by s 28(1)(b) of the NGL:
(1) to ensure that ATCO, users or prospective users of
the pipeline services, and any user or consumer associations or interest groups
that the ERA considers have an interest in the matter are informed of the
material issues under consideration by the ERA and are
given a reasonable
opportunity to make submissions in respect of the decision before it is
(2) to specify:
(a) the manner in which the constituent
components of the decision relate to each other; and
(b) the manner in which that interrelationship has been taken into account in
the making of the decision;
(3) if there are two or more possible designated
reviewable regulatory decisions that will or are likely to contribute to the
achievement
of the NGO:
(a) to make the decision that the ERA is
satisfied will or is likely to contribute to the achievement of the NGO (the
preferable designated reviewable regulatory decision
(b) to specify reasons as to the basis on which the ERA is satisfied that the
decision is the preferable designated reviewable regulatory
Applications by Public Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd and Ausgrid
PIAC and Ausgrid
Tribunal (differently constituted) recently made the following pertinent
comments (at [77]) on the role of the NGO (and the
National Electricity
Objective, as relevant in that proceeding):
The ultimate objective reflected in the NEO and NGO
is to direct the manner in which the national electricity market and the
natural gas market are regulated, that is, in the long term interests
of consumers of electricity and natural gas respectively with
respect to the
matters specified. The provisions proceed on the legislative premise that their
long term interests are served through
the promotion of efficient investment in,
and efficient operation and use of, electricity and natural gas services. This
is to be done “for” the long term interests of consumers.
It does not involve a balance as between efficient investment,
operation and use
on the one hand and the long term interest of consumers on the other. Rather,
the necessary legislative premise
is that the long term interests of consumers
will be served by regulation that advances economic
efficiency.
Community Consultation
LMR Act also introduced a new process in s 261(1)(b) of the NGL such that the
Tribunal must, before making a determination that
relates to a designated
reviewable regulatory decision, take reasonable steps to consult, in such manner
as the Tribunal thinks appropriate,
(1) users and prospective users of the pipeline
services; and
(2) any user or consumer associations or user or consumer interest groups that
the Tribunal considers have an interest in the determination,
other than a user
or consumer association or a user or consumer interest group that is a party to
the review.
consultation process is an additional procedural step which the Tribunal must
take and, ideally, is to be accommodated within
the target time prescribed by s
260 of the NGL.
Tribunal notified the public of the consultation both via the Australian
Competition Tribunal website and newspaper advertisement.
consultation took place at the Federal Court of Australia in Perth on 2 December
ensure a satisfactory process, the Tribunal issued a consultation agenda under
which it provided for those who wished to speak
to the Tribunal on that occasion
either personally or on behalf of an organisation, to do so. In addition,
opportunity was given
to those who wished to make written submissions to submit
them for consideration by the Tribunal following the consultation.
this application, no member of the community sought to make any submissions to
the Tribunal.
GROUNDS FOR REVIEW
Nature and scope of the grounds for review under s 246
246(1) of the NGL provides that applications for merits review under s 245(1)
may only be made on one or more of the following
(1) the original decision maker made an error of fact in
the decision maker’s findings of facts, and that error of fact was
material to the making of the decision (s 246(1)(a) of the NGL);
(2) the original decision maker made more than one error of fact in the decision
maker’s findings of facts, and those errors
of fact, in combination, were
material to the making of the decision (s 246(1)(b) of the NGL);
(3) the exercise of the original decision maker’s discretion was
incorrect, having regard to all the circumstances (s 246(1)(c)
of the NGL);
(4) the original decision maker’s decision was unreasonable, having regard
to all the circumstances (s 246(1)(d) of the NGL).
Error of fact
order to determine whether the ERA made an error of fact for the purposes of s
246(1)(a) and (b) of the NGL, the Tribunal must:
(1) ascertain the precise conclusion of fact made by the
(2) determine whether, within that conclusion, there is a finding of fact (or
facts) that can properly be said to be erroneous (or
erroneous in combination);
(3) if the finding of fact (or combination of facts) was erroneous, determine
whether the error was material to the making of the
Incorrect exercise of discretion
discretionary decision making process requires the decision maker to weigh up
relevant considerations. Some of the circumstances
in which an incorrect
exercise of discretion will occur are set out in the following paragraphs.
decision which is not determined by reference to the applicable criteria in the
NGL or the NGR is likely to have involved an incorrect
exercise of discretion.
Similarly, an incorrect exercise of discretion may occur where the exercise of
the discretion is:
(1) based upon a misconstruction or misapplication of
relevant principles, methodologies or factors required to be considered by the
NGL or NGR;
(2) affected by a failure to have regard to a mandatory relevant factor
prescribed by the NGL or the NGR;
(3) affected by the regulator taking into account factors which are extraneous
to those relevant under the NGL or NGR; or
(4) affected by a failure to take into account a relevant
submission.
the reasons for a decision contain a logical error or an unexplained
discretionary choice made in reaching a conclusion, then the
decision is likely
to have involved an incorrect exercise of discretion (and is also likely to be
unreasonable). If factual error
is made out and the exercise of discretion is
based upon it, the exercise of discretion is incorrect.
the ground for review is not available merely because the Tribunal would
exercise the discretion in a different way. If
the ERA has exercised its
discretion correctly, in accordance with correct principles, and if the
particular exercise of discretion
was open to it within the framework of the
NGL, then it is not for the Tribunal to substitute a decision which it might
the material before the decision maker.
Unreasonableness
ground for review in s 246(1)(d) of the NGL requires that the decision under
review is itself unreasonable.
the unreasonableness ground in s 246(1)(d) of the NGL to be established, it must
involve logical error or irrationality in the
decision, and the decision must
not be justified by reference to its stated reasons. A decision will be
unreasonable if there is
an absence of reason to explain the discretionary
choices made by the ERA in arriving at its conclusions.
is not possible to give an exhaustive definition of what constitutes an
unreasonable decision. However, at one end of the spectrum,
an arbitrary or
capricious decision will be unreasonable, but at the other end of the spectrum,
it is not sufficient merely to reach
a different view to the original decision
decision which is not determined by reference to the applicable criteria in the
NGL or the NGR is likely to be unreasonable in all
the circumstances. A failure
to take into account a matter which is required to be considered, or
consideration of a matter which
is irrelevant, may also constitute
unreasonableness.
unreasonableness ground in s 246(1)(d) and the incorrect exercise of discretion
ground in s 246(1)(c) overlap to a certain extent.
For example, if the
reasons for a decision contain logical error or an unexplained discretionary
choice made in reaching a conclusion,
then the decision is likely to be
unreasonable.
Interaction between the grounds
Notwithstanding
the discussion above, and as noted by the Tribunal in
Application by ATCO Gas
Australia Pty Ltd
[2015] ACompT 7
, the Tribunal accepts that:
(1) the line between the several available grounds for
review is not necessarily always clear cut;
(2) there is no clear line between factual error, opinion, and discretionary
judgment, as one may feed into the other;
(3) any such error or errors - if accepted by the Tribunal - may be a
combination of error or errors of fact, wrongful exercise of
discretion, and the
outcome of an unreasonable decision.
Application by ATCO Gas Australia Pty Ltd
[2015] ACompT 7
Applications by Public Interest Advocacy Centre Ltd, Ausgrid, Endeavour
Energy and Essential Energy
[2015] ACompT 2
Application by ActewAGL
Distribution
[2015] ACompT 3.
accordance with the legislative context, ATCO’s Review Application to the
Tribunal is limited in that:
(1) ATCO must establish that the ERA made an error of
one of the four kinds described in s 246(1)(a)-(d) of the NGL;
(2) where, as in the present application, the application relates to a
“designated reviewable regulatory decision”, ATCO
must identify how
addressing any errors it establishes by varying or setting aside the decision
would, or would be likely to, result
in a materially preferable designated NGO
(3) ATCO may not raise any “matter” (by way of evidence or
submissions) that it did not raise and maintain in submissions
to the ERA before
the decision was made; and
(4) unless the Tribunal is satisfied that a ground of review has been made out,
the Tribunal must not consider any material other
than that specified in s
261(1) of the NGL, which material essentially comprises the material that was
before the ERA and the parties’
submissions to the
SUSTAINING CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
Introduction
seeks a review of the ERA’s determination of ATCO’s forecast capex
used to determine projected capital base over
Specifically,
ATCO contended that the ERA was in error in not approving forecast sustaining
capex relating to the following projects:
(1) a proposed spur line from the existing Dampier to
Bunbury transmission pipeline offtake at the Muchea gate station to Two Rocks
and areas south of Two Rocks including Yanchep and Alkimos (‘
(2) a three stage project commencing with reinforcement from the Fairbridge gate
station to Pinjarra, then two further stages extending
a new spur line to
Greenfields and Mandurah (‘
Peel project
(3) a number of smaller interdependency projects to improve reliability and
security of supply at certain points in the network (‘
Interdependency
’) as well as metallic mains
replacement.
Legislative framework
r 76(a) and r 76(b) of the NGR, two of the building blocks in determining
ATCO’s total revenue for each regulatory year
of the access arrangement
period are a return on, and depreciation of, the projected capital base for the
projected capital base is determined by adding to the opening capital base,
forecast conforming capex for the period (less forecast
depreciation and assets
to be disposed of during the period): r 78.
r 79(1), conforming capex is capex that meets the following criteria:
(1) the capex must be such as would be incurred by a
prudent service provider acting efficiently, in accordance with accepted good
industry practice, to achieve the lowest sustainable cost of providing
(2) the capex must be justifiable on a ground stated in r
is justifiable under r 79(2) if:
(a) the overall economic value of the expenditure is
positive; or
(b) the present value of the expected incremental revenue to be generated as
a result of the expenditure exceeds the present value
of the capex; or
(c) the capex is necessary:
(i) to maintain and improve the safety of services; or
(ii) to maintain the integrity of services; or
(iii) to comply with a regulatory obligation or requirement; or
(iv) to maintain the service provider’s capacity to meet levels of
demand for services existing at the time the capex is incurred
(as distinct from
projected demand that is dependent on an expansion of pipeline capacity);
(d) the capex is an aggregate amount divisible into two parts, one referable
to incremental services and the other referable to a
purpose referred to in
paragraph (c), and the former is justifiable under paragraph (b) and the latter
under paragraph (c).
contended that the capex in question is justified under one or more of the heads
of justification in r 79(2)(c)(i)-(iii), namely
that it is necessary
(1) maintain and improve the safety of services: r
79(2)(c)(i); or
(2) maintain the integrity of services: r 79(2)(c)(ii); or
(3) comply with a regulatory obligation or requirement: r
79(2)(c)(iii).
74 addresses the basis on which a forecast (like forecast capex) is to be
determined, and the information necessary to support
it. Rule 74
(1) Information in the nature of a forecast or
estimate must be supported by a statement of the basis of the forecast or
(2) A forecast or estimate:
(a) must be arrived at on a reasonable
(b) must represent the best forecast or estimate possible in the
circumstances.
71 is also relevant to the ERA’s consideration of forecast capex, and
(1) In determining whether capital or operating
expenditure is efficient and complies with other criteria prescribed by these
may, without embarking on a detailed investigation,
infer compliance from the operation of an incentive mechanism or on any other
considers appropriate.
must, however, consider, and give appropriate weight to,
submissions and comments received when the question whether a relevant
access arrangement proposal
should be approved is submitted for public
consultation.
ERA’s discretion in approving conforming capex is limited: r 79(6). The
consequence is that under r 40(2) of the NGR, the
ERA may not withhold its
approval to an element of an access arrangement proposal that is governed by the
relevant provision if the
ERA is satisfied that it:
(1) complies with applicable requirements of the NGL and
the NGR; and
(2) is consistent with applicable criteria (if any) prescribed by the NGL and
is in contrast to other provisions of the NGR where the ERA has no discretion or
conversely full discretion: see r 40(1), r 40(3).
may appear to be some tension between these provisions in the NGR, and
s 28(1)(b)(iii) of the NGL. However, putting aside any
issues of the
status of the NGR (which whilst they have the force of law in Western Australia
are not elevated to have the same effect
as the NGL), s 28(1)(b)(iii) is to be
applied in contemplation of the operation of the NGR. So, for instance, if a
provision of
the NGR has mandatory effect (see, eg r 50) then the ERA must
decide according to that direction. It could not rely on s 28(1)(b)(iii)
ignore the operation of a mandatory provision of the NGR, on the basis that
there was a preferable designated reviewable regulatory
decision. It is only
when the ERA, in correctly applying the NGR, comes to the conclusion that there
are two or more possible designated
reviewable regulatory decisions, that the
ERA needs to consider whether there is such a “preferable” decision.
ERA has a limited discretion under the NGR, it must proceed accordingly,
and not at large.
Factual background
Australian and New Zealand standards and their
application
justification for ATCO’s sustaining capex is its need to comply with a
number of Australian standards. ATCO and the ERA
had very different
interpretations of what those standards required and how they should be applied.
As much of the claimed sustaining
capex turns on these standards, it is
necessary to consider them in some detail.
4645.1:2008 Gas distribution networks Part 1: Network management
’) applies to gas distribution networks. Appendix C
of AS 4645 is headed “Qualitative risk assessment”. The opening
paragraph of Appendix C headed “C1 General” provides:
This appendix provides guidance for qualitative risk
assessment undertaken in accordance with AS/NZS 4360.
relied on the references to the expression “qualitative” in the
heading to Appendix C and the above passage in support
of its view that AS 4645
does not require (and relevantly did not require) a cost-benefit analysis. It
consistently maintained that
reference in Appendix C to “AS/NZS 4360” is a reference to the
Australian and New Zealand risk management standard
’). It is undisputed that AS 4360 was replaced by
31000:2009 Risk Management – Principles and guidelines
’) in November 2009. The preface to AS 31000 traces the
development of the standard and the decision to move to an international
standard on risk management.
preface to AS 31000 also states that the process described for managing risk is
identical to that in AS 4360. Much of AS 31000
is devoted to describing that
process and what it requires. Some of the features of that process include:
communication
and consultation with external and internal stakeholders during all stages of
the risk management process;
the internal and
external environment in which the organisation seeks to achieve its objectives
is to be assessed;
risk assessment
is the overall process of risk identification, risk analysis and risk
evaluation;
risk treatment
involves selecting one or more options for modifying risks, and implementing
those options;
there should be
planned monitoring and review as part of the risk management process; and
risk management
activities should be traceable.
risk analysis process under AS 31000 may be undertaken with varying degrees of
detail, depending on the risk, the purpose of the
analysis and the information,
data and resources available. It is expressed that the analysis can be
qualitative, semi-qualitative
or quantitative, or a combination of these
depending on the circumstances. Again, ATCO pointed to this passage in support
view that a cost-benefit approach is not mandated.
management process under AS 31000 also requires
[s]electing the most appropriate risk treatment
option [which]involves balancing the costs and efforts of implementation against
benefits derived, with regard to legal, regulatory, and other requirements
such as social responsibility and the protection of the
environment
ERA relies on this passage (among others) in support of its view that a
cost-benefit analysis is required.
4360 and its replacement, AS 31000 are useful in setting the framework for the
management of risks. However, those standards are
necessarily general in nature
as they are intended to apply to many industries, not just gas. For that
reason, the parties acknowledged
that AS 4645 is more relevant as it applies
specifically to gas distribution networks, including the ATCO gas distribution
Unsurprisingly, AS 4645 was the subject of much attention by the
4645 requires that all actions and activities not unduly expose personnel, the
public or the environment to unacceptable risks.
Measures to mitigate those
risks are to be identified, reviewed and documented. The areas to be considered
safety of the
public (including consumers);
personnel working on the gas distribution network;
integrity of the
minimisation of
environmental impacts; and
protection of
4645 requires that the risk assessment of threats be undertaken under AS 4360.
AS 4645 further provides:
Appendix C provides the requirements for qualitative
risk assessment and it provides a risk matrix that should be used in an AS/NZS
4360 qualitative risk assessment.
are circumstances where risk estimation using qualitative methods is required to
enable comparison of alternative mitigation
measures as a basis for
demonstration of ‘as low as reasonably
practical’(‘
’), and in some jurisdictions, to
satisfy planning criteria.
ATCO relied on the references to the expression ‘qualitative’ in
support of its view that a qualitative approach,
rather than a cost-benefit
analysis is all that is required.
C of AS 4645 provides guidance for undertaking a qualitative risk assessment.
That process first involves assessing the
severity of the consequences of
failure of each event. The consequences to be assessed include the potential
for the following:
Human injury or
Interruption to
continuity of supply with economic impact
Environmental
factors such as property damage and loss of reputation may also be
considered.
severity class is then assigned to each failure event based on the consequences
at the location of the failure (‘
consequence analysis
using the class selected from the following Table C1:
severity class is applied for each of the dimensions, people, supply and the
environment, and a severity class assigned to each
ranging from catastrophic to
trivial (as seen across the top columns of Table C1) .
a “frequency analysis” of each threat is to be assigned for each
location where risk estimation is required.
The frequency classes are those
from the following Table C2:
frequency classes range from “Frequent” (expected to occur once per
year or more) to “Hypothetical” (theoretically
possible but has
never occurred on a similar gas distribution network).
Table C3 below is then used to combine the results of the consequence analysis
and frequency analysis to determine the risk
example, a severity class of “Catastrophic” with a frequency class
of “Hypothetical” yields a risk ranking
“Intermediate” in Table C3.
the risk ranking is determined, action is to be taken to reduce the risk as set
out in the following Table C4:
can be seen from Table C4, any risk that is considered to be
“Extreme” or “High” should be dealt with to
reduce it to
“Intermediate” or lower.
the example of a risk ranking of “Intermediate”, Table C4 specifies
the actions required including repeating
the evaluation process and where the
risk is confirmed, modifying the threat, the frequency or the consequence to
reduce the risk
rank to “Low” or “Negligible”. Where
the risk cannot be reduced to “Low” or “Negligible”,
action is to be taken to:
remove threats,
reduce frequencies and/or reduce severity of consequences to the extent
practicable; and
demonstrate
relation to ALARP, AS 4645 provides:
A risk cannot be designated as ALARP until the
following has been completed:
(a) Analysis of the means of further reducing the risk, including an analysis
of various options.
(b) Review as to the reasons why these further means have not been
(c) Substantiation that the cost of further risk reduction measures is
grossly disproportionate to the benefit gained from the reduced
risk that would
Options that shall be considered include –
(i) relocation of the network
components;
(ii) modification of the design of network components;
(iii) review of pressure levels;
(iv) modification or enhancement of specific operations or maintenance
procedures;
(v) modification to gas distribution network marking; and
(vi) threat treatment for operating gas distribution networks shall consider
interim control measures (e.g. reduction in operating
pressure, access
restrictions) to allow time for the implementation of permanent control measures
(e.g. repair).
ATCO maintains that ALARP can be demonstrated without a cost-benefit
The ATCO risk matrix
developed a risk management matrix in April 2014. The matrix adopts the factors
specified in AS 4645, namely the impact on people,
the environment and supply
and the severity classes for each ranging from “Catastrophic” to
“Trivial”. However,
the matrix applied different definitions of
“Consequence” (severity) from that specified in AS 4645 –
reflecting ATCO’s specific risk appetite, as identified in the
following table:
also developed the following frequency table:
can be seen, ATCO modified the descriptors for both consequence (severity) and
frequency from that listed in AS 4645. A comparison
of the specific changes
ATCO made to the supply category of risk is set out in Table 37 below:
a comparison of the specific changes ATCO made to the people category of risk is
set out in Table 36 below:
is worth noting some specific differences between ATCO’s approach and that
specified in AS 4645, as they are the subject
of dispute. Relevantly for
matrix defines a “Catastrophic” event as one involving the
interruption of supply affecting more than 25,000
customers. AS 4645 defines it
as a “Long term interruption of supply”.
matrix defines a “Major” supply event as one involving the
interruption or restriction of supply affecting
greater than 5000 customers. AS
4645 defines it as a “Prolonged interruption or long- term restriction of
Relevantly,
for “People”:
matrix defines a “Catastrophic” event as more than two fatalities.
AS 4645 defines it as “Multiple
fatalities result”.
The ATCO matrix
defines a “Major” event as “Up to 2 fatalities: Several people
with life threatening or permanently
disabling injuries”. AS 4645 defines
it as “Few fatalities, or several people with life threatening
ATCO’s Safety Case
Gas Standards (Gas Supply and System Safety) Regulations 2000
Regulations
’) are made under the
Gas Standards Act
27 requires that a network operator submit a safety case to the Director of
Energy Safety (‘
’) for the distribution system of the
network operator. A “network operator” is defined in reg 3 to mean
an undertaker
who operates a distribution system. It was undisputed that reg 27
applies to ATCO.
3 defines a “safety case” as relevantly a document that sets out the
safety management and technical practices
and procedures to be followed by a
network operator in the operation of a distribution system.
27(2) requires that the safety case comply with a number of standards
AS 2885.1 - 2007
(Pipelines - Gas and liquid petroleum Part 1: Design and construction); and
AS 2885.3 - 2001
(Pipelines - Gas and liquid petroleum Part 3: Operation and maintenance).
31(1) requires that the safety case be accompanied by a certificate signed by a
nominated auditor certifying that the safety
case complies with a number of
31. Preliminary certification of safety
(1) A safety case submitted under regulation 27 is to be accompanied by a
certificate signed by the nominated auditor certifying that
(a) the safety case complies with the
requirements of this Division;
(b) the safety case is appropriate having regard to the size and complexity
of the distribution system and the possible risks; and
(c) the safety case adequately identifies the measures necessary —
(i) to prevent hazardous
events identified in the safety case from occurring; and
(ii) to protect consumers, the public, employees, plant, equipment and the
environment, should such events occur;
(d) the safety case adequately identifies
the training and equipment requirements necessary for personnel to be able to
the various procedures set out in it; and
(e) the network operator has in place a plan (the “
implementation
(i) implementing the measures
referred to in paragraph (c); and
(ii) meeting the requirements referred to in paragraph
submitted, the Director is required to assess the safety case: reg 32(1). The
Director may approve the safety case for the purpose
of certification under reg
33(1) or refuse approval and must notify the network operator: reg 32(2).
a safety case is approved, reg 33(1) provides that a network operator may submit
to the Director a certificate signed by the auditor
certifying that the measures
specified in reg 31(1)(c) have been implemented, and that the requirements
in reg 31(1)(d) have been
met. On receipt of that certificate the Director may
accept the safety case or reject it: reg 34(1).
2011 ATCO, under previous ownership as WA Gas Networks Pty Ltd
’), submitted a safety case in relation to its gas
distribution network to the Director under reg 27. In June 2011, EnergySafety
approved the safety case for the purposes of certification.
July 2011, WAGN submitted a revised and certified safety case, and acceptance of
the safety case was notified by EnergySafety under
parties proceeded on the basis that the safety case as submitted by WAGN and
accepted by EnergySafety (the ‘
Safety Case
’) now applied to
ATCO. As indicated, the accepted Safety Case required ATCO to apply certain
risk thresholds, and to then
take prescribed actions based on those thresholds,
under AS 4645 and AS 2885.
37 requires that a “prescribed activity” comply with the accepted
safety case:
37. Compliance with accepted safety
If an accepted safety case has effect in relation to a distribution system,
the network operator must ensure that a prescribed activity
is carried out in
such a way as to comply with—
(a) any practice or procedure set out in the accepted safety case;
(b) any provision of a code, standard or specification compliance with which
is required under the accepted safety case.
“Prescribed
activity” is defined in reg 3 to mean
anything related to the conveyance, control, supply
or use of gas done by, for, or with the authority of, the network operator in
the course of the construction, maintenance, repair or operation of any part of
a distribution system
37(a) requires ATCO, in the course of operating its gas distribution network to
comply with any “practice or procedure”
set out in the Safety Case.
ATCO said this clearly includes the procedure of assessing risks and then, to
the extent that the Safety
Case prescribes a practice or procedure that must be
followed, dealing with them in accordance with the Safety Case – which
must comply with AS 4645.
37(b) requires compliance with any provision of a code, standard or
specification. ATCO submitted that the reference to
includes for example AS 4645, compliance with which is required under the Safety
1 of ATCO’s Safety Case indicates, as required by reg 31(1)(c) and (d),
that it is intended to adequately identify:
the measures
necessary to “prevent hazardous events identified in the safety case from
occurring”;
the measures
necessary “to protect consumers, the public, employees, plant, equipment
and the environment, should such events
occur”; and
training and equipment requirements necessary for personnel to be able to
implement the various procedures set out in
Safety Case is also expressed to comply with AS 4645 and where applicable, also
AS 2885.1 - 2007
(Pipelines – Gas and liquid petroleum Part 1: Design and construction);
AS 2885.3 - 2001
(Pipelines – Gas and liquid petroleum Part 3: Operation and maintenance),
as required by reg 27(2).
Safety Case also obliges ATCO to undertake a Formal Safety Assessment
’) where aspects of the management of the network are
not in accordance with the means of compliance identified in AS 4645 to
the risk measures implemented result in an acceptable level of risk.
says it implemented its Safety Case in January 2013.
The Two Rocks, Peel and Interdependency projects
17 March 2014, ATCO submitted its AA Revision Proposal. It proposed sustaining
capex for the Two Rocks project, the Peel project
and the Interdependency
project (the ‘
’). As will be seen, ATCO claimed that
the capex on these Projects is required to comply with the Regulations, the
Safety Case
and AS 4645. To understand this argument it is useful to describe
these projects in more detail.
THE TWO ROCKS PROJECT
2013, ATCO prepared a document titled ‘Spurline – Two Rocks (Growth
and Maintenance Capex) in relation to the Two Rocks
Two Rocks project report
Two Rocks project report is a high level assessment proposing to secure supply
to the North Metro HP network in the event that
the pressure reduction station
’) at various points is unavailable. The report draws
on Western Australian Department of Planning Report Directions 2031
Directions 2031
’) identifying potential developments in the
North West region over the next 20 years.
Two Rocks project report presents three options. One of these is a ‘do
nothing’ option.
option is the construction of a 36 km steel pipeline to Two Rocks and areas
south of Two Rocks including Yanchep and Alkimos
from the existing DBP Muchea
off take, along existing roads and the installation of a PRS. This option was
said to “ensure
continuity of gas supply to existing customers and
capacity to provide gas to an additional 111,000 customers from the proposed
developments in the northern part of North West region in (sic) next
further option involves constructing a 44 km 300mm steel pipeline with two PRSs,
from the existing DBP Muchea off take, along existing
roads with a further 5 km
200mm steel reinforcement in the next access arrangement period
’). Its aim is also to ensure continuity of gas supply
to existing customers and capacity to provide gas to an additional 111,000
customers from the proposed Greenfield developments in the northern part of
North West region. This option is shown in the following
indicated, this option includes a subsequent reinforcement line to be
constructed in AA5 (shown bounded within a circle in the
top left of the map).
The Two Rocks project report recommended this option.
ATCO’s Amended AA Revision Proposal, these options were discussed in
Appendix 8.2 which specifically addressed aspects of
the Draft Decision,
including as it related to the Projects. It noted the decision to proceed with
the construction of the 44 km
steel pipeline as described in the diagram above.
the Amended AA Revision Proposal, ATCO indicated that the option was chosen to
provide greater security of supply to current and
future customers including to
over 60,000 existing customers in the northern networks.
indicated that the construction of a new pipeline was required to reduce the
supply risk, which it considered “High”
to an acceptable level, by
introducing a secondary supply of gas of sufficient capacity to an area that is
currently vulnerable due
to its reliance on a single supply.
addition to the loss of supply to domestic customers, there are 635 small
commercial customers and 29 large commercial customers
it considered would be
therefore, the option was considered as a risk reduction measure against the
possibility of a loss of supply. As discussed
below, ATCO’s
classification of that risk as “High” is disputed by the
THE PEEL PROJECT
a similar way to the Two Rocks project, in 2013 ATCO prepared the ‘Project
Feasibility Study: Peel Region Long Term Growth
Strategy’ in relation to
the Peel project (‘
Peel project report
’). It noted that the
Peel region is expecting a significant growth in new residential and commercial
developments including
in Austin Lakes. The report discussed the options to
connect the proposed developments in Austin Lakes as well as the future
developments
in the Peel region.
identified that the Greenfields developments noted in Directions 2031 are
predominantly along Pinjarra road. It noted that “[t]he
route of the
proposed pipeline along Pinjarra Rd has been strategically selected to
accommodate the Greenfields developments....
This will allow the new
developments to easily connect to the gas network without extensive mains
extension”. The ERA pointed
to this statement in support of its view that
the Peel project was in reality a growth project and not one directed at
security of supply.
Peel project report canvassed three options. The Amended AA Revision Proposal
indicates that the Peel project was proposed to
address the loss of supply risk
in the Peel region. This includes the loss of supply to over 34,000 customers
in the Mandurah gas
network. It also stated that in addition to the loss of
supply to domestic customers there are 437 small commercial customers and
large commercial customers affected.
Amended AA Revision Proposal suggested that what was ultimately proposed was a
three-stage project. It indicates that the project
was selected after
consideration of risks to reliability and security of supply identified in the
Mandurah area and was ultimately
proposed by ATCO in combination with the
reinforcement of the existing spur line from the Fairbridge gate station
supplying Pinjarra,
and an extension of the line from Pinjarra in a
north-westerly direction through Greenfields to Mandurah, where it would connect
with the Rockingham High Pressure line.
first stage is 3.2 km of high pressure main commencing with reinforcement from
the Fairbridge gate station (GS011) to Pinjarra.
The two further stages of 7 km
and 15.6 km extend a new spur line to Greenfields and Mandurah. The location of
the Peel project
is shown in the following
considered that the growing Pinjarra area could not be adequately served by its
present supply as the supply to Mandurah is currently
largely dependent on a
single spur line, originating at the Mandurah gate station (GS025) travelling
west along Redheads Road to
a point north of Mandurah. ATCO considered that the
reliability and security of supply to the areas south of this spur line,
the Greenfields area, require improvement.
like the Two Rocks Project, the Amended AA Revision Proposal indicated that the
Peel Project was designed to address the
possibility of the loss of supply,
including to over 34,000 customers in the Mandurah gas network. In addition to
the loss of supply
to domestic customers, ATCO said that there are 437 small
commercial customers and eight large commercial customers affected. Like
Rocks, ATCO identified the risk of loss of supply to the Mandurah network as
“High”. As discussed below, ATCO’s
classification of that
risk as “High” is disputed by the ERA.
INTERDEPENDENCY PROJECTS
part of its annual asset management plan review, ATCO identified five
interdependency projects it considered were necessary to
“High” loss of supply risk due to their relative size and location
within the network and options to isolate in
the event of interruption to
supply. In Appendix 8.2 of the Amended AA Revision Proposal, ATCO pointed to
three options, one of
which is a ‘do nothing’ option.
option involves constructing pipelines and regulating facilities which will
reinforce isolated networks which have the potential
to lose supply to over
25,000 customers for a long term period.
option involves increasing operational maintenance and third party damage
mitigation initiatives by increased maintenance
frequency of assets and
increased frequency of patrols for third party interference.
classification of that risk as “High” is again disputed by the
summary therefore, across the three Projects, ATCO identified aspects of the
network that gave rise to a risk of supply interruption,
in the event of
pipeline failure, to more than 25,000 customers. This resulted in a risk, the
consequence of which was “Catastrophic”
according to ATCO’s
risk matrix. ATCO then characterized the “Catastrophic” risk case
having a “Remote”
frequency. Therefore, under AS 4645 and its Risk
Matrix, a “Catastrophic” risk with a “Remote”
consequence
resulted in the identification of a “High” risk ranking,
for each of the Projects.
Regulatory decision
ATCO’s AA Revision Proposal and Amended AA Revision
March 2014, ATCO submitted its AA Revision Proposal to the ERA.
relation to the Two Rocks project and the Peel project, the following appeared
in the “Asset performance and safety”
section of the AA Revision
Security of supply – HP spur lines
New high pressure spur lines and pipelines are primarily demand-related
capital expenditure. However, the forecast investment also
provides security of
supply to new and existing customers. Therefore, a proportion of the
infrastructure costs are allocated to network
sustaining capital forecasts.
These spur lines are discussed in detail in section 8.5.2(b)
the “Growth capital forecast” section of the AA Revision Proposal,
ATCO sought to provide justification for network
growth capex. Section 8.5.2(b)
was entitled “Demand related capital”. The first two “key
demand related projects”
ATCO identified were the Two Rocks and the Peel
projects. In relation to the Two Rocks project, ATCO said:
To ensure continuity of gas supply, ATCO Gas
Australia will construct a 44 km steel pipeline...The proposal will also
accommodate
potential consumers from developments in the North West Metropolitan
region, predicted by the WA Department of Planning to be a high
growth area over
the next 20 years.
The construction of this pipeline in conjunction with the interdependency
project described above will provide security of gas supply
Metropolitan high pressure networks in accordance with AS/NZS 4645. It will also
reduce the risk of loss of supply to as
low as reasonably practicable in
accordance the Safety Case. This option will also accommodate greenfield
developments in the North
West region.
relation to the Peel project, ATCO said:
The Peel Region is expecting significant growth in
greenfield residential and commercial developments. This pipeline is essential
to economically grow the gas network and has the capacity to supply gas to
future domestic and commercial developments in the Peel
forecasts the Peel region will grow by an additional 10,750 residential
dwellings and several industrial sites in West Pinjarra,
Greenlands and
justification for these projects in the AA Revision Proposal was therefore
broadly consistent with the reasons presented
in the Two Rocks project report
and the Peel project report.
8.2 of the Amended AA Revision Proposal provided the ERA with further
information in relation to ATCO’s requirement
for the Interdependency, Two
Rocks and Peel projects:
The requirement for the Interdependency, Two Rocks
and Peel projects are to reduce risk from High for a loss of supply incident on
high pressure infrastructure affecting greater than 25,000 customers. Currently
the areas covered by the proposed projects have single
source critical high
pressure feeds, where the construction of secondary high pressure feeds reduces
the assessed risks to an acceptable
To not address the High loss of supply risks would result in a breach of
AS4645, the Safety Case and likely action from
EnergySafety.
the Projects were expressed as a measure designed to address security of supply,
clearly growth impacts also informed the
When assessing the merit of individual projects, AGA
considers the specific immediate and short term asset needs. However, to ensure
that future growth investment is undertaken as efficiently as possible
considerations of future needs are also taken in to account.
Where it is
efficient to do so, AGA will look to achieve both security of supply and future
growth objectives.
In designing Two Rocks and Peel spur line projects to meet security of supply
requirements, AGA has considered growth factors in the
area and where possible
increased the scope of the security of supply projects to ensure future growth
can be accommodated to avoid
higher future costs of supporting future growth
through an additional standalone project.
ERA argued that these statements indicate that the Projects were in fact growth
projects not security of supply projects. While
ATCO did not deny that the
Projects had a growth element, it proposed to deal with the dual nature of the
costs attributable to them
in the following way:
In the AAI, where a project achieved both security
and future growth objectives, the costs were allocated to the sustaining and
investment categories on the basis of an NPV assessment. AGA conducted an
NPV assessment of the project costs and future load and
allocated the total
amount of the project that enabled a neutral NPV value to growth. AGA considered
that this provided a higher
threshold test when considering projects against NGR
79 (2). The balance of the forecast expenditure for these projects was included
in the sustaining capital expenditure category to be assessed in accordance with
NGR 79 (2) (c).
Although AGA considers that its approach to categorising expenditure on
shared objective projects remains appropriate, the following
sections provide
the stand alone security project assessments.
These assessments demonstrate that the cost of undertaking discrete projects
to achieve the security and growth objectives is greater
than the projects costs
proposed by AGA. An alternative method of allocation might include adopting the
stand alone security project
costs as the costs to be allocated to sustaining
capital expenditure and only allocate the incremental cost of a joint project to
the growth project. This increases the NPV for the costs to be allocated to
growth investment.
provided a confidential table in which it provided a comparison of the project
costs to be allocated between growth and sustaining
capex based on ATCO’s
method adopted in the AA Revision Proposal and the alternative method outlined
Experts’ reports
to considering the ERA’s decision and ATCO’s responses, it is worth
noting that the ERA relied heavily on its expert
consultant, Energy Market
Consulting Associates (‘
’). Similarly, ATCO relied
heavily on its expert Zincara Pty Ltd (‘
responding to the ERA and to EMCa. In many respects, the position of each party
is intimately tied to the opinions and
conclusions of their respective experts.
For that reason it is necessary to consider each report in some detail
June 2014, EMCa prepared a report for the ERA titled “ATCO Gas Australia
Proposed Access Arrangement for the Mid-West and
South-West Gas Distribution
Systems: Review of Technical Aspects of the Proposed Access Arrangement”
EMCa report
’). EMCa also prepared two separate addendums;
the first in April 2015 (‘
April addendum
’) and the second in
June 2015 (‘
June addendum
’), each at the request of the ERA
and in response to submissions made by ATCO. The April addendum assessed the
Revision Proposal. It canvassed whether the information provided by
ATCO or third parties engaged by ATCO, changed the conclusions
reached in the
EMCa report. For the most part, EMCa’s June addendum traversed matters
and conclusions which are broadly similar
to those reached in the EMCa report
and the April addendum.
25 November 2014, Zincara prepared a report for ATCO titled “Review of
ATCO Gas Australia Capital and Operating Expenditure”
minor preliminary issue in relation to these expert reports concerns the
qualifications (and by implication, the expertise) of the
authors of the EMCa
report and the Zincara report.
EMCa report was prepared by a team comprising senior management with expertise
in economics and engineering across both gas and
electricity. The April
addendum included an additional member of the EMCa team – an engineer and
business manager with 31
years’ experience in strategic planning,
maintenance, operation and expansion of gas distribution businesses.
Zincara report was prepared by a director and an associate of Zincara. The
director is an engineer with more than 35 years’
experience in the energy
sector, specialising in, among other things, business planning, implementation
of utilities reforms, establishing
organizations for privatisation, operating
and capital cost reviews. The associate is also an engineer with more than 28
experience in the gas industry.
principal difference in expertise is that the Zincara authors have engineering
qualifications alone, while the EMCa authors have
qualifications in both
engineering and economics. On the basis of this, the ERA therefore invited the
Tribunal to conclude that
the qualifications of the EMCa team
‘trump’ that of Zincara.
Tribunal has not taken up this invitation. Rather, it has considered each
report based on the strength of the arguments and evidence
presented in each and
given them weight accordingly.
The ERA’s Draft Decision
ERA published its Draft Decision on 14 October 2014.
Draft Decision notes that the ERA retained EMCa to assess ATCO’s proposed
capex, opex and governance processes. In relation
to capex, the ERA (relying on
advice from EMCa) assessed ATCO’s proposed capex forecast under the NGR,
by applying a three-stage
evaluate whether the expenditure is justifiable on the grounds set out in r
79(2) of the NGR;
consider whether the expenditure satisfies the prudent service provider test
set out in r 79(1)(a) of the NGR; and
assess whether forecasts or estimates comply with r 74(2) of the
will be seen, this process is the same as that applied by EMCa. Under this
approach, the ERA first considered whether any of the
proposed expenditure
satisfied one of the heads of expenditure in r 79(2), before turning to consider
the test in r 79(1)(a) and
then r 74(2). That is, the ERA considered that the
expenditure must satisfy all three of these processes before that expenditure
would be permitted to be included in the building blocks - it was not sufficient
if it satisfied r 79(2) but failed r 79(1)(a).
ERA noted EMCa’s assessment that the Projects had not undergone a
cost-benefit analysis and the risk thresholds for “Catastrophic”
events applied by ATCO are lower than other gas distribution networks:
EMCa has assessed the Safety Case, FSAs and the risk
thresholds that ATCO has adopted when applying the ALARP test to security of
supply projects, and has the following concerns:
ATCO has not conducted a cost benefit analysis.
ATCO has adopted a risk threshold for catastrophic events that appears to be
lower than the threshold employed by other gas distribution
networks. EMCa
considers that the risk threshold that ATCO has adopted of 25,000 customers for
loss of supply to be catastrophic
is not prescribed in AS/NZS4645 and AS2885,
nor mandated by EnergySafety, and is low by industry
concluding that ATCO had adopted a risk threshold which was “Low”
when compared with other gas distributors and not
prescribed by AS 4645 or
mandated by EnergySafety, EMCa (although not expressly stating) must have
considered that the consequence
should be lower than
“Catastrophic”.
on EMCa’s advice, the ERA was therefore not satisfied that the Projects
were justified under the test in r 79(1)(a)
or under any head under r
Based on EMCa’s advice, the Authority is not
satisfied that the security of supply related portion in asset performance and
safety ($86.34 million) is consistent with good industry practice as required by
rule 79(1)(a) of the NGR. Therefore, the Authority
is not satisfied that the
following projects are justified under any ground in rule 79(2) of the
Two Rocks Spur line ($18.13
Peel Spur Line ($20.93 million); and
interdependency projects ($47.29
ATCO’s response to the Draft Decision
Amended AA Revision Proposal can broadly be summarised as follows:
ATCO maintained
that the portion of the capex proposed for the Two Rocks project and the Peel
project that it attributed to growth
was justified under r 79(2)(b).
ATCO maintained
that the portion of the expenditure proposed for the Two Rocks project and Peel
project that it attributed to sustaining
capex was justified under
r 79(2)(c)(i), (ii), and (iii).
ATCO reassessed
the proposed Interdependency Projects and decided that six of them could be
deferred, reducing the forecast capex
from $47.3 million to $34 million, and
maintained that the remaining four Interdependency Projects were justified under
r 79(2)(c).
ATCO provided
the conclusions reached by Zincara in its report of 25 November 2014.
ATCO provided
confidential Appendix 8.1 which included e-mails from an officer of EnergySafety
in November 2014.
ATCO provided a
confidential Appendix 8.2, setting out its detailed justification for the three
The ERA’s Final Decision and Amended Final
ERA published its Final Decision on 30 June 2015 and Amended Final Decision on
10 September 2015.
relation to sustaining capex, it is sufficient to refer to the Amended Final
Decision as it embodies conclusions very similar to
those reached in the Final
Decision. Like the Draft Decision, the ERA relied heavily on EMCa in reaching
its conclusions in the
Amended Final Decision. Indeed, a great deal of the
Amended Final Decision is devoted to referring to various aspects of the
and conclusions reached by EMCa and EMCa’s criticisms of ATCO,
Zincara and the approach taken by EnergySafety.
In relation to the Two Rocks project, the ERA agreed with EMCa’s risk
ranking of “Intermediate” and the actions
consequently required
under AS 4645:
The Authority accepts EMCa’s conclusion that
the risk ranking for the ‘Northern Networks’ is
‘intermediate’
Authority shares EMCa’s view that for intermediate risks AS 4645 and the
prudent service provider test in rule 79(1)(a)
requires ATCO to diligently
consider all options for reducing the risk ranking to Intermediate or lower,
applying a cost-benefit
analysis test to determine if an Intermediate ranking is
As the Authority accepts EMCa’s recommendations that the risk ranking
for the ‘Northern Networks’ and ‘Two
‘intermediate’
Authority considers that:
the expenditure is not required for ATCO to comply with
rule 79(2)(c)(iii) of the NGR; and
the expenditure that ATCO has proposed to reduce its considered security of
supply risk does not satisfy rule 79(2)(c)(i) of the NGR.
the ERA agreed with EMCa’s risk ranking of “Intermediate” for
the Peel project in almost identical terms
to its conclusion on the Two Rocks
As the Authority accepts EMCa’s recommendations
that the risk ranking for the ‘Peel Region’ is
‘intermediate’
Authority considers that:
the proposed expenditure is not required for ATCO to
comply with rule 79(2)(c)(iii) of the NGR; and
the expenditure that ATCO has proposed to reduce its considered security of
supply risk does not satisfy rule 79(2)(c)(i) of the
ERA reached a similar conclusion in relation to the Interdependency
the ERA concluded that the risk ranking for the Projects is
“Intermediate”, it determined that ATCO should formally
reassess its
security of supply risk for each Project under the steps specified in Table C4
of AS 4645 for an “Intermediate”
ranked risk. The ERA considered
that ATCO should submit how it proposes to treat the “Intermediate”
risk in the form
of a cost pass through which, if accepted, would allow ATCO to
commence recovery of these costs (through tariffs) during AA5.
ERA therefore required that ATCO include a cost pass through mechanism in the
following terms:
The Authority requires that ATCO include the
following clause 3.1(e):
ATCO Gas Australia incurs Conforming Capital Expenditure or Conforming
Operating Expenditure as a result of addressing an “Intermediate”
security of supply risk following an assessment in accordance with the required
steps prescribed in Table C4 of AS 4645 for an ‘intermediate’
risk. This expenditure can only be passed through for the following areas of the
network identified by ATCO in its Response
to the Draft Decision: Northern
Network, Peel, Hillary’s, Canning Vale, Fremantle and
cost pass through mechanism in this form was included in the ERA Access
Arrangement as amended at 29 September 2015. It appears
in cl 2.1(e) of
Appendix B. It is necessary to return to this cost pass through later in these
EMCA’S REPORT ON CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
collectively, the EMCa report (with its addendums) is an extensive document.
Although the Tribunal has read and considered
the EMCa report (and its
addendums), what follows are those matters that featured most prominently in the
ERA’s Draft Decision
and Amended Final Decision and on which the substance
of the dispute and the parties submissions were based.
adopted a three-step approach in assessing ATCO’s capex and opex
proposals. First, it considered whether the expenditure
was justified on any of
the grounds set out in r 79(2). Secondly, it considered whether the proposed
expenditure on Projects, justified
under r 79(2), satisfied the prudency test in
r 79(1)(a). Finally, it considered whether the forecasts or estimates
underlying those
Projects that are justifiable under r 79(2) and satisfy the
prudency service test, have been arrived at on a reasonable basis and
the best forecast or estimate possible in the circumstances, as required by r
74(2). It will be noted that this is the
approach which the ERA itself adopted,
undoubtedly following the approach taken by EMCa.
reviewed the methods employed by ATCO to forecast its capex and opex. Although
EMCa found that many aspects of ATCO’s
approach to forecasting aligned
with good industry practice, it considered that ATCO’s descriptions of its
forecasting approaches
for specific expenditure components were vague, listing a
range of factors that have been “taken into account” but without
they were taken into account. EMCa also found significant
subjectivity in the way the ATCO managers had made assumptions at detailed
levels that then aggregate up to produce the proposed expenditure forecasts.
Although not critical of the managers, EMCa considered
that such an approach,
when applied without strong top-down challenge, is likely to lead to
overestimation.
EMCa also considered that ATCO had failed to provide
sufficient evidence for its claims of poor or deteriorating performance of
of the network or the improvements in performance outcomes that could be
expected from the proposed increases in expenditure. EMCa
provided the
following example:
ATCO was, for example, unable to identify any safety
or non-supply incidents relating to “loss of pressure”, and the rate
of leaks (as indicated by UAFG) has been declining steadily over the past five
years, yet despite significantly increased proposed
expenditure ATCO does not
forecast it to decline further from its most recent
asserted that it sought ATCO’s business plans for the past four years on
the basis that these might provide an insight
into ATCO’s cost
projections. EMCa said that they were not provided. ATCO only provided
top–line capex and opex budgets
that it advised were extracted from those
plans. Those budgets figures are confidential. However, it is sufficient to
ATCO’s capex budget figures for the AA4 are considerably higher
than its 2012 and 2013 business plan forecasts for the same
years, and are also
higher than the capex and opex forecasts in its
2014 business plan. The
ERA submitted that the disparity would make one wonder about the validity of the
assessment that has been
undertaken.
proceeded on the basis that ATCO’s Two Rocks project and Peel project
contained both growth and sustaining capex elements,
with the sustaining element
sought to be justified under r 79(2)(c) and its Safety Case.
noted that most of ATCO’s increase in expenditure on sustaining capex was
being driven by its application of the Safety
Case and in particular the FSAs
that it has conducted under the Safety Case and the risk threshold it applied to
security of supply
related projects when carrying out the FSAs. A greater
concern for EMCa was ATCO’s failure to undertake a cost-benefit assessment
when applying the ALARP test under the FSAs, which EMCa considered was required
under AS 4645.
indicated than when conducting an FSA, AS 4645 and AS2885 require that, where
risks are assessed and categorised as “Intermediate”,
they must be
considered further and only accepted if they satisfy the ALARP test.
Importantly, EMCa considered that AS 4645 does
not envisage risk mitigation at
any cost. Rather, the ALARP test it says requires a cost-benefit analysis to be
undertaken and measures
implemented only if the costs are justified.
concern was that ATCO had “not provided any evidence (and confirmed in
answer to questions during the on-site meetings)
that it has conducted a
cost-benefit assessment for any of the projects that have been identified as
being required to reduce risks
to ALARP as required by AS/NZS 4645 and
further concern related to the risk threshold applied by ATCO, which EMCa
considered to be too low:
The second concern we have with ATCO’s approach
is that the risk threshold it has adopted for catastrophic events appears to
lower than the threshold employed by other gas distribution networks, as
highlighted in Table 18. This driving much higher levels
of security of supply
related expenditure than we would expect to observe, and which are much higher
than this business has previously
concluded that there is no evidence to support the position that reinforcement
is justified to ensure customers do not suffer
loss of gas supply due to a
single point failure in the ATCO gas distribution network at a threshold of
25,000 customers, when the
likelihood of such an event attributable to a
distribution network failure is in EMCa view, extremely low. It considered that
continued application of this threshold has the potential therefore to
result in inefficient over-investment in the network and concluded:
It follows from the preceding discussion that we are
satisfied that the threshold ATCO has employed when assessing the
need for security of supply related expenditure is consistent with
good industry
practice as required by rule 79(1)(a). Nor are we satisfied that ATCO has
properly applied the ALARP test given that
there is no evidence it has
undertaken a cost benefit assessment either when setting its risk threshold or
when assessing whether
to proceed with the proposed security of supply projects.
We have therefore carefully examined those security of supply related projects,
which are contingent on this threshold.
this passage indicates, as ATCO failed to undertake a cost-benefit analysis,
EMCa carefully scrutinised the Projects. EMCa was
not satisfied with the capex
attributable to the Interdependency project:
According to the information provided by ATCO these
projects are only being proposed to satisfy its 25,000 customer at risk
which as noted above is lower than industry standards. In some cases
the costs of carrying out individual projects also appear to
be disproportionate
to the reduced risk that would result...
was similarly dissatisfied with the capex attributable to the Two Rocks
In this case ATCO has assumed a 60,000 customer
threshold. While the threshold applied in this case is higher, the costs
with reducing the risk of a supply interruption to 60,000 customers
still appear disproportionate to the reduced risk that would
result from
building the spur line, with the costs of carrying out the project forecast to
be in excess of $300 per customer.
Additionally,
EMCa considered that ATCO had not satisfactorily justified the growth component
of the Two Rocks project. Therefore,
disallowing some of the costs of this
Project on that basis placed a further burden on the need to justify it on
security of supply
grounds as claimed.
was also not satisfied with the capex in relation to the Peel project:
In this case ATCO has assumed a 29,000 customer
threshold. In a similar manner to the other projects, the costs associated with
the risk of a supply interruption to 29,000 customers appears
disproportionate to that would result from building the spur line,
costs of carrying out the project forecast to be in excess of $720 per
EMCa was not suggesting that these Projects could never be justified. It
indicated what would be required to justify the
costs attributable to
Although we cannot accept that these projects (or the
security of supply related portion of these projects), which total $86.3m, are
justified under rule 79(2) based on the information that ATCO has provided in
its AA, this should not be taken as a finding that
these projects could never be
justified. We would expect though that any assessment that ATCO may choose to
respond in response to
the ERA’s Draft Decision would be conducted in
accordance with good industry practice. This should
distinguishing between events that have a direct safety
consequence for employees, customers and/or the wider public and events that
primarily have a potential loss of supply impact;
evidence-based assessment of risk likelihood;
evidence of consideration of risk mitigation measures; and
the assessment of proposed projects by reference to consideration of costs
and benefits as is required by the aforementioned
this passage makes clear, EMCa maintained its view that for these Projects to be
justified, they must undergo a cost-benefit analysis.
therefore, EMCa’s main findings can conveniently be summarized as
ATCO has not provided sufficient evidence of existing
performance issues or justified the significant increases in capex and opex
it proposes, nor has it been able to show how performance outcomes would improve
as a result of such higher levels of expenditure.
The proposed expenditure in
these instances fails to satisfy several components of NGR rule 79 and of rule
In several categories of expenditure, ATCO’s proposed increased
expenditure requirements are inconsistent with its chosen current
expenditure levels and its most recent business plans prior to its AA4
budgeting. In these cases, the proposed expenditure
fails to satisfy rule
ATCO’s devolved approach to budgeting has not been subject to
sufficiently rigorous top-down challenge. In our experience, bottom-up
that are not subject to a rigorous top-down challenge process are more likely to
be over-estimated. In these cases, the proposed
expenditure fails to satisfy
rule 79(1)(a) and rule 9(1);
Significant drivers such as the criteria used in claiming justification for
expenditure based on ATCO’s Safety Case, have not
been adequately
justified by reference either to fundamental impact analysis or to peer
benchmarks. The use of these criteria has
led ATCO to propose significant
increases in expenditure. The relevant proposed expenditure fails to satisfy
rule 79(1)(a); and
ATCO’s project costings and volume activity costings appear
reasonable. In the relevant instances, the expenditure satisfies
rule 79(1)(a)
Areas of dispute
is useful at this stage to set out the areas of dispute.
indicated in its Amended AA Revision Proposal that the Two Rocks, Peel and
Interdependency projects are designed to reduce risk
from “High” for
a loss of supply incident on high pressure infrastructure affecting greater than
25,000 customers. It
maintained that not addressing the “High” loss
of supply risks would result in a breach of AS 4645, the Safety Case and
action from EnergySafety.
therefore contended that the capex in question is justified under the following
heads in r 79(2):
(1) to maintain and improve the safety of services: r
79(2)(c)(i);
(2) to maintain the integrity of services: r 79(2)(c)(ii); or
(3) to comply with a regulatory obligation or requirement: r
79(2)(c)(iii).
ERA was not satisfied that r 79(2)(c)(iii) has been met for any of the Projects.
Similarly, it was not satisfied that ATCO has
complied with r 79(2)(c)(ii) in
respect of the Peel project and the Interdependency project. ATCO submitted
that the ERA did not
address the application of r 79(2)(c)(ii) in relation to
the Two Rocks project. The ERA also considered that r 79(2)(c)(i) had no
application to the Projects.
should be noted that the ERA rejected the growth components of the Projects.
ATCO no longer seeks a review of that outcome.
argued that the claimed capex satisfies the prudency test in r 79(1)(a). The
ERA disputed this.
reaching these conclusions, ATCO therefore contended that the ERA made a series
of factual errors, incorrectly exercised its discretion
or made decisions which
were unreasonable having regard to all the circumstances. In order to
demonstrate each area of failure,
ATCO identified several specific matters
running to many paragraphs in its Review Application and supporting submissions
a ‘list’ of failures.
the Tribunal to simply reproduce that extensive list it would not be conducive
to a meaningful understanding of the core issues
in dispute. The Tribunal has
noted the grounds of review raised by ATCO in its application and supporting
submissions. However,
to enable those issues to be more efficiently addressed,
the Tribunal has grouped them into specific topics - which in any case,
follow the submissions of ATCO and the ERA.
Tribunal has adopted this approach also because (with some small differences)
the ERA agreed with ATCO that its reasons for rejecting
ATCO’s sustaining
capex across each of the Projects were essentially similar. This also means
that the Tribunal need only
consider the areas in dispute by reference to a
single Project – and the others, only to the extent that there are
differences
that require specific mention.
this approach, the areas that ATCO claimed the ERA was in error can be grouped
as follows:
(1) The ERA’s failure to accept that the Projects
satisfied one or more limbs of r 79(2)(c);
(2) The ERA’s failure to consider the application of r 79(2)(c)(ii) to the
Two Rocks project;
(3) The ERA’s failure to accept that the Projects satisfied the prudency
test in r 79(1)(a);
(4) The ERA’s requirement for a cost-benefit analysis to demonstrate
compliance with the prudency test in r 79(1)(a) and its
rejection of
ATCO’s view that a quantitative assessment was not necessary;
(5) The ERA’s downgrading of ATCO’s risk ranking from
“High” to “Intermediate” and the consequences
would follow;
(6) Assuming the ERA was correct to assess the risk as
“Intermediate”, the ERA was wrong to suggest that a cost-benefit
analysis of options was required to satisfy the ALARP test;
(7) The ERA’s failure to determine that a proper application of AS 4645
(as varied by ATCO’s Risk matrix) results in
ATCO being obliged under its
Safety case to undertake the projects;
(8) The ERA’s requirement that ATCO assess its projects under the
cost-pass through mechanism for an “Intermediate”
risk imposed under
the Final Decision.
Tribunal considers that the issues raised by the errors identified by ATCO can
be conveniently dealt with under a discussion of
the following topics:
79(2)(c)(iii) – Compliance with a regulatory obligation or
requirement;
The nature of
the analysis required under AS 4645;
The operation of
r 79(2)(c) and r 79(1)(a);
thresholds applied by ATCO; and
failure to consider the application of r 79(2)(c)(ii) to the Two Rocks Project
and the Peel Project.
The Tribunal will then separately consider the ERA’s determination to
require ATCO to assess its Projects under a cost-pass
Consideration
Rule 79(2)(c)(iii) – compliance with a regulatory
obligation or requirement
submitted it was under a “regulatory obligation or requirement”
under r 79(2)(c)(iii) to undertake the Projects and
that the expenditure on them
was conforming expenditure. While the expression “regulatory obligation
or requirement”
is not defined in the NGR, it is the expression defined in
reached the conclusion that it was under a regulatory obligation or requirement
by the following process of reasoning:
(1) Section 28(1)(a) of the NGL requires the ERA, in
making an Access Arrangement Decision, to do so “in a manner that will
is likely to contribute to the achievement of the national gas objective”.
The NGO is defined in s 23 of the NGL as follows:
The objective of this Law is to promote efficient investment in, and
efficient operation and use of, natural gas services for the
long term interests
of consumers of natural gas with respect to price, quality, safety, reliability
and security of supply of natural
(2) Under s 28(2)(a)(i) of the NGL, in exercising a discretion in approving or
making those parts of an access arrangement relating
to a reference tariff, the
ERA must take into account the RPP in s 24 of the NGL, which it is convenient to
set out again:
(1) The revenue and pricing principles are the principles set out in
subsections (2) to (7).
(2) A service provider should be provided with a reasonable opportunity to
recover at least the efficient costs the service provider
providing reference services; and
(b) complying with a regulatory obligation or requirement or making a
regulatory payment.
(3) A service provider should be provided with effective incentives in order
to promote economic efficiency with respect to reference
services the service
provider provides. The economic efficiency that should be promoted
(a) efficient investment in, or in connection with, a pipeline with which the
service provider provides reference services; and
(b) the efficient provision of pipeline services; and
(c) the efficient use of the pipeline.
(4) Regard should be had to the capital base with respect to a pipeline
(a) in any previous—
(i) full access arrangement decision; or
(ii) decision of a relevant Regulator under section 2 of the Gas
(b) in the Rules.
(5) A reference tariff should allow for a return commensurate with the
regulatory and commercial risks involved in providing the reference
which that tariff relates.
(6) Regard should be had to the economic costs and risks of the potential for
under and over investment by a service provider in a
pipeline with which the
service provider provides pipeline services.
(7) Regard should be had to the economic costs and risks of the potential for
under and over utilisation of a pipeline with which
a service provider provides
pipeline services.
(3) Thus, s 24(2)(b) of the NGL requires that a service
provider be provided with a reasonable opportunity to recover at least the
efficient costs it incurs in complying with a regulatory obligation or
requirement or making a regulatory payment.
(4) Under s 6(1) of the NGL, a “regulatory obligation or
requirement” includes the following:
(a) in relation to the provision of a
pipeline service by a service
(i) a pipeline safety duty;
(ii) a pipeline reliability standard; or
(iii) a pipeline service standard;
(b) an obligation or requirement
(i) this Law or the Rules;
(ii) an Act of a participating jurisdiction, or any instrument made or issued
under or for the purposes of that Act, that levies
or imposes a tax or other
levy that is payable by a service provider; or
(iii) an Act of a participating jurisdiction, or any instrument made or issued
under or for the purposes of that Act, that regulates
the use of land in a
participating jurisdiction by a service provider; or
(iv) an Act of a participating jurisdiction or any instrument made or issued
under or for the purposes of that Act that relates to
the protection of the
environment; or
(v) an Act of a participating jurisdiction, or any instrument made or issued
under or for the purposes of that Act (other than national
gas legislation or an
Act of a participating jurisdiction or an Act or instrument referred to in
subparagraphs (ii) to (iv)), that
materially affects the provision, by a service
provider, of pipeline services to which an applicable access arrangement
(5) Section 2 of the NGL defines “pipeline
reliability standard” and “pipeline safety duty” in the
pipeline reliability
means a standard imposed by or under an Act of a
participating jurisdiction, or any instrument made or issued under or for the
of that Act, relating to the reliable haulage of natural gas in that
pipeline safety duty
means a duty or requirement under an Act
of a participating jurisdiction, or any instrument made or issued under or for
the purposes
of that Act, relating to—
(a) the safe haulage of natural gas in that jurisdiction; or
(b) the safe operation of a pipeline in that
(6) The expression “regulatory obligation or
requirement” also extends to an obligation or requirement under an Act (or
instrument under an Act) which materially affects the provision of pipeline
services via the relevant pipeline: s 6(1)(b)(v).
(7) The interpretation of the NGL, the regulations under it, and the NGR is
governed by the interpretation principles in Sch 2 to
the NGL: s 20 of the NGL.
Clause 13 in Sch 2 provides that, subject to a contrary intention,
expressions defined in the NGL (such
as “regulatory obligation or
requirement”) are to be taken to mean the same as such terms in statutory
instruments (such
as the NGR).
submitted that no contrary intention appears in the NGL, the regulations, or the
NGR indicating that the term “regulatory
obligation or requirement”
should have a meaning in the NGR which is different from the meaning of that
term in the NGL. By
this process of reasoning, ATCO maintains that the term
“regulatory obligation or requirement” in r 79(2)(c)(iii) has
the same meaning as that term in the NGL. Therefore, the expression
“regulatory obligation or requirement” under the
r 79(2)(c)(iii) is
said to include a “pipeline safety duty” as defined in the NGL.
therefore considered that it was under a regulatory obligation or requirement if
it was under a pipeline safety duty or requirement.
ATCO said that this duty or
requirement arises under its Safety Case (as approved by EnergySafety) and under
Western Australian
laws; relevantly the Regulations.
now, the Tribunal is prepared to assume (without deciding) that ATCO is under a
regulatory obligation or requirement. However,
for the reasons discussed below,
that does not of itself mean that the claimed sustaining capex is permitted.
ENERGYSAFETY
placed considerable reliance on input it received from an officer of
EnergySafety in support of its capex relating to the three
identity of the EnergySafety officer is not material. It is sufficient to note
that the officer has an engineering background.
ATCO did not suggest the
officer had expertise in any other area. Neither party questioned the
officer’s authority to respond
on behalf of EnergySafety. For that
reason, the officer’s response will be considered that of EnergySafety and
will be referred
to in that way.
were a number of e-mail exchanges between ATCO and EnergySafety in November
2014. On 14 November 2014, EnergySafety sent an
e-mail to the ERA, in response
to the Draft Decision “to ensure that ATCO is given an opportunity to
continue to comply with
the technical regulatory requirements and its associated
safety case.”
that e-mail, EnergySafety reached several conclusions and made several
recommendations. First, EnergySafety appeared to conclude
from the Draft
Decision that the Projects would not proceed:
the draft decision the report would indicate that these projects are not going
to proceed and in that justification, it would further
appear that the draft
decision has used the risk model of AS/NZS2885.1: Pipelines-Gas Liquid and
Petroleum and a Quantitative Risk
Assessment.
conclusion demonstrates a misunderstanding of the scheme of regulation under the
NGR. The Draft Decision, of course, does not
prevent ATCO from proceeding with
the Projects. What the ERA was suggesting in the Draft Decision is that it
would not allow the
capex associated with those projects to be included in the
building blocks used to set reference tariffs, as it was not satisfied
complied with the NGR.
Tribunal also does not accept EnergySafety’s conclusion that the ERA only
considered and used AS/NZ 2885.1, suggesting it
was the only standard it
considered. In its Draft Decision, the ERA refers to both standards in reaching
its conclusion. This is
consistent with EMCa’s advice where it also
considered both standards in reaching its conclusion. In its April addendum,
explained its reasons for referring to AS 2885:
We reject EnergySafety’s conclusion that we
relied upon AS 2885 in our assessment of ATCO’s proposed AA4 sustaining
projects. We referred only to that standard to assist in interpreting the
guidelines in Appendix C of AS 4645, given that they do
not appear to
contemplate risk mitigation options of the scope, scale and cost proposed by
ATCO. AS 2885 applies to high pressure
gas transmission pipelines and risk
treatments can often incur significant costs. Ultimately and primarily, ATCO
must comply with
AS 4645, not AS 2885.
EnergySafety
then commented on the application of the standards and concluded that the wrong
standard has been applied:
operating under AS/NZS 2885, which ATCO is not, an operator may conduct a
quantitative risk assessment (cost/benefit analysis)
that would allow, in some
circumstances, acceptance of a higher risk threshold. i.e. if it is proved that
the current mitigation
strategies were indeed ALARP or using the terminology -
“Tolerable”. In other words, any capital spent on lowering the
of a loss of supply event would be disproportionate to the added gain. In
contrast AS 4645 does not cater for this level of
quantitative scrutiny. This
information can be obtained by putting the 2 risk models side by
applies to high pressure gas transmission pipelines. AS/NZS4645 applies to Gas
Distribution Networks. It is not feasible
to adopt the risk model of AS/NZS2885
to regulate networks that require compliance to AS/NZS4645.1 as the conditions
under which
these apply are vastly different.
other words the wrong risk model has been used to arrive at this draft decision
disallowing the ATCO proposed network reinforcement
the reasons stated above the Tribunal rejects the conclusion reached by
EnergySafety at paragraphs 6 and 7 of its e-mail above.
EnergySafety commented on the nature of the assessment required under AS 4645:
Re 6) AS/NZS4645.1:2008 relates to gas distribution
networks that are by their very nature in densely populated areas, that are also
under continued high levels of risks from third party interference and operate
at pressure and flow scenarios that can be managed
safely in a practical and
cost effective manner. Therefore only a qualitative risk model has been adopted
in AS/NZS4645.
Re 7) A quantitative risk assessment (QnRA) does not form part of AS/NZS4645
and a QnRA was used to justify the preclusion of these
relied on this statement in support of its view that AS 4645 does not require a
cost-benefit analysis, and accordingly, it was
not in error in not commissioning
one in relation to the Projects. However, EnergySafety’s conclusion that
AS 4645 does not
cater for quantitative scrutiny is not supported by any
compelling analysis undertaken by EnergySafety, other than it seems, the
EnergySafety. EnergySafety’s conclusion is also unconvincing because it
has not considered the question of whether
a quantitative analysis is required
by any provision of the NGR, quite separately to AS 4645.
EnergySafety
appeared to conclude that were the Draft Decision applied, it may place ATCO in
breach of the Regulations:
ATCO would conform to the draft decision then they will be breaching the Gas
Standards Act 1972 immediately when such access arrangement
becomes effective.
Because the risk of a loss of supply event is high to extreme, ATCO is then
unquestionably obliged to mitigate
to a lower, acceptable risk level. The Draft
Decision in effect directs ATCO into non-compliance with AS/NZS 4645 and is
untenable from a technical and safety regulatory point of
EnergySafety’s
comments above further demonstrate a misunderstanding of the Draft Decision and
the role of the ERA. The Draft
Decision does not excuse ATCO from compliance
with the Regulations nor does it, of its own operation, place ATCO in breach of
Regulations. The ERA merely concluded that it was not satisfied that the
costs of the Projects claimed by the ERA met the requirements
of the NGR. The
statement also failed to indicate the process by which EnergySafety reached the
conclusion that the risk of loss
of supply is “High” to
“Extreme” or the evidence available or relied on in support of that
conclusion.
EnergySafety
also explored the risk ranking reached by ATCO:
A notifiable incident is defined in the Gas Standards
(Gas Supply and System Safety) Regulations 2000 (GSR) as “an incident,
event or other thing of which the Director requires notification under
regulation 34.” Looking through the lens of the Draft
Decision in
particular, para 451, EMCa states that, in its view, ATCO’s adopted risk
threshold of a catastrophic event of a
loss of 25,000 to be “low by
industry standards.” Under the severity classes in AS/NZS 4645 Table C1, a
supply catastrophic
event is defined as a “long term interruption of
supply.” According to GSR reg 43(1)(c), EnergySafety considers a loss
major customer exceeding 50 TJ/year or 100 other customers to be considered a
notifiable incident. This is 250+ times less than
the risk threshold mentioned
by EMCa. Considering the urban sprawl in the WA metropolitan areas with critical
customers dispersed
within it, such as hospitals, NG bus depots and schools, it
is this office’s view that ATCO’s threshold of 25,000 is,
anything, too high contrary to the belief of EMCa.
Therefore, ATCO’s assessment of a “catastrophic” loss of
such supply event
t around 25,000 customers is accepted by
EnergySafety.
43(1)(c) to which EnergySafety refers, requires a network operator to notify the
Director of any unplanned interruption
of the supply of gas to any consumer
whose annual gas consumption usually exceeds, or can reasonably be expected to
exceed 50TJ,
or to at least 100 customers. Therefore, when the passage refers
to this being “250+ times less than the risk threshold mentioned
EMCa”, it is a reference to ATCO’s supply risk threshold of 25,000
customers which is ‘250’ multiplied
by the 100 customers mentioned
in reg 43(1)(c). It is on that basis that EnergySafety concluded that
ATCO’s threshold was
if anything, too high. It is also for that reason
that EnergySafety accepted ATCO’s classification of
“Catastrophic”
as a loss of supply to around 25,000 customers.
e-mail noted that plastics gas mains are inadvertently dug-up and damaged on a
regular basis and refered to a recent example impacting
in excess of 700
customers. It also explained that steel mains can be damaged, though it
suggested that the potential for this to
occur is lower due to the strength of
the material and the frequency of vehicle patrols inspecting the pipelines for
nearby construction
e-mail therefore concluded that a loss of supply event cannot be classified as
“Hypothetical” because it has been
proven that a loss of supply
event is indeed possible on steel mains. Table C2 of AS 4645 defines
“Hypothetical” as
“Theoretically possible but has never
occurred on a similar gas distribution pipeline”.
it is unclear when the email refers to a “proven” event of damage
whether there have been actual examples of
damage to comparable steel gas
networks that would take it outside the descriptor of a
“Hypothetical” event.
EnergySafety’s
email concludes with the following recommendation to the ERA:
EnergySafety respectfully requests that the Economic
Regulatory Authority reviews its decision making processes and consider
the current Draft Decision that prevents ATCO remedying the major
predictable supply interruptions it has successfully identified
and in doing so
reinforce the gas distribution network.
EnergySafety
sent a second e-mail to the ERA on the 14th November 2014 in which it outlined
significant safety concerns “that
may arise from the restriction imposed
on ATCO disallowing it to expand its network on economic grounds.”
22 November 2014, EnergySafety sent an e-mail to ATCO in which it stated:
has to comply with the Safety Case which links to
scenario that involves 20-25,000 customers or more is considering the duration
of the interruption, is classified as catastrophic
cost benefit analysis is accepted to justify not taking action as AS/NZS4645 is
qualitative only.
Tribunal has already commented on the conclusions reached by EnergySafety in
paragraphs 1 and 4 of the e-mail of 22 November 2014
above. The findings and
statements of EnergySafety are not compelling for the reasons discussed and the
ERA and EMCa were entitled
to give them little weight.
the Tribunal is in no way critical of EnergySafety. EnergySafety is a safety
body and the officer, an engineer. It would
not be expected that EnergySafety
have an understanding of the process of economic regulation prescribed by the
NGL and NGR.
The nature of the analysis required under AS 4645
indicated, the Regulations require that the Safety Case comply with a number of
specified standards, including AS 4645. ATCO’s
Safety Case is expressed
to comply with AS 4645. Much of the battle of the parties and their consultants
was therefore directed
at what AS 4645 required. A recurring and polarising
issue is whether AS 4645 relevantly requires a qualitative analysis (as ATCO
argued) or a cost-benefit analysis as the ERA argued.
is a considerable lack of precision in the way both EMCa and Zincara described
the source of the analysis required. It is unclear
whether EMCa was asserting
that a cost-benefit analysis is required:
by AS 4645 (as
part of the overall framework of that standard);
as part only of
the ALARP test for an “Intermediate” ranked risk;
as a requirement
of r 79(2)(c) itself;
by the operation
of the prudency test in 79(1)(a); or
combination of all.
few examples from the EMCa report serve to highlight this problem. In chapter 4
of the EMCa report, EMCa points to the following
issues with ATCO’s
analysis that suggest it does not meet r 79(1)(a) and 79(2)(c):
ATCO has expressed a belief that projects that relate
to safety do not require economic justification. This stance is reflected in
lack of cost-benefit analyses in the FSAs with respect to the ALARP criterion
and may be based on the assumption that satisfying
rule 79(2)(c) does not
require an economic test. However, as discussed in Sections 5 and 6 and in
Appendix A, we believe such a test
is required.
the passage is intended to demonstrate a lack of compliance with both r 79(1)(a)
and r 79(2)(c), there is in fact no mention
of r 79(1)(a) itself.
chapter 5 of its report, EMCa commented that “of even greater concern
though is that ATCO has not conducted a cost-benefit
assessment when applying
the ALARP test under the FSAs, as required by AS/NZS4645 and AS2885”.
Table 16 of its report, EMCa provided a summary of the reasons why ATCO’s
proposed capex does not satisfy r 79. In relation
to the Two Rocks project and
the Peel project, that summary is in the following terms:
Not justified under either:
Rule 79(2)(c) because:
ATCO has not conducted the cost benefit
assessment required by AS/NZS4645 and AS2885 when applying the ‘as low as
practicable’ test; and
the 25,000 customer threshold applied by ATCO in defining a catastrophic
loss of supply is not consistent with good industry practice.
Rule 79(2)(b) because compelling information has not
been provided by ATCO to demonstrate that the expected incremental revenues of
these spur lines exceed the proposed capex
passage does not mention r 79(1)(a).
Appendix A of its report, EMCa referred to the requirements of the ALARP test in
AS 4645 and, immediately following, concluded
that “ATCO has not provided
any evidence (which was confirmed in answer to questions during the on-site
meetings) that it has
carried out the cost benefit assessment required by
AS/NZS4645 and AS2885.” Given the proximity of the passages, what appears
to be suggested is that the cost-benefit analysis to which it is referring is in
fact the test required by paragraph C5.2 of AS 4645
to demonstrate ALARP. Under
AS 4645, that test is required only where a risk is ranked as
“Intermediate” and steps are
to be taken to demonstrate ALARP.
its April addendum, EMCa considered that AS 4645 and the prudency test in r
79(1)(a) required ATCO to diligently consider all options
for reducing the risk
ranking to “Intermediate” or lower, applying a cost-benefit analysis
test to determine if an “Intermediate”
risk is ALARP.
in relation to the Two Rocks project, EMCa concluded in its April
While noting the very high cost per customer of the
mitigation that ATCO has proposed, it is not within our scope to undertake, on
ATCO’s behalf, the depth of analysis that correct interpretation of AS
4645 requires. In the absence of this analysis, we conclude
(a) ATCO does not have a regulatory obligation to satisfy under the NGR (per
r. 79(2)(c)(iii)); and
(b) The expenditure that ATCO has proposed to reduce its considered security
of supply risk does not satisfy r. 79(2)(c)(i) of the
is unclear how EMCa concluded that ATCO “does not have a regulatory
obligation”. As indicated, EMCa did not undertake
a process of reasoning
like ATCO to indicate whether a regulatory obligation exists, as ATCO said,
under its Safety Case. Nor did
EMCa justify the level of analysis it says is
required by AS 4645.
is unnecessary to refer to further examples to highlight the lack of precision
in EMCa’s approach. That same lack of precision
appeared in the Zincara
report. For example, in the case of all three Projects, Zincara reached the
same conclusion:
In summary, Zincara considers that ATCO does not have
to demonstrate ALARP as the project is considered high risk and as such, Zincara
therefore considers the project to be consistent with rule
Zincara’s conclusion says little about the interaction between r 79(2)(c)
and r 79(1)(a).
lack of precision is perhaps hardly surprising as both EMCa and Zincara were
ultimately focussed on advising their respective
clients on the amount of capex
to be included in the building blocks. They were not focussed in any great
detail on the interplay
between the standards and the NGR. For example, EMCa
did not spend any detail on assessing ATCO’s claim that it is under a
regulatory obligation in the way ATCO had developed that argument. Again, it is
hardly surprising that it did not do so, not least
because the background of
EMCa’s authors is in economics and engineering.
Notwithstanding
this, that level of precision is important because a great deal of the dispute
now attaches to the proper application
of AS 4645 and the NGR.
parties pointed to various provisions of AS 4645 (many of which the Tribunal has
already alluded) in support of their view that
AS 4645 requires, or conversely
does not require a cost-benefit analysis, however described. To the extent that
the parties, or
more relevantly their experts, may have been suggesting that
such a view is apparent from the text of AS 4645 as a whole –
not clear that they were suggesting that – the Tribunal is not in a
position to make such a determination. The Tribunal
was not taken to the
history of this standard or other evidence that would enable it to draw such a
conclusion. Rather, the Tribunal’s
approach is to consider whether a
particular provision in AS 4645 requires, within its terms, a quantitative
cost-benefit analysis,
or something else.
of EMCa’s concerns was ATCO’s failure to undertake a cost-benefit
assessment when applying the ALARP test under the
FSAs, which EMCa considered
was required under AS 4645. The difficulty with this conclusion is that
the ALARP test is only required
where an “Intermediate”
classification has been adopted. It is not required where a “High”
classification
is adopted, as ATCO had done. For a “High”
classification, AS 4645 requires modifying the threat, the frequency or the
consequence to ensure that the risk is reduced to “Intermediate” or
lower. For a gas distribution network in operation,
the risk must be reduced
“as soon as possible, typically within a timescale of not more than a few
ATCO consistently proceeded on the basis of a “High” risk, it had no
reason to apply an ALARP test as required by EMCa
- at least not the ALARP test
prescribed by AS 4645. The Tribunal sees no basis for concluding that AS 4645
requires that the same
ALARP test be applied to a “High” risk. AS
4645 specifically deals with the requirement for an ALARP test at paragraph
C5.2, immediately following Table C4, where the ALARP requirement appears only
under the “Intermediate” risk category,
not in relation to other
risks. For the reasons indicated earlier, the Tribunal is also not prepared to
conclude that the ALARP
approach in paragraph C5.2 emerges as an inherent
feature of all risks classified under AS 4645.
appeared to have been aware of this issue. It noted that some confusion arose
because ATCO’s Safety Case misused the
term ALARP, and that it has used
ALARP to mean “acceptable risk” which could be a “Low”
or “Intermediate”
risk. The following passage from the Zincara
report explains where “acceptable risk” ought to have been used in
In Section 4.2.2.3.5 of the Safety Case, ATCO
describes the steps that it takes following the risk ranking:
the risk is ranked Extreme or High, ATCO determines the steps that are necessary
to reduce the risk to ALARP.
the risk is Intermediate, ATCO determines the appropriate action to reduce the
risk to ALARP.
the risk is Low or Negligible, ATCO determines the management plan to prevent
future occurrence and to monitor changes that could
To be consistent with ATCO’s risk management approach, Step 1 and Step
2 (described above) should use the term “acceptable
risk” which
could be intermediate (in which case the ALARP test should be applied) or
Zincara appeared to be suggesting is that ATCO would only need to apply the
guidelines for ALARP if the risk is at an “Intermediate”
not if it is “High” (as incorrectly described in step 1 from the
above passage). This construction is consistent
with two examples of its
application cited by Zincara in the case of meter installations and cast iron
networks. The approach is
also consistent with Table C4 of AS 4645. Despite
this misapplication, Zincara did not consider it would affect the methodology
adopted by ATCO in preparing its forecast capex. Zincara therefore concluded
that ATCO’s approach is compliant:
As such, Zincara considers that ATCO’s risk
management practice is consistent with that of a prudent service provider acting
efficiently in accordance with accepted good industry practice, to achieve the
lowest sustainable cost of delivering pipeline
is for this reason that in the case of all three Projects, Zincara reached an
identical conclusion that ALARP was not required:
In summary, Zincara considers that ATCO does not have
to demonstrate ALARP as the project is considered high risk and as such, Zincara
therefore considers the project to be consistent with rule
had ATCO applied an “Intermediate” risk classification then under
Table C4, AS 4645 would have required that
ALARP be demonstrated. In this
respect, there is no need to look further than the clear words of paragraph C5.2
of AS 4645 which
expressly require substantiation of the costs and benefits of
any risk reduction measure. Indeed that provision provides a further
– a requirement that several options be considered as part of that
assessment. Zincara did not appear to dispute
the nature of the cost-benefit
analysis required by paragraph C5.2 of AS 4645, had it applied to
As discussed in Section 3.1.1, AS/NZS4645.1 requires
that if the risk is assessed as extreme or high, ATCO is to take action that
reduces the risk to low without any cost benefit analysis. However, if the
action only reduces the risk to intermediate, then ATCO
is required to
investigate further action. If ATCO has to resolve to extreme measures to reduce
the risk to low, it is required to
carry out a cost benefit analysis and
demonstrate that the cost is grossly disproportionate to the
number of observations can be made regarding this conclusion. What Zincara in
fact did at section 3.1.1 was set out the process
undertaken by ATCO. Under
that process, if the risk is considered “Intermediate” after the
risk treatment, ATCO would
then conduct a further risk treatment option to
reduce the risk to “Low” or “Negligible”. If the
option did not reduce the risk to “Low”, ATCO would
consider additional treatment options and also carry out a cost-benefit
in accordance with AS 4645. The Tribunal agrees with Zincara that ATCO’s
“High” risk ranking did not
impose on it the ALARP requirement
required under paragraph C5.2 of AS 4645. It is axiomatic though that if ATCO
had classified
a risk as “High” under its risk matrix, then it would
take the actions required by its risk matrix to address a “High”
risk. However, that conclusion says little about whether the risk ought to have
been so classified. Secondly, when Zincara refers
in section 3.1.1 to a
cost-benefit analysis required for certain risks under AS 4645, it is not clear
how it has reached this conclusion
because there was inadequate discussion of it
in this part of the report.
conclusions are therefore not a complete answer to ATCO’s claim to include
the capex costs associated with the
projects. The ALARP requirement under
paragraph C5.2 did not extend to ATCO because it had applied risk measures (and
definitions
of those risks) that ultimately resulted in a “High”
risk ranking. The relevant question is however whether a “High”
ranking was appropriately applied. This is discussed further below.
the lack of precision on the part of both EMCa and Zincara to which the Tribunal
has already referred, the best that can be
said is that each expert alluded
generally to the operation of r 79(2)(c) or r 79(1)(a), or a combination, in
support of their positions
on allowable capex. That is, AS 4645 is not the only
source of the obligation. As the ERA relied on the conclusions of EMCa, that
assessment will also effectively determine whether the ERA made the errors
alleged by ATCO. At this point, it is therefore important
to consider the
operation of r 79(2)(c) and r 79(1)(a).
The operation of r 79(2)(c) and r 79(1)(a)
ATCO’S SUBMISSIONS
said it is unclear whether the “prudent and efficient” criterion in
r 79(1)(a) will always be met where capex is
“necessary” or
“required” under r 79(2)(c)(iii), for example because it is required
as a result of a pipeline
duty or requirement, and the service provider cannot
choose to cease to provide gas services by means of the relevant pipeline.
similar issue arises as to whether the criterion applies if something is
“necessary” under r 79(2)(c)(i) or (ii).
was prepared to concede that r 79(1)(a) is intended to provide some form of
relevant filter on what expenditure will be allowable
even in the circumstances
where the service provider is required to incur capex in order to meet a
regulatory obligation or requirement,
or where it is otherwise necessary.
However, ATCO’s preferred construction of r 79 generally was that the
prima facie
permits such expenditure, but only if it meets the
“prudent and efficient” criterion. ATCO suggested that the
limb in r 79(1)(a) would be met almost as a matter of
course. This is because it is axiomatic that any prudent service provider
comply with “regulatory obligations and requirements” under r
79(2)(c)(iii), or for that matter where expenditure
is “necessary”
under r 79(2)(c)(i) or (ii). As regards the “efficient” limb, ATCO
submitted that attention
must be given to the means for achieving sustainable
compliance at the lowest cost.
there is only one way of doing what is “justifiable”, then ATCO
suggested that should be taken to be efficient,
in accordance with “good
industry practice”, and incurred to achieve the lowest sustainable cost
for the purposes of
r 79(1)(a). Where there is more than one way of meeting a
“regulatory obligation or requirement”, or doing something
“necessary”, ATCO argued that r 79(1)(a) invites inquiry as to
whether the proposed course of action meets the
“prudent and
efficient” criterion.
maintained that it applied the criterion because it considered more than one way
to spend the “justifiable” expenditure
on the Two Rocks project, and
the current proposal was chosen from those options. ATCO suggested that the
question is not whether
the justifiable expenditure necessarily meets the
“prudent and efficient” criterion, but whether the option so chosen
satisfies the “prudent and efficient” criterion. Under this
approach, ATCO necessarily rejected EMCa’s requirement
that it ought to
have undertaken a cost-benefit analysis.
Additionally,
ATCO asked the Tribunal to consider the following process of reasoning for
concluding that r 79(1)(a) does not demand
a cost-benefit analysis:
MR GRAY: ... But the first step in that is to go back
to the submissions I made about the hierarchy of provisions in rule 79 and how
it is that we put our case that there has been an impermissible gloss placed on
section 79 by imposing a cost - a quantitative costs-benefit
requirement in all cases, including in cases where the various roman numeral
subparagraphs at paragraph (c), subrule (2)
are engaged.
We say 79(2) itself contains a hierarchy of justification, starting with
economic justifications or two different kinds in (a) and
(b), and then moving
on to different justifications, justifications of a different character
altogether, justifications that are
not economic justifications but are
justifications in the nature of obligations or other subject matter consonant
with the National
Gas Objective.
The National Gas Objective is not only limited to the long-term interests of
consumers on matters of price, but also on matters of
safety, security, supply
and such like. Now, just taking (2) one - subrule (2) one paragraph at a time,
the first justification is
in the nature of an economic justification. It is
informed by subsection (3).
We say subrule (2)(a) certainly imposes an economic justification test, and
we say that the limitation, such as it is, imposed by
subrule (3) is not such as
to deprive that criterion of its character as a costs-benefit-type test.
It’s a quantitative costs-benefit
test; it’s just that the economic
values to be included in that test are economic values that can be said to
directly accrue
to the four categories of entities mentioned, service providers,
MR GRAY: - - - we say 79(1)(a) is to be construed in a way that it
doesn’t just duplicate the ground already covered by the
justifications in
79(1)(b) and that is 79(2). And because in 79(2) there are cost benefit
requirements in each of justifications
(a) and (b) it’s highly unlikely
that there is some formal quantitative cost benefit requirement in (1)(a). It
certainly doesn’t
read like there is. We disagree, with respect, with our
friend’s submissions that any of the four limbs or elements of (1)(a)
impose such a requirement. They don’t read like that. I will take them one
at a time. Prudent service provider, well, if you
had a statutory obligation to
do something you have to do it. Granted, you have to adopt the cheapest,
appropriate way of doing
it but that’s - again, I repeat my submission -
not a quantitative cost benefit analysis of the cost of balancing the cost
doing what you’re required to do with the benefit in terms of avoidance of
economic impact on users and so forth. It’s
simply finding the cheapest
way to achieve the required regulatory outcome and efficiently that requirement
doesn’t add anything
to what I’ve already said. If one has an
obligation it has to meet it. Then, granted you have to adopt the cheapest way
meet it but it doesn’t mean you have to conduct some sort of balancing
of the broader benefit to be achieved by incurring the
cost. You just have to
find the cheapest cost...
argument was that EMCa’s and the ERA’s insistence on a cost-benefit
analysis was in substance, a contention
that, in quantitative terms, a service
provider must demonstrate that the costs of a project are outweighed by economic
This amounts to mandating compliance with r 79(2)(a) or (b) in every
case, an outcome that deprives r 79(2)(c) of a legitimate role.
also suggested that some risks, particularly those that may have to be addressed
under a regulatory obligation relating to safety,
will not be readily
susceptible to a strict monetary cost-benefit analysis. It will not always be
possible for societal benefits
of elimination of such risks to be quantified.
This must be so in light of the prevalence of regulatory obligations directed to
the risk to human life or injury. ATCO argued that it is wrong to read into
r 79(1)(a) a requirement that efficiency should be assessed
by reference to
cost-benefit considerations where it may well be that the benefit in question
(eg avoidance of death or injury) is
qualitative and involves societal norms.
In the case of expenditure for a purpose under r 79(2)(c)(i)-(iii), the costs
issue which
must be addressed under r 79(1)(a) is whether the safety or
integrity of service risk, or the regulatory obligation in question,
addressed cost efficiently. ATCO said its analysis satisfied that test and
there is nothing in the text or context of r
79(1)(a) that compelled the
conclusion urged by the ERA.
accepted that if there is a cheaper method evidently available to satisfy the
relevant regulatory obligation in a manner conducive
to the achievement of the
NGO, then a more expensive option for doing so will not satisfy r
THE ERA’S SUBMISSIONS
ERA argued that r 79(1)(a) requires satisfaction of a wider and more stringent
test than is required by AS 4645. In this respect,
the purpose and focus of AS
4645 and the Safety Case is the assessment and treatment of risk. The focus of
r 79(1)(a) is economic
efficiency, for the purpose of determining if
ATCO’s proposed capex should be included in the determination of total
for the purpose of calculating a regulated tariff. Further, a
cost-benefit analysis is widely recommended as a requirement for evaluating
publicly funded infrastructure projects.
ERA maintained that for capex to be conforming, it must satisfy both r 79(1)(a)
and r 79(2). At a high level, that much is agreed
between the parties.
However, the ERA argued that (contrary to what it considered ATCO to be
suggesting), there is no necessary
implication that, merely because certain
proposed capex might be justified as necessary for one of the objectives
identified in r
79(2)(c)(i), (ii), or (iii), the particular proposed expenditure
is prudent, efficient, or otherwise satisfies any of the requirements
79(1)(a). Nor must it necessarily follow that the proposed expenditure is the
lowest sustainable cost of achieving that objective.
ERA argued that in the absence of some form of quantitative analysis, such as a
cost-benefit analysis, ATCO did not demonstrate
that the proposed capex was
efficient and the lowest sustainable cost of providing the regulated services,
even if it was necessary
for one or more of the purposes in r 79(2)(c)(i)-(iii).
The ERA maintained that it is insufficient for ATCO to point to compliance
a regulatory obligation under its Safety Case as justifying the capex because
that conflates a safety obligation with the economic
objectives in, among other
things, r 79. Were that the case then compliance with r 79(2)(c)(i), (ii), or
(iii) alone would be sufficient
to render proposed capex conforming, despite the
operation of r 79(1)(a).
CONSIDERATION
is useful to again set out r 79(1) and r 79(2) in full ahead of the
Tribunal’s consideration of these arguments:
79 New capital expenditure criteria
(1) Conforming capital expenditure is capital expenditure that conforms with
the following criteria:
(a) the capital expenditure must be such
as would be incurred by a prudent service provider acting efficiently, in
accordance with
accepted good industry practice, to achieve the lowest
sustainable cost of providing services;
(b) the capital expenditure must be justifiable on a ground stated in subrule
(2) Capital expenditure is justifiable if:
(a) the overall economic value of the
expenditure is positive; or
(b) the present value of the expected incremental revenue to be generated as
a result of the expenditure exceeds the present value
of the capital
expenditure; or
(c) the capital expenditure is necessary:
(i) to maintain and improve
the safety of services; or
(ii) to maintain the integrity of services; or
(iii) to comply with a regulatory obligation or requirement; or
(iv) to maintain the service provider’s capacity to meet levels of
demand for services existing at the time the capital expenditure
is incurred (as
distinct from projected demand that is dependent on an expansion of pipeline
capacity); or
(d) the capital expenditure is an
aggregate amount divisible into 2 parts, one referable to incremental services
and the other referable
to a purpose referred to in paragraph (c), and the
former is justifiable under paragraph (b) and the latter under paragraph
previously stated, the projected capital base for a period is determined by
taking the opening capital base and adding to it conforming
capex permitted
under r 79 (less certain deductions). The opening capital base is not revalued
under the NGR at each access arrangement
period for the purpose of determining
the projected capital base.
this way, the decision to include sustaining capex impacts both the projected
capital base for the period and also subsequent periods.
Additionally to this
consequence, a rate of return is applied to the projected capital base, which
together with other items, ultimately
determines the total revenue by which
reference tariffs are calculated.
purpose of this “trail” is to demonstrate the significance that
capex attaches to the regulatory process under the
NGR. If capex is allowed
when it ought not be, then the projected capital base and ultimately the revenue
requirement will be higher
(all other things being equal) than ought to be, and
customers will be paying higher tariffs than they should. This might occur,
example, if a service provider were allowed to include ‘gold plated’
capex when that is not required. Similarly,
allowing less capex than ought to
be allowed, may result in insufficient costs to fund the necessary expenditure
needed to adequately
deliver reference services, with the consequence that
service delivery and safety may be compromised.
capex therefore plays a very significant role in the scheme of regulation, and
the NGR provide for a fine balance between
allowable and disallowable capex.
Rule 79 is designed to ensure that the balance is appropriately struck and
should be construed
with that in mind.
suggested that there is a hierarchy of justifications in r 79(2) where the
character of r 79(2)(a) and (b) stand in contrast
to r 79(2)(c). However,
there are no express words in r 79 to indicate that the criteria in r 79(2)(a)
and (b) on the one hand,
have any different status in r 79 than the
criteria in r 79(2)(c).
is true, as ATCO suggested, that on their face, r 79(2)(a) and (b) address
broader concepts of whether the return from capex exceeds
the cost. In
contrast, r 79(2)(c) addresses more precise issues relating, for example, to
compliance with regulatory obligations
or requirements, as well as other
matters. ATCO believed that the factors in r 79(2)(c) were therefore not
economic factors but
rather justifications in the nature of obligations. The
significance of this construction for ATCO is that it purportedly sheds
the construction of r 79(1)(a). That is, if r 79(2)(a) and (b), because of
their “economic” character, already
import a cost-benefit
requirement, it is highly unlikely that a formal quantitative cost-benefit
analysis is required under r 79(1)(a).
Tribunal does not accept that construction. For instance, r 79(2)(b) requires
an examination of whether the present value of
the expected incremental revenue
to be generated as a result of the expenditure exceeds the present value of the
capex. The issue
is what ought to be the value for capex applied in that
circumstance, where there are multiple values that are each capable of
the requirement in r 79(2)(b). Rule 79(2)(b) provides no answer to
that question. The Tribunal considers that the answer is to
be found in r
79(1)(a). That is, r 79(1)(a) operates very much in conjunction with r 79(2).
It is what contributes to capex constituting
“conforming capex” that
is allowed under r 79.
support for this view is to be found in the words of r 79(1) itself. Conforming
capex must satisfy both limbs of r 79(1)
for it to be included, not just one.
There is nothing in r 79(1) to suggest that priority should be given to r
79(1)(b) over r 79(1)(a).
somewhat reluctantly conceded that r 79(1)(a) is intended to provide some form
of relevant filter on what expenditure will be
allowable, even in the case of
compliance with a regulatory obligation or requirement. Nevertheless, its
preferred position was
that such expenditure ought to be
prima facie
allowable. The Tribunal does not accept this position if its effect is to
deprive both limbs of r 79(1) of their full effect as the
Tribunal has
is very limited discussion in the experts’ reports, the ERA decisions and
the parties’ submissions on the meaning
to be given to the key words in r
79(1)(a) and what they require.
referenced the Australian Concise Oxford Dictionary in support of its
definitions of “prudent” and “efficient”.
report, it adopted the following definitions in applying r 79(1)(a) and r
as “discreet” or “cautious in managing one’s activities
to avoid undesirable consequences’;
industry practice” as “the actions carried out by ATCO’s peers
in Australia”;
“efficient”
as “functioning or producing effectively and with the least waste of
view of the limited attention given to it by the parties and their experts, the
Tribunal does not propose to provide detailed guidance
on the meaning of r
79(1)(a). Ultimately, given the way in which both the ERA and ATCO presented
their cases, it is not necessary
to do so. However, given the Tribunal’s
conclusion on the interplay between r 79(1)(a) and r 79(2), it is necessary to
something about the nature of the assessment that is required under
r 79(1)(a).
the ERA maintained that it imports a requirement for a quantitative analysis,
like a cost-benefit analysis. ATCO suggested
that the “prudent”
limb in r 79(1)(a) would be met almost as a matter of course, because it is
axiomatic that any prudent
service provider would comply with “regulatory
obligations and requirements” under r 79(2)(c)(iii).
a prudent service provider would comply with a relevant regulatory obligation,
there are many ways in which it could do so.
There may be a range of options
that it can deploy to comply, as well as a range of costs attributable to those
each of which may be capable of satisfying the regulatory
requirement. Prudency, therefore, extends not simply to the issue of compliance
with an obligation but also to the means by which that is done.
is also wrong to consider “prudency” in isolation to the surrounding
words. It is not prudency
simpliciter
. It is a prudent service provider
“acting efficiently, in accordance with accepted good industry practice,
to achieve the
lowest sustainable cost of providing services”. These
surrounding words provide context (in the regulatory scheme under the
the considerations that ought to be in the mind of a prudent service
party explored in any detail the expression “efficiently”. When
used in r 79, it is undoubtedly referring to
economic efficiency - allocative
efficiency, productive efficiency and dynamic efficiency. Allocative efficiency
occurs when resources
are allocated, through price, to their highest-value use
among all competing uses. Productive efficiency is achieved where goods
produced at the lowest possible cost, given a particular set of inputs. Dynamic
efficiency encourages firms to improve their
products, to produce new or better
products, and to find better ways of producing goods and services.
the context of r 79, productive efficiency and dynamic efficiency are
particularly relevant because the provision addresses the
capacity of the
service provider to achieve the lowest sustainable cost of providing
directive in r 79 is not only that the services be provided efficiently (and
consistent with good industry practice), they must
be done ‘to’
achieve the lowest sustainable cost of providing services - indicating that
prudency and efficiency must
drive lower sustainable costs of service
way to demonstrate compliance with the economic directives in r 79(1)(a) is
through a cost-benefit test. The ERA referred, for
example, to a suggestion by
the Productivity Commission in its report on public infrastructure, where it was
Insights into the economic efficiency of proposed
public infrastructure projects can be gained by conducting thorough and
transparent
cost-benefit analysis. This sometimes needs to incorporate real
options analysis to properly factor in uncertainty. Where a cost-benefit
analysis shows a project has a positive net benefit, this suggests that
proceeding with it will improve economic efficiency. However,
it is necessary to
consider whether there are alternative projects that would improve efficiency to
a greater extent, or achieve
particular benefits at a lower cost.
See Productivity Commission Inquiry Report,
Public Infrastructure Volume
(No 71, 27 May 2014).
Ultimately,
it is not so important whether the label “cost-benefit” is used to
describe what is needed to demonstrate
the economic efficiency directives
required to demonstrate compliance with r 79(1)(a). What is more important is
that the process
employed be robust, and it must critically assess all available
options for achieving the desired outcome, even if those options
may not have
been ones that were originally contemplated. There must be a dispassionate,
objective and open mind brought to bear.
The process must also examine the
consequences of embarking on an option (or of not doing so), the costs attached
to each option,
and the ultimate return from them over their life, in present
value terms. Although the process will have some qualitative features,
invariably be a quantitative process.
against the Tribunal’s discussion of the operation of r 79 above,
ATCO’s approach to the Projects fell short
of what is expected under r 79.
In those circumstances, the ERA was entitled not to be satisfied that the costs
claimed in relation
to the projects were costs that complied with the
requirements of r 79.
further issue is then whether, on the available evidence, the ERA could reach
the conclusion that the risk classification was “Intermediate”
rather than “High”. This is considered below.
The risk thresholds applied by ATCO
ATCO AND THE ERA’S RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
main findings in relation to the Projects can conveniently be summarised as
ATCO has relied on its assessment of the need for the
Two Rocks and Peel spur lines (with $18.1m and $20.9m respectively allocated
‘sustaining’ justification criteria) and interdependency projects of
$34m, based on its claim that these projects
are required to address what are
risks. As we find the risk rankings are no higher than
Intermediate
, for the events nominated by ATCO it is required by AS 4645
to, among other things, demonstrate that its proposed investments are
grossly disproportionate to the benefit gained from the reduced risk that would
As ATCO has not undertaken the assessment required for
Intermediate
ranked risks, we have no basis for concluding that its proposed expenditure
satisfies the ALARP test. The current situation in which
significant numbers of
WA gas customers are supplied from a single pipeline source is not uncommon
elsewhere in Australia and has
existed in WA for a number of years. EnergySafety
has not found it necessary to intervene in this situation on safety grounds to
date, nor do we consider that ATCO is or is likely to be under an obligation to
construct such new pipelines on safety grounds, based
on proper application of
the applicable Australian Standard. We therefore conclude that for the two
proposed spur line projects and
the four proposed interdependency
(a) ATCO does not have a regulatory obligation to satisfy under the NGR (per
r.79(2)(c)(iii)); and
(b) The security of supply risk does not satisfy r. 79(2)(c)(i) of the
concluded that ATCO’s risk management framework was consistent with
Zincara considers that ATCO’s consequence and
frequency tables (Table 3-3 and Table 3-4) are consistent with that set out in
AS/NZS4645.1 (Standard) and that ATCO’s definitions in the table meet the
guidelines as set out in the Standard. Similarly,
the ATCO’s risk matrix
(Table 3-5) is also consistent with that of the Standard.
In relation to the steps taken to assess and reduce the risk as described in
Section 3.1.1, Zincara considers that process is also
consistent with
Zincara therefore considers that ATCO’s risk management approach is
consistent with AS/NZS4645.1.
Zincara indicated that ATCO’s consequence and frequency tables were
“consistent” with AS 4645, it must have
been suggesting that, in its
view they accurately applied AS 4645. This is because, as indicated, the ATCO
matrix applied different
consequence and frequency definitions to those
specified in AS 4645. Even accepting this, Zincara did not indicate in any
the information it has relied on for its satisfaction.
considered ATCO’s risk threshold for loss of supply issues to 25,000
customers and EMCa’s conclusion that it is
too low. Zincara undertook a
comparison of ATCO’s thresholds with other gas distributors Envestra and
Allgas Energy, as comparable
public data for other utilities was not available.
Zincara considered that although each had developed its own risk matrix, the
severity of each category was not materially different.
considered the risk definitions of other gas distributors listed at Table 18 of
the EMCa report, as referred to earlier in
these reasons. It concluded that
ATCO’s definitions were comparable and realistic:
Based on its experience, Zincara considers that
ATCO’s estimate of the length of time for long term interruption is
Air getting into the gas network as a result of third party damage to
a pipeline will result in an unsafe situation. The purging
of the gas network to
remove the air is a lengthy and complex situation and will take a considerable
time and resources.
Using an average four week duration interruption to 25,000 customers will
result in 100,000 customer weeks which is similar to that
of Envestra. It is
also similar to that of Multinet, which has defined a one month failure of gas
supply as a catastrophic event.
relation to SP AusNet’s definition of 200,000 customers, relied on by
EMCa, Zincara was unsure of the conditions behind that
number of customers.
However, Zincara observed that SP AusNet had approximately 571,000 customers at
the start of 2011. Therefore
200,000 customers represented 35% of its total
customer base. Given the nature of gas networks, with multiple feeds into the
Zincara believed that any third party damage in one section of the
network or loss of supply from one injection point, would not
cause significant
disruption. Zincara believed that it would have to be a disruption in the
transmission system (which SP AusNet
does not own) that was likely to cause such
a disruption.
therefore considered that it was not possible to compare ATCO’s definition
of a catastrophic event to that of SP AusNet.
Zincara was satisfied that
ATCO’s definition of a catastrophic event for loss of supply “is
consistent with industry
practice and as such consistent with a prudent service
provider acting efficiently in accordance with accepted industry practice
achieve the lowest sustainable cost of delivering pipeline services”.
was concerned with what it considered was a low risk threshold applied by ATCO.
In its April addendum, EMCa took the opportunity
to closely consider both the
consequence analysis and frequency analysis applied by ATCO on both interruption
to supply and human
Zincara’s support for a threshold of 25,000 customers, in its April
addendum, EMCa maintained that they were unaware
of a distribution network
failure event in Australia leading to the loss of supply to more than 25,000
customers, or of the loss
of supply of that magnitude that had taken more than
two weeks to restore. EMCa noted that gas supply was restored to more than
million customers following the Longford gas explosion incident in 1998 in less
than three weeks. Despite this, EMCa acknowledged
Zincara’s expertise and
its view that this is consistent with industry standards. Accordingly, in cases
in which there is
risk of interruption to continuity of supply to 25,000
customers or more, EMCa conservatively applied a consequence rating of
“Catastrophic”.
criticised EMCa for applying a value judgment that the cost of the Project
exceeds the customer benefit in terms of security
of supply. Zincara was
satisfied that ATCO’s definition of a “Catastrophic event of the
loss of supply to 25,000 customers”
was consistent with the industry
CONSIDERATION
Tribunal does not accept Zincara’s characterisation of EMCa’s
position. As noted above, EMCa pointed to the example
of SP Ausnet in support
of its view that the customer number applied by ATCO was too high. As the
Tribunal has already indicated,
the approach to r 79(1)(a) demands a robust
quantitative assessment before capex can be included in the building blocks.
very little information available in the public domain, it was open
to EMCa (and ultimately the ERA) to accept the best available
comparable data,
on which it ultimately proceeded. This cannot be characterised as applying a
value judgment as Zincara suggested.
relation to the frequency classification for safety events, EMCa considered that
ATCO misapplied the frequency class on the basis
of the failure of the event
occurring rather than its consequence. However, having examined the ATCO risk
approach, the Tribunal
is satisfied that ATCO well appreciated the difference
between a failure event occurring and the potential consequences of failure
events, and addressed the risks of those outcomes occurring.
was also critical of ATCO’s failure to provide any new statistical
information to support its risk assessment. Certainly
EMCa was unable to find
any comparable public data:
As discussed above, we have been unable to find any
event on the public record where a
distribution
network in Australasia
has been damaged to the extent that more than 5,000 customers have lost supply
from the events nominated by
ATCO. We acknowledge that third party damage to
distribution pipelines is possible and does occur from time to time, but we can
no information to support a finding that a rupture or other event
sufficient to cause loss of supply to over 25,000 customers for
over four weeks
has occurred.
therefore observed that although the consequence of the event (loss of supply to
more than 25,000 customers) is theoretically
possible, it has never occurred on
a similar asset. EMCa therefore concluded that based on AS 4645, this equates
to a “Hypothetical”
frequency class. The Tribunal considers that
this conclusion was open to EMCa for similar reasons as were open to it in
to the consequence rating.
regards human safety, EMCa found no evidence to support EnergySafety’s
view that the appropriate safety consequence rating
for such a loss of supply is
“Catastrophic”. EMCa was not aware of fatalities associated with
large scale gas supply
restoration projects. EMCa did not accept a
“High” rating on safety grounds:
We consider the frequency class for consideration of
the impact as a ‘major’ consequence is best described as
Hypothetical
. This would lead to the risk being classed as
under the AS 4645 risk framework. If one considers the likely safety
consequence of a supply interruption to more than 25,000 customers
safety ranking, then we consider that the most appropriate
likelihood to apply to this would be
and this would lead to an
Intermediate
risk ranking on safety
Tribunal considers that this conclusion was open to EMCa for similar reasons as
were open to it in relation to the consequence
and frequency ratings.
EMCa assessed the risk ranking to be “Intermediate” at best with the
consequence that under AS 4645 a prudent
operator would undertake further
analysis to determine what other risk reduction measures (other than building
new pipelines) are
available and should be adopted.
THE APRIL ADDENDUM
the April addendum, EMCa specifically considered the loss of supply to northern
networks and, in this context, the justification
for the Two Rocks project and
the capex attributable to it. Consistent with its earlier report, EMCa was
unable to independently
verify that 60,000 customers in the northern suburbs
were at risk, without assessing ATCO’s detailed modelling, which it
beyond scope. However, assuming ATCO’s analysis was correct,
the risk ranking is “Intermediate” for the reasons
EMCa provided
above. The consequence is that ATCO should have applied the measures provided
for an “Intermediate” risk
specified in Table C4 of AS 4645.
was also critical of ATCO’s failure to consider other options for
mitigating risk, including a shorter pipeline:
ATCO has chosen to present only one option for
mitigating the supply risk. We consider that there are number of other pipeline
it could have considered, such as a new shorter pipeline from Bullsbrook
GS005 to the southern nominated interconnection point as
shown in ATCO Figure
1-4 Appendix 8.2 at notionally half the length of that proposed and therefore
notionally, half the cost. We
also consider that ATCO should have examined other
capital and operational measures to reduce risk, including the options
in section C5.2 of AS 4645, but has provided no evidence that it has
was critical of this comment because it said that EMCa did not genuinely
attempt, other than notionally, to cost this option
or the other pipeline
options to which EMCa alluded. ATCO said that this suggestion was obviously
flawed because it suffered from
similar vulnerabilities to supply interruption
as the present network configuration by reason of its dependence on the same
gateway from the transmission pipeline.
EMCa was not suggesting that its proposal for a shorter pipeline was costed.
Looked at in its context, EMCa was indicating
that there were other options that
ATCO ought to have considered in its ‘mix’. The Tribunal agrees
that ATCO ought to
have done so as part of the proper application of r 79(1)(a).
The ERA (and EMCa) were not wrong to require of ATCO that degree of
The ERA’s failure to consider the application of r
79(2)(c)(ii) to the Two Rocks Project and the Peel Project
is convenient at this stage for the Tribunal to address an error contended by
ATCO specific to the Two Rocks project – namely
the ERA’s failure to
consider whether the capex was justified under r 79(2)(c)(ii) (to maintain the
integrity of services).
Tribunal observes that the issue was considered in EMCa’s report. The ERA
addressed the issue of the integrity of service
delivery and loss of supply
issues in relation to Two Rocks in its Amended Final Decision albeit, it seems,
without express reference
to the provision itself. Nevertheless, the Tribunal
is satisfied that the ERA’s consideration can be attributed to r
79(2)(c)(ii).
In any case, ATCO did not advance a position as to why the
expenditure would be permitted under r 79(2)(c)(ii), if it is not justified
under say r 79(2)(c)(iii), such as to justify any interference by the
relation to the Peel project, EMCa was unable to independently verify that
34,000 customers in Mandurah, and 1800 customers in
Pinjarra were currently at
risk without assessing ATCO’s detailed modelling, which it considered out
of scope. Similarly it
considered the risk ranking “Intermediate”.
the Two Rocks project, EMCa was similarly critical of ATCO’s failure to
consider other options, including procedural controls
or, if economically
justified, a new shorter pipeline option from Fairbridge GS011 to the nominated
interconnection point in the
Mandurah distribution system, as shown in
ATCO’s Appendix 8.2, Figure 1 –6. The Tribunal’s comments in
to ATCO’s failure in this regard in relation to the Two Rocks
project apply equally to the Peel project.
conclusion in relation to the Interdependency project is broadly similar to the
conclusions it reached for the Two Rocks
and Peel projects. However, in
relation to metallic mains replacement, EMCa was satisfied that ATCO is capable
of delivering the
amended revised proposed expenditure of $47.1 million (a $3.4
million reduction to its revised proposal) within the AA4 period.
considered that the deferral of 11 km of unprotected metallic mains replacement
into AA5 is prudent. EMCa was therefore
satisfied that the program of work
satisfies r 79(2).
the reasons discussed, the Tribunal considers that it was open to the ERA to
require that ATCO undergo the assessment specified
by the Tribunal to
demonstrate compliance with r 79(2)(c) and r 79(1)(a). As discussed, in
applying that assessment, it was open
to the ERA to conclude that ATCO had not
demonstrated that its risk ranking was “High” and in compliance with
and r 79(2). The ERA was not in error in doing so. Similarly, as
discussed, on the balance of the available evidence, it was also
open to the ERA
to conclude that the proper ranking was “Intermediate” and not
“High”. The ERA therefore
did not make the errors alleged,
incorrectly exercise its discretion or act unreasonably.
The ERA’s requirement that ATCO assess its projects under
the cost-pass through mechanism for an “Intermediate”
risk imposed
under the Final Decision
view of the Tribunal’s conclusion above, it is necessary to address
ATCO’s criticisms of the pass through mechanism
imposed by the ERA under
its Amended Final Decision.
will be remembered that the ERA required that ATCO include a cost pass through
mechanism in the following terms:
The Authority requires that ATCO include the
following clause 3.1(e):
ATCO Gas Australia incurs Conforming Capital Expenditure or Conforming
Operating Expenditure as a result of addressing an “Intermediate”
security of supply risk following an assessment in accordance with the required
steps prescribed in Table C4 of AS 4645 for an ‘intermediate’
risk. This expenditure can only be passed through for the following areas of the
network identified by ATCO in its Response
to the Draft Decision: Northern
Network, Peel, Hillary’s, Canning Vale, Fremantle and
requirement was finally reflected in cl 2.1(e) of Appendix B (Reference Tariff
Variation Mechanism) in the Final Access Arrangement.
objected to the need for this mechanism at all because, in its view, it had
applied the appropriate risk classification.
the cost pass through mechanism were to stand, ATCO identified several problems
with its application. One of those difficulties
was that the ERA and ATCO have
fundamentally different views as to what is required to undertake an assessment
under Table C4 of
AS 4645. That difficulty, of course, merely re-states what,
in effect, was the very nature of the dispute. As the Tribunal has
indicated in
these reasons the nature of the assessment required under the NGR, that should
go some way towards addressing the difficulty
ATCO has raised.
further difficulty raised by ATCO is the uncertainty as to whether expenditure
would ultimately be accepted by the ERA and satisfy
the pass through
MR GRAY: I make two points. One is there’s this
disagreement about the ranking, but perhaps more importantly this expenditure
has to be incurred before this pass through event will be triggered. That is
leaving the projects and their viability, in financial
terms, as a hostage to
fortune in terms of the ERAs decision about whether to approve the pass through
event, and that’s a
matter that would impact deleteriously on financing,
and is not an acceptable outcome.
MR GRAY: That’s the – that’s what our friends’ client
is doing. It’s putting it off for another day
in a particular way, which
is not satisfactory in my submission, for the company to conduct its affairs in
a manner consistently
with the NGO, and to earn the efficient return
that’s mandated, or at least contemplated, by the revenue pricing
principles.
Why? Because if the company hopes to avail itself of this pass
through event, it first has to incur the expenditure. It has got no
if I can use that word, that any approval would be forthcoming from the ERA that
the expenditure turns out to be conforming
capital expenditure on these –
or conforming operating expenditure on these projects.
It would have to incur the money, then claim a pass through event, and abide
the decision of the regulator. Now, that would raise
its – raise its costs
of financing, because there’s no guarantee that there’s going to be
any sort of return, at
least in AA4, from the
the Tribunal notes about the cost pass through mechanism is that it is not
capable of operating of its own force. That is, it
is drafted in such a way
that there will invariably need to be another process employed to assess whether
the expenditure incurred
by ATCO complies with the terms of the pass through
mechanism. In this respect, ATCO was correct to observe that it puts off these
issues for another day, and in doing so creates some uncertainty.
uncertainty is compounded by the fact that the “Intermediate” risk
ranking, which the Tribunal has determined to
be appropriate, was nevertheless
disputed by ATCO. Therefore, ATCO would need to reassess the Projects on a
fundamentally different
premise to that on which it initially embarked.
ensure that the mechanism is satisfied, the Tribunal assumes that the ERA may
engage additional consultants and possibly seek input
from stakeholders. The
cost pass through mechanism therefore gives rise to a separate process outside
the access arrangement approval
process prescribed by the NGR. It is
undesirable that a mechanism such as this should give rise to a separate process
that is not
managed by the NGR.
the context of the disagreement between the parties on the risk ranking and a
process that was already delayed, it is perhaps understandable
why the ERA chose
to employ this cost pass through mechanism to deal with the issue –
effectively at a later time.
said, in view of the Tribunal’s conclusion, the Projects will need to be
re-assessed by some means. In effect, that is
what the cost pass through
mechanism seeks to do. The Tribunal understands that will involve further work
by ATCO and the ERA and
necessitate a degree of co-operation between them, armed
with the direction the Tribunal has provided in these reasons.
balance, there are no alternative measures the Tribunal considers would result
in any significantly better process by which this
task should be undertaken.
The Tribunal does however encourage the parties to take a cooperative approach
to the task. It would
clearly be undesirable for the current dispute to be
re-agitated again in applying the pass through mechanism.
the Tribunal cannot conclude there is an error in the pass through mechanism so
as to be a basis to vary or set it aside.
DEPRECIATION
Introduction
to r 76(b) of the NGR, one of the building blocks in determining ATCO’s
total revenue for each regulatory year of the
access arrangement period is
depreciation on the projected capital base for the year.
Depreciation
also affects the determination of ATCO’s total revenue for each regulatory
year as depreciation is deducted from
the projected capital base for each year
(r 78(c)), and a rate of return is applied on the capital base determined under
contended that the ERA’s determination of ATCO’s depreciation
schedule under r 89 of the NGR, and underlying depreciation
methodology, are
vitiated by grounds of review under s 246(1) of the NGL. These errors are said
to impact the depreciation allowance
to be included in ATCO’s total
revenue (and the calculation of the projected capital base) for each regulatory
year of the
access arrangement period AA4.
depreciation schedule determines (together with new capex) the change in the
regulatory asset base over time and thus also affects
the return on capital
component of the building block approach. The pattern of cash flows, or total
revenue, over time thus depends
on the depreciation schedule adopted. In turn,
given a specified consumption stream over time, this affects the time path of
’) and tariffs.
Legislative framework
69 provides that “depreciation” in Pt 9 of the NGL means
“depreciation of the capital base”. Depreciation
is otherwise not
defined in the NGL or the NGR.
r 76(b), one of the building blocks to determining revenue is depreciation on
the projected capital base for the year. Depreciation
is often referred as a
‘return of capital’ (cf ‘return
89(1) of the NGR identifies five objectives for consideration in design of the
depreciation schedule to be used. These are:
(1) so that reference tariffs will vary, over time, in a
way that promotes efficient growth in the market for reference services;
(2) so that each asset or group of assets is depreciated over the economic life
of that asset or group of assets; and
(3) so as to allow, as far as reasonably practicable, for adjustment reflecting
changes in the expected economic life of a particular
asset, or a particular
group of assets; and
(4) so that (subject to the rules about capital redundancy), an asset is
depreciated only once (ie that the amount by which the asset
is depreciated over
its economic life does not exceed the value of the asset at the time of its
inclusion in the capital base (adjusted,
if the accounting method approved by
the regulator permits, for inflation)); and
(5) so as to allow for the service provider’s reasonable needs for cash
flow to meet financing, non-capital and other costs.
central question is whether ATCO’s schedule has been designed so that
reference tariffs will vary over time in a way that
promotes efficient growth in
the market for reference services (it not having been suggested that the market
for such services is
immature) and so as to allow for ATCO’s reasonable
needs for cash flow to meet financing, non-capital and other costs: r 89(1)(a)
and (e) of the NGR.
is uncontroversial that those objectives are best met by the depreciation
methodology that most closely matches AR with long run
marginal cost
’) associated with an incremental increase in services.
However, there is dispute as to the basis for that comparative analysis.
submitted that the basis of the comparison should be AR for each GJ of gas
delivered through ATCO’s gas pipeline network
compared with the LRMC per
GJ (the total of costs involved in the long run, in delivering an incremental
increase in delivery by
Grounds of review
its Review Application, ATCO submitted that the revenue effect in AA4 of the
ERA’s Amended Final Decision relative to the
depreciation proposal
submitted by ATCO was to reduce revenue by some $17 million. This material
difference arises from effects
on both the return
capital and return
capital components (together referred to as the ‘
capital cash
’) of the building block approach. The return on capital effect
arises from the different time path implied for the regulatory
asset base on
which the return on capital is calculated. While the effect on AA4 revenue is
material, this results from bringing
forward of expected cash flows from later
access periods under the historical cost accounting (‘
approach (and the transition path) relative to the current cost account
’) approach. Both approaches have the same present
value impact from expected cash flows over the life of the asset. The effect
thus material in the context of AA4 revenues, but arguably not material in the
context of the present value of longer term revenues
over the life of the assets
set out a large number of issues on which it claimed that the ERA made error or
errors of fact which were material to the decision,
or that its exercise of
discretion was incorrect or its decision was unreasonable. Many of these are
reformulations or restatements
of other alleged errors or would-be consequences
of other errors. Ultimately, much of the focus of ATCO’s application, and
matters under contention, is the shape or position of the LRMC curve, for many
years into the future.
would be unhelpful to restate the errors verbatim, hence the specific errors
which ATCO contended were made by the ERA can be summarised
(1) when the ERA estimated that the LRMC per GJ would
rise over the next 65 years this led to subsequent errors in a comparison of
and LRMC per GJ and the decision to retain indexed depreciation. ATCO contended
this occurred because the ERA disregarded legitimate
methods for estimation of
LRMC and failed to have regard to the objective evidence of the trend in LRMC.
The Tribunal notes that
the parties ultimately agreed on a common forecast for
the LRMC per GJ (denoted as Final Figure 40). This is no longer an issue,
except to the extent that ATCO claimed that the ERA erred in exercising its
discretion to reject the ATCO proposal based on such
errors at the time of its
determination.
(2) when the ERA took into account the per connection AR and per connection
LRMC, and failed to assess LRMC and prices overtime on
a per GJ basis only or
failed to give the per GJ assessment more weight than the alternative basis of
per connection.
(3) the ERA gave wrong emphasis to the timeframe over which the LRMC should be
considered.
(4) the ERA made estimates of the LRMC incorrectly by using Average Incremental
’) calculations for different durations. It also
made errors in inputs to its calculations and in assumptions about the growth
capex. The Tribunal notes that the agreement referred to above on the Final
Figure 40 again means these are no longer an issue,
except to the extent that
ATCO still claimed that the ERA erred in exercising its discretion to reject the
ATCO proposal based on
such errors at the time of its determination.
(5) the ERA inappropriately used an historical estimate of LRMC for 2006 in
forming a view on the trend in LRMC because LRMC is a
forward looking concept.
(6) the ERA made errors in asserting that unwarranted subsidies and allocation
of capital costs between present and future consumers
would occur, and that
there would be undesirable implications for capital asset investment and
(7) the ERA erred in invoking reg 7 of the
National Gas Access (WA) (Local
Provisions) Regulations 2009
Local Provisions
Regulations
’) because of (incorrectly) asserted price shocks as
justification for rejecting ATCO’s proposal.
prior access arrangement periods for ATCO, including the previous access
arrangement period AA3, the depreciation schedule used
to determine the return
of capital and thus the adjustment to the regulatory asset base
’) was based on a CCA approach. This involved
depreciation providing for the return of capital in real terms over the life
the asset, such that the effect of inflation was built into the nominal return
of capital. Consistently, the rate of return on
capital applied was a real
(inflation adjusted) rate of return. The depreciation schedule used was a
straight line approach in which
the amount of real depreciation applied each
year over the life of the asset would be constant.
complication to the CCA approach introduced by the specification of the building
block approach in the
National Gas Amendment (Price and Revenue Regulation of
Gas Services) Rules 2012
2012 Rule Amendments
requirement in r 87(4)(b) of the NGR that the allowed rate of return is to be
“determined on a nominal vanilla
basis that is consistent with the
estimate of the value of imputation credits referred to in rule 87A”.
Allowing a nominal
rate of return in conjunction with CCA depreciation, where
both of these components of the building block approach allow for compensation
for inflation, would lead to over-compensation for inflation. This complication
could be dealt with under the building block requirements
(1) deducting an amount, determined by applying the
inflation rate to the regulatory asset base, from the depreciation amount
using CCA; or
(2) shifting to an HCA approach.
first approach was preferred by the ERA, and the second approach was preferred
by ATCO. Either approach will generate an expected
revenue stream over the life
of the asset which reflects the required aggregate of the capital cash flows
with present value equal
to the asset cost, but with differing time patterns of
those revenue streams.
relevant to this issue is the NGR relating to tariff determination. Rule 94(4)
A tariff, and if it consists of 2 or more charging
parameters, each charging parameter for a tariff class:
(a) must take into account the long run marginal cost for the reference
service or, in the case of a charging parameter, for the
element of the service
to which the charging parameter relates
is no guidance given in the NGR on what is specifically meant by “take
into account”. Moreover, there is no guidance
on how LRMC is to be
interpreted or calculated. Nor does this provision imply that consideration of
LRMC should involve projections
of the value of that concept into the
far-distant future. Rather it provides, albeit vaguely, guidance for setting
tariffs at a
given point in time.
dispute between the parties, however, ultimately came down to differing views on
the compatibility of estimated values of LRMC
at future points in time with the
revenue streams resulting from the alternative approaches to depreciation, and
consequences for
efficiency.
ATCO’s proposed approach
AA4, ATCO proposed a gradual shift towards use of the HCA approach. In the HCA
approach, a constant nominal value of depreciation
is applied each year such
that the original dollar cost of the asset is recouped over the life of the
asset in nominal terms. Compensation
for the effects of inflation is provided
by use of a nominal rate of return on capital. A straight line approach was
also proposed.
gradual shift towards an HCA approach proposed by ATCO was termed the
“transitional approach”. For AA4, this involved
the CCA approach
(with the depreciation amount being adjusted to offset the provision of
inflation compensation via use of a nominal
return on capital in the building
block approach) still being applied to the pre-existing capital base, but HCA
being applied to
new capex. For subsequent access periods there would be a
gradual conversion of depreciation of existing assets to the HCA approach.
Specifically, in AA5 (commencing at the start of 2020) the CCA approach would
only be applied to the (depreciated) capital base
which was in existence at the
start of 2000. In AA6 (commencing at the start of 2025) HCA would be applied to
all assets. ATCO
also proposed a “fixed principle” such that HCA
would then remain in use after that time.
Implications of choice of depreciation schedule
is well known that under the HCA or CCA approaches the present value of the
capital cash flows equals the original asset cost,
but with a difference in the
time pattern of the revenue streams over the life of the asset. Assuming the
same style of depreciation
schedule (eg straight line depreciation), the
HCA revenue stream is more “front end loaded” than the CCA revenue
(assuming that inflation is positive).
NGR do not mandate a straight line method of depreciation, and any shaped
depreciation schedule which provides for full return
of the invested amount (in
conjunction with the appropriate rate of return) is consistent with the present
value condition outlined
in the preceding paragraph. Also r 89(2) would allow
for non-straight line depreciation as it states that “[c]ompliance with
89(1)(a)] may involve deferral of a substantial proportion of the
depreciation” under certain conditions where this is perceived
consistent with efficient growth of the market.
the choice between the HCA and CCA approaches implies for the pattern of nominal
tariffs over time, and efficiency in provision
of services and growth of the
unclear. It depends,
time pattern of demand for the asset services, and the expansion of capacity
through new capex. If there were larger demand
towards the end of the asset
life, a revenue stream which, in real terms, is more “back-end
loaded” (such as from CCA
depreciation determining the capital cash flows)
would be more likely to lead to more constant real tariffs over time. In
HCA depreciation would imply lower real tariffs in later years as full
capacity was approached. In practice, the time path of real
tariffs could be
expected to affect the pattern of demand over time, such that there would be
different market growth and need, and
incentives, for further capex under an HCA
versus CCA approach.
discussed subsequently, the issue of the likely temporal pattern of demand is
only one of several considerations. Promoting a
revenue stream which allows
tariffs to be set efficiently over time in accordance with anticipated movements
in costs is another
consideration, and assessing the relative merits of CCA and
HCA (or proposed transitional) approaches in this regard is one key area
contention between ATCO and the ERA.
for a given specified time pattern of demand over the asset life, the CCA
approach will involve relatively lower tariffs
than the HCA approach in the
earlier years of the asset life and conversely relatively higher tariffs in the
later years. Some part
of the rationale for use of CCA by Australian regulators
in the past has been the view that anticipated growth in demand over time,
combined with a CCA approach generates a more level path for real tariffs over
Application by APA GasNet Australia (Operations) Pty Limited (No
[2013] ACompT 8
, the Australian Energy Regulator
rejected a proposal from the applicant to switch from
CCA to HCA citing concerns over the resulting implied tariff path and
consequences
for efficient growth of the market and asset utilisation. In that
case, the Tribunal did not find any reviewable error and upheld
the decision of
the AER. In that case, the arguments considered in reaching that conclusion
were largely qualitative in nature.
In contrast, in this case, much of the
emphasis was on quantitative analysis involving projections of demand and cost
into the far
distant future. The objective was to assess how expected revenue
streams arising from different depreciation approaches aligned
with projected
cost estimates and the consequent implications for efficient growth of the
ERA noted that, despite proposals by regulated firms to switch to the HCA
approach, there were no cases under the NGR or NER where
the AER had agreed to
these proposals. ATCO submitted one case of such a switch by the relevant
regulator – the ERA’s
Final Decision on the Proposed
Access Arrangement for the Goldfields Gas Pipeline’
in relation to
Goldfields Gas Transmission Pty Ltd in May 2005.
The ERA decision process
ERA, in its Draft Decision, Final Decision and Amended Final Decision,
consistently rejected ATCO’s HCA approach and retained
the CCA approach.
Despite substantial interchange between the ERA and ATCO from the time of the AA
Revision Proposal, neither party
shifted from its original position on the
choice of depreciation schedule. The ERA did, however, shift from incorporation
inflation adjustment as an additional “building block” in its
Draft Decision to incorporating it directly into the return
of capital building
block in its Amended Final Decision. This reflected the view that the building
block specification did not allow
for an additional building block to those
prescribed by the NGR.
were, however, variations made during the process by the ERA (and ATCO) in
associated calculations of dollar magnitudes involved
(and their timing) as
alternative approaches to practical implementation of relevant economic concepts
adopted. These involve a
number of conceptual and technical issues on which
debate between the parties continued into, and beyond, the Tribunal hearings
the production of further statistical evidence.
its Draft Decision, the ERA set out its conclusions and reasons for rejecting
ATCO’s HCA approach. It argued that ATCO’s
HCA approach would not
promote efficient growth in the market, and is not consistent with r 89(1)(a)
(1) “prices under the HCA approach are likely to
diverge to a greater degree from LRMC than under the CCA approach”;
(2) it will “lead to an unnecessary price shock in the near term”;
(3) it would “act to discourage efficient management of the pipeline
while ATCO’s proposal is accepted as meeting the requirements of r
89(1)(b)–(e) the ERA determined that it “is
not consistent with the
National Gas Objective with regard to the promotion of efficient investment in,
and efficient operation and
use of, natural gas services for the long term
interests of consumers”.
its Amended Final Decision, the ERA reaffirmed its view that, following revised
indicative modelling analysis, “the CCA approach
aligns trends in AR more
closely with long run marginal costs over the longer term, as compared to
HCA”. The ERA’s reasons
for rejecting the HCA approach were
(1) it is not consistent with r 89(1)(a) of the NGR;
(2) it does not comply with the NGO; and
(3) it does not comply with the RRP.
in its Amended Final Decision, the ERA variously raised the following arguments
against the HCA approach:
(1) “leads to subsidies from current consumers to
future consumers, which is not in the long term interests of (all)
consumers.”
(2) “may result in unnecessarily high prices in the short to medium term -
these could discourage gas usage and upstream and
investment.”
(3) “provide for price paths that encourage inefficient utilisation of
assets, that is, under or over utilisation of the asset
at different times in
its life cycle.”
(4) “may result in an inefficient management of
addition, the ERA rejected the HCA approach because it “would have a clear
detrimental impact on the incomes of Western Australian
small use customers over
the next decade or more, making this approach contrary to regulation 7 of the
National Gas Access (WA) (Local Provisions) Regulations 2009
Regulation 7 provides:
7. Impact on small use customers and retailers to
be taken into account
(1) When exercising a discretion in approving or making an access arrangement
for a distribution pipeline the ERA must take into account
the possible impact
of the proposed reference tariffs, the method of determining the tariffs and the
reference tariff variation mechanisms
(a) users to whom gas is or might be delivered by means of a small delivery
service provided for in the access arrangement; and
(b) small use customers to whom gas is or might be delivered by those
(2) In subregulation (1) a reference to the impact of something is not
limited to the economic impact of that thing.
(3) A requirement under this regulation to take a matter into account applies
(a) despite anything in the National Gas Law or Rules
that would otherwise prevent the matter being taken into account; and
(b) in addition to any requirement under the National Gas Law or Rules
(i) for any other matter to be taken into account; or
(ii) as to the content of the access arrangement.
(4) For the avoidance of doubt, this regulation does not permit the ERA to
approve or make an access arrangement that does not include
a reference tariff
variation mechanism that complies with rule 92 of the
Tribunal accepts that this regulation requires the ERA, in making a
determination, to take into account adverse consequences for
the relevant
consumers of higher tariffs as a relevant factor, but does not accept that it is
an overriding consideration in comparison
to other considerations related to the
NGR and the NGO. In other words, it is a factor to take into account. It is a
take into account in the exercise of “a discretion”, which
is necessarily involved in the making of a determination.
As reg 7 makes clear,
the factors mentioned in reg 7 are to be taken into account despite anything in
the NGL or the NGR. In any
event, without reg 7, it is a relevant factor to
take into account under the NGO and the NGR each of the factors referred to in
7(1). However, the Tribunal does not consider that the ERA’s reliance
on reg 7 was material to its rejection of ATCO’s
HCA approach. The other
matters relied upon by the ERA were significant and supported its
conclusion.
Limited discretion under r 40(2)
initial question arises for consideration in the context of depreciation, namely
whether it was open to the ERA to exercise its
discretion in rejecting
ATCO’s HCA approach.
89(3) provides that the ERA’s discretion under r 89 is limited, in
accordance with r 40(2) of the NGR which provides:
states that the
discretion under a particular provision of the
is limited, then the
may not withhold its approval to an
element of an access arrangement proposal
that is governed by the relevant
provision if the
is satisfied that it:
(a) complies with applicable requirements of the
(b) is consistent with applicable criteria (if any) prescribed by the
has limited discretion under rule 89. (See rule 89(3).) This
rule governs the design of a depreciation schedule. In dealing with
access arrangement submitted for its approval, the
cannot, in its
, insist on change to an aspect of a depreciation schedule
governed by rule 89 unless the
considers change necessary to
correct non-compliance with a provision of the
or an inconsistency
between the schedule and the applicable criteria. Even though the
might consider change desirable to achieve more complete conformity between the
schedule and the principles and objectives of the
, it would not be
entitled to give effect to that view in the
making process.
ATCO’s submissions
contended that the ERA incorrectly exercised the limited discretion under r
89(3) in rejecting ATCO’s HCA approach and
substituting its own
methodology. More specifically, ATCO contended that the ERA had no discretion
to reject the ATCO’s HCA
approach, as it should have found itself
satisfied on the basis of the evidence presented by two experts, NERA Economic
’) and HoustonKemp Economists
HoustonKemp
’), that ATCO’s HCA approach complied with
r 89(1)(a) of the NGR.
this ground of review is ATCO’s contention that the ERA made errors of
fact in its consideration of the accounting
methodology to be used, which led it
to determine that ATCO’s HCA approach did not comply with the applicable
requirements
under the NGL. As a consequence, ATCO contended that the nature of
this ground of review requires the Tribunal to examine the way
in which the ERA
reached the conclusion that it was not satisfied ATCO’s transition path
complied with the NGL. Should ATCO
prove that an error of fact was made, then
it submitted that ‘as night follows day’, the exercise of the
discretion was
not open to the ERA in the first instance, and was therefore
contended that the ‘limited discretion’ regime established by r
40(2) cannot be side-stepped by the ERA merely not
being ‘satisfied’
of a particular thing – in this case, that the depreciation scheduled
proposed by ATCO complied
with r 89. The clear implication of r 40(2) is
that the ERA must assess compliance with the NGR correctly, and that it is only
the ERA correctly decides that a limited discretion component of the proposal
is non-compliant that the ERA can substitute its own
view on that matter.
such, ATCO submitted that the ERA’s satisfaction is not to be read as
conferring any sort of determinative character. ATCO
relied on the operative
aspect of r 40(2), that the ERA ‘may not withhold its approval’.
While the expression of the
condition for that is ‘if the ERA is
satisfied’, ATCO submitted that, in the context of a regime in which there
limited merits review under the NGL as the dominant instruction, the ERA
being satisfied could not be read as being a determinative
Satisfaction must be reached without there being a ground of reviewing attaching
to the way it was reached.
support of this construction, ATCO relied on commentary on previous iterations
of the rule by the Standing Committee of Officials
of the Council of Australian
Governments on Energy matters (the ‘
’). The former
‘limited discretion’ rule, r 39(2), read:
If the Law states that the
[regulators]
discretion under a particular provision of the Law is limited, then an element
of an access arrangement proposal that is governed
by the relevant provision
must be regarded as acceptable if the AER is
satisfied...
of the several problems identified by the SCO in relation to this provision was
that “[t]he concept of the [regulator] regarding
as acceptable an element
of an access arrangement creates a double test and confuses the implementation
of fit-for-purpose.”
The SCO’s response to this issue was:
Accepted. This provision has been redrafted to make
clear that the [regulator] must not withhold approval of an element of an access
arrangement if the relevant requirements are
submitted that this response indicates no intention for any degree of
determinative force to be given to the ERA’s satisfaction,
vitiated by a ground of review. In such circumstances, it will not be a
‘satisfaction’ that properly gives
rise to the discretion to
displace a proposal.
the SCO also raised for consideration that “[a]llowing the test for a
limited discretion element of an access arrangement
to be at the
regulator’s satisfaction means that ‘limited discretion’ is,
in fact, ‘full discretion’.”
ATCO relied on the identification
of this issue itself as indicative of a concern that the provision arrogates to
the regulator too
much discretion, and waters down the cascading gradations of
the discretion rule as a whole. While the SCO responded with “Not
accepted”, ATCO contended that such a response in fact highlighted that
the SCO considered that the provision could never operate
or be interpreted to
operate as arrogating too much discretion.
submitted that its construction is also supported by the cascading nature of r
40, being that:
(1) r 40(1) prohibits any discretion being exercised in
relation to certain provisions;
(2) r 40(3) provides for full discretion to be exercised and the regulator to
have the ability to substitute a decision it simply
prefers, provided it
complies with the NGL; and
(3) r 40(2) operates as a middle ground between the two.
submitted that this ‘scheme’ contemplates that there are rules that
can be capable of being met in different circumstances
and ways, and that the
ERA may consider that the rule could be met in a more preferable way, but it
cannot displace the preference
of the regulated entity.
example, if the Tribunal comes to the view that both are respectably efficient,
but one is identified as more efficient than the
other, then r 40(2) will apply
because the efficiency requirement in r 89(1)(a) will still have been complied
with. All ATCO has
to do is satisfy the Tribunal that they have proposed a
designed efficient depreciation regime.
identified that the real point of disagreement between the parties is what
logically flows from the submission made above: whether
the Tribunal should form
its own view about the material submitted by ATCO under r 89 by considering the
material itself and then
decide if ATCO’s HCA approach was compliant.
accepted however that if, in the Tribunal’s assessment, the ERA’s
conclusion that r 89(1)(a) was not met, was not
attended by an error of
fact or an incorrect exercise of discretion, then the ERA is not bound by the
limited discretion.
previously mentioned, s 28(1)(b)(iii) of the NGL may cause tension in relation
to the question. Section 28(1)(b)(iii) provides:
The AER must, in performing or exercising an AER
economic regulatory function or power—
(a) perform or exercise that function or power in a manner that will or is
likely to contribute to the achievement of the national
gas objective;
(b) if the AER is making a designated reviewable regulatory decision
(iii) if there are 2 or more possible designated reviewable regulatory
decisions that will or are likely to contribute to the achievement
national gas objective —
(A) make the decision that the AER is satisfied will or is likely to
contribute to the achievement of the national gas objective to
the greatest
degree (the preferable designated reviewable regulatory decision); and
(B) specify reasons as to the basis on which the AER is satisfied that the
decision is the preferable designated reviewable regulatory
contended that, in determining the interaction between r 40 and s 28, r 40, and
the NGR in general, should not necessarily be
considered subordinate.
ATCO sought to demonstrate that s 28 in fact fell within r 40(2) according to
the following string of definitions throughout
(a) “designated reviewable regulatory
decision” is defined in s 2 of the NGL
an applicable access
arrangement decision (other than a full access arrangement decision that does
not approve a full access
arrangement)
(b) “applicable access arrangement
decision” is defined in s 2 of the NGL to mean:
(a) a full access arrangement
decision; or
(b) a limited access arrangement
(c) “full access arrangement
decision” is also defined in s 2 of the NGL
a decision of the AER under
the Rules that—
(a) approves or does not approve a full access arrangement or revisions to an
applicable access arrangement submitted to the AER under
section 132 or the
ATCO submitted that a “designated reviewable regulatory decision”
must, by definition, be one that complies
with r 40. As such, the meaning of
designated reviewable regulatory decisions” is
limited to decisions that comply with r 40(2).
The ERA’s submissions
ERA accepted that its discretion under r 89 is limited, so that it could not
withhold its approval of ATCO’s proposed depreciation
schedule if it was
satisfied that the schedule complied with the applicable requirements of the NGL
and NGR, and that it was consistent
with any applicable criteria prescribed by
the NGL or NGR: r 40(2) of the NGR.
the ERA contended that there is no suggestion in the remainder of ATCO’s
submissions that the ERA committed any reviewable
error as a result of exceeding
its limited discretion under r 89. The ERA pointed to ATCO’s submission
that “[i]n the
Amended Final Decision, the ERA came to the view that
ATCO’s depreciation methodology was not compliant with the NGR”,
indicating ATCO’s acceptance that the ERA was not satisfied that its
depreciation methodology complied with the NGR. Given
this, the ERA submitted
that ATCO could not challenge the discretion the ERA exercised under r
relation to s 28(1)(b)(iii), the ERA submitted that while there may be some
tension between the provisions at first glance, broadly
speaking the legislative
provision should trump the rules.
the alternative, however, the ERA submitted that the provisions can in fact be
reconciled. Rule 40(2) requires compliance with
the applicable requirements of
the NGL and consistency with applicable criteria (if any) prescribed by the NGL.
Therefore, the ERA
contends that s 28(1)(b)(iii) is incorporated into r
40(2), and for r 40(2) to be satisfied, the ERA must demonstrate compliance
s 28(1)(b)(iii) in relevant circumstances.
the ERA’s more substantive response to ATCO’s allegations regarding
the incorrect exercise of discretion turned
on what the ERA submitted to be
ATCO’s incorrect characterisation of the findings made by the ERA in
relation to the accounting
methodology as “findings of fact”.
ERA submitted that correcting ATCO’s mischaracterisation in this regard
would dispose of 80% of the criticisms made of the
determination.
ERA relied upon
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Australian
Competition Tribunal
[2006] FCAFC 83
(2006) 152 FCR 33
[171], where the Court identified findings of fact
(1) The existence of an historical fact being an
event or circumstance.
(2) The existence of a present fact being an event or circumstance.
(3) An opinion about the existence of a future fact or
circumstance.
Court further held (at [171]):
The ACCC’s function under the
Third Party Access Code for National Gas Pipeline Systems]
assessment not only of historical and present facts but also of expert opinion
on various matters relevant to the fixing
of a Reference Tariff. The term
“findings of fact” should be interpreted broadly enough to be
meaningful in relation
to the function of the ACCC under review. It should
encompass opinions formed by the ACCC based upon approaches to the assessment
facts or methodologies which it has chosen to apply. The question of what
constitutes a finding of “fact” varies according
to the statutory
context in which that word or like words are used.
relevantly at paragraph [172], the Court held:
In reaching findings of fact in this broad sense the
ACCC will necessarily make choices of a discretionary character as was pointed
. An example is the choice between permitted
methodologies for the calculation of Total Revenue mentioned in s 8.4 of the
a choice is not a finding of fact. Nor is a finding of fact in error
because it is based upon the use of one methodology rather than
another. The
relative weight to be given to the factors set out in s 8.10 is also a matter of
discretion rather than a finding of
fact which can be impugned as
ERA submitted that this passage directly applied to the subject matter
concerning depreciation in this matter. In particular,
the ERA submitted that
this passage outlines the constraints that the Court imposed in respect of the
review of that kind of discretionary
methodological analytical subject matter
and places that subject matter outside the realm of “findings of
the basis of the above passage, the ERA essentially denied the
claim that it was making “findings of fact”.
and in connection with the limited discretion arguments made by the ERA above,
the ERA relied upon the further following
The Tribunal has not been given a purely substitutive
function in relation to the review of the ACCC’s discretion. That is to
say, if the ACCC has exercised its discretion on correct principles and if the
particular exercise of the discretion was open to
it within the framework of the
Code, the Tribunal is not empowered to set aside that decision simply because it
thinks another decision
would have been
preferable.
Application by Envestra Ltd (No 2)
[2012] ACompT 3
, the Tribunal made
the following observations (at [33] – [34]):
at [34], the Tribunal considered
the meaning of a “discretionary decision”. It
It is most commonly applied to decision
making which involves essentially a weighing up of relevant facts. First the
decision maker
finds the facts. Then the decision maker undertakes a weighing up
process which involves taking into account considerations that
are found to be
relevant, assessing the weight to be given to those considerations so assessed
and determining what, as a result
of that process, is the right
This ground for review is not available merely because the Tribunal would
exercise the discretion in a different way. In
ElectraNet (No 3)
Tribunal stated at [72]:
the concept of incorrectness extends
beyond “Wednesbury unreasonableness”, but on the other hand does not
extend simply
to where the Tribunal would have exercised the discretion in a
different way.
Consideration
Tribunal proceeds on the basis contended for by ATCO. There is a limited
discretion, and if ATCO’s HCA approach complies
with the NGR then it
should be accepted by the ERA, even if the ERA regards its approach as
preferable. The Tribunal must examine
the analysis of the ERA in reaching its
conclusion of non-compliance by ATCO, and if that analysis involves errors of
fact, wrongful
exercise of discretion or is unreasonable in result, reviewable
error will result. The Tribunal needs to consider ATCO’s proposal
course of this examination, to understand the analysis of the ERA and whether
the ERA made any reviewable error in coming
to the conclusion that the proposal
was not consistent with r 89(1)(a).
Application by APA GasNet Australia (Operations) Pty Limited (No 2)
[2013] ACompT 8
, the Tribunal described the approach:
In the light of those considerations, the Tribunal is
of the view that no reviewable error on the part of the AER has been made out.
The AER directed itself to the correct question and reached the view that it was
not satisfied that APA GasNet’s proposed methodology
promoted efficient
growth in the market for reference services. The findings of fact made by the
AER are not shown to have been erroneous.
The conclusion based upon those
findings is not shown to have been unreasonable in all the circumstances. There
has not been an exercise
of a discretion, that is the limited discretion allowed
for under rule 79(3), which was misunderstood or which was incorrect in all
circumstances.
the same time, the Tribunal is not to substitute its own preference as to the
approach to depreciation, at least at this stage
of the enquiry. The Tribunal
is to focus on the analysis of the ERA, and to determine whether there is any
reviewable error.
Tribunal has come to the view that the ERA was correct in its analysis of
whether there was compliance with r 89(1)(a), and therefore
correct in rejecting
ATCO’s proposal. To a large extent, the question of whether ATCO’s
depreciation schedule complied
with r 89(1)(a) is to be resolved as a matter of
judgment or opinion, but based upon certain relevant facts. Once it is
that the ERA was correct in concluding that there was non-compliance
with r 89(1)(a), then the ERA could reject ATCO’s proposal.
Consideration
going into some detail as to the depreciation issue, the Tribunal makes the
following observations. On this topic, much, but
not all, of the analysis and
argument has revolved around the use and interpretations of long-horizon (up to
60 year) forecasts of
economic variables. At the outset, the Tribunal notes
that limited confidence can be placed in such long-horizon forecasts, based
they are on demographic projections, consumption demand (which is in turn
dependent on relative prices and incomes and consequences
of technological
change), and changing supply conditions and costs. Confidence must inevitably
decline as the length of the horizon
increases. Nevertheless, such forecasts
are one piece of information which can be relevant to assessment of the relative
of alternative depreciation approaches. It is thus appropriate for
the Tribunal to consider the dispute between the parties over
interpretation of
the “facts” arising from such forecasts.
Tribunal makes some further comments on reg 7 of the Local Provisions
Regulations.
ERA’s rejection of ATCO’s HCA approach includes reference to reg 7
of the Local Provisions Regulations which requires
it to take into account
effects on small users of the service. One consequence of ATCO’s proposed
switch to the HCA approach
is that AR and thus tariffs will be higher for
several years than would otherwise be the case (and lower in later years).
HCA approach was designed to moderate such shorter term price
shocks. Figure 38 of the Amended Final Decision illustrates that the
approach results in lower AR per GJ in real terms until the early 2030s (and
higher thereafter). The ERA “considers that
it is clear that the adverse
impact on consumers of moving to the HCA approach, even with ATCO’s
proposed transition, would
be significant”.
7 states that the ERA must take into account the possible impact of tariff
decisions on “users to whom gas is or
might be delivered by means of a
small delivery service” (reg 7(1)(a)), and “small use customers to
whom gas is or might
be delivered by those users” (reg 7(1)(b)). While
this wording does not explicitly preclude consideration of future customers,
ERA has interpreted the higher near term prices arising from ATCO’s HCA
approach as having undesirable consequences for
current and future near-term
customers and that the price outcome is at variance with this provision. The
Tribunal is of the view
that the ERA’s interpretation of this wording is
not unreasonable, and thus consideration of such effects in making its decision
is not inappropriate.
previously indicated, however, reg 7(1) only requires the ERA to “take
into account the possible impact”. While this
provides support for the
ERA considering this price effect in making its judgment, it does not imply that
an adverse effect on current
consumers is a sufficient reason for rejecting
ATCO’s HCA approach. Consequently, the Tribunal is of the view that reg 7
not, of itself, provide sufficient reason for the ERA’s rejection of
ATCO’s HCA approach. However, the ERA is correct
in taking account of
adverse price impacts over AA4 (and AA5) on consumers as a contributing factor
in making its decision.
to determining whether the ERA made any errors, the Tribunal makes the following
general observations.
General Observations - Capital cash flows under HCA and
Tribunal notes that there is a clear relationship between the alternative cash
flow patterns over the life of a particular asset
arising under the building
block approach from the depreciation model adopted. As already explained above,
the CCA approach involves
a “flatter” path of real capital cash
flows over time than does the HCA approach where the real revenues are (in a
inflation environment) more “front end loaded”. For the
case of an individual asset where demand is expected to gradually
increase over
time to, eventually, full capacity, the CCA approach creates (if the pattern of
demand is the same in both cases) a
time pattern of real tariffs which is more
constant over the life of the asset. The reason is that the HCA approach will
higher real cash flows in the earlier part of the asset life when demand
is lowest, implying higher real tariffs per unit of output
in the earlier years
and lower in later years. This effect is one of the motivations for the
preference of Australian regulators
for the use of the CCA approach. Also
relevant in this regard is the likely effect of such differential tariff paths
on the pattern
of demand under HCA versus CCA. Higher real tariffs in earlier
years (under HCA versus CCA) can be expected to reduce demand and
usage of the
asset (when there is substantial excess capacity). The corresponding lower real
tariffs later in the asset’s
life can be expected to increase demand when
full capacity may be approaching, possibly bringing forward the need for new
investment to expand capacity.
there are a number of complications to this analysis. First, from the
perspective of the asset installation date, it is
not clear which of CCA or HCA
would lead to an eventual earlier date for full capacity and need for additional
capex. The level
of demand per period could, for example, be the same at later
dates in both cases despite differential tariffs at that time. That
could arise
if, for example, the key determinant of total demand is the number of connected
consumers, rather than consumption per
head (and if disconnections are
relatively price-inelastic). Under CCA, the rate of connections might be
relatively higher in the
earlier years, but with total connections being very
similar at a common future date where the asset nears full capacity.
Identifying
which depreciation approach would lead to an earlier or later eventual need for
additional capacity is not a simple matter.
The answer will depend
on the responsiveness of demand (both consumer numbers and consumption
per head) to tariffs (which reflect the input cost of gas
as well as the
regulated transmission and distribution charges), and a range of assumptions
more relevant issue, however, is what the choice of depreciation model implies
for the temporal pattern of the real total revenue
stream for an access provider
with a portfolio of assets of different vintages. This is unclear. Under the
HCA approach, at any
point in time, older assets will have lower real cash flows
than if CCA applied, while the reverse will apply for newer assets.
effect will thus depend upon the time pattern of capex.
observation has two consequences. First, the theoretical arguments related to
the efficiency consequences of the time pattern
of cash flows associated with a
particular individual asset are reduced in relevance – unless allowable
revenues and associated
tariffs are set on an asset by asset basis. Where
revenues are set in aggregate across the entire portfolio of assets, as is the
case under the building block approach, it thus becomes necessary to consider
the time pattern of aggregate revenues.
second consequence is that empirical analysis of the efficiency consequences of
HCA versus CCA will require projections of the
time pattern of aggregate
revenues associated with the current and future age distribution of capital
assets. This is, in essence,
what both the ERA and ATCO have done in
forecasting comparative paths of AR over an horizon of many decades under the
alternative
assumptions of CCA versus HCA. There are no substantive matters of
dispute in this regard; ATCO stated “no part of this application
the ERA erred in relation to its AR per GJ forecasts between 2015 and
2080”. Those forecasts rely upon projections
of demand (both connections
- reflecting demographic trends and geographical distribution considerations,
and consumption per head
- reflecting
relative prices and
income) and consequent needs for future capex (which affects the RAB used in
determining capital cash flows).
noted earlier, such long term forecasts must be viewed with caution, and while
they are possibly a “best estimate”,
there is potentially a wide
confidence interval associated with them. While it can be assumed that both the
ERA and ATCO were cognisant
of this, neither directly incorporated this element
of uncertainty into the process of comparing far-distant AR and LRMC forecasts.
Considerations
of longer term capacity utilisation and expansion requirements are only one
aspect of efficiency considerations. More
immediate, in terms of efficiency of
consumption, is the effect of tariffs on the decisions of consumers regarding
the level of consumption
of gas relative to alternative uses of available funds.
While tariff structures which involve both a per GJ charge and a fixed (per
connection) charge can exert influence over that, optimal pricing is not a
simple matter. It is in this regard that r 94 of the
NGR incorporates the
requirement that tariff structures should take into account LRMC, thereby
incorporating both short run variable
operating costs but also implications of
increased demand on future capex expansion needs.
General Observations - Forecasting the LRMC
parties attempted to forecast future values for the LRMC for comparison with
contemporaneous AR figures under HCA versus CCA.
The Tribunal notes that both
have assumed a future consumption path common to both cases which is
problematic – since differential tariff paths under each may
affect the time pattern of consumption. That however, is likely
to be of second
order importance, particularly given the possible lack of robustness of other
assumptions used in the exercise.
as forecasts of AR for far different dates must be subject to wide confidence
bands, so to must forecast of future LRMC values.
The same uncertainties about
reliability of demographic projections, consumption demand (which is in turn
dependent on relative
prices and incomes and consequences of technological
change), and changing supply conditions and costs also apply in this case.
Indeed, given the complexities in appropriately defining and measuring LRMC (as
discussed later in these reasons) the confidence
bands for far-distant LRMC
values are likely to be even wider than those for AR. Indeed, the Tribunal has
considerable doubt whether
attempting to forecast this variable in precise
quantitative terms over an horizon of sixty plus years is a valuable exercise,
thus whether the results of which provide valuable guidance for
decision-making.
confidence in such forecasts must inevitably decline as the length of the
horizon increases, comparisons of forecast LRMC
and AR over a shorter time
period are likely to have greater reliability than those for far distant
Tribunal now turns to consider the factual issues underlying the errors claimed
by ATCO to have been made by the ERA.
Cross-subsidisation
ATCO’s Review Application, much was made of the language used by the ERA
in describing the temporal effect of the different
approaches on tariffs.
Objection was raised to the use of terms such as “bringing forward
revenues” and “current
consumers subsidising future consumers”
as a result of higher near term tariffs under HCA than under CCA.
is some merit in this complaint, in that such terminology presupposes that
outcomes should be judged from a benchmark position
of the CCA approach.
However, these matters are primarily ones of semantics and should not be allowed
to confuse the key issues.
It is a matter of fact that:
(1) use of HCA will, relative to CCA, lead to higher
near term revenues and lower longer term revenues from return on and return of
capital over the life of an asset; and
(2) given a consumption stream common to both cases, HCA will, relative to CCA,
involve higher near term prices and lower longer
term prices.
contended that the ERA made errors in claiming that ATCO’s HCA approach
involved “subsidies” from current to
future consumers. It is true
that if there is a single “correct” (on some criteria) depreciation
schedule and associated
revenue and tariff path, but an alternative depreciation
schedule is used, then there will be some unjustified cross-subsidisation
between current and future consumers.
the extent that the ERA has correctly determined that its approach is the
“correct” one, there is no error in making
such a statement.
However, if it has incorrectly rejected a “correct” ATCO proposal,
then the ERA’s statement
is an error.
that is a consequence of a decision about the choice of depreciation schedule
which is under review, and thus not an independent
source of error. Unless it
can be shown that the view regarding subsidies incorrectly led to the decision
on the depreciation schedule
to be adopted, it is not an independent source of
error. This has not been shown, and the significant resources devoted to
identifying
the relative merits of alternative schedules would suggest that it
is not the case.
Tribunal is of the view that while the choice of language used to refer to
differences in projected tariff paths under alternative
depreciation schedules
is unhelpful, it does not constitute a reviewable error. Since the comments
relating to inefficient and equitable
allocation of the cost of capital to
current and future consumers are essentially the same comments expressed
differently, the same
decision applies here.
Efficient growth and asset management
also claimed a number of errors were committed by the ERA in conjectures made
relating to adverse consequences for efficient
growth and management of assets
of the HCA approach and transition path advocated by ATCO.
the Amended Final Decision, the ERA asserted that under the HCA approach, ATCO
may have an incentive for earlier replacement of
assets nearing the end of their
economic life “to be able to earn a higher return on the replacement cost
of a new asset.”
This would appear to confuse dollar amounts with rates
of return, since the effect would simply be to lead to a higher dollar revenue
on a higher asset base, but with no change in rate of return achieved.
Management decisions could be driven by the absolute size
of revenues rather
than the rate of return on invested capital (and differences between accounting
book values and RAB values could
be relevant here). However, there is no
evidence provided to the Tribunal to support or refute such a conjectures.
Nevertheless,
the conjectures were not central to the reasoning of the ERA in
reaching its conclusions as to compliance with r 89(1)(a). If anything,
comments of the ERA were employed merely to support its conclusion otherwise
reached, and the conjectures were more by way of
commentary.
Efficient growth of the market and the LRMC
contended that its depreciation proposal was consistent with the provisions of r
89 of the NGR, and particularly that it would
satisfy r 89(1)(a) regarding
efficient growth in the market, and r 89(1)(e) regarding adequate cash flow to
meet the access provider’s
reasonable needs.
is the assessment of ATCO’s proposal against r 89(1)(a) which constitutes
the main issue in dispute. ATCO argued that the
ERA made an error of fact in
determining that its depreciation proposal would lead to a less efficient
outcome, and that therefore
it was not consistent with the NGR.
most fundamental area of contention lies in the technical issue of calculation
of current and future LRMC curves. The concept
of LRMC is well accepted in the
economics literature as the change in costs arising from a marginal increase in
output when all input
factors of production are allowed to vary. This is in
contrast to short run marginal cost, in which certain inputs, such as capital,
are assumed to be fixed.
this concept in practice becomes complicated because increments to capital are
typically lumpy with long lives. This means
that for significant periods of
time there can be spare capacity, such that increases in the level of output can
occur without any
need for increased capital inputs until some future date when
market growth means that capacity is reached. However, a sustained
increase in
the rate of consumption can mean that capacity utilisation will occur sooner
than would otherwise occur, thus bringing
forward capex such that this cost has
a higher present value. It is generally argued that prices should reflect LRMC
since consumer
demand will then be responding to current production costs but
also to future cost consequences for timing of additions to capacity.
is no substantive divergence of views on the “relevance” of LRMC in
setting of tariffs. This is reflected in the
r 94(4) referred to earlier.
is an hypothetical economic construct which refers to the cost of providing
increments in the rate (per period) of output from
a specified output level when
all factors of production (and in particular capital) are variable. It is thus
generally defined and
described as a curve where a cost figure is related to
output levels, and has its most simple interpretation as showing the additional
cost of increasing output from present level to various output levels if capital
input could be varied rather than fixed. In doing
so, the question becomes what
cost should be attached per period to the increase in capital, since the
increase in capital enables
a higher rate of output over a long period (its
economic life). It is thus inappropriate to allocate the entire purchase price
the capital goods to the current period.
principle, the cost of renting that capital item for the current period to
expand output is the appropriate cost, but that figure
cannot be observed in
cases such as this where the nature of the capital assets does not lend itself
to existence of a rental market.
Instead, some measure of calculating an
implicit rental price is required (and that is what approaches such as
calculation of AIC
discussed later are attempting to achieve).
is, in fact, in accordance with the approach followed in the regulatory building
block approach, where capital cash flows allocate
the cost of the capital asset
over the life of the asset, mimicking a rental cost. What that underscores
however, is that there
is no unique method for making that calculation, since
the pattern of capital cash flows over the life of the asset will vary depending
upon the depreciation schedule adopted.
particularly significant complication which arises in the current discussion is
that the calculations being undertaken attempt to
estimate LRMC at future dates
in time. These are based on an assumption that at any of those future dates
there is a specific rate
of output in existence from which the cost of changes
in output can be estimated. The LRMC estimated for that future date thus
an assumption about the implicit rental cost of an additional unit of
capital at that date. It also requires an assumption about
the productivity of
capital (the number of units of resulting output) at that time so that a cost
per unit of output can be derived.
the delivered output in this case involves transport to the consumer, the
spatial distribution of future consumers (rather than
simply their number) will
also be a determinant of costs.
later reference (since this is relevant to one point at issue), it should be
noted that output (GJ) can be equated to the product
of “customers”
(connections) and “GJ per customer” (average consumption).
point of contention is whether over the distant future periods under
consideration the marginal changes in output (GJ) are more
related to changes in
connections or changes in average consumption.
Reference to historical LRMC Estimate
argued that the ERA erred in suggesting that the LRMC was increasing over time
by relying on LRMC for past periods and comparing
that to the estimate for
current and future periods.
referred to statements of its experts (and other consultants) that the LRMC is a
“forward looking” concept and argued
that this makes estimation of a
LRMC for a prior date or period invalid.
noted earlier, LRMC is an economic concept which shows the change in costs of a
change in an output level when all inputs are variable.
While LRMC is
potentially of most use in looking forward to identify the costs associated with
changes in output from the current
or future levels, there is no inconsistency
in examining the cost of changes in output from levels which prevailed in the
Arguably, such an estimate may be more precise than forward looking
estimates since actual data can be used in the calculation.
However, whether
the change in actual capex occurring over that period used in estimation of the
LRMC was the optimal long run change
implicit in the LRMC may be open to debate.
The Tribunal is thus of the view that the reliance of the ERA on calculation of
for a past period, as part of determining its view that LRMC was increasing
over time, was not, of itself, an error of fact.
Undue attention to LRMC per connection
contended that the ERA gave undue attention to the LRMC per connection relative
to the LRMC per GJ. As noted earlier, total
consumption (GJ) is the product of
“connections” (consumers) and “consumption per
connection”, such that
both are relevant to changes in total consumption.
in the short run there seems little question that consumption per connection is
the most likely determinant of changes in total
consumption, this is much less
likely in the longer run where the number of connections is likely to be
relevant. ATCO made the
point that the number of existing customers dwarfs new
connections (700,000 versus 14,000 p.a.) with the implication that consumption
per connection is more important. However, while marginal changes in
consumption per existing customer can have implications for
capacity utilisation
and thus need for additional capex to serve those customers, it is likely that
new capex is aimed primarily
at servicing new areas of population growth (or
increased demand from higher density of customers in existing service areas).
the focus of the quantitative LRMC analysis is long term, focusing upon
efficient growth of the market, attention to LRMC per
connection does not appear
inappropriate. Moreover, even though existing customers far exceed new
customers per annum, the increase
in demand from the former group relates to
their marginal change in consumption, whereas for the latter it is their average
consumption
(having previously been zero). Which figure is larger is an
empirical matter. However, it has not been demonstrated before the
that the disparities in size would be so great as to rule out consideration of
analysis based on new connections. The Tribunal
is thus of the view that the
use by the ERA of LRMC per connection in assessing the future path of LRMC and
resulting alignment with
AR is not a reviewable error.
Depreciation schedules, the LRMC curve and
connection between depreciation schedules, LRMC and efficient market growth
stems from the likely time pattern of future total
revenue and thus AR (and
tariffs) associated with different depreciation schedules. The question at
issue here is which depreciation
schedule is more suited to generation of future
projected allowable revenue streams that, given the projected consumption
would enable closer correspondence of tariffs with LRMC over time.
has been outlined above, CCA depreciation involves less “front end
loading” of real revenues (capital cash flows) than
the HCA approach.
Operating costs are ignored since they are likely to be similar regardless of
depreciation schedule, and thus
not an issue in dispute – although they
should be included in LRMC calculations.
introduced the argument that quantitative analysis should be used to assess the
impact of the depreciation schedule on the relationship
between the future
expected stream of AR and future LRMC in its access proposal. It asserted the
principle advanced by NERA that
“...the depreciation schedule should be
designed to minimise the gap between LRMC and the revenue per unit to be
over the life of the asset”. ATCO produced modelling results
from spreadsheet analysis that, it argued, demonstrated a smaller
gap from the
use of the HCA approach. The ERA engaged with this argument, requesting the
underlying spreadsheet and undertaking
its own analysis based on both
maintaining and varying some of the assumptions contained therein.
the course of the regulatory process, and subsequently into the hearing,
purported errors and incorrect assumptions in the spreadsheet
modelling were
claimed by each party. The range of possible errors and arguably incorrect
assumptions is quite large, particularly
since the modelling envisages an
horizon out to 2080.
are a number of issues involved in assessing the positions of both parties on
the future level of LRMC. First, there is the
theoretical definition of LRMC.
There appears to be no substantive disagreement on this, although whether focus
should be more upon
LRMC per GJ or LRMC per connection is a fundamental point of
contention. Second, there is the hypothesis that aligning AR as closely
feasible to LRMC is consistent with promoting efficient consumption and growth
of the market. There appears to be no substantive
disagreement on this. Third,
there is the question of how, in practice, the LRMC at any date (now and in the
future) is to be estimated.
While there are a range of practices which have
been advanced in the literature, there appears to be no substantive disagreement
on use of AIC to undertake this calculation. Fourth, there is the mechanics of
how to apply the AIC method. There is significant
disagreement in this regard
in several respects. One (explained in more detail later) is in the context of
what horizon should be
used in the calculation of the AIC (eg whether one-,
eight-, ten-, or twenty- year horizons should be used). Fifth, there is the
appropriate use and interpretation of historical data to derive forecasts of how
the AIC might change over future decades. There
is significant disagreement on
those, with the ERA presenting additional evidence in its Amended Final Decision
from unpublished
Australian Bureau of Statistics (‘
of historical figures for the implicit price deflator applicable for capex for
the electricity, water and gas sector,
which facilitate an alternative
interpretation of past trends to that advanced by ATCO.
Productivity trends and LRMC
estimating the LRMC, ATCO claimed that the ERA erred in not taking into account
the views and expert evidence that increasing productivity
of capital would be
relevant to the level of the LRMC in future years, causing it to decline over
time. ATCO’s argument is
based on two types of evidence. One is the
historical trend in the implicit price deflator for capital goods calculated for
industry categories. ATCO provided such data showing, what it claimed
to be a declining trend in the cost of capital goods for the
period 1987-2014
for ABS data for electricity, gas, water, and waste water sectors, and asserted
that this trend could be expected
to continue. The associated inference is that
there is increasing productivity of capital goods in the sense of a lower LRMC
on the assumption that the cost of a unit of capital goods producing the
same output level is declining. In its Amended Final Decision,
the ERA provided
more granular ABS data relevant to the sector and argued that since the early
2000’s the trend has been relatively
flat. The second type of expert
evidence was the analysis provided by ATCO that (implicit) general equilibrium
analysis would lead
to the expectation that the costs of capital intensive
industries would fall relative to the general price level over time.
Considering
the first piece of evidence, there are two substantive considerations. The
first is the robustness of projecting past
trends decades into the future, even
for magnitudes which have been relatively slowly changing over past years. The
cost and productivity
of capital goods reflects both technological advances as
well as the cost of the physical inputs which are used in their construction.
Forecasting both of these ingredients into the far distant future, based on
historical trends, is more an act of faith than analysis.
The second is that
the supply cost of capital goods is only one component of the capital related
cost of supplying additional units
of output. For example, additional
connections at future dates may involve significantly different geographical
dispersion to current
connections thus requiring more or less units of capital
goods for supply. It is undoubtedly the case that suppliers making current
capital investment decisions (including whether to defer investment) need to
make assumptions about cost and productivity based on
the long economic life of
assets involved. But attempting to forecast how these matters will play out in
affecting such decisions
to be made in several decades into the future is highly
speculative. The Tribunal is of the view that the ERA did not make an error
act unreasonably in its consideration of the implications of historical
productivity trends
second piece of expert evidence provided involves economic analysis in the form
of an argument that with ongoing technical progress,
the cost of capital goods
could be expected to fall over time relative to the general price level. The
Tribunal agrees with the
ERA that the issue is far more complex than suggested,
and therefore does not attach much weight to this.
The AIC approach to estimated LRMC
use of the AIC method for estimating LRMC was adopted, albeit with substantive
differences in implementation, by both parties.
The AIC approach is, at best,
an approximation to the true concept of LRMC, and is essentially a proxy for the
unobservable one
period rental cost of capital, which could be consistently
related to a one period increase in output.
approach such as the AIC method is needed because an increase in capital
provides increased capacity for a sustained increase in
output over the economic
life of the asset. It can be calculated for any date t and the associated level
of projected output at
that date. It involves:
(1) taking a projection of the increase in output over
the date t level of output (Q
) for some number (T) of subsequent
years, represented (Q
) where k takes on values 1
(2) taking projections of required capex (I
) in years t to T-1
required to meet that output path; and
(3) calculating the present value of each projection and calculating the ratio
of discounted capex to discounted output increase
to give the AIC.
practice, the estimate should also take into account changes in opex, denoted by
, associated with the changed level of output.
While correct estimation of real changes in opex were a matter of contention
the parties, those matters appear to have been resolved and make little
difference to the matter under dispute. Hence, for ease
of exposition, opex is
ignored in the following discussion.
symbols, the standard formula for AIC is of the
that the denominator involves a discount factor slightly different to that in
Marsden Jacob Associates report, ‘
Estimation of Long Run Marginal
’, which both parties rely upon, and which appears to be in error
– although the effect is of second order importance.
This formula also
differs slightly from those provided by ATCO in a supplementary note of 25
February 2016 which uses Q
as the benchmark output level for which
is calculated. This is of minor import in the context of
analysis where the estimates are related to changes from projected output
decades into the future.
see intuitively the correspondence of this to inclusion of a rental cost of
capital, consider a case where the increase in Q compared
a constant amount (C) for each year to date T which is also the economic life of
the asset, and that there was only a once off
’ required at date t to meet that increase in output,
the change in opex being ignored, then:
numerator indicates that the AIC thus involves allocating only part of the capex
cost to the current year increase in output (in
this case the annuity value
equivalent of the total cost), and spreading the total amount over the asset
life, equivalent to calculating
a rental cost of capital.
practice, the approach cannot be applied so simply, and the conventional
approach is to take some relatively long horizon over
which the increase in
output and capex are forecast. Even if this horizon is equal to the economic
life of the asset, there will
be capacity created during the period prior to the
horizon date and available for output beyond that horizon (and the same is true
if the horizon is less than the economic life). But, if the assumption is made
that there is no significant change over time in
the proportion of the whole of
asset-life’s output capacity captured in the horizon, the AIC estimates
made at different points
in time will move in accordance with the true LRMC
are somewhat heroic assumptions, which are mitigated somewhat by assuming a
relatively long horizon and keeping the horizon
used of constant length in
calculating the AIC at different points in time. In that regard, ATCO is
correct to criticise the ERA
for using periods of different length in
calculating the AIC at different points in time as occurs in some of the
estimates presented.
The shorter the horizon used, the smaller the proportion
of life-time output captured, thus potentially increasing the risk of error
– although the effect of discounting is to reduce the weight given to
further distant amounts. It is also the case that using
a short horizon over
which to calculate the AIC is likely to result in greater variability in
resulting estimates, given the inherent
lumpiness of new capex.
The agreed shape of LRMC curve
is beyond the scope of the Tribunal’s function to review the details
involved in the spreadsheet modelling behind the calculation
of the AIC and
comparisons with AR, nor does the Tribunal believe it is necessary for it to do
parties have ultimately reached at least a partial consensus on the time profile
of LRMC, at least over the medium term as reflected
in the Final Figure 40 (as
shown in the graph below). This was presented by ATCO on 25 February 2016, and
reproduced in the ERA
document dated 26 February 2016 where it is stated that
“[t]he ERA has no objection to that rendition”.
Figure 40 provided estimates of the LRMC derived using the AIC method, assuming
periods of nine years, commencing in 2015.
While it does not incorporate a LRMC
figure for the historical period 2006-2014, the Tribunal does not infer that the
ERA was, in
not objecting to that rendition, agreeing with ATCO’s position
that it was not permissible to calculate LRMC at an historical
issue then becomes interpretation of Final Figure 40 and its relationship to
revenue streams arising from alternative depreciation
schedules. This is a key
point of disputation between the parties, with the ERA arguing that (real) LRMC
is, if anything, expected
to increase over time and ATCO arguing the reverse.
These positions lead directly to the respective positions regarding whether
CCA approach or ATCO’s HCA approach support the efficient growth of the
Figure 40, particularly once the 2006-2014 LRMC estimate (which is less than
$50) is incorporated, is argued by the ERA to demonstrate
that LRMC is not
declining in the period up to 2050. The Tribunal’s interpretation of that
figure is that LRMC is shown to
be increasing at least up until the period
2024-2032. In the subsequent two periods (up to 2050) it reverts to a similar
the 2015-2023 estimate. In contrast, ATCO placed emphasis on the
period out to 2069-2077 where, from the 2042-2050 period there
declining trend. Whether there is a declining trend from an earlier period,
such as 2024-2032, relies upon one’s
subjective assessment of whether the
2024-2032 figure should be viewed in isolation or whether it is an aberration
from the figures
for the periods both immediately before and after.
Tribunal is of the view that the uncertainty which must surround estimates of
LRMC for dates several decades into the future is
sufficient to justify a
reasonable person not attributing significant weight to those estimates relative
to estimates for earlier
periods. In this regard, the approach of the ERA in
focusing on more near term estimates is appropriate. It was not unreasonable
for it to interpret the estimates for LRMC associated with Final Figure 40 as
indicating an upward or flat trend in LRMC over the
next few access periods.
For that reason, the Tribunal does not regard the ERA as having made an error in
its assessment that LRMC
per GJ, and also LRMC per connection is likely
increasing in real terms over the next several decades.
Assessing correspondence between LRMC and AR
TimeProfiles
there was a submission made by ATCO that the ERA did not properly consider the
statistical analysis of differences in LRMC
and AR, this is not a significant
matter in determining whether ATCO in fact complied with r 89(1)(a).
important and central issue is the time period over which the LRMC-AR
comparisons should be made. As outlined earlier, the degree
of confidence which
can be held in the accuracy of both LRMC and AR forecasts several decades hence
is relatively low, and lower
than confidence in forecasts for earlier dates.
Arguably, lower weight should also be applied to far distant differences in
by some form of time-discounting. Consequently, the Tribunal is of the
view that little weight should be given to the comparisons
of forecasts for
several decades hence. The ERA did not commit an error of fact or act
unreasonably in relying on comparisons over
a shorter horizon.
the parties had, by the conclusion of the Tribunal’s hearings, reached
agreement on a set of forecasts for future LRMC
values (Final Figure 40 above),
they remain divided on how to best interpret those for assessing the matter
under consideration.
That is whether use of HCA depreciation is preferable to
CCA depreciation. The key issue is whether ATCO’s proposed approach
failed to satisfy r 89(1)(a) of the NGR “that reference tariffs will vary,
over time, in a way that promotes efficient growth
in the market for reference
services”. Despite agreement on Final Figure 40, the ERA contended that
the increase in LRMC over
the period from AA3 to (at least) 2024-2032 is
evidence that ATCO’s HCA Approach is not consistent with r 89(1)(a) since
depreciation gives the appropriate alignment of AR with LRMC. Conversely,
ATCO argued that taking into account the forecasts out
to 2069-2077 and ignoring
the AA3 estimate, the forecasts imply better alignment of AR from HCA with
considering the debate between the parties, for the reasons discussed above, it
is the Tribunal’s view that the ERA was
correct in determining that
ATCO’s HCA approach is inconsistent with r 89(1)(a) of the NGR, and so it
did not err in rejecting
ATCO’s proposal.
CORPORATE SUPPORT COSTS OPERATING EXPENDITURE
seeks a review of the ERA’s determination of ATCO’s forecast opex,
specifically its corporate support opex. Broadly,
ATCO contended that the
ERA’s error is its failure to include in the forecast, opex costs of $1.4
million in 2015 for preparation
costs relating to the current access arrangement
review process.
Legislative framework
r 76(e) of the NGR, one of the building blocks is a forecast opex for the
91(1) of the NGR provides that opex must be such as would be incurred by a
prudent service provider acting efficiently, in accordance
with accepted good
industry practice, to achieve the lowest sustainable cost of delivering pipeline
to r 91(2), the ERA’s discretion under r 91 is limited. The nature of
that limitation was noted in the discussion
on capex and depreciation. Rules 71
and 74 apply to forecast opex. The operation of those provisions was noted in
the discussion
The nature of the dispute
dispute relates only to the ERA’s failure to include in the forecast opex
any preparation costs in 2015. To better
understand the dispute, it is useful
to set out the process under the NGR by which an access arrangement commences
and the timelines
by which that typically occurs.
access arrangement must contain a ‘review submission date’: r
49(1)(a). This is the date by which a service provider
must submit an access
arrangement revision proposal to the regulator: r 52(1). The regulator may
extend the period for submitting
an access arrangement revision proposal,
however that period cannot exceed 2 months: r 52(3).
access arrangement must also include a ‘revision commencement date’:
r 49(1)(a). This is the date by which the revisions
resulting from a review of
the access arrangement are intended to commence. However, the actual date of
commencement may not necessarily
be this date (see Pt 8, Div 8 of the NGR).
the review submission date and revision commencement date are to fall four and
five years respectively after the last revision
commencement date: r 50(1).
This contemplates a “typical” access arrangement period of five
years and up to a year to
complete the process for approval of a subsequent
access arrangement revision proposal. It also means that preparatory work in
to a subsequent access arrangement revision proposal must necessarily
occur during the currency of an existing access arrangement
period. For that
reason, each access arrangement period will usually include forecast opex
relating to the subsequent access arrangement
previous access arrangement, AA3 required ATCO to submit its access arrangement
revision proposal by the review submission date
of 1 July 2013. However, that
date was extended to address amendments to the NGR that were made in November
2012. This arose in
the following way.
34 of Sch 1 to the NGR varied r 52(3) to provide that the period for submitting
an access arrangement revision proposal under
r 52 may be extended by a period
of no more than 18 months with respect to the next access arrangement revision
proposal. Clause
35(1) of Sch 1 to the NGR required the regulator to exercise
its power under r 52(3) (as modified by cl 34 of Sch 1) to extend the
submitting the next access arrangement revision proposal until three months
after the date the first rate of return guidelines
are published under cl 37 of
rate of return guidelines were published by the ERA on 16 December 2013, and the
time for ATCO to submit its AA Revision Proposal
for AA4 was extended until 17
March 2014 (the first business day after 16 March 2014). The actual revision
submission date was therefore
some eight months later than the 1 July 2013 date
specified by AA3, and some three months before AA3 was scheduled to end in June
required, on 17 March 2014, ATCO submitted to the ERA its AA Revision Proposal
for AA4. That period is five and half years, because
of the delays outlined
with the regulatory process prescribed by the NGR involves costs associated
with, among other things, preparing the access
arrangement proposal and
revisions, preparing and responding to submissions, and reviewing and responding
to decisions of the regulator
(collectively, ‘
preparation
’). The preparation costs include both internal costs (for
example, management time) and external costs, such as the costs
of technical and
legal consultants.
Preparation
costs for the current AA4 access arrangement revision process were included in
the opex forecasts used to determine ATCO’s
total revenue for AA3.
However, ATCO suggested that the actual amount was never specified by the
categories of opex proposed by ATCO for AA4, and considered by the ERA, included
corporate opex, comprising corporate support
costs, business development and
marketing and licence fees. The corporate support costs category included
forecast opex relating
to internal support costs for ATCO’s finance and
tax, human resources, corporate affairs, legal, regulatory and information
technology cost centre functions and intercompany charges.
the AA Revision Proposal, ATCO sought $2.4 million to cover AA4 preparation
costs for the period 1 July 2014 to 31 December 2014
’) and 2015. This was in addition to any costs
allowed in AA3 attributable to AA4 preparation costs.
its Draft Decision, the ERA was not satisfied that ATCO’s corporate
support opex was consistent with what a prudent service
provider acting
efficiently would incur. Rather, the ERA considered that the expenditure
incurred by ATCO for 2013 represented the
best forecast possible in the
circumstances. In its Draft Decision, it said:
The Authority considers that the provision of
corporate support services of the nature provided by the cost centres described
are a necessary function of the prudent operation of a large business.
However, the Authority is not satisfied that ATCO’s
proposed corporate
support operating expenditure is consistent with what a prudent service provider
acting efficiently, in accordance
with good industry practice, to achieve the
lowest sustainable cost, would incur because of the following:
ATCO has not adequately justified the need for
significant increases in forecast internal support costs; and
ATCO has not demonstrated the value received from the forecast intercompany
As a result, the Authority is not satisfied that the annual forecast
corporate support expenditure, which includes both internal support
intercompany charges, should be increased above the level of corporate support
expenditure incurred by ATCO in 2013 of
$12.30 million ($67.65 million over five
and a half years). The Authority considers that the expenditure for 2013
represents the
best forecast possible in the circumstances and is arrived at on
a reasonable basis for the following reasons:
ATCO has had an incentive to reduce operating
expenditure in the current access arrangement because it can capture the
resulting cost
savings, so its revealed costs in 2013 should form a reasonable
basis for determining the allowance required for corporate support
expenditure; and
by 2013, ATCO would have had two years to determine the efficient corporate
support spending level following its due diligence during
the GDS purchase
the ERA allowed a one-off expenditure of $2.10 million for the preparation of
ATCO’s AA5 proposal, divided between
2018 and 2019. In the ERA’s
view, this represented a reasonable forecast of the costs to be incurred based
on the costs relating
to the access arrangement proposal for AA4.
its Amended AA Revision Proposal, ATCO proposed an increase in corporate support
opex for: (a) 2014-2H and 2015, as a result of
increased requirements associated
with the AA4 access arrangement revision process; and (b) in 2018 and 2019, as a
result of increased
requirements associated with the AA5 revision process. It
sought $3.4 million in preparation costs in 2014 and 2015, and $3.3 million
2018 and 2019 for preparation costs associated with AA5.
February 2015, ATCO provided the ERA with its regulatory financial statements
for the year ended 31 December 2014, which contained
information regarding
ATCO’s actual expenditure (including corporate opex) for 2014-2H. ATCO
submitted that the information
in the regulatory financial statements was
directly relevant to the review process and should be taken into account when
considering
the expenditure incurred and forecast by ATCO for AA4.
its Final Decision, the ERA purportedly approved corporate support costs of $2.1
million for 2014-2H and 2015 for AA4 preparation
costs, and $2.4 million divided
equally between 2018 and 2019 on preparation costs for the AA5 access
arrangement. In rejecting
ATCO’s proposed increases, the ERA said in its
Final Decision:
ATCO has rejected the Draft Decision’s
estimates of $2.10 million on preparation costs for this proposed revised access
arrangement
and $2.40 million on preparation costs for the next proposed revised
access arrangement. ATCO has proposed $3.4 million on preparation
costs for this
proposed revised access arrangement and $3.3 million on preparation costs for
the next proposed revised access arrangement.
ATCO has justified additional
costs by reference to expenses of answering additional questions on the
proposal, and the required
amendments of the Draft Decision. The Authority does
not accept this justification on the following grounds:
ATCO has not provided any evidence to justify the
additional costs, which is inconsistent with rule 74 of the NGR; and
ATCO has not demonstrated how answering questions in relation to unclear and
deficient information in its proposal and addressing
the Draft Decision’s
required amendments is not part of the daily operations of the regulatory
there was an error in the Final Decision which the ERA later acknowledged in the
Amended Final Decision. What the ERA said
it had intended in the Final Decision
was only to approve $2.1 million for AA5 preparation costs (to be incurred in
2018 and 2019),
not the same costs for 2014-2H and 2015 in respect of AA4
preparation costs.
remedying this error in its Amended Final Decision, the ERA did not approve any
preparation costs for AA4. The ERA maintained
its reasoning from the Draft
Decision and rejected ATCO’s proposed $3.40 million for preparation costs
for AA4 and $3.30 million
for preparation costs for AA5. In its Amended Final
Decision, it said:
The Authority did not include preparation costs in
the revenue building block for the fourth access arrangement period in its Draft
Decision which was evidenced by not including this expenditure in the total
operating expenditure approved by the Authority. The
Authority acknowledges that
the wording in paragraph 243 of the Draft Decision may have caused some
confusion. However, paragraphs
250 and 251 and Table 13 of the Draft Decision
demonstrate that the Authority only approved one-off expenditure of $2.10
for the preparation of the next access arrangement proposal (for the
fifth access arrangement period), divided between 2018 and
ERA’s reason for reaching this conclusion was that it was not satisfied
that ATCO’s claim for extra preparation costs
for AA4 was consistent with
r 91(1). The ERA was also not satisfied that ATCO had provided sufficient
evidence to justify the extra
AA4 preparation costs, which was said to be
inconsistent with r 74. The ERA said:
The Authority does not approve preparation costs for
this revised access arrangement in 2014 and 2015 as:
Rule 91 of the NGR requires that operating expenditure
must be such as that incurred by a prudent service provider acting efficiently,
in accordance with accepted good industry practice, to achieve the lowest
sustainable cost of delivering pipeline services. Prudent
and efficient
operating expenditure was forecast at the time of the third access arrangement
review for expenditure during that period
and incorporated into the calculation
of total revenue. As a result, the forecast operating expenditure for the third
access arrangement
period was prepared on the assumption that expenditure
related to the preparation of the fourth access arrangement review would have
been incurred during the third access arrangement period. The inclusion of
operating expenditure now for the preparation of the fourth
access arrangement
review during the fourth access arrangement period would be a
for ATCO and would not be in the long-term interest of consumers in
accordance with the National Gas Objective.
A prudent service provider acting efficiently would have incurred the
majority of expenditure related to preparing an access arrangement
review prior
to submitting its access arrangement, which was during the third access
arrangement period.
ATCO has not demonstrated how answering questions in relation to unclear and
deficient information in its proposal and addressing
the Draft Decision’s
required amendments is not part of the daily operations of the regulatory team.
The Authority notes that
had it been provided sufficient information at the time
of lodgement, most of these questions could have been avoided.
ATCO also provided revised numbers and forecasts, particularly for
Information Technology expenditure and Unaccounted for Gas a considerable
after lodgement of the access arrangement. Also, ATCO provided numerous other
letters and submissions to the Authority following
lodgement, outside of formal
consultation processes, which has contributed to the delay in reviewing this
access arrangement. The
Authority considers that allowing a service provider to
recoup costs for submitting further information after it has submitted its
access arrangement would provide a perverse incentive to service providers. The
Authority considers that consumers should not have
to incur these costs.
ATCO has not provided sufficient evidence to justify the additional costs,
which is inconsistent with rule 74 of the NGR.
(Emphasis added.)
the ERA allowed ATCO its actual corporate opex costs (as disclosed in
ATCO’s regulatory financial statements). In
doing so, ATCO’s actual
preparation costs incurred in 2014-2H were, in effect, included in the approved
opex forecast for that
year, even though the precise amount of the preparation
costs was not separately identified within the allowed corporate opex
therefore does not dispute the AA4 preparation costs allowed for 2014-2H. It
also does not dispute the amount of AA5 preparation
costs allowed in 2018 and
2019. The dispute is confined only to the decision of the ERA not to allow AA4
preparation costs in 2015.
does not seek inclusion of preparation costs based on the full $3.4 million
proposed in its Amended AA Revision Proposal. It
only seeks a lesser pro-rata
amount of $1.4 million, for AA4 preparation costs incurred in 2015 calculated as
(+) Reasonable costs recoverable as estimated by EMCa, for the 18 month
period comprising 2014-2H and the whole of 2015:
$2.10 million
(-) Less six months allowed for 2014-2H (estimated from the ERA’s
($0.70 million)
(=) Reasonable costs as above of $2.1m not recovered under the Amended Final
Decision in 2014-2H (covering the twelve months of 2015)
$1.40 million
contended that the ERA was in error when it did not allow the amount of $1.4
million as AA4 preparation costs in 2015. ATCO
raised several arguments in
support of its contention.
Windfall gain
submitted that the ERA’s finding that the inclusion of forecast opex in
AA4 for AA4 preparation costs would result in a
windfall gain for ATCO involved
both errors of fact as well as the incorrect exercise of discretion by the ERA.
ATCO also claimed
that the decision was unreasonable.
under the method of regulation prescribed by the NGR, specific building blocks
(including opex) are forecast at the beginning
of the period and tariffs set
accordingly. If the service provider is able to spend capex more efficiently
than forecast, it entitled
to reap the benefits of those efficiencies by
retaining the costs as forecast. Conversely, if the service provider is
inefficient
and spends more than what is forecast, it bears that risk. It is
not entitled to recover additional revenue in a regulatory period
that shortfall. In this way, the regime provides incentives to encourage
efficiency.
said that the regime also does not allow for revenues to be reduced in a
regulatory period because the service provider has (or
may have) underspent
against the approved forecast in the previous period – what it considers
is the “windfall gain”
argument wrongly applied by the ERA in the
Amended Final Decision.
ERA did not dispute ATCO’s characterisation of the incentive nature of the
regime. However, it disagreed that its approach
was contrary to that incentive
scheme. Indeed, the ERA considered that its approach enhances it. The approach
to which the ERA
referred is its decision to infer that the amount allowed in
AA3 as opex for AA4 preparation costs was efficient and otherwise compliant
the NGR. The ERA maintained it could therefore assume that ATCO’s
efficient AA4 preparation costs were already covered
by AA3. The onus was on
ATCO to show why any additional amounts claimed for AA4 preparation costs were
allowed under r 91, and ATCO
failed to provide that justification.
the Tribunal’s view, the very incentive scheme which ATCO described
explains the ERA’s use of the expression ‘windfall
Taken in its context in the Amended Final Decision, the ERA was indicating that
ATCO needed to demonstrate why it was
prudent or efficient under r 91(1) to be
compensated for costs in relation to preparing AA4, given that ATCO had already
been compensated
under AA3 for AA4 preparation costs. If ATCO were allowed to
recover extra AA4 preparation costs under AA4 that had not been justified
r 91(1), then ATCO would receive a windfall gain. That is plainly correct
for several reasons.
it is forecast opex that is permitted to be included in the building blocks.
However, it will be noted that the opex which
ATCO seeks is actual opex
attributable to AA4. It is that forecast that creates the very incentive under
the regime. That is, if
the service provider operates more efficiently than the
forecast it can effectively retain those costs. Similarly, if it exceeds
forecast it will be penalised because the revenue requirement is not adjusted to
reflect that shortfall.
opex were allowed there is no incentive mechanism in play
because the costs will already have been incurred. Even if only some,
than all of those costs were allowed by the regulator, they would nevertheless
be costs that had not been derived under the
incentive scheme, with the
efficiencies that such incentives drive.
is for that reason that during the hearing, the Tribunal asked both parties
whether it is open to the Tribunal to consider actual
opex incurred in AA4. At
the very least the Tribunal considers that where actual opex is sought, there
must be a compelling case
for requiring it, consistent with what the NGR
provide. The Tribunal takes this no further as the issue was not addressed in
written submissions of either party.
the ERA was correct to consider whether the preparation costs permitted in AA3
were adequate because those were costs already
allowed for AA4. Consistent with
the incentive nature of the scheme, had ATCO overspent against the AA3 forecast
for AA4 preparation
costs, then it ought to demonstrate why that overspend
against forecast was justified under r 91(1), and why, therefore, it ought
allowed. If it were not able to demonstrate it, then were it allowed additional
AA4 preparation costs, that would indeed be
a windfall gain. If ATCO had
underspent its forecast, then ATCO would have effectively retained the
difference and would have adequate
funds for its AA4 preparation costs when they
are incurred. The issue is therefore not whether there was a windfall gain but
whether ATCO had adequately demonstrated the need for AA4 preparation
costs in 2015 under r 91(1) of the NGR.
Timing of incurring costs
considered that the ERA was wrong to conclude that a prudent service provider
acting efficiently would have incurred the majority
of AA4 preparation costs
prior to submitting its access arrangement revision proposal for AA4, namely
during AA3. It said that conclusion
ignores the fact that the access
arrangement review process was extended as referred to above. ATCO was
originally required to submit
its access arrangement revision proposal for AA4
to the ERA by the review submission date specified in the access arrangement for
AA3, which was 1 July 2013. That date was extended for the reasons mentioned
these circumstances, ATCO argued it is an error of fact, or alternatively is
unreasonable, to conclude that the majority of preparation
costs would or should
have been incurred by ATCO (or a prudent service provider, acting efficiently)
during AA3. Broadly, the ERA’s
response was that a prudent service
provider would have incurred the bulk of AA4 preparation costs prior to
submitting it –
certainly no significant costs ought to have been incurred
during 2014-2H or 2015.
is true that the timing of AA4 was extended by reason of the delays already
noted above. However, the scheme of regulation under
the NGR is well known to
both parties. It is known, for instance, that a revision submission date may be
extended, that the access
arrangement revision process may take longer than what
is “typical”, and that the time taken to respond to inquiries
the regulator (and the regulator to the service provider) will depend on the
number of issues in contention. There is also
the possibility (as occurred
here) of a change in the NGR during the process. None of that should be
particularly surprising, least
of all for a service provider that is familiar
with the process. That degree of familiarity ought to enable a prudent service
to forecast preparation costs with some accuracy, building in some
degree of flexibility to deal with unforeseen delays as occurred
some of the delays (and hence the costs arising from them) resulted from ATCO
taking issue with a number of the conclusions reached
by the ERA in the Draft
Decision, that impacted on the building blocks, including those in dispute in
these proceedings. Although
there is no criticism of ATCO for doing so,
ATCO’s responses ought to be seen as part of the ordinary and robust
that typically occur between the regulator and a service provider in
approving an access arrangement proposal. In that sense it
is not so unusual,
at least to a prudent service provider.
these circumstances, it was reasonable for the ERA to adopt, at least as a
starting point, the preparation costs allowed in AA3
for the AA4 process as
representing the bulk of the preparation costs that would be incurred by a
prudent service provider, acting
efficiently.
issue is whether there was other evidence that justified additional costs beyond
those allowed in AA3. ATCO said there was ample
other evidence presented to the
The issue of evidence
starting point on the issue of evidence was to note that, as the ERA’s
discretion is limited, the ERA was not entitled
to reject ATCO’s opex
forecast unless it was satisfied that it did not comply with the NGR.
Therefore, unless the ERA was
satisfied that a prudent service provider, acting
efficiently and in accordance with good industry practice, would not actually
AA4 preparation costs in 2014-2H and 2015, it was required to allow for
such costs in the opex forecast.
evidence that ATCO maintained was available to the ERA included an explanation
of the additional preparation costs incurred in
2014-H2, and forecast to be
incurred in 2015 in its AA Revision Proposal and Amended AA Revision Proposal.
One explanation provided
by ATCO included the following passage from its AA
Revision Proposal:
Corporate support costs have been increasing since
2011. Corporate support costs during the periods prior to acquisition were less
than required to maintain the full provision of corporate services ATCO Gas
Australia believes are required to support the forecast
growth of the network
and customer base over the AA4 period. The key drivers for this difference are
explained below. Corporate support
costs over the AA4 period will increase in
2014 and 2015 and then remain relatively steady.
passage then proceeds to indicate the key drivers for the increases. However,
these passages merely provide an explanation for
the increases but not why they
have arisen or how they satisfy r 91(1).
also provided the following explanation in its Amended AA Revision Proposal:
AGA does not accept $2.1 million is sufficient to
cover the current access arrangement process. Costs were incurred in 2013 and
to prepare and submit the initial access arrangement revisions proposal.
Subsequent costs were incurred to respond to the 160 questions
generated by EMCa
and the ERA in their review of the proposal. The ERA’s Draft Decision and
the quantum of the reductions applied
by the ERA means AGA is incurring further
regulatory related costs to provide the ERA with additional information to
demonstrate
compliance with the NGR.
like ATCO’s comments in the AA Revision Proposal, these are more in the
nature of an explanation but do not go to the
core issue of their justification
under r 91(1).
also relied on a report prepared for it by KPMG titled ‘The corporate
support operating costs of the Mid-West and South-West
Gas Distribution Systems
November 2014’, and particularly the following passages:
The expert is of the view that the corporate support
costs forecast for the MWSWGDS for AA4 meet the requirements of NGR 91(1) in
the corporate support services for which ATCO Gas
Australia has forecast costs in AA4, are services that meet the criteria of NGR
while... the... corporate support service expenditure forecast for AA4
exceed benchmarks that provide a measure of efficient sustainable
cost by $3.55m
(which is less than 4% of the benchmark costs) over the AA4 period, whether that
difference is material for the purposes
of assessing whether the expenditure
meets the requirements of NGR 91(1), is a matter of regulatory
specifically, in relation to preparation costs, the KPMG report
Access-regulated businesses commonly use economic,
engineering, legal and financial consultants, typically for such things as
in the development of regulatory policy and strategy, pricing
submissions and regulatory consultation. This work tends to peak at
or close to
the time of an access arrangement revision. There are also continuing
requirements for ad hoc and independent regulatory
advice. In the expert’s
estimation of regulatory consulting costs, he has assumed annual recurring
advisory costs, and cyclical
advisory costs associated with the access
arrangement revision determination:
Annual costs – ad hoc regulatory advice on matters
such as developments in the regulatory framework, regulatory strategy, tariff
submissions and compliance and reporting (approximately $360,000 per annum has
been assumed, representing an average 90 consulting
$4,000/day).
Cyclical costs (every five years) – focused on the development of the
access arrangement revision. This would reasonably be
expected to
regulatory strategy and determination
project management;
legal advice on managing and responding to, the determination
tariff development and tariff and revenue modeling;
demand forecasting;
capital planning expenditure forecasting and reporting;
benchmarking;
model review and assistance;
independent critiques and reviews of material;
cost benefit analyses; and
stakeholder engagement.
Over a five year cycle, a sum of the order of $3.6m or about 900 consulting
days would be reasonable. This equates to an annualised
ATCO relied on these passages to conclude that KPMG found that it is not unusual
for economic, engineering, legal and financial
work to peak at, or close to the
time of an access arrangement revision, and that the amount claimed by ATCO for
preparation costs
was therefore reasonable.
reached this conclusion by applying a benchmarking approach involving a
“top down” or overall benchmarks of observed
and reported total
activity costs, and a “bottom up” approach using cost modelling.
Under the “bottom up”
approach, benchmarks of unit costs applicable
to each cost component within an activity, such as labour have been applied to
an efficient
staffing structure for the activity. The nature and sources of all
benchmarks are listed in Appendix C of that report. It reveals
documents and
decisions within and outside Australia and across a number of industries and
regulators. KPMG’s report suggests
that the benchmarking approach has
been applied by a number Australian regulators.
Tribunal observes that the benchmarking data is necessarily broad given the
range of sources mentioned. It is also not clear
how it would be best applied
in demonstrating compliance with r 91(1). Benchmarking can be a useful tool in
assessing costs, however
it is not the only approach that is available and it is
reasonable for the ERA to critique those benchmarks and to rely on other
available information in reaching its conclusions. It was open to it to do so.
The Tribunal is also not satisfied that ATCO has
demonstrated how the
information contained in KPMG’s report relates to the timing of the
expenditure in issue here.
also pointed to advice from the ERA’s own expert, EMCa:
Legal and regulatory opex is forecast to be 78%
higher in 2019 than it was in 2011. This increase is largely driven by an
eight staff and ‘extra’ AA4 and AA5 preparations costs.
We estimate that ATCO has or will spend approximately $2.1m’extra’
[ie. estimated expenditure on consultants and contractors compared to
the2013 base year]
on its AA4 proposal through to finalisation. As shown in
the figure below, ATCO forecasts spending approximately $2.4m
on AA preparation and revision for AA5 in 2018-2019. ATCO
has not provided justification for the growth in expenditure from 2013
estimated ‘AA preparation’ amount. We believe that only $2.1m
expenditure (for AA5 preparation) above the base
year is prudent and
asserted that this passage demonstrates that EMCa considered ATCO’s claim
for an additional $2.1 million in preparation
costs were reasonable. However,
that is not what EMCa concluded. EMCa merely concluded that ATCO will spend an
extra $2.1 million.
It did not comment on whether that expenditure would meet
the test in r 91(1). ATCO’s reliance on this should be
Inconsistency
ATCO asserted that the ERA’s decision not to allow any AA4 preparation
costs in 2015 is internally inconsistent with
its decision that, for the
purposes of determining the best forecast for this period as per r 74(2), the
best forecasts would be
the actual expenditure for July to December 2014 (which
actual expenditure included AA4 preparation costs). In addition, the
decision would be illogical given that it well knew that ATCO would
incur further expenditure in 2015, and therefore also unreasonable.
as the Tribunal has discussed, there can be no criticism of the ERA for
concluding that a prudent service provider acting
efficiently would not have
incurred AA4 preparation costs in 2015.
Accordingly,
ATCO has not succeeded in establishing that the ERA was in error in not allowing
$1.4 million as AA4 preparation costs
REFERENCE TARIFF VARIATION MECHANISM
Introduction
seeks a review of the ERA’s calculation of the reference tariffs to apply
during AA4, and its rejection of a proposed cost
pass through event as part of
the reference tariff variation mechanism in the access arrangement.
contended that the ERA’s determinations of these issues are vitiated by
grounds of review in respect of:
(1) the ERA’s use of ATCO’s forecast revenue
for 2014-2H, rather than its actual revenue, in the calculation of the reference
tariffs to apply from 1 October 2015; and
(2) the ERA’s rejection of a cost pass through event proposed by ATCO in
respect of certain regulatory costs and licence fees.
Legislative framework
2 of the NGL defines “reference tariff” as
a tariff or charge for a reference
(a) specified in an applicable access arrangement approved or made under a
full access arrangement decision; or
(b) determined by applying the formula or methodology contained in an
applicable access arrangement approved or made under a full
access arrangement
r 92(1), a full access arrangement must include a “reference tariff
variation mechanism” for variation of a reference
tariff over the course
of an access arrangement period. A reference tariff must not vary during the
course of an access arrangement
period except as provided by a reference tariff
variation mechanism: r 97(5).
r 97(1), a reference tariff variation mechanism may provide for variation of a
reference tariff in the following way:
(1) in accordance with a schedule of fixed tariffs;
(2) in accordance with a formula set out in the access arrangement;
(3) as a result of a cost pass through for a defined event (such as a cost pass
through for a particular tax); or
(4) by the combined operation of two or more of the
r 97(3), in deciding whether a particular reference tariff variation mechanism
is appropriate to a particular access arrangement,
the ERA must have regard
(1) the need for efficient tariff structures; and
(2) the possible effects of the reference tariff variation mechanism on
administrative costs of the ERA, the service provider and
users or potential
(3) the regulatory arrangements (if any) applicable to the relevant reference
services before the commencement of the proposed reference
tariff variation
mechanism; and
(4) the desirability of consistency between regulatory arrangements for similar
services (both within and beyond the relevant jurisdiction);
(5) any other relevant factor.
reference tariff variation mechanism must give the ERA adequate oversight or
powers of approval over variation of the reference
tariff: r 97(4).
this legislative background, the two issues, noted above, that were raised by
ATCO ((a) the ERA’s use of ATCO’s
forecast revenue for 2014-2H,
rather than its actual revenue; and (b) the ERA’s rejection of a cost pass
through event proposed
by ATCO) will be considered in turn.
Reference Tariff Calculation
revision commencement date stated in the access arrangement for AA3 is 1 July
2014. Although the ERA Access Arrangement took
effect from 1 October 2015, the
ERA Access Arrangement applies in fact to AA4, the access arrangement period
commencing on 1 July
2014 and ending on 31 December 2019.
there is a delay between the revision commencement date and the date on which
revisions to the access arrangement actually
take effect. In this case, that
delay is the period 1 July 2014 to 30 September 2015.
92(3) deals with this delay in the following way:
However, if there is an interval (the interval of
delay) between a revision commencement date stated in a full access arrangement
and the date on which revisions to the access arrangement actually
(a) reference tariffs, as in force at the end of the previous access
arrangement period, continue without variation for the interval
of delay; but
(b) the operation of this subrule may be taken into account in fixing
reference tariffs for the new access arrangement
92(3) effectively provides that the reference tariffs in force at the end of the
previous access arrangement period apply during
the period of delay.
the more difficult question, and the subject of this dispute, is how future
reference tariffs for the remainder of the new
access arrangement period are to
be adjusted to take account of the delay. Rule 92(3) deals with this in very
broad terms by permitting
the delay (and its treatment under the NGR) to be
“taken into account” in fixing reference tariffs for the new access
arrangement period.
reference tariffs are rising compared to the previous access arrangement period,
the service provider will “under recover”
revenue during the period
of the delay by continuing to charge the previous lower tariffs, unless an
appropriate adjustment is made
under the new tariff structure. Conversely,
where reference tariffs are falling compared to the previous period, an
adjustment is
needed to the new tariffs so that the service provider is not
overcompensated by having received the higher tariffs during the period
an adjustment occurs in the context that the form of regulation adopted in the
ERA Access Arrangement is price regulation; that
is, a tariff basket price
control under r 97(2)(b). Under price regulation, if at the end of the
regulatory year the revenue generated
under the prices exceeded, or fell short
of the service provider’s total revenue for the year, there is
nevertheless no adjustment
to address the discrepancy.
A of the ERA Access Arrangement specifies the reference tariffs that ATCO is to
charge for reference services during AA4.
Those tariffs can be varied during
the term of AA4 under the reference tariff variation mechanism in Annexure B to
the ERA Access
Arrangement, including for inflation, the annual update of the
return on debt, and as a result of the occurrence of any cost pass
reference tariffs set out in the ERA Access Arrangement are calculated by using
the ERA’s Public Reference Tariff Model
Broadly, reference tariffs are established by determining the total revenue to
be earned by ATCO for each regulatory year
using the building block approach.
Then there is a determination of the forecast demand and customer numbers for
the access arrangement
period. Finally, reference tariffs are calculated (for
the various tariff classes, service elements and charging parameters) in
way that, when applied to the forecast demand and customer numbers, ATCO is
forecast to earn the total revenue over the access
arrangement period.
of the AA4 process was delayed for the reasons already discussed. By the
operation of r 92(3)(a), the reference tariffs
in force under AA3 continued to
apply over the period of delay – 1 July 2014 to 30 September 2015.
the current case, reference tariffs are declining compared to the AA3 period.
Therefore, there will need to be a reduction in
the reference tariffs over the
remainder of the access arrangement period to adjust for the over-recovery by
ATCO during the period
of delay. The aim is to adjust reference tariffs for the
remainder of AA4 to ensure that the total revenue forecast to be earned
over the entire access arrangement period (based on forecast demands and
customer numbers) is equal to the total revenue
as approved by the ERA.
is consistent with r 92(2) which provides:
reference tariff variation mechanism
be designed to equalise (in terms of present values):
(a) forecast revenue from reference services over the
access arrangement
(b) the portion of total revenue allocated to reference services for the
access arrangement period
at least, part of the interval of delay (namely 2014-2H), ATCO’s actual
revenue was known prior to the making of the Access
Arrangement Decision and had
been reported in ATCO’s regulatory financial statements provided to the
ERA. However, the ERA
did not use the actual revenue over this period in
adjusting tariffs but instead used an estimate of ATCO’s revenue during
this period in the PRTM used to calculate the reference tariffs to apply from 1
October 2015.
Areas of dispute
contended that the ERA’s decision to use forecast revenue for 2014-2H,
rather than actual revenue, in the PRTM involved
the incorrect exercise of
discretion and was unreasonable.
contended that the ERA made several errors. It is convenient to list them,
largely as they were pleaded by ATCO in its Review
Application:
(1) when fixing reference tariffs for AA4, the ERA did
not take into account that the tariffs to apply after 1 October 2015 under
Access Arrangement Decision should (as r 92(3) requires) include an amount
representing the present value of the difference between
actual tariffs
recovered in the period 1 January 2014 to 30 September 2015 and the tariffs
applicable to that period;
(2) more specifically, the amount actually recovered by ATCO in the period 1
January 2014 to 30 September 2015 was $3.824 million
less than the forecast
revenue for 2014-2H, which has been included in the tariff model as reference
tariffs in the ERA Access Arrangement,
and unless the adjustment referred to
above is made, ATCO will suffer a revenue shortfall over the remainder of
(3) the ERA erred in dismissing the use of actual revenue in 2014-2H on the
incorrect basis that doing so would be akin to applying
a revenue cap;
(4) the ERA erred in dismissing the use of actual revenue in 2014-2H on the
basis that it would require a revision of demand forecasts
and reassessment of
capex and opex, despite the ERA adopting ATCO’s actual opex and capex for
the period as the best estimate
of those costs for 2014-2H;
(5) the ERA’s decision is contrary to r 92(2)(a) in that the reference
tariff variation mechanism does not equalise forecast
revenue from services with
the total portion of total revenue allocated to reference services over AA4; and
(6) the ERA’s decision does not satisfy the RRP, as it does not allow ATCO
to recover at least its efficient costs of providing
reference services over AA4
(and, in particular, in 2014-2H).
submissions followed these identified areas of error fairly closely, and it is
therefore convenient to consider each
broadly in turn, noting however that there
is some overlap between them.
revenue that was forecast over 2014-2H was higher than the revenue actually
earned over that period, such that ATCO is treated
as having earned more revenue
that it actually did. The consequence is that the downward adjustment to be
made to ATCO’s aggregate
total revenue over AA4 is greater, and its
overall aggregate total revenue allowed by the ERA is less, than would otherwise
its Amended Final Decision, the ERA explained its reasons for using forecast
rather than actual revenue as follows:
The Authority notes ATCO’s concerns regarding
the delay to the commencement of the new tariffs and the costs it has incurred
during the 2014 period. However, the Authority has determined haulage reference
tariffs based on its assessment of ATCO’s forecast
operating expenditure,
in accordance with the requirements of rule 91(1) of the NGR based on its
assessment of what would be incurred
by a prudent service provider acting
efficiently. The Authority has also determined haulage reference tariffs based
on its assessment
of ATCO’s forecast conforming capital expenditure, in
accordance with the requirements of rule 79(1) for the purposes of rule
The Authority notes that it has calculated haulage reference tariffs based on
its assessment of ATCO’s proposed demand forecast.
The Authority considers
that given its required changes in its Draft Decision which would result in all
tariffs to be charged based
on a price cap (or variant) form of price control
and not a revenue cap form of price control, forecast demand should be used to
determine tariff revenue prior to the access arrangement start date (1 July 2014
to 1 October 2015).
The use of actual revenue would be akin to a revenue cap
which is not the form of price control approved.
The Authority also used forecast demand during the period 1 July 2014 to 1
October 2015 to determine prudent and efficient expenditure
for the fourth
access arrangement period. The demand forecast during this period also has
flow-on impacts to the demand forecasts
for the remainder of the fourth access
arrangement period.
If the Authority had used actual tariff revenue during
the period 1 July 2014 to 1 October 2015 as requested by ATCO, to determine
haulage tariffs, then for consistency, the Authority would have revised the
demand forecast and reassessed efficient capital and
operating expenditure.
The Authority provided its explanation for using actual operating and capital
expenditure information to determine efficient and
prudent expenditure for the
six month period to 31 December 2014.
(Emphasis added.)
submitted that it is clear from the bolded passages above that the ERA
misunderstood ATCO’s submission. ATCO had not proposed
to use actual
revenue for the entire period of delay (1 July 2014 to 30 September 2015 as
quoted) but only for the period 2014-2H
in respect of which ATCO had already
provided its regulatory financial statements.
ERA relied on several letters and meetings between the parties to suggest it had
not misunderstood the submission put by ATCO
or that the relevant period was in
fact 2014-2H. The Tribunal does not consider it to be productive to discuss
that correspondence
or those meetings. Whatever may have transpired between the
parties, it was well understood by both parties (as is apparent from
passages from the Amended Final Decision) that ATCO wanted the ERA to use its
actual revenue for the purpose of calculating the
reference tariffs.
Consideration
considered that neither “demand” nor “revenue” are
concepts like “opex” or “capex”,
that are subject to a
test of prudency or efficiency. Therefore, there was no reason why the ERA
ought to have used a forecast of
demand and revenue when actuals are known for
2014-2H, particularly if this represents the best forecast or estimate possible
the circumstances under r 74(2). The purpose of using actual demand and
revenue figures for 2014-2H is not to set a revenue cap
but rather to set an
accurate price cap for the remainder of the access arrangement period.
was correct that there is no express provision in the NGR that imports a
prudency or efficiency test for revenue. However, that
does not mean that the
concept of efficiency is not embodied in the determination of revenue. Under
the building block approach,
both capex and opex is forecast and is allowed into
the building blocks only if each satisfy a prudency and efficiency test (see
79, r 91 of the NGR). Those components (together with other items) ultimately
determine the total revenue that the service provider
revenue and the reference tariffs are intended to mimic what a prudent and
efficient service provider will earn over the access
arrangement period. That
concept of efficiency does not end with the setting of total revenue and
reference tariffs. It carries
through the life of the access arrangement in
this way. If the service provider earns more revenue than is forecast from
tariffs (because it has been efficient) it can retain that amount
because there is no adjustment. Conversely, it is penalised if
it operates
inefficiently.
actual revenue for 2014-2H is inconsistent with the incentive nature of the
scheme. Using actual revenue provides no insight
into whether it was earned by
the service provider operating efficiently or conversely inefficiently.
will be noted from the bolded passage in the ERA’s Amended Final Decision
extracted above, that as the ERA considered that
had it used actual tariff
revenue to determine haulage tariffs, then for consistency it would have needed
to revise the demand forecast
and reassess efficient capital and operating
expenditure. ATCO considered this approach to be illogical because demand
over this period are only necessary to forecast expected revenue and
align it to total revenue for the regulatory year. However,
when actual revenue
is already known, the demand forecasts become inconsequential.
indicated previously, using actual revenue for 2014-2H would undermine the
incentive nature of the scheme.
also argued that the ERA’s arguments against using actuals are
inconsistent with its own use of actual opex and capex incurred
in 2014-2H as
the best forecast of prudent opex and conforming capex for that period. There
is no reason why it is reasonable and
appropriate to use actual opex and capex
costs in the PRTM where available, but to use forecasts of demand and revenue
for the same
ERA’s response was that the use of actual 2014-2H figures for capex and
opex was part of forecasting and estimating the
total revenue under the building
block approach. The ERA was permitted to infer compliance on any basis the ERA
considered appropriate,
within the terms of r 71(1). In accepting the actual
opex and capex for 2014-2H as the best forecast, the ERA also accepted that
expenditure was efficient and complied with the NGR.
the Tribunal’s view, capex and opex are only components of the building
blocks, not their totality. That is fundamentally
different to actual revenue
which is the “end product” of the application of all the building
Tribunal concludes that the ERA did not make the errors contended by
Pass through of licence fees
the AA Revision Proposal, ATCO proposed the inclusion of a number of defined
cost pass through events in cl 3.1 of Annexure B.
Relevantly cl 3.1 (iii)
3.1 Cost Pass Through Events
For the purpose of this clause 3, each of the following is a “Cost Pass
Through Event”:
(iii) ATCO Gas Australia incurs:
(A) Conforming Capital Expenditure or Conforming Operating Expenditure as a
result of, or in connection with, a Change in Law, Tax
Change or Regulatory
(B) Regulatory Costs, to the extent that such costs can be demonstrated to
have been reasonably excluded from the forecast Conforming
Capital Expenditure
or forecast Conforming Operating Expenditure.
not defined in the AA Revision Proposal, the following definition of
“Regulatory Costs” appeared in the proposed
Access Arrangement
Information:
...direct costs as a result of:
(a) a Regulatory Obligation or Requirement (as defined in section 6 of the
National Gas Access Law) that are demonstrated to have
reasonably been excluded
from forecast Conforming Capital Expenditure or forecast Conforming Operating
Expenditure for the Access
Arrangement Period;
(b) ATCO Gas Australia’s compliance with the National Gas Access
(Western Australia) Legislation, its Distribution Licence,
Coordination Act 1994
Gas Standards Act 1972
Energy Operators (Powers) Act 1979
Environmental Protection
(WA), and its compliance with all other applicable Laws and with the
requirements of any government department, agency or authority
operating in
accordance with those Laws to the extent such cost can be demonstrated to have
been reasonably excluded from the forecast
Conforming Capital Expenditure or
forecast Conforming Operating Expenditure.
its Draft Decision, the ERA rejected ATCO’s proposed cost pass through
ATCO has amended its cost pass-through events to
include direct and indirect regulatory costs, to the extent that such costs can
demonstrated to have been reasonably excluded from the forecast conforming
capital expenditure or forecast operating expenditure.
In the current access
arrangement, regulatory costs are part of the tariff variation formula. Actual
regulatory costs are currently
assessed against forecasts, and any over or under
spend is reflected in the tariff. ATCO’s proposal now only includes any
spend as a result of unforeseen costs related to existing regulatory
obligations and increases in license fees. The Authority notes
the following in
relation to ATCO’s proposed amendment:
ATCO’s proposed amendment is asymmetric, in that
it only addresses higher than forecast regulatory costs. Unforeseen benefits
reduce ATCO’s regulatory costs.
The Authority will find it difficult to reconcile regulatory cost pass
throughs relating to ATCO’s proposed amendment with corresponding
regulatory cost forecasts in operating expenditure and capital
expenditure.
ATCO’s proposed amendment does not provide the right incentives for
ATCO to focus on cost efficiencies.
Therefore, the Authority rejects ATCO’s
proposal to include increased regulatory costs as a cost
pass-through.
response to the Draft Decision, in its Amended AA Revision Proposal, ATCO
proposed a revised cost pass through event in cl 3.1(e)
of Annexure B in the
following terms:
3.1 Cost Pass Through Events
For the purpose of this clause 3, each of the following is a “Cost Pass
Through Event”:
(e) ATCO Gas Australia incurs any costs in relation to the following
regulatory and compliance requirements or instruments:
Fee Description
1 Department of Commerce
EnergySafety Levy
2 WA Energy Disputes Arbitrator
Standing Charges for the GDL8- Quarterly Fee
3 Energy Industry Ombudsman
Levy – Annual Fee
Standard Charges GDL8 (First time charged starting April 2014) –
Quarterly Fee
Specific Charges
Gas Licence Fee GDL8 – Annual Fee
Annual Service Fee
Participant Training
9 Down to Earth Training & Assessing
WorkSafe licence Fee
10 Department Minerals and Petroleum
Pipeline Safety Case GD Pl 0150 Levy- Quarterly Fee
11 Department Minerals and Petroleum
Dangerous Goods Site Licence – Annual Fee
12 Department Minerals and Petroleum
Pipeline Licence PL 83 (Chargeable Length: 8kms) – Annual
13 Energy Safety Gas permits
Gas fitters must retain a current permit
14 Department of Land
Access Rights Charges: S14/Pipeline: 2010 to 2013/2014
15 Department of Land
Access Rights Charges: S14/Pipeline: 2014/2015- Annual
16 Landgate
Land Enquiry Fees, Access Licence
this revised cost pass through mechanism, ATCO sought to recover costs in
relation to the 16 regulatory and compliance requirements
listed, including
licence fees imposed by regulators or under legislation (‘
of the licence fees identified by ATCO in item 5 of cl 3.1(e) of the cost pass
through mechanism are “Specific Charges”
payable to the ERA. These
charges are payable by ATCO to the ERA under reg 6 of the
Economic Regulation
Authority (National Gas Access Funding) Regulations 2009
Funding Regulations
6 of the Funding Regulations relevantly provides:
(1) The Authority may give written notice to a person
described in Schedule 2 requiring the person to pay a charge in connection with
the performance of the corresponding functions described in that Schedule or the
doing of anything that was necessary or convenient
to be done for or in
connection with the performance of those functions.
(2) A notice under subregulation (1) must specify —
(a) the amount of the specific charge; and
(b) the day on which the notice was issued.
(3) The amount of a specific charge is to be an amount equivalent to costs
described in subregulation (4) that —
(a) have been incurred by the Authority; and
(b) are directly attributable to the performance of the relevant function or
to the doing of anything that was necessary or convenient
to be done for or in
connection with the performance of the relevant function.
(4) For the purposes of subregulation (3), the costs are —
(a) costs of consultants or contractors engaged by the Authority including
accommodation costs, travel costs and equipment costs;
(b) photocopying, mailing, publishing and advertising costs; and
(c) costs associated with public consultation conducted under the national
gas scheme laws.
reg 6(1), the ERA may by written notice require a person described in Sch 2 of
the Funding Regulations to pay a charge in connection
with the performance of
the corresponding functions described in that Schedule.
is a person captured by item 11 of Sch 2 and to which reg 6(1) applies. The ERA
may therefore give ATCO a written notice to
pay a relevant charge in connection
with the performance of the ERA’s functions under the NGR
Specific Charge
’). This is the Specific Charge ATCO
proposed to capture under item 5 of cl 3.1(e) of its pass through
reg 6(6) of the Funding Regulations, a person given a notice under reg 6(1) must
pay the Specific Charge to the ERA within 30
days of the date of issue of the
notice. The Specific Charge must be attributable to the costs listed in reg
6(4) that are incurred
by the ERA and attributable to the performance of its
its Amended Final Decision, the ERA rejected ATCO’s proposed revised cost
pass through event:
The Authority does not approve the changes made by
ATCO to clause 3.1 of Annexure B, and maintains its decision to reject
proposal to include increased regulatory costs as a cost pass
through. The Authority considers that ATCO has not addressed its concerns
relation to maintaining regulatory cost changes as cost pass throughs. The
Authority notes that ATCO does not report on its regulatory
costs separately,
which would create an oversight issue for the Authority in case such cost
increases are passed through.
ATCO has included additional detail in the cost pass throughs to cover
licence fee changes from those forecast as cost pass throughs.
The Authority
considers that ATCO should be responsible to ensure reasonable licence fee
forecasts. Moreover, the Authority reviews
these forecasts to ensure that they
are prudent and efficient. The Authority considers that any change to licence
fees as a result
of a change in Law can be considered as a cost pass-through in
accordance with the reference tariff variation
reference tariff variation mechanism as finally approved by the ERA relevantly
provides for the following cost pass through event:
2.1 Cost Pass Through Events
For the purpose of this clause 2, each of the following is a “Cost Pass
Through Event”:
(c) ATCO Gas Australia incurs Conforming Capital Expenditure or Conforming
Operating Expenditure as a result of a Change in Law or
Areas of dispute
ATCO contended that the ERA’s rejection of ATCO’s proposed cost pass
through event involved errors of fact, the
incorrect exercise of discretion and
was unreasonable.
advanced a number of arguments in support of its submission. Those arguments
broadly responded to the ERA’s reasons for
rejecting ATCO’s cost
pass through mechanism in its Amended Final Decision. It is therefore
convenient to consider each argument
of ATCO’s attack on the ERA’s
overarching criticism stemmed from the ERA’s view that ATCO should be
responsible for ensuring reasonable licence
fee forecasts. This suggested that
the ERA considered that it is reasonably possible for a service provider to
ensure reasonable
licence fee forecasts, in circumstances where the
regulator’s costs are out of the control of the service provider. As
fees are fees payable to regulators or under legislation or legislative
instruments, ATCO has no control over the amount of the licence
fees charged or
the rates or criteria used to calculate them, and no discretion whether or not
to pay them. Nor does ATCO have any
advance notice of any changes to be made to
those licences.
is said to be clearly illustrated by the example of Specific Charges. ATCO said
it has no control over, or ability to predict,
what consultants the ERA may
engage in the access arrangement revision process, the issues in respect of
which the ERA may seek consultant
input or the cost of those engagements. ATCO
indicated that, as at the date of the Access Arrangement Decision, the ERA had
2015 alone) already invoiced ATCO for over $85,000 more than the amount
included for such charges in the approved opex forecast for
ERA’s response is fivefold. First, just as for other regulatory costs, if
a licence fee cost arises from a change in law
then provision exists in the
tariff variation mechanism to allow for pass through of such costs.
ATCO has not demonstrated that it is in any worse a position as regards
forecasting or controlling its licence fee costs than
for any other regulatory
costs it incurs.
there is no logical basis for ATCO to single out licence fees for special
treatment as a cost pass through event as compared
with any other regulatory
ATCO does have insight into and control over the costs it is invoiced by the
ERA. ATCO submitted the AA Revision Proposal
and was aware of the relative
number and complexity of the proposed revisions, which will indicate the level
of costs likely to be
incurred by the ERA during the revision process.
if a service provider is acting prudently and efficiently as a licence holder,
the margin between its forecast and actual
costs for licence fees should be
relatively small and would likely be outweighed by the amount of administrative
costs involved in
claiming a pass through. It is relevant in deciding whether
to allow a pass through mechanism to consider whether the costs of administering
the variation mechanism are disproportionately high compared to the possible
passed through costs themselves.
ERA believed ATCO could mitigate its licence fee costs by complying with its
licence conditions, and being more efficient in its
dealings with the ERA.
Reasonable restrictions on the availability and operation of any pass through
mechanism are necessary to
guard against service providers passing through to
consumers the cost of their own lack of prudence or efficiency. Relevantly, for
example, users should not be charged higher tariffs because of a deficient
proposal that caused the ERA’s assessment to take
longer and require a
greater level of input from technical advisors.
overarching criticism is supported by a number of specific planks. In order to
deal with those additional planks, it
will invariably be necessary for the
Tribunal to address ATCO’s overarching criticism and the ERA’s
response. It is
therefore convenient to deal with the totality of ATCO’s
criticisms by proceeding to consider each plank.
ATCO submitted that one of the reasons for the ERA’s rejection of its
proposed mechanism was that it does not provide
the right incentives to focus on
cost efficiencies. This finding was made by the ERA in the Draft Decision. It
did not appear in
these express terms in the Amended Final Decision, though ATCO
said it follows from the ERA’s comments in the Amended Final
Decision that
ATCO had “not addressed its concerns” – a reference to not
having addressed the incentive issue from
the Draft Decision.
to the nature of the licence fees (imposed by regulators or under legislation or
legislative instruments), ATCO had no power or
control over the amount it pays.
Therefore, ATCO considered it irrelevant to speak of incentives in relation to
this category of
The ERA considered however that ATCO has influence over some of its licence
fees, such as the ERA charges under the Funding Regulations.
ATCO has some
knowledge and control over how much the ERA is likely to spend on the access
arrangement revision process, and consequently
over the amount ATCO is likely to
pay for these licence fees. In particular, the cost to the ERA of the access
arrangement revision
process is affected by the scale and complexity of
ATCO’s proposed access arrangement, and how efficient ATCO is in its
with the ERA, including in providing accurate information thus limiting
the need for subsequent information gathering. If ATCO were
permitted to simply
pass through its licence fee costs, it would not have an incentive to be
efficient in its dealings with the ERA.
is important to appreciate the context in which a pass through mechanism is
provided. A forecast of capex and opex is made and
ultimately feeds into the
building blocks. Those capex and opex forecasts will extend to regulatory and
other requirements, like
the current dispute over corporate support opex.
Leaving aside for the moment the issue of whether licence fees are truly out of
the control of a service provider (as ATCO contended), there is nothing unique
matter) that preclude them
from being assessed under the prudency and efficiency test. They ought to be
assessed under those tests
to ensure there is an incentive for a service
provider to act prudently and efficiently.
cost pass through mechanism should therefore only be reserved for those events
that are truly beyond contemplation. The reason
for that is because a cost pass
through mechanism will allow costs to flow through to reference tariffs during
an access arrangement
period, without those costs being subject to the same
prudency and efficiency tests at the time an access arrangement revision is
considered – unless the mechanism itself imports a prudency or efficiency
is then the issue of whether licence fees occupy any different place because
they are not within the control of the service
provider. It should be noted
that ATCO did not seek to distinguish, in any significant way, between the
different types of licence
fees, except for its particular emphasis on Specific
Charges. Nevertheless, it is useful to distinguish between two
of licence fees – Specific Charges and all other
licence fees (‘
’) in considering ATCO’s
criticisms.
Tribunal has already noted the basis on which the Specific Charges are levied.
It is true that these Specific Charges are levied
by the ERA and in that sense,
ATCO has little choice but to pay them, as levied.
that does not mean that ATCO’s actions have no impact on the amount of the
Specific Charges or what they encompass.
First, there are limitations on what
the ERA may levy under the Funding Regulation noted previously in these reasons.
The ERA may
only levy Specific Charges where they have been incurred by the ERA
and are directly attributable to the performance of the relevant
function, or to
the doing of anything that was necessary or convenient to be done for, or in
connection with, the performance of
the relevant function: see reg 6(3) Funding
Regulation. Also the only costs that the ERA may levy are the costs of
consultants or
contractors engaged by the ERA, administrative costs (such as
photocopying) and costs associated with public consultation: see reg
Funding Regulations. In this sense, although the quantum may vary between
access arrangements, the criteria for levying the
Specific Charges is well
addition, the process for the conduct of an access arrangement revision is (or
ought to be) well known to both the regulator and
service provider. That
process is well documented in the NGR. Necessarily, it involves a degree of
“back and forth”
between the service provider and regulator –
both in a formal way through the submission of a revision proposal and the
preparation
of decisions by the regulator – and informally through
numerous exchanges between the service provider and regulator as, for
occurred here in relation to the cost pass through mechanism.
ought to be known to a prudent service provider acting efficiently that it has
some control over the amount of a Specific Charge
by the nature and extent of
the issues it seeks to agitate with the regulator. The more issues that it
argues potentially translates
into greater expense for the regulator in public
consultation and in engaging experts, among other things and hence the higher
Specific Charges. As with litigation, a service provider should not be
rewarded for agitating every point – even where they
have little prospect
of success. In the context of the NGR, customers should not pay for these
inefficiencies. ATCO should be subject
to the discipline of acting prudently
and efficiently by having to forecast these costs with some precision, without
the need for
a cost pass through. It should not struggle to do so because it is
aware of the process under the NGR, has previous experience with
other revision
proposals and as explained, has a degree of control over the Specific Charges
through its own actions.
relevant Other Fees are those that ATCO has sought to capture in its revised
pass through mechanism noted previously in these
reasons. Those Other Fees
include matters such as annual charges and fees levied under legislation. The
Tribunal was not provided
with any substantial background to these Other Fees
and therefore cannot comment on how they are comprised, levied or their quantum.
In the absence of being taken to each of the Other Fees, the Tribunal is not
prepared to conclude that there is anything otherwise
particularly unique about
them that warrants a pass through. In any case, the Tribunal would expect ATCO
to be in a position to
provide some accurate forecasts in relation to them for
much the same reasons as it ought to be able to address Specific Charges
Tribunal has indicated.
ATCO also believed that the Access Arrangement Decision is likely to result in
ATCO not recovering the efficient licence
fee costs it incurs in providing
reference services, and therefore offends one of the RRP, as set out in s 24(2)
of the NGL.
to the nature of the licence fees, ATCO believed there was no issue that the
costs are efficient or would be incurred by a prudent
service provider under r
91(1). That is, licence fees – being costs that must be paid by a service
provider in the amount
specified by the relevant regulator or legislation
– are in a different category to most other opex costs, where a service
provider has discretion as to which costs it incurs and how and when they are
incurred. There is no scope for ATCO to achieve cost
efficiencies in respect of
licence fees, and therefore no reason to incentivise ATCO to incur those costs
efficiently. ATCO submitted
that this is an ideal example of a circumstance in
which the ERA should approve a cost pass through event, and one that satisfies
the requirements of r 97(3).
ERA maintained that it is not necessarily true that all licence fees incurred by
ATCO will have been incurred efficiently. They
may have been incurred or
increased because ATCO was not acting as a benchmark efficient service provider.
For example, if ATCO is
not efficient in its dealings with the ERA, then the ERA
may incur extra costs in dealing with ATCO’s inefficiencies, which
turn be passed on to ATCO as licence fees. Consequently, contrary to
ATCO’s assertions, there is scope for ATCO to
achieve cost efficiencies in
respect of licence fees, and some reason to incentivise ATCO to incur those
costs efficiently.
Tribunal has effectively addressed this issue in its consideration above. For
those reasons, the Tribunal rejects ATCO’s
assertion that it is deprived
of the ability to recover efficient licence fee costs it incurs in providing
reference services.
the ERA was concerned that ATCO’s proposed amendment is asymmetric, in
that it only addressed higher than forecast
regulatory costs; unforeseen
benefits may reduce ATCO’s regulatory costs.
argued that the criticism misconceives the nature and purpose of cost pass
through provisions. These are, of their nature, asymmetric.
The proposed pass
through event would only apply if there is under-forecasting of regulatory
compliance costs. The regulatory environment
faced by ATCO has shown no sign of
decreasing in complexity – the opposite is the case, and is likely to
remain so. ATCO maintained
it is apparent from the Amended AA Revision Proposal
that it intended to propose a cost pass through event which was symmetric (ie
which applied both to positive and negative changes in licence fees over the
period), and ATCO had no objection to the cost pass
through event operating
symmetrically.
ERA disagreed that it misconceived the nature or purpose of cost pass through
provisions. Under the AA3 access arrangement, which
was revised in the ERA
Access Arrangement, actual regulatory costs were and are assessed against
forecasts, and any over-spend or
under-spend was and is reflected in the tariff.
However, ATCO’s proposed cost pass through event would include only any
as a result of unforeseen costs related to existing regulatory
obligations and increases in licence fees. Further, the ERA maintained
ATCO’s assertion that regulatory compliance costs are unlikely to be
over-forecast is without foundation. As evidenced
by the ERA’s own gas
distribution licence fee, licence fees can decrease, not just increase. An
asymmetrical cost pass through
mechanism that allowed only for pass through of
under-forecast amounts could give the service provider a succession of windfalls
and would be contrary to the NGO.
Tribunal sees no reason why some licence fees might not increase or decrease or
why some licence fees may not be abolished altogether
or new ones added. A cost
pass through should also be able to cater for circumstances where there is a
decrease in fees. In any
case, ATCO, like any other service provider, is not
prejudiced by this approach. It has the opportunity through its forecasts to
address licence fee costs, and it is well equipped to do so for reasons already
discussed. In circumstances, for example, where
a new type of licence fee is
introduced by legislation, this will undoubtedly trigger the “Change in
Law” component of
the pass through and entitle recovery on that basis, as
discussed further below.
the ERA also rejected ATCO’s pass through because it considered that any
change to licence fees as a result of a change
in law could be considered as a
cost pass through in accordance with the reference tariff variation mechanism in
cl 2.1 of Annexure
B to the ERA Access Arrangement. It will be noted that that
mechanism provides for a pass through event if “ATCO Gas Australia
Conforming Capital Expenditure or Conforming Operating Expenditure as a result
of a Change in Law or Tax Change.”
expression “Change in Law” and “Tax Change” are defined
in the Dictionary in cl 12 of the ERA Access Arrangement.
The expression
“Change in Law” is defined as follows:
(a) the introduction of a new Law;
(b) an amendment to, or repeal of, an existing Law; or
(c) a new or changed interpretation of an existing Law resulting from a
decision of:
(i) a court;
(ii) a tribunal;
(iii) an arbitrator;
(iv) a Government or regulatory department, body, instrumentality, minister,
commissioner, officer, agency or other authority; or
(v) a person or body which is the successor to the administrative
responsibilities of any person or body described in paragraph (iv)
definition.
expression “Law” is defined to mean:
(a) written and unwritten laws (including, without limitation, laws set out
in statutes and subordinate legislation, the common law
and equity) of the
Commonwealth, of Western Australia, of local government authorities, and of any
other State, Territory or foreign
country having jurisdiction over the subject
matter of a Service Agreement, or the Access Arrangement; and
(b) judgments, determinations, decisions, rulings, directions, notices,
regulations, by-laws, statutory instruments, Codes of Practice,
Standards or orders given or made under any of those laws or by any government
agency or authority.
argued that the “Change in Law” cost pass through event in the ERA
Access Arrangement will not necessarily apply
to all changes in licence fees.
In particular, it will not apply to any licence fee changes that do not result
from a change in
legislation or from a change in the way in which (or the rate
at which) a fee is calculated. For example, the Specific Charges vary
to time, and cannot reasonably be forecast by ATCO, not because of any change in
the underlying Funding Regulations, or
because of any change in the way they are
calculated by the ERA, but merely due to the nature of the fee.
ERA expects that any significant changes to licensing fees, for example the
introduction of new charges, would be likely to fall
within the definition of a
“Change in Law”. Also, any new licence fee or material change to
the calculation of the fee
would likely require an amendment to the Funding
Regulations. In relation to ATCO’s example of Specific Charges, the ERA
that ATCO should be responsible to ensure reasonable licence fee
forecasts, consistent with the ERA’s statement to this effect
Amended Final Decision.
the Tribunal’s observation, the ERA and ATCO are at cross purposes in
their submissions on this issue.
ATCO is suggesting is that an increase, for example, in the quantum of the
Specific Charge levied by the ERA (other than from
a law change – such as
a change to the Funding Regulations) will not constitute a “Change in
Law” and will therefore
not entitle ATCO to recover that amount under the
pass through as drafted by the ERA. That is plainly correct because the
Charge will still be one levied under the existing provisions of the
Funding Regulations, albeit that the quantum levied may have
increased. That
is, it is clearly not the product of the introduction of a new Law, an amendment
to, or repeal of, an existing Law
or a new or changed interpretation of a Law,
within the definition “Change in Law” as the ERA contended.
the ERA was suggesting is that the introduction of a new licence fee will
require a law change. Similarly, a new way of determining
the Specific Charge
will undoubtedly require an amendment to the Funding Regulations. Such an
amendment would trigger the “Change
in Law” definition in the pass
and the ERA were therefore both correct in the way they have presented their
positions. However the real point of difference
is what is implicit in the
ERA’s position. It is that the cost pass through mechanism should only be
reserved for circumstances
where there is a true Change in Law (in the manner
they have explained) and not, as ATCO contended, where there is an increase in
quantum of a fee, that does not result from a law change. This seems to follow
from the ERA’s assertion that licence fees
do not stand in any different
position to other regulatory forecasts, and do not require a pass through except
in the case of a true
Change in Law. The Tribunal agrees with this position for
substantially the same reasons indicated in its treatment of the case
Specific Charges.
the ERA rejected ATCO’s cost pass through because “ATCO does not
report on its regulatory costs separately, which
would create an oversight issue
for the [ERA] in case such cost increases are passed through”.
considered this an unreasonable basis to reject its pass through for several
reasons. First, the proposed cost pass through
event identified comprehensively
and with specificity the licence fees to which it was to apply. Secondly, ATCO
had already provided
a detailed breakdown of its licence fee opex forecast by
individual licence fees, and it would have been straightforward for the
compare actual licence fees paid by ATCO during the period against the forecast,
and calculate any deviation from it. Finally,
the proposed access arrangement
(and the ERA Access Arrangement) includes a process for ATCO to provide the ERA
with a variation
report substantiating the basis for the cost pass through
before any variation to reference tariffs would take effect.
ERA’s response is little more than a general denial that it acted
unreasonably in rejecting ATCO’s proposed cost pass
through event on this
basis. In the Tribunal’s view, the ERA’s response is not
compelling. ATCO has submitted a number
of practical ways that the ERA can
manage the oversight issue including through a detailed breakdown of these costs
and through the
variation report contemplated by ATCO.
in rejecting ATCO’s pass through mechanism the ERA said:
The Authority considers that ATCO should be
responsible to ensure reasonable licence fee forecasts. Moreover, the Authority
these forecasts to ensure that they are prudent and
ATCO argued that the licence fee opex forecasts approved by the ERA in the
Access Arrangement Decision were not reasonable,
prudent and efficient licence
fee forecasts as they did not include any forecast changes (over 2014 levels) to
licence fees in the
remaining years of AA4.
maintained that it indicated (repeatedly) in its Amended AA Revision Proposal
that its proposed licence fee opex forecast was
based on the actual costs
expected to be incurred by ATCO in 2014, only on the basis that any deviation
from those amounts would
be recovered through the proposed cost pass through
event. That is, they did not represent a forecast of the likely licence fees
(including any possible increases or reductions in licence fees) payable over
AA4, but merely adopted 2014 costs for all future years
of the access
arrangement period on the assumption that any deviations would be captured by
the cost pass through mechanism.
following passages from ATCO’s Amended AA Revision Proposal allude to it
putting the ERA “on notice” of this:
With regard to licence fees, in section 6.2.3 AGA
provides a reforecast based on actual costs and costs expected to be incurred in
2014. AGA intends to recover any deviation from this forecast through the cost
pass through mechanism.
AGA has implemented the ERA’s amendment with a minor modification. AGA
has updated the forecast to reflect the expected licence
fees in 2014 and will
then adopt this amount in each year of AA4 unless it is advised of a change by
one of the licence fee vendors.
The list of vendors and reforecast of licence
fees for AA4 is shown in Table 6–23 below.
AGA notes that variations between licence fees actually paid and forecast
will be subject to a cost pass through application. Therefore,
it is important
to provide a specific and accurate forecast for these
in an e-mail from ATCO to the ERA dated 19 August 2015, ATCO raised concerns
regarding the removal of licence fees from the
cost pass through clause,
especially the determination of Specific Charges. The e-mail concluded by
requesting that the ERA reconsider
how changes in licence fees arising for
reasons other than a change in law will be dealt with in the Access Arrangement
the extent that [ATCO] is not able to reasonably forecast costs which
are efficient, prudently incurred and (in this particular case,
outside of its control.”
that e-mail was sent after the publication by the ERA of its Final Decision but
before the publication of its Amended Final
argued that the cost pass through event should have been approved, or a licence
fee opex forecast developed that reflected a
true forecast of licence fees
(including forecast changes as compared to 2014 levels) over the course of
ERA has not disputed in its submissions (at least not expressly) the
communications on 2014 opex claimed by ATCO. Rather, the
ERA’s response
is that even if those licence fee opex forecasts did not include any forecast
changes (over 2014 levels) in
the remaining years of AA4, that does not
necessarily make those forecasts not reasonable, prudent and efficient. The ERA
that ATCO was in a better position than the ERA to forecast the fees.
In addition, it was a reasonable assumption for the ERA to
make that what ATCO
forecasted at the 2014 level was done accurately and properly so that the
forecasted amounts were prudent and
efficient, given ATCO’s obligation
under r 74(2)(b) to submit forecasts representing the best forecast or estimate
in the circumstances.
ATCO’s Amended AA Revision Proposal, it should have been obvious to it
from the ERA’s Draft Decision, and at the
very least from the ERA’s
Final Decision, that the ERA had rejected the pass through in the form ATCO had
proposed. It was
unreasonable for ATCO to continue to assert a position
(including as late as its e-mail of 19 August 2015) when it well knew it had
been rejected and the ERA had proposed an alternative mechanism. Additionally,
there was no change in that mechanism between the
Final Decision and Amended
Final Decision. At some point the ERA needed to bring the issue to a
conclusion, which it did in its
Final Decision and ultimately in its Amended
Final Decision. It was not unreasonable at that stage for the ERA to proceed on
basis that ATCO’s forecasts of licence fees were properly formed. In
any case, it is also not clear to the Tribunal that the
costs at 2014 levels
which ATCO had submitted were not in themselves prudent and efficient.
Tribunal is satisfied that despite the relatively minor oversight argument, the
ERA’s rejection of ATCO’s proposed
cost pass through event did not
involve errors of fact, the incorrect exercise of discretion or was
unreasonable.
RETURN ON EQUITY
Introduction
seeks review of the ERA’s rejection of the Fama French three factor model
’) to calculate the return on equity.
the date of ATCO’s Review Application and the Tribunal’s hearing of
matters related to the rate of return, a separately
constituted Tribunal in
PIAC and Ausgrid
delivered its decision on related matters in the case of
NSW electricity distributors. Consequently, ATCO sought leave, which was
granted, to resubmit its Review Application which involved a change in the scope
of the challenge of matters for review. This reflected
the fact that
and Ausgrid
, similar matters related to the
regulator’s reliance or non-reliance upon estimation materials in rate of
return determination,
but did not explicitly consider the case of the FFM in
this regard.
Consequently,
as ATCO stated:
ATCO’s challenge is now limited to the
ERA’s rejection of the FFM as being
“irrelevant”
“not fit for purpose”,
findings that led to the ERA not
giving any weight to the “
factor or the
factor included in the
Legislative framework
requirements for determining the return on equity are set out in Pt 9 Div 5 of
the NGR. This division deals with the allowed
rate of return objective
’), which encompasses both return on equity and return
on debt for each regulatory year of an access arrangement period.
ARORO is described in r 87(3) of the NGR as follows:
allowed rate of return objective
the rate of return for a service provider is to be commensurate with the
efficient financing costs of a benchmark efficient
entity with a similar degree
of risk as that which applies to the service provider in respect of the
provision of reference services
allowed rate of return objective
allowed rate of return is to be a weighted average of the return on equity and
return on debt “determined on a nominal vanilla
basis that is consistent
with the estimate of the value of imputation credits referred to in rule
87A”: r 87(4)(b).
87(5) outlines the requirements for determining the allowed rate of return, as
In determining the
allowed rate of return
regard must be had to:
(a) relevant estimation methods, financial models, market data and other
(b) the desirability of using an approach that leads to the consistent
application of any estimates of financial parameters that are
relevant to the
estimates of, and that are common to, the return on equity and the return on
(c) any interrelationships between estimates of financial parameters that are
relevant to the estimates of the return on equity and
the return on
estimation of the return on equity is required to be undertaken such that it
“contributes to the achievement of the allowed
rate of return
objective”, and in doing so “regard must be had to the prevailing
conditions in the market for equity
funds”: r 87(6) and r 87(7).
to r 87(13), the ERA is required to make and publish rate of return guidelines.
Rule 87(14) requires that these guidelines
(a) the methodologies that the AER proposes to use in
estimating the
allowed rate of return
, including how those methodologies
are proposed to result in the determination of a return on equity and a return
on debt in a way
that is consistent with the
allowed rate of return
(b) the estimation methods, financial models, market data and other evidence
the AER proposes to take into account in estimating the
return on equity, the
return on debt and the value of imputation credits referred to in rule
the guidelines are not mandatory, the regulatory authority must state reasons
for any departure from them in reasons provided
for any access arrangement
decision: r 87(18).
ATCO’s matters for review
challenges under this ground of review relating to material errors of fact were
limited to those listed in ATCO’s
Review Application (and consequent
resultant errors regarding alleged superiority of the S-L CAPM). Ultimately,
this challenge hinges
upon whether the approach and results of several recent
Australian studies of the FFM, available at the time of the ERA decision,
have led the ERA to amend its view of the FFM being neither relevant nor fit for
specific challenges are as follows:
The ERA’s Final Decision, Amended Final
Decision and Access Arrangement
Decision involved the following error or errors of fact, alone or in
combination,
which were material to its decision, within the meaning of section 246(1)(a)
and/or (b) of the National Gas Law:
(a) The ERA’s finding that the FFM is empirically unstable and the
ERA’s finding that applications of the FFM in Australia
fail to produce
consistent outcomes contain errors of fact because some studies (in particular
the 2012 studies of Brailsford, Gaunt
and O’Brien) have used much larger
data sets and developed state of the art empirical methodologies (which are now
accepted good practice) and have given consistent results.
(b) The ERA’s finding that studies in the Australian context do not
consistently report that the additional value (HML) factor
used in the FFM is
priced is an error of fact because:
(i) there is consistent evidence that the
value factor is priced in the Australian market. In particular, the 2012 study
of Brailsford,
Gaunt and O’Brien has found strong support for the value
factor; and
(ii) the evidence before the ERA that the required return for high
book-to-market (or ‘value’) stocks is consistently
and materially
higher than the S-L CAPM would suggest is at least as extensive and
comprehensive as the evidence of the low equity
beta/Black CAPM effect (as
accepted by the ERA);
by ATCO relating to incorrect exercise of discretion or reaching an unreasonable
decision were limited to those in paras
54(a) – (k) of ATCO’s Review
Application below, with paras 54(ee) – (ll) dependent upon the ERA
incorrectly giving
any weight to the FFM:
exercise of the ERA’s discretion in making the Final Decision, Amended
Final Decision and Access Arrangement Decision was
incorrect and, further or
alternatively the ERA’s decision was unreasonable having regard to all the
circumstances within the
meaning of section 246(1)(c) and/or (d) of the National
Gas Law, because:
(a) the ERA erred in preferring its own study in relation to the FFM over the
published state-of-the-art study of Brailsford, Gaunt
and O’Brien,
contrary to the view of Professor Gray that no reasonable person would do so in
circumstances where:
(i) the ERA’s study
considered only 5 years of data (compared, for example, to the Brailsford, Gaunt
and O’Brien study
which considered 25 years of data) which is an
insufficient time period for a cross-sectional study and to test any asset
(ii) the ERA justified the length of its study by reference to the standard
Australian regulatory control period of 5 years, which
is wholly irrelevant to
the time period required for a valid cross-sectional asset-pricing test;
(iii) the ERA study did not consider at all the comparative performance of
the SL-CAPM (which is the only point of conducting such
a cross-sectional
(iv) the results of the ERA’s study are implausible (likely due to the
insufficient dataset);
(b) the ERA erred in concluding that it
should not apply more weight to higher quality studies (that adopt the latest
econometric
techniques, that use comprehensive and up-to-date data sets, and
which have been subjected to more scrutiny), but that it should
regard to all studies (regardless of their quality);
(c) the ERA erred in concluding that the fact that the FFM was originally
developed to improve upon the very poor empirical performance
of the S-L CAPM
actually supports the continued use of the S-L CAPM over the FFM. It is
illogical to maintain sole reliance on the
CAPM due to the fact that alternative
models (i.e. the FFM) were developed for the purpose of improving on the
CAPM’s poor
empirical performance;
(d) the ERA erred in concluding that the FFM cannot contribute to the rate of
return objective and is not fit for purpose of estimating
the return on
(e) the ERA erred in concluding that the FFM is not relevant because it is an
empirical test rather than an asset-pricing model when
the origins of the FFM
were in studies documenting the failings of the CAPM, which studies showed that
the additional factors introduced
by the FFM result in the modelling better
fitting the data;
(f) the ERA erred in concluding that the FFM is not relevant because a range
of studies produce a range of estimates without considering
the quality of those
studies or preferring the higher-quality studies over others;
(g) the ERA erred in concluding that the FFM is not relevant due to the
existence of other multi-factor models, none of which have
been recognised by a
Nobel Prize and none of which have been submitted by any stakeholders in this
(h) the ERA erred in preferring the use of the S-L CAPM over the FFM on the
basis that applications of the FFM in Australia fail to
produce consistent
outcomes and estimates from the FFM vary significantly and produce mixed results
without considering whether,
or to what extent, the S-L CAPM suffers from the
same criticisms;
(i) in rejecting the FFM as not relevant, the ERA erred in considering the
fact that the FFM has not been adopted in the estimation
of a return on equity
by other economic regulators, when the FFM is commonly used by market
practitioners and in academic research,
is discussed at length in textbooks, is
part of the curriculum for professional accreditation courses and has been
recognised by
a Nobel prize;
(j) the ERA erred in concluding that the FFM is not relevant, and preferring
the sole use of the S-L CAPM to estimate the return on
equity, when the most
comprehensive study to date (the 2012 Brailsford, Gaunt and O’Brien study)
found the FFM to be consistently
superior to the CAPM empirically;
(k) the ERA erred in not having regard to the FFM when estimating the return
The S-L CAPM
(ee) the ERA erred in concluding that an equity rate of return derived solely
from the S-L CAPM is consistent with the outcomes of
efficient, effectively
competitive markets, with prevailing market outcomes and for the benchmark
efficient entity;
(ff) the ERA erred in concluding that only the S-L CAPM should be utilised
directly to estimate the return on equity;
(gg) the ERA erred in concluding that incorporating returns from other models
would detract from the ability of the ERA to meet the
allowed rate of return
(hh) the ERA erred in concluding that its application of the S-L CAPM meets
the requirements of the National Gas Rules and the allowed
rate of return
Estimating the return on equity
(ii) the ERA failed to take all relevant information into consideration with
respect to its estimate of the return on equity in that
the ERA failed to use
any of the Black CAPM, DGM or FFM in directly estimating the return on equity
and relied solely on the S-L
CAPM to directly estimate the return on
(jj) rather than considering the Black CAPM, DGM or FFM and the returns they
produce from ATCO and then deciding whether they influence
the estimate of the
return on equity, the ERA erred in rejecting the models out of hand for directly
estimating the return on equity;
(kk) the ERA’s decision does not comply with Rule 87(5)(a) of the
National Gas Rules in that:
(i) under Rule 87(5)(a), in
determining the allowed rate of return, regard must be had to relevant
estimation methods, financial models,
market data and other evidence;
(ii) having decided that the Black CAPM, DGM and S-L CAPM are all relevant
for the purpose of estimating a return on equity for regulatory
decisions in
Australia, the ERA then determined that those models were irrelevant for the
purposes of determining the return on equity
to apply to ATCO and placed sole
reliance on the SL CAPM to calculate its estimate of the return on equity;
(iii) the ERA further erred in concluding that the FFM, which is a relevant
estimation method and/ or financial model, is not relevant;
(iv) the ERA further erred when it failed to accept the weightings which ATCO
had placed on Black CAPM, DGM, S-L CAPM, and FFM, as
set out in paragraph 49
above, when proposing the rate of return on equity to apply;
(ll) by reason of the errors identified in the preceding
sub-paragraphs:
(i) the ERA’s decision does not comply with Rule 87(6) of the National
Gas Rules in that it does not contribute to the achievement
of the allowed rate
of return objective as the rate of return derived from using the S-L CAPM only
to estimate the return on equity
is lower than the efficient financing costs of
a benchmark efficient entity with a similar degree of risk as that which applies
(ii) the ERA’s decision does not comply with Rule 87(7) of the National
Gas Rules in that it does not have proper regard to
the prevailing conditions in
the market for equity funds for the reasons set out above;
(iii) the ERAs decision not comply with Rule 87(2) and (3) as the allowed
rate of return will not achieve the allowed rate of return
(iv) the ERA’s decision does not comply with Rule 74(2) of the National
Gas Rules as it does not represent the best estimate
of the return on equity for
the benchmark efficient entity;
(v) the ERA’s estimate of the return on equity is unreasonably low and
will impede efficient investments and the ERA erred in
concluding to the
contrary; and
(vi) the ERA erred in concluding that its estimate of the return on equity is
commensurate with the equity costs incurred by a benchmark
efficient entity with
a similar degree of risk as ATCO with respect to the provision of reference
successful, ATCO requested that some weight be given to the outputs of a FFM in
the determination of the return on equity.
provided expert evidence from its consultant SFG Consulting
’) that the FFM would imply a return on equity of 6.1
percentage points above the risk free rate, compared to a 5.3 percentage
premium to the risk free rate in the Amended Final Decision. This would involve
an increase in the return on equity of 0.8
percentage points, which is material.
However, in its Amended AA Revision Proposal, ATCO had argued that a weighted
average of relevant
models be used, with a weight of 37.5% for the FFM.
Consequently, because this was viewed by ATCO as a constraint on allowable
challenges,
it argued that the FFM estimate be given a weight of 37.5% and the
ERA S-L CAPM based estimate be given a weight of 62.5%. This
would lead to 0.3
percentage points (37.5% of 0.8 percentage points) being added to the return on
The regulatory background
outlined by the Tribunal in
PIAC and Ausgrid
[648]), the 2012 Rule Amendments significantly altered the process for
determining the return on capital. Previously
r 87 of the NGR required the
return on equity to be determined using “a well accepted financial model,
such as the Capital
Asset Pricing Model”. The subsequent, now, required
approach is as set out above, and includes publication of rate of return
previously noted, the ERA published rate of return guidelines on 16 December
2013, together with an explanatory statement document
and appendices, one of
which (Appendix 8) contained the ERA’s evaluation of models for the return
on equity. This considered,
, various forms of the CAPM and
the FFM. The conclusion drawn by the ERA at that time regarding the FFM was
verall, the Authority has significant concerns as
to the robustness of the FFM model specification and its results, particularly
the model is not ‘based on a strong theoretical foundation’. The
Authority’s view is that the model is not ‘fit
for purpose’ or
able to be ‘implemented in accordance with best practice’ at the
current time. On this basis, the
Authority considers that the model cannot be
relied on to achieve the rate of return objective, and hence is not relevant at
current time.
ERA’s conclusion was that:
The Authority has reviewed these asset pricing
approaches in terms of their ability to contribute to the achievement of the
rate of return objective. The conclusion
from that assessment leads the Authority to consider that only the Sharpe
Lintner CAPM model is relevant for informing the Authority’s
estimation of
the prevailing return on equity for the regulated firm, at the current
However, the Authority proposes to give weight to relevant outputs from the
DGM when estimating the market risk premium (
) for input to the Sharpe
Lintner CAPM. In particular, estimates from the DGM will be used to inform the
range of the MRP, which will
be then used as input to the Sharpe Lintner
Other models and approaches are considered to be not relevant within the
Australian context at the current time, at least without
some new developments
in terms of the theoretical foundations or in the empirical
explicitly excluded a role for the FFM at that time, but did not preclude a
possible subsequent role if there were “some
new developments in terms of
the theoretical foundations or in the empirical evidence”.
the ERA outlined the following five step approach to be followed in estimating
the return on equity:
the light of the refined challenge by ATCO to the ERA decision, which focuses
upon the decision to disregard estimates of the return
on equity derived from
the FFM, it is primarily the first step in that process, to identify relevant
material and its role in the
estimate, which is at issue.
Regulatory decision
process of determination of the return on equity in the matter under appeal
involved the following stages. First, ATCO provided
its AA Revision Proposal in
March 2014 in which it argued that adherence to the ERA’s guidelines would
“not result in
an estimate of a return on equity that achieves the ARORO
or complies with the rules”. Among the reasons advanced was the
reliance of the ERA on the S-L CAPM and exclusion of other relevant estimation
methods and models. ATCO’s proposal
thus was to propose that an equally
weighted average of four methods of calculating the rate of return be used.
These four methods
(1) the required return of the average firm;
(2) the S-L CAPM;
(3) the FFM;
(4) the dividend growth model (‘
on expert advice from SFG, the rate of return on equity proposed by was 10.7%
its Draft Decision, the ERA rejected the approach proposed by ATCO. It noted in
its rate of return guidelines that “estimate
materials” (estimation
methods, financial models, market data, and other evidence) would need to pass
an “adequacy threshold”
to be considered relevant. It noted that
some may perform better on some criterion, and that an “on balance”
of contribution to the ARORO and compliance with legislative
requirements was required.
ERA responded to ATCO’s criticism that by excluding consideration of other
models, and in particular the FFM, it was not
determining a return on equity
consistent with the ARORO. The ERA rejected the arguments of ATCO and SFG,
concluding that it “remains
of the view that the FFM is not relevant
information in the context of estimating the return on equity”. In coming
view, the ERA:
(1) referred to its own empirical study of the FFM in
Australia (incorporated at Appendix 4 of the Draft Decision) as confirming the
inconsistency of results from previous applications of the FFM for Australia,
with particular reference to the role played by portfolio
formation methods in
such empirical studies;
(2) reiterated its concern about absence of underlying theory for the FFM; and
(3) noted the recent development by Professors Fama and French of a five factor
Particularly
relevant to the grounds of ATCO’s refined challenge, which relied heavily
on the results provided by two studies
by Brailsford, Gaunt and O’Brien
(and updating by SFG), the ERA noted that its view on the lack of robustness of
the FFM for
Australia was not changed by the updated study of Brailsford, Gaunt
and O’Brien.
its Amended AA Revision Proposal, ATCO argued that ERA’s rejection of
models other than the S-L CAPM is based on a number
of errors. With reference
to rejection of the FFM, ATCO noted the expert opinion from SFG that the errors
(1) to “reject the FFM on the basis of its
empirical motivation” when FFM was developed for the purpose of improving
the very poor empirical performance of the CAPM; and
(2) giving weight to the ERA’s own study compared to “the published
study of Brailsford, Gaunt and O’Brien, which
concludes that the
factor model is found to be consistently superior to the CAPM
Australian market”.
its Amended AA Revision Proposal, ATCO argued that:
AGA has based its estimate from the FFM on the SFG
2014 study, which sets out the most recent estimates of beta and the size and
book-to-market
premiums using Australian and US-listed observations. As a
result, AGA’s FFM estimate encompasses the most recent and relevant
information. In order to arrive at an estimate the FFM has been populated with
the following parameters:
Market beta of 0.77
Ex-imputation MRP of 6.53%
Risk premium in relation to the size factor of -0.19%
Risk premium in relation to the book-to-market of 1.15%
Risk free rate and required return on the market as specified in the SL CAPM
on advice from SFG, ATCO argued that the return on equity should be calculated
as a weighted average of four models: S-L CAPM
(weight of 12.5%); Black CAPM
(weight of 25%); FFM (weight of 37.5%); and DGM (25% weight), where these
weights differ from those
proposed in its AA Revision Proposal.
the justification for the weights, SFG noted that
[o]f the 75% weight that is applied to
asset-pricing-models, we apply half to the Fama-French model and half to the
CAPM. That is
the question of whether the value premium is a proxy for a risk
factor or a statistical aberration is addressed by applying equal
weight to each
possibility.
would appear to suggest that even ATCO recognised that some doubt exists over
the appropriate interpretation of the empirical
“facts” derived from
the modelling exercises of researchers.
its Final Decision and the Amended Final Decision – which involved no
changes relevant to this topic – the ERA amended
its approach to
determining the return on equity in a manner which
the S-L CAPM as the primary method for estimating the return on equity, but
incorporated information based on the Black
CAPM and the DGM.
doing so, it maintained its prior position of allowing no role for the FFM. The
ERA relied on the Australian Energy Market Commission
’) to explain that the 2012 Rule Amendments give the
regulator greater discretion, that “[t]he objectives and factors
regulator what it must bear in mind when it exercises that discretion”.
as the AEMC also said
the objective has primacy over other matters which
the regulator is directed to consider.
These other matters include factors which the regulator is directed to
consider....
The regulator must actively turn its mind to the factors listed, but it is up
to the regulator to determine how the factors should
influence its decision. It
may, indeed, consider all of them and decide none should influence its
PIAC v Ausgrid
(at [713]), the Tribunal affirmed the obligation on the
regulator as
requiring it to give consideration to the range of
sources of evidence and analysis to estimate the rate of return. It need not
particular weight to any one source of evidence, and indeed it might treat
particular evidence as having title or no weight in the
circumstances. It is for
the AER to make that assessment.
the Tribunal concluded that it “does not consider the AER, by selecting
the S-L CAPM as its foundation model made an
error of fact.”
ERA went on to say that following ATCO’s Amended AA Revision Proposal
including the proposed use of the FFM, the ERA “once
again gives
consideration to the ability of these models to deliver estimates that meet the
requirements of the NGR, and the allowed
rate of return objective, in what
follows.” The ERA then devoted approximately 11 pages to an assessment of
the FFM before
concluding that:
the Authority is of the view that the Fama French
three-factor model is neither relevant nor fit for the purpose of estimating a
on equity for a regulatory decision in Australia. As a result, the
Authority remains of the view that the FFM should
play no role in
estimating a return on equity for ATCO. This decision is based on
the following considerations:
The Fama French three-factor model was not developed
on a theoretical basis.
New factors that are now included in the new Fama French five factor
model raise questions about the validity of the FFM
three factor
The estimates from the Fama French three factor model vary
significantly and produce mixed results.
The Fama French three factor model is not used by economic regulators
either in Australia or overseas to estimate the
expected return on
is clear from the preceding, that the ERA did consider the potential role of the
FFM in the determination of the return on equity,
including making its own
assessment of the strengths and weaknesses of the model, and of the resulting
evidence from its application
to Australian equity markets. The issue is then
whether, in making that assessment, the ERA committed an error or errors of fact
or was unreasonable in deciding to reject a role for the FFM.
Consideration
ATCO listed a large number of failures by the ERA, they all stand or fall upon
one specific question: was the available evidence
such that incorporation of
information from available FFM studies of the Australian equity market would
have led the ERA to make
a return on equity decision more consistent with the
ARORO, and lead to a materially preferable designated NGO decision?
ultimately involves comparison of the merits of alternative models generating
different results, based on relevant criteria.
However, while there are (or may
be) cases where unanimity would exist about the superiority of one model over
another, this, as
reflected in the differing views of experts, is not such a
case. Reasonable people could disagree based on different emphasis placed
different criteria as well as differences in assessment of how well different
models met those criteria. This is particularly
the case in the current
circumstances where the objective of inquiry is estimation of the required rate
of return demanded by equity
investors in a company, at a particular point in
time. That is, itself, directly unobservable, and must be inferred from other
observable data using models incorporating allowance for risks (risk premiums),
or other considerations, which are believed to influence
the rate of return
demanded by investors. Identifying what are relevant risks, and then reliably
quantifying their effects are particular
issues involved in this instance.
FFM was developed as an empirical model prompted at least in part by observed
anomalies inconsistent with the CAPM. In particular,
it was observed that
historical returns on equities (after allowing for the effect of the systematic
risk factor implied by the CAPM)
were related to size and to book-to-market
value of companies. This prompted research as to whether these might reflect
of additional risk factors (rather than simply being characteristics
of the company) contributing to required returns.
FFM thus involved constructing variables which might represent such risk factors
and assessing whether stock returns were reliably
related (with differing
sensitivities) to movements in these variables. The risk factors constructed in
the FFM involved a relatively
complicated process of constructing a number of
portfolios each of which comprised stocks with particular size characteristics,
particular book-to-market value characteristics. For example, one portfolio
might contain those stocks which were in both the top
size decile and in the top
decile by book-to-market value. At the other extreme would be a portfolio
containing stocks in both the
bottom deciles by size and book-to-market value.
“risk factors” are proxied by the variation over time in the
difference in returns between various portfolios. The
HML (book-to-market)
factor is the difference in returns between the portfolios including,
respectively, the highest and lowest book-to-market
value stocks. The SMB
(size) factor is, similarly, the difference in returns between portfolios of
smallest and largest stocks.
There are potentially many ways of forming such
portfolios (and in how their composition varies over time), and various ways of
testing whether the resulting risk factors contribute reliably to explaining
historical stock returns. By assuming that resulting
historical relationships
provide some guide to the future it is then inferred that the risk factors are
also relevant for determining
required returns (just as occurs in use of the
CAPM). The contribution made to required returns reflects the estimated
sensitivity
of a stock’s return to the risk factor (its factor loading)
multiplied by the risk premium associated with that risk factor.
FFM has had a significant influence on the academic finance research agenda,
leading to many studies applying similar methods
to different markets as well as
many attempts to find other risk factors. Academic research presented to the
Tribunal indicates
the “discovery” by various researchers of over
three hundred such factors – although that research also raised
used as supporting evidence led to incorrect
acceptance of many newly discovered
risk factors.
many of those subsequent studies build on the foundations of the FFM (by
including the size and value factors), the FFM is not
universally accepted as
providing a “better” model for the explanation of equity returns for
a range of reasons exemplified
in the debate between the ERA and ATCO.
is not the role of the Tribunal to assess the merits of the FFM versus the S-L
CAPM, but rather to consider whether the ERA made
errors in rejecting a role for
the FFM, on incorrect reasons, or in misinterpreting, such reasons. It is those
reasons to which
the Tribunal now turns.
Theoretical Foundations
plank in the ERA’s argument for disregarding the FFM is concern over its
genesis as an empirical approach without prior
theoretical foundation. As
argued by ATCO (and SFG), the discovery of empirical irregularities prior to
development of generally
accepted theoretical explanations should not
necessarily weaken confidence in a model. There have been subsequent attempts
a theoretical foundation for the FFM (including arguments that it is
not inconsistent with some existing theories such as the Arbitrage
Theory which admits of multiple risk factors but without identifying
theoretically what they are). However, experts disagree
on whether the
research, to date, provides a clear theoretical foundation for the empirical
Tribunal is of the view that it was not an error, nor unreasonable, for the ERA
to take into account, as one input into its decision,
concerns over the
theoretical foundations of the FFM in coming to its view to disregard the FFM in
determining the ARORO. By itself,
lack of a generally accepted theoretical
explanation for a consistently demonstrated and agreed set of empirical
in the form of results of statistical analysis, would be
unlikely to lead a reasonable person to disregard those facts in attempting
draw conclusions about their implications. In this case, the
“facts” are the existence of a statistical relationship
between the
return on equity and some particular financial variables, variously constructed
by researchers, and all purporting to
represent the same concepts. However,
where those empirical facts are not generally agreed, perhaps because different
researchers
have constructed empirical proxies differently for the same concept,
concerns about lack of strong theoretical foundations could
be expected to lead
a reasonable person to place less, or no, weight on the model generating those
“facts”. Thus whether
the ERA’s decision in this regard was
unreasonable, hinges on whether it erred in interpreting the robustness of the
before it regarding outputs from the FFM. This is
considered in later paragraphs.
New five factor model implications
ERA made submissions referring to the development by Professors Fama and French
of a new five factor model for equity returns.
It was argued that their
estimates of this model for the case of the USA had led to results which
appeared to remove the role of
the HML factor as a determinant of equity
returns. Since there is no argument in this appeal to use the new five factor
the determination of the ARORO, this reason has little relevance, other
than its potential for causing the ERA or other parties to
be sceptical of the
three factor FFM to place reduced weight on the empirical facts emanating from
Mixed results
the Amended Final Decision, the ERA argued that one reason for disregarding the
FFM is that “the estimates ...vary significantly
and produce mixed
results”. This general statement was made more specific:
applications of the FFM in Australia fail to produce
consistent outcomes;
...studies in the Australian context do not consistently report this pricing
– some studies price the size factor, while others
price the value
different proxies are adopted...with the result that the estimates from the
FFM vary significantly from study to study;
...adopting different portfolio formation on the same dataset will provide
difference outcomes, yet portfolio formation is a key characteristics
support of these contentions, the ERA provided at Table 73 the results of a
number of prior studies (including two papers by Brailsford,
O’Brien from 2012 which feature prominently in ATCO’s submission,
namely: ‘The Investment of the value
premium’ in the Pacific Basin
Finance Journal (‘
’), and ‘Size and
book-to-market factors in Australia’
in the Australian Journal of
Management (‘
’)). The ERA also referred to its own
FFM study, one conclusion drawn from which was that results were significantly
on the method of portfolio formation used. This was also the
conclusion of the BGO PBFJ paper which stated that “different
portfolio formation lead to different conclusions.”
ERA pointed to different results in a prior version of the BGO AJM paper from
2008 where a different portfolio formation process
was used. The Tribunal
recognises that the evolution of approaches and differences in results in
succeeding versions of a research
project’s output are an inherent feature
of the research process, rather than indicating that the credibility of the most
results is contaminated by differences with earlier results, as was
suggested in the oral submission. However, the sensitivity of
different approaches found in the two papers does reinforce the position of the
ERA that results of applications of the
FFM are dependent upon the approach used
(in this, case for portfolio formation). In addition, in the absence of a
single generally
agreed “right” approach, there is therefore
uncertainty about the superiority of one set of results over another.
argued that the ERA made an error (or errors) of fact in concluding that mixed
results were a relevant factor for disregarding
the FFM in determining the
return on equity. Their argument was based on the existence of BGO PBFJ and BGO
AJM, and the subsequent
updating of those studies by SFG. The claim is that
those studies (the latest available at the date of the ERA’s decision)
adopt superior techniques and data to previous Australian studies (including
that undertaken by the ERA itself), and should lead
to acceptance of their
results as providing confirming evidence of the relevance of the FFM to
Australia, and providing reliable
estimates of its quantitative significance.
In particular, BGO AJM finds that the HML factor is priced and consistent with
expectations,
although the SMB factor results are not consistent with
expectations. The ATCO proposal for an adjustment to the return on equity
based on results from SFG applying and updating BGO AJM (including the effects
of both the HML and SMB factors).
is little question that BGO AJM involves use of a more comprehensive database
than prior Australian studies. It is also the
case that the BGO studies
carefully investigate the effects of some commonly used different methods of
portfolio formation –
and find (as does the ERA’s own study) that
results are dependent upon the approach used. In BGO AJM they construct
in a way which more closely resembles the FFM approach for the USA
and which they state is “a more appropriate portfolio formation
method” and find that the HML factor is priced, but the SMB factor is not.
Specifically, the results involve a coefficient
on the HML factor which is
positive and statistically significant, but an insignificant negative
coefficient on the SMB factor (which
is of opposite sign to that expected).
Tribunal accepts that there may be “more appropriate” ways to
conduct empirical research which, in this case involves,
methods of portfolio formation. Whether there is a “most
appropriate” way and whether the BGO approach is more appropriate
others simply because it resembles the Fama-French USA approach and generates
some similar results are, at the current time,
open questions. The issue thus
becomes that of what weight a reasonable person would accord to the results of a
range of studies
and the implications of variations between them.
effectively argued that full weight should be given to BGO AJM (and SFG
updates), and other FFM studies in Australia be given
no weight. (In
submissions, ATCO referred to the BGO studies as providing a
“watershed” moment in the Australian search
for reliable estimates
of risk factors and their effects on the required return on equity). It thus
argued that the claim that diverse
results from a range of previous studies mean
that the FFM is unstable and thus not relevant for determining the return on
is invalid. The ERA alternatively argued that the diversity of results
arising from different approaches means that no conclusive
results can be drawn
from existing Australian FFM studies regarding the required return on equity.
The ERA argued:
The Authority disagrees with SFG’s view
that a range of studies of variable quality produce a range of
and therefore should not be used as the basis for the
outright rejection of the entire model and that a better
approach is
to consider the robustness and the reliability of the best available
estimates of each model.
Furthermore,
the ERA rejected BGO and the SFG updates as superior to other studies.
Tribunal’s role is not to pass judgment on the superiority of one study
over the others investigating the application of
the FFM to Australian data.
Its role is to assess whether the regulator made errors or was unreasonable in
considering (or not considering)
the available information available to it in
forming a judgment about the merits of incorporating results from one, or some,
of those studies into its determination of the return on equity.
ERA decided that, contrary to the view of SFG (and some other experts), the
range of diverse results from the range of available
studies meant that no
confidence could be placed on any of those results. In this, it was supported
by the views of its own experts,
McKenzie and Partington. Ultimately, the
decision involves a subjective weighting of the facts available which, in this
varying statistical estimates of particular parameters from a range of
studies. The claimed superiority (by ATCO) of BGO AJM (and
the SFG updates)
might lead one to accord greater weight to their estimates, relative to those of
other studies.
Alternatively,
one could be inclined to accord full weight to the results of the claimed
superior study, and interpret that study’s
method and results as
demonstration of support for the model involved. This is a matter on which
reasonable people could disagree,
due to differences in caution, different prior
beliefs, or subjective weightings of alternative types of evidence, without
demonstrable error. The Tribunal accepts that the ERA did carefully
consider the merits of the FFM, including results from the latest
research, before rejecting the use of the FFM, and in doing so did not make
errors of fact or act unreasonably.
No prior use by regulators
The ERA’s Amended Final Decision refers to no prior use of the FFM by
regulators in Australia and overseas, as a further reason
supporting its
decision to disregard the FFM. This, it was argued by ATCO, involves circular
reasoning, such that prior non-use
justifies continued non-use, regardless of
new evidence. That would be the case if decisions of other regulators to eschew
were based on lack of investigation or evidence of merits of the FFM,
and that the ERA acted similarly. It could then amount to
an error of fact or
unreasonable decision. However, an alternative explanation is that decisions by
other regulators have been based
on analysis of evidence and led them to a
decision to reject use of the FFM, with those decisions not having been
previously found
to constitute errors in available appeal processes. This would
then provide support, in the absence of new contradictory evidence,
for adopting
the same position – rather than simply revisiting arguments raised in such
prior cases.
this instance, new evidence has been advanced by ATCO. Thus, sole reliance on
the rejection of the FFM in prior regulatory decisions
as an explanation for the
ERA’s decision would be unreasonable, or an error if that new evidence
were persuasive. However,
because the ERA has considered that new evidence and
rejected it, it is not unreasonable to draw upon prior regulatory decisions
support of its view to reject the FFM in this case. Consequently, the Tribunal
is of the view that the ERA did not make an error
of fact or act unreasonably in
relying on prior rejection of use of the FFM by other regulators as one factor
in reaching its decision.
Tribunal finds that the ERA did not make an error of fact or act unreasonably in
rejecting use of the FFM in calculating the return
ERA considered the Tribunal’s reasons for decision in
ERA accepted that it would undermine the effectiveness of the regulatory regime
and would be against the public interest in consistency
of decision-making for
it to re-argue matters that have recently been considered and decided by the
Tribunal in that matter, notwithstanding
that aspects of the
decision relating to the value of imputation credits are currently
the subject of an application for judicial review before the Federal
the purpose of this application, and applying the reasons of the Tribunal in
PIAC and Ausgrid
, the ERA accepted that:
(1) the ERA has made a reviewable error in its decision
to apply a gamma of 0.4 in its rate of return determination in the Amended
Decision; and
(2) the best estimate of gamma on the basis of the material before the ERA at
the time of its Amended Final Decision was 0.25.
Tribunal accepts, on the basis of the material before it, that a gamma value of
0.25 should be adopted and that the ERA erred
in adopting the alternative figure
DISPOSITION
259(4a)-(4c) were inserted into the NGL with effect from March 2014.
Section 259(4a) provides that, in a case where the
decision under review is
a designated reviewable regulatory decision, the Tribunal may only make a
determination to vary the designated
reviewable regulatory decision (under s
259(2)(b)) or to set aside the designated reviewable regulatory decision and
remit the matter
(a) the Tribunal is satisfied that to do so will, or
is likely to, result in a decision that is materially preferable to the
reviewable regulatory decision in making a contribution to the
achievement of the national gas objective set out in s 23 of the NGL
materially preferable designated NGO decision
) (and if the Tribunal is
not so satisfied the Tribunal must affirm the decision under s 259(2)(a));
(b) in the case of a determination to vary the designated reviewable
regulatory decision, the Tribunal is satisfied that to do so
will not require
the Tribunal to undertake an assessment of such complexity that the preferable
course of action would be to set
aside the decision and remit the matter to the
ERA to make the decision again.
considering its role in the review process, the Tribunal in
(at [91] – [93]) made the following pertinent
the correction of error or errors in a decision under
review will not necessarily lead to a materially preferable decision. Whether
there is a preferable decision to the decision made by the AER depends upon an
assessment of the decision as a whole, and a
of that decision
with a putative alternative decision; it does not depend simply on an assessment
of errors in individual components
of the decision under review. That reflects
the Minister’s comments that the 2013 Legislative Amendments:
Require the [Tribunal] to undertake a
holistic assessment of whether the setting aside or varying of the reviewable
regulatory decision,
or remission of the matter back to the original decision
maker, will or is likely to deliver a materially preferable outcome in the
term interests of consumers.
See: South Australia, House of Assembly, Hansard, 26 September 2013 at 7173
(The Hon J R Rau).
The 2013 Legislative Amendments reflect a deliberate policy decision to
change the NEL and NGL and, in particular, to change the scope
Tribunal’s limited merits review function. They introduce a series of
steps which require the Tribunal, even if it
is satisfied of one or more grounds
of review arising from one particular aspect of the AER’s decision, to
consider whether
and how the potential consequences of that ground being
established may be reduced, counterbalanced or rendered immaterial following
processes mandated by ss 71P(2a), 71P(2b)(a) and 71P(2b)(c) of the NEL and ss
259(4a), 259(4b)(a) and 259(4b)(c) of the NGL.
...it is axiomatic in the principles of regulatory economics, that promoting
allocative, productive and dynamic efficiency generally
serves the long term
interests of consumers. However, the 2013 Legislative Amendments contemplate
that there can be more than one
available decision that is economically
efficient – and certainly more than one available decision that is roughly
regard to the unavoidable approximations involved.
The role of the AER and the Tribunal in giving effect to the NEO and NGO is
to promote the “long term interests of consumers”
with respect to
the matters stipulated. This will always involve an attempt to promote
efficient investment in, and operation and
use of, services, but will also
require taking into account other factors as
appropriate.
the Tribunal has not found there to be any error in the ERA’s decision,
other than in relation to gamma, the question is
as to the appropriate relief to
provide. The Tribunal is of the view that the relevant decisions should be set
aside and a new decision
made so as to take into account the correct value of
gamma, but this should be done by the ERA.
Tribunal is satisfied that for it to do so would require the Tribunal to
undertake an assessment of such complexity that it is
not appropriate for it to
undertake that task and it is preferable that the matter be remitted to the
Tribunal is satisfied that in so acting in setting aside the relevant decisions
of the ERA, and in remitting, will likely result
in a decision that is
materially preferable to the relevant decision set aside in making a
contribution to the achievement of the
Tribunal determines that:
(1) Pursuant to s 259(2)(c) of the
National Gas
Access (Western Australia) Law
, the Amended Final Decision, including
appendices, and the Access Arrangement Decision, including appendices, are set
aside and remitted
to the ERA to make the decisions again in accordance with the
following directions:
(a) the ERA is to decide the constituent
components of the Amended Final Decision and Access Arrangement Decision that
involve the
estimated cost of corporate income tax (gamma) by reference to a
gamma of 0.25; and
(b) the ERA is to consider, and to the extent appropriate, to vary interrelated
constituent components of the Amended Final Decision
and Access Arrangement
Decision, having regard to s 28(1)(b)(iii) of the NGL, where necessary in light
of variations made to the
Amended Final Decision and Access Arrangement Decision
by reason of sub-para (a) above.
I certify that the preceding six hundred and ninety-three (693) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination
herein of the
Honourable Justice Middleton, Professor K T Davis and Mr R
Dated: 13 July 2016
RTF format (24.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format