Rindeklev v Comcare (No 3) [2025] FCA 1399 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Rindeklev v Comcare (No 3)
File number:
WAD 227 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Cases cited:
Masters v Lombe (liquidator), in the matter of
Babcock & Brown Limited (in liq) (Referee Report)
[2025] FCA 740
Rindeklev v Comcare
[2024] FCA 1023
General Division
Western Australia
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Determined on the papers
Counsel for the Applicant:
The applicant appeared in person
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Moray & Agnew Lawyers
WAD 227 of 2023
GUNILLA RINDEKLEV
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth), the report
of the referee, National Judicial Registrar Trott, dated 31 July 2025, as to the
lump sum quantum of costs be adopted
quantum of costs to be paid by the applicant to the respondent pursuant to the
orders made on 21 November 2024 be determined in
the amount of
$29,722.90.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Rindeklev brought proceedings in this Court seeking to review a decision by the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal. Her application
was unsuccessful:
Rindeklev v Comcare
[2024] FCA 1023.
Orders were made requiring
Ms Rindeklev to pay Comcare's costs of and incidental to those proceedings,
'save and except for the
costs incurred in relation to the refusal to make any
further confidentiality order'. The costs were to be quantified on a lump
basis by a registrar acting as referee. A copy of the referee's report was
provided to the parties. Orders were made for any
application 'for any order
other than an order that the report be adopted shall be filed and served on or
before 22 August 2025'.
It was further ordered that if no such application was
filed then the question whether the report shall be adopted and the orders
consequent upon the determination of the question will be dealt with by the case
managing judge on the papers before the registrar.
authorities as to the procedure to be followed in considering whether to adopt
the report of a referee, as applied to a referee
report as to costs, were
recently considered by Cheeseman J in
Masters v Lombe (liquidator), in the
matter of Babcock & Brown Limited (in liq) (Referee Report)
the registrar was an affidavit of Ms Amanda Danti which deposed to a
summary of costs being a fair and accurate summary of
the costs and
disbursements that the respondent was entitled to claim pursuant to the order
made as to costs (see paras 2 and 4).
It follows that, on the evidence before
the registrar, the costs claimed did not include the costs incurred in relation
to the refusal
to make any further confidentiality order.
referee report sets out the procedure that was followed by the registrar. It
records the opinion of the registrar that the quantum
of the lump sum costs
should be fixed in the amount of $29,722.90. The amount was assessed by the
registrar on a broad-brush basis
applying an overall discount to fees that, in
the opinion of the registrar, 'cannot be shown [to be in respect of] legal work
[that] was excessive or unwarranted or not fairly and reasonably
incurred'. The application of a discount on that basis is orthodox.
Ms Rindeklev
has not brought any application for any order that the referee report not be
adopted or for any variation of the report
or for any aspect to be sent back to
the referee. There being no contested issue as to law or facts, it is
appropriate for the matter
of the amount of the costs to be paid to be
determined on the papers.
the principles as to adoption of a referee's report, I have reached the
following conclusions:
(1) there can be no issue as to the registrar's expertise in circumstances where
registrars of this Court act as taxing officers;
(2) there is no evident error of principle in the preparation of the report;
(3) the factual matters relied upon were supported by an affidavit provided to
the registrar;
(4) the conclusion reached does not indicate error; and
(5) Ms Rindeklev has not sought an order that the report not be adopted.
those reasons, I am satisfied that the referee's report should be adopted. An
order on that basis as to the quantum of costs
to be paid by Ms Rindeklev
should be made.
I certify that the preceding seven (7) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 13 November 2025
RTF format (277 KB)
Signed PDF/A format