TJKB; Secretary, Department of Social Services and (Social security second review) [2025] ARTA 2396 (10 November 2025)
TJKB; Secretary, Department of Social Services and (Social security second
review) [2025] ARTA 2396 (10 November 2025)
Applicants:
Secretary, Department of Social
Secretary, Department of Education
Respondent:
Tribunal Numbers:
2023/5744, 2023/5745, 2023/5762, 2023/5763,
2023/5764, 2023/5765, 2023/5766 & 2023/5767
Senior Member T Hamilton-Noy (second review)
The Tribunal sets aside the decision under review and makes
a decision in substitution that:
(i) The Respondent was a member of a couple, for social security purposes, from
30 November 2015;
(ii) The Respondent’s carer payment was correctly cancelled from 9
December 2021;
(iii) The Respondent owes debts of newstart allowance totalling $6,415.50 for
the period 30 November 2015 to 6 April 2016, parenting
payment (single)
totalling $30,403.52 for the period 7 April 2016 to 25 September 2017, newstart
allowance totalling $11,606.21 for
the period 26 September 2017 to 19 June 2018,
parenting payment (single) totalling $7,534.66 for the period 20 June 2018 to 1
2018, newstart allowance totalling $8,092.59 for the period 1 November
2018 to 6 May 2019, carer payment totalling $65,011.58 for
the period 7 May 2019
to 8 December 2021, newstart allowance totalling $2,837.18 for the period 9
December 2021 to 22 March 2022
and the debts are all recoverable by the
Commonwealth;
(iv) Any debts of family tax benefit for the 2015/16, 2016/17, 2018/19 and
2020/21 financial years are to be recalculated and are
recoverable by the
Commonwealth;
(v) The Respondent owes a debt of child care benefit in the amount of $1,251.86
for the period 3 July 2017 to 1 July 2018 and this
amount is recoverable by the
Commonwealth; and
(vi) The Respondent owes a debt of child care rebate in the amount of $1,065.86
for the period 3 July 2017 to 24 September 2017 and
this amount is recoverable
by the Commonwealth.
Statement made on 10 November 2025 at 4:41pm
Names used in all published decisions are pseudonyms. Any references
appearing in square brackets indicate that information has been
removed from
this decision and replaced with generic information so as not to identify
involved individuals as required by
subsections 201(1A)
(1B) of the
Security (Administration) Act 1999
subsections 161(1B)
(1C) of the
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
Member of a couple – paid single rates of payment – whether
partnered – cancellation of carer payment – carer
payment debt
– newstart allowance debt – parenting payment debt – family
assistance debts – knowingly provided
false information – no grounds
for waiver or write off of debts
Legislation
Administrative Review
Tribunal (Consequential and Transitional Provisions No.
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
Social Security Act 1991
Social Security (Administration) Act
Day and Secretary, Department of Education, Employment and Workplace
[2009] AATA 415
Drake and Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No 2)
Kazmierczak and Secretary, Department of Families, Housing, Community
Services and Indigenous Affairs
[2010] FCA 1084
Melvin v Secretary, Department of Social Security
[2016] FCA 375
Pelka v Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
(2006) 151 FCR 546
RFZX and Secretary, Department of Education, Employment and Workplace
[2010] AATA 35
Staunton-Smith v Secretary, Department of Social Security
[1991] FCA 513
Wall and Secretary, Department of Education, Employment and Workplace
[2010] AATA 740
Zablotsky and Secretary, Department of Social Services
[2020] AATA
Statement of Reasons
application relates to a series of decisions by the Applicants (Services
Australia – Centrelink) to find that the Respondent
was a member of a
couple, for social security purposes, and to raise debts arising from
overpayments of carer payment, newstart allowance,
parenting payment (single),
family tax benefit, child care benefit and child care rebate.
Respondent was paid social security and family assistance payments between 30
November 2015 and 22 March 2022 at the single rate
of payment. Following a
review of his circumstances, an employee of Centrelink assessed that the
Respondent had been a member of
a couple with his Alleged Partner (AP) from 30
November 2015. As a result of this finding, the following decisions were made by
Centrelink:
To cancel the
Respondent’s carer payment on 3 February 2022;
To raise and
recover debts of carer payment, newstart allowance and parenting payment
totalling $131,901.24 for the period 30 November
2015 to 22 March 2022;
To raise and
recover family tax benefit debts in the amounts of $5,066.29 for the period 28
August 2015 to 30 June 2016, $3,066.38
for the 2016/17 financial year,
$11,478.14 for the 2018/19 financial year and $9,917.43 for the 2020/21
financial year;
To raise and
recover a child care benefit debt of $1,251.86 for the period 3 July 2017 to 1
July 2018; and
To raise and
recover a child care rebate debt of $1,065.86 for the period 3 July 2017 to 24
September 2017.
a request for an internal review by the Respondent, an authorised review officer
of Centrelink affirmed the decisions on
17 January 2023.
Respondent then sought a review of the decisions by the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal (AAT) and on 26 June 2023, the AAT at
first review set aside the
decisions under review and substituted its decision that the Respondent was not
a member of a couple with
AP from 30 November 2015 to 3 June 2020 and was a
member of a couple with AP from 4 June 2020. As a result of this, he was
to be paid the single rate of carer payment and family tax benefit
between 30 November 2015 and 3 June 2020. Any recalculated debt
was recoverable
by the Commonwealth.
of the findings of the AAT about the period he was not a member of a couple, the
AAT also went on to find that the Respondent
did not owe a child care benefit
debt for the period 3 July 2017 to 1 July 2018 and did not owe a child care
rebate debt for the
period 3 July 2017 to 24 September 2017.
Applicants then sought a second review of the decision by the AAT.
14 October 2024, the AAT became the Administrative Review Tribunal (the
Tribunal). Under the transitional provisions in the
Administrative Review
Tribunal (Consequential and Transitional Provisions No.
1) Act 2024
(the Transitional Act)
applications for review to
the AAT that were not finalised before 14 October 2024 are taken to be an
application for review to the
Tribunal. The Transitional Act gives the Tribunal
the authority to continue and finalise any aspect of the review not already
by the AAT. This decision and statement of reasons is made by the
Tribunal hearing was conducted on 11 August, 12 August, 13 August and 9
September 2025. The Respondent appeared in person and
gave evidence on
affirmation and the Tribunal also heard evidence from AP, who also appeared in
person and gave evidence on affirmation.
A representative for the Applicants
appeared at the hearing in person.
The law relevant to a
“member of a couple” assessment
rates of social security payments and family assistance payments are determined
by a range of factors, including whether a person
is single or is partnered (a
“member of a couple”).
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999
Family Assistance Act) states that a “member of a couple” has the
same meaning as in the
Social Security Act 1991
Security Act
Social Security Act
states that, subject to subsection (3), a person
is a member of a couple for the purposes of the
Social Security Act
legally married to another
is not, in the Secretary's opinion (formed as mentioned in
living separately and apart from the other
a permanent or indefinite basis; or
(aa) both of the following conditions are met:
(i) a relationship between the
of the same sex or a different sex) is registered under a law of a State or
Territory prescribed for the purposes of section
Interpretation Act 1901
as a kind of relationship prescribed for
the purposes of that section;
not, in the Secretary's opinion (formed as mentioned in
living separately and apart from the other
a permanent or indefinite basis; or
(b) all of the following conditions are met:
a relationship with another
whether of the same sex or a different sex (in this
not legally married to the
(iii) the relationship between the
in the Secretary's opinion (formed as mentioned in
subsections
and (3A)), a de facto relationship;
(iv) both the
over the age of consent applicable in the State or Territory in which they
not within a
relationship
Social Security Act
then states that, in forming an opinion about
the relationship between two people for the purposes of
subsection 4(2)
Secretary (and the Tribunal, standing in the shoes of the Secretary) is to have
regard to all the circumstances of the relationship
including, in particular,
the following matters:
(a) the financial aspects of the
relationship, including:
(i) any joint ownership of real estate or other major assets and any joint
liabilities; and
(ii) any significant pooling of financial resources especially in relation
to major financial commitments; and
(iii) any legal obligations owed by one
respect of the other
(iv) the basis of any sharing of day-to-day household expenses;
(b) the nature of the household, including:
(i) any joint responsibility for providing
(ii) the living arrangements of the people; and
(iii) the basis on which responsibility for housework is distributed;
(c) the social aspects of the relationship, including:
(i) whether the people hold themselves out as married to, or in
a de facto relationship with, each other; and
(ii) the assessment of friends and regular
the people about the nature of their relationship; and
(iii) the basis on which the people make plans for, or engage in, joint
social activities;
(d) any sexual relationship between the people;
(e) the nature of the people's commitment to each other, including:
(i) the length of the relationship; and
(ii) the nature of any companionship and emotional support that the people
provide to each other; and
(iii) whether the people consider that the relationship is likely to
continue indefinitely; and
(iv) whether the people see their relationship as a marriage-like
relationship or a de facto relationship.
Social Security Act
provides that the Secretary must not form the
opinion that the relationship between a person and his or her partner is a de
relationship if the person is living separately and apart from the partner
on a permanent or indefinite basis.
Courts have provided some guidance for decision makers when assessing a
relationship within the context of
Social Security Act
Staunton-Smith v Secretary, Department of Social Security
[1991] FCA 513
(1991) 32 FCR
, the Court commented that (at
suggested that this list is exhaustive nor will each of these subjects fall to
be considered in every case. It must also
be emphasised that a particular answer
to a single subject will rarely, if ever, supply a final solution. The
responsibility of the
fact-finding tribunal is to have regard to all the
material facts of each case, treating the matters listed above only as
indicators.
The Tribunal will make its determination whether a particular man
and woman are or are not living separately and apart only after
assessing the
totality of the evidence and other material that is before it.
Melvin v Secretary, Department of Social Security
[2016] FCA 375
Federal Court stated (at 83-84)
It was open to
the Tribunal on the evidence to find that the appellant lived at Pawlett Way
from time to time during the first period.
They lived neither separately nor
apart on a permanent or indefinite basis. They physically lived together from
time to time. That
of itself is not determinative. The meaning of the expression
“living separately and apart” was considered at length
by the Full
Court of the Federal Court in
SZOXP v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2015] FCAFC 69
(2015) 231 FCR 1
albeit in the context of provisions
Migration Act 1958
There is both a physical and mental
element involved and the mental element is independent of whether the parties
lived in the same
house. This cuts both ways. Characterisation of a relationship
as not marriage-like may be reached even where the persons live in
Moreover, the mental element supporting the existence of a marriage-like
relationship may be inferred, despite the person’s
subjective evidence to
the contrary, as here, from objective circumstances including those set out in
-(e). The Tribunal by reference to all the circumstances of their
relationship found that they were living during the first period
marriage-like relationship. This being so,
was not engaged.
Pelka v Secretary, Department of Family and Community Services
(2006) 151 FCR 546
, the Federal Court commented (at 46)
Having regard to
the current provisions of
and the approaches discussed in the earlier
authorities mentioned, a decision-maker concerned with whether an unmarried
in a marriage-like relationship with another person of the opposite
have regard to their interpersonal relationship as a whole not limited by the
factors listed in
have regard to each of:
(a) the financial aspects of the relationship;
(b) the nature of the household;
(c) the social aspects of the relationship;
(d) any sexual relationship between the people;
(e) the nature of the people’s commitment to each other.
having regard to the preceding five matters, must have regard to all factors
relevant to each and, in particular, must have regard
to the factors listed
under each heading in
specifically consider the total picture of the relationship created by all of
these factors bearing in mind that consideration
must be given to those which
weigh against a marriage-like relationship and those which weigh in favour of
undertake the preceding consideration bearing in mind that a marriage-like
relationship is not disclosed solely by any one of
the following
(a) financial cooperation;
(b) cohabitation;
(c) a sexual relationship;
(d) cooperative household arrangements;
(e) mutual commitment.
then states that a person is not a member of a couple if a determination
is in force in relation to that person.
Social Security Act
allows a person to not be treated as a member of a couple
“for a special reason in the particular case”.
Kazmierczak and Secretary, Department of Families, Housing, Community
Services and Indigenous Affairs
[2010] FCA 1084
, the Federal Court
stated that:
to reason that if for some legal or other practical reason the partner member of
the couple cannot be treated as sharing
income and assets then there is a ground
for exercising the discretion under
so as not to treat the holder of the
pension as a member of a couple who are capable of sharing resources. In that
regard, in effect,
-A2 expectation that there will be pooling is
Social Security Guide at Point 2.2.5.40 states that
applies only in
very limited cases, “when all other reasonable avenues have been explored
and exhausted”. The Guide notes
that a couple’s circumstances must,
in general, be unusual although not necessarily unique and that common
considerations include
whether there is an inability for a couple to pool
resources because of their circumstances, or whether there is financial
because of the couple’s circumstances. The Guide notes that
may be considered if, for example, one member of the couple is
required to move interstate for a considerable period to attend to
proceedings; is living overseas awaiting a residency application; is subject to
a newly arrived resident’s waiting period
and is unable to work; or due to
court ordered conditions, is in rehabilitation or is subject to parole resulting
in separate living
arrangements.
Tribunal is not bound by the above commentary but will generally follow the
Department’s policy unless there are cogent
reasons for not doing so
Drake and Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs (No 2)
(1979) 2 ALD 634
at 639-645).
Evidence before the Tribunal
regarding the Respondent’s relationship with AP
addition to the oral evidence of the Respondent and AP at the hearing, and the
submissions made by the Applicants and Respondent
at hearing, the Tribunal had
the following documents before it for the review:
(i) Bundle of “T” documents T1 to T194 (6,883 pages);
(ii) Bundle of supplementary T documents ST1 to ST69 (982 pages);
(iii) Provided by the Applicants: historical and current home and postal
addresses for the Respondent and AP, summary of bank statements
Respondent’s emailed response to this, tables of unexplained deposits for
the Respondent and AP, with a response for
AP’s information, and a call
record dated 22 October 2015;
(iv) The Applicants’ Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions;
(v) Provided by the Respondent: medical reports prepared by a psychologist,
neuropsychologist, consultant psychiatrist and medicolegal
consultant, in
addition to an MRI report dated 16 May 2025;
(vi) Provided by the Respondent post-hearing: a list of upcoming medical
appointments.
Tribunal heard extensive evidence from the Respondent about his relationship
with AP and his circumstances. The Respondent gave
evidence that he had had an
accident in July 2024 where he sustained physical injuries and brain injuries.
He doesn’t remember
what he has said and can only rely on what he has
previously said and has “zero memory”. A number of medical documents
were provided to the Tribunal by the Respondent and these are discussed further
Applicants state that the Respondent was in prison between November 2012 and 27
August 2015. The Respondent gave evidence to the
Tribunal of having been in
prison but stated that he doesn’t remember the dates he was in prison. As
to whether his sentence
had been for fraud and theft, he stated he thinks so. He
stated he doesn’t remember the date he met AP, but agreed they had
through her brother who was also incarcerated. As to whether there had been
phone calls between himself and AP while he was in
prison, he stated he thinks
so; he also thought there had been visits by AP while he was in prison. He
stated he doesn’t recall
meeting AP’s children in jail or whether
she brought his children to see him in jail.
Respondent did not dispute having a Facebook page as of October 2014. Posts from
his account show that the Respondent and AP both
changed their relationship
status to being in a relationship as of 12 October 2014. When asked about these
Facebook posts, the Respondent
stated he thinks so, yes.
Tribunal was provided various documents in relation to the Respondent’s
imprisonment and parole and accepted that the Respondent
applied for parole on
31 March 2015. When asked about this date, the Respondent stated he could not
remember the date. The Respondent’s
parole application listed an address
at his family’s residence (Address 1) for his release. When asked whether
there were two
houses at the address, the Respondent stated he doesn’t
remember and thinks there was only one house there. As to whether his
was living in the other house, he then stated ok, yes. As to whether other
family members had also lived there, he stated
he thinks so, yes; and possibly
this included his daughter from a previous relationship.
Tribunal was provided a letter prepared by the Respondent to the Adult Parole
Board dated 23 June 2015, in which he requested
for AP to be added as a person
who could speak to the Adult Parole Board and indicated she was residing at
Address 1. When taken
to this letter during the hearing, the Respondent stated
he disagreed with this. When asked whether AP had been living at Address
that time, the Respondent stated he doesn’t remember.
Respondent wrote a further letter to the Adult Parole Board, dated 20 July 2015.
The letter stated, in part, that:
I am currently in a new
relationship of around 10 months she is my rock my soul mate and we plan on
getting married when I get out.
taken to this letter during the hearing, the Respondent stated he doesn’t
remember referring to a new relationship of 10
months and that he can see he
referred to a rock and soul mate, and that he was planning to marry, but it
doesn’t have AP’s
name there.
also prepared a letter for the Adult Parole Board, which stated in part
My name is [AP]. I am writing to you regarding the upcoming
parole hearing of my partner [the Respondent]. [The Respondent] and I
in a relationship for just over 9 months. We met while he was incarcerated
through my brother. We are religiously married.
We plan to get engaged once he
is released on parole. I am currently living at his parents’ house with my
two children whom
have taken to him very well. Since meeting [the Respondent] I
have visited every weekend. I take in his children every Sunday and
every opportunity I get. [The Respondent] has four children to past
relationships. I, his ex-wife and children all have a
great relationship. His
ex-wife [redacted] has just moved back to Melbourne so the kids will be close to
their father upon his release.
taken to this letter during the hearing, the Respondent told the Tribunal that
he doesn’t remember AP providing the letter
or describing them as
religiously married and that, for them, it means before they hold hands. When
asked whether they were religiously
married at the time, he stated he
doesn’t know. When asked whether her two children had taken to him well,
he responded by
stating that children were not allowed in the jail.
parole suitability report was prepared in respect of the Respondent at an Adult
Parole Board meeting on 13 August 2015. The Tribunal
noted this referred to two
of the Respondent’s aliases. The Tribunal accepted the Respondent was
released on parole on 27 August
the Respondent’s release, two home inspections were undertaken by a parole
officer, on 15 September 2015 and 25 January
2016. When asked about these, the
Respondent stated he doesn’t recall. As to whether he and AP were present
at the inspections,
he stated he doesn’t remember. Notes from the
inspections indicate that, of the two properties at the address, the Respondent
was in one with AP, his parents, AP’s two children and his daughter. When
asked about this record, the Respondent stated he
doesn’t remember. When
asked how many bedrooms the house had, he stated he doesn’t remember.
Respondent submitted a claim for newstart allowance with Centrelink on 3
September 2015. When asked about this application, the
Respondent stated he
doesn’t remember.
Respondent and AP applied for a joint account with NAB on 3 September 2015. The
Tribunal noted that no relationship information
was provided in the
application.
Applicants submit that AP contacted Centrelink on 22 October 2015 and that the
Respondent was also on the call. The record of
this contact is as
Customer contacted CC MARYBOROUGH on 22 OCT 2015 regarding
General Enquiry for Parenting Payment Single. Information was obtained
Call. Document created by [customer service officer ID] on 22 OCT 2015.
Call Transfer
Customer’s Query: Caller is a friend [one of Respondent’s
aliases] and has been confirmed by the customer to speak on
her behalf and
customer is present. customer has applied for the JET and advised that she is
being paid the incorrect PES. Education
information as per scanned image
19/10/2015.
Respondent was provided a copy of the record of contact at the hearing and
stated he doesn’t remember making the call, doesn’t
know if it was
him and the customer service officer could have misspelt his surname. As to why
he spoke on AP’s behalf, he
stated he doesn’t recall.
lodged a rent certificate with Centrelink on 4 November 2015 for another address
(Address 2), stating she had started living at
the address in January 2015, that
she was living with a friend (not the Respondent) and that a male with a
variation to the Respondent’s
aliases was her landlord. When taken to the
rent certificate and in response to the Applicant’s observation that AP
at that address prior to meeting the Respondent in jail, the
Respondent stated he didn’t remember. The Respondent agreed he
didn’t own Address 2 and was not AP’s landlord. He stated he
doesn’t know if AP was living at that address as of
4 November 2015 and
doesn’t remember if they were both living at Address 1. At the hearing,
the Applicants submitted that the
rent certificate had been submitted because
they knew if they had used the same address for AP’s parenting payment
claim, it would have been likely to trigger an inquiry; the Applicants
submitted that the Respondent had assisted AP to create a
false address. The
Respondent stated in response that he doesn’t know.
on 4 November 2015, the Respondent contacted Centrelink on behalf of AP and
stated he had been given a “person permitted
to enquire” authority.
The Respondent’s response to this entry was that he could see that.
Applicants submitted at the hearing that on 30 November 2015, the Respondent and
AP had signed a lease for another property (Address
3), in response to which the
Respondent stated he doesn’t remember.
the AAT first review hearing, the Respondent is recorded as having told the
Tribunal that he had signed the lease for Address 3
because AP had been unable
to secure a home without him being on the lease. When asked about this evidence,
the Respondent stated
that if he told the AAT that, then yes. The Applicants
submitted that this suggested the Respondent was living at that address with
and that he was a member of a couple with her from November 2015. When asked
November 2015 and 6 April
2016, the Respondent stated he doesn’t remember. When asked about
AP’s business, he stated
he didn’t remember. When asked about
AP’s receipt of income, he stated he didn’t remember. In response
Applicants’ submission that due to their relationship and
AP’s income from a business, he did not have any entitlement
to newstart
allowance, the Respondent stated he doesn’t know.
response to the Applicants’ submission that during 2015 he had received
notices from Centrelink reminding him of the obligation
to notify of changes in
circumstances, he stated he did not recall. The Respondent was taken to one such
letter, dated 3 September
2015, during the hearing, headed “Your Newstart
Allowance”. The letter provided information about the Respondent’s
rate of payment and noted that: “Your Reporting Statement is enclosed. If
you are using self service (online or phone), you
do not need to return this
form. You must report your earnings and other information on the due
date”. The second page of the
letter noted the following
information:
What is Income
Income has a very broad meaning for social security purposes. Some examples
of income are earnings from employment (including fringe
benefits), business
income (including farms), income from rental properties, deemed income from
financial investments, income from
superannuation pensions and other income
streams, income paid from overseas including pensions, most compensation
payments. If you
have a partner, that person’s income may affect your
response to the Applicants’ assertion that the Respondent had not advised
Centrelink about the relationship and that he didn’t
advise his partner
was receiving income, the Respondent stated he doesn’t recall.
Address 3 and advised she had been living there from
30 November 2015. When
asked whether AP had been living at that address, the Respondent stated he
couldn’t remember. The Applicants
asserted at the hearing that, while AP
had advised Centrelink she wasn’t sharing with anyone else, that was not
correct. In
response, the Respondent stated that his parole letter refers to him
living at Address 1.
Applicants noted at the hearing that they had spoken to the Respondent’s
former landlord at Address 3 and asked whether
he was aware of that, through the
hearing papers that had been provided to him. The Respondent stated not really.
The Applicants
took the Respondent during the hearing to an email sent from the
property manager at that address, dated 23 November 2021, which
As discussed over the phone, I remember having contact [AP]
and [the Respondent].
The property was vacated on 22/06/2016
The tenant in 2016 tried to take our company for compensation due to someone
breaking into his home apparently but was not granted
any compensation.
I have attached a photo of some items left behind by the tenant and the goods
left behind request.
I also found a photo of a box from Ebay with his name and address on it.
I apologise that I wasn’t able to provide any more information, we had
some incompetent staff at the time that must have lost
Applicants submitted that the reference to a tenant seeking compensation due to
breaking into “his” home suggested
it was the Respondent being
referred to. In response, the Respondent stated that that’s what it says.
As to whether he had
sought compensation, he stated he doesn’t
documents also contained information about text messages to a phone number that
Centrelink had linked to the Respondent, about
rent being overdue, and that the
response provided didn’t state that he was not living there. The
Respondent stated he doesn’t
recall. One of the responses provided to the
text was “so u want money”, to which the Respondent stated he
recall. In response to the Applicant’s observation that AP
was not mentioned in the texts, the Respondent stated, “Not
documents also contained a form, “Request for inspection of goods left
behind” for the same property address, listing
the Respondent and AP as
the tenants. The Respondent stated that if his name was on the lease, it would
be in the papers.
documents also contained a text message stating: Hi [Respondent], The items in
the picture have been brought back to the office.
Please collect them” and
signed off with a real estate agent’s name. A photo accompanying the text
showed earrings, an
Australian money order and other documents. The Respondent
stated that they were not his items as far as he knows.
Respondent was also taken during the hearing to a photo of an eBay parcel in his
name with Address 3 address on it. The Applicants
asserted this was clear
evidence that the Respondent was a tenant at the address, to which he stated
that AP could have used his
eBay account. In response to the Applicants’
assertions that the evidence demonstrated he had rented Address 3 from November
2015 to 22 June 2016 when the keys were returned due to rental arrears, the
Respondent stated he doesn’t recall.
Customer contacted CC ADELAIDE on_7 APR 2016 regarding
General Enquiry, Cancellation/Suspension/Rejection, for Parenting Payment
Information was obtained via Phone Call. Document created by [customer
service officer ID] on_7 APR 2016.
Date of Effect: 070416
PPS Cancelled under SS Admin Act 1999 Part 3, Division 7, Subdivision A,
Explanation for cancellation:
Children left care: new carer:
Customer has advised both children have left care to live with:
[Respondent]
taken to this record of contact during the hearing, the Respondent stated he
doesn’t remember that and doesn’t recall
how old the children were
in 2016. In response to the Applicants’ assertion that AP wasn’t
surrendering the children
to his care because they were living together and were
trying to maintain a charade, the Respondent stated he doesn’t recall.
response to the Applicants’ assertion that this was a deliberate move
because AP received TAC compensation payments from
April 2016, the Respondent
stated he doesn’t recall. In response to the Applicants’ assertion
that they had maintained
separate residences so he could claim a benefit he was
not otherwise entitled to, the Respondent stated he doesn’t recall.
Applicants submit that the Respondent claimed family tax benefit on 7 April 2016
in respect of AP’s two children. When this
was put to him at hearing, he
stated he doesn’t recall. As to whether he was a parental figure to
AP’s two children,
he stated he doesn’t recall.
“Benefit Status (XBS)” screen, contained in the documents before the
Tribunal, indicated that the Respondent had been
granted parenting payment
(single) for AP’s two children plus two other children. When asked about
this, the Respondent stated
he doesn’t recall.
May 2016, AP posted a photo on Facebook, which the Applicant asserts is the
Respondent and a young child. When asked if the child
was one of AP’s
children, the Respondent stated he doesn’t know. When asked about the
caption to the photo, which read
that the commentator loved watching the
Respondent and the child together, that they were the best of friends, the
Respondent stated
it could be one of his family members, he doesn’t know.
As to whether he had been residing at Address 3 at the time, he stated
doesn’t recall.
in the documents was a “to whom it may concern” letter prepared by a
teaching institute, stating that the Respondent
was undertaking a diploma and
that he was living at Address 1. The course’s start date was 23 May 2016
and end date was 2 June
2017. The Respondent stated he had to be at Address 1
for 18 months while on parole or would have had to return to jail.
Correctional Services provided responses to specific questions put by
Centrelink, by response dated 9 August 2021. The information
provided by
Community Correctional Services included a response to the question of the
address listed by the Respondent during his
parole period and information
obtained during the initial review of the property:
[variation of Respondent’s name] to this service. Provided address
[Address 1] within his parole application. This
property was assessed by this
service in August 2015 as part of parole application process. Telephone
interview was conducted with
all co-residents over age of 18. Noted two separate
properties on the same address. Proposed to reside in property 1.
response to the request to provide all co-residents listed as living at that
address and their relationship to the Respondent,
Community Correctional
Services stated that the Respondent’s parents, AP “(partner)”,
AP’s two children and
the Respondent’s daughter were living in
property 1. The Respondent’s brother, sister-in-law, two nieces and nephew
living in property 2. In response to the question as to whether any
inspections were conducted during the Respondent’s parole
period and, if
so, the dates and information obtained, the following response was given:
Physical home visits conducted by this service on 15/9/2015 and
25/01/2016. All co-residents were present during both visits and interviewed.
No concerns identified by this service in regards to environmental risk or
non compliance towards residing at property.
Parolee provided advice on 24/5/2016 and again on 31/8/2016 that he was
residing part time with partner [AP] – two different
addresses provided,
being [Address 3] and [Address 4].
On 5/12/2016 parolee advised that the relationship with [AP] had broken down
and he had returned full time to the [Address 1] address,
with the garage having
been converted into a granny flat for him. On 11/01/2017, he advised that he had
reunified with [AP] and was
again residing between the [Address 1] and [Address
4] addresses.
response to the two addresses reflected in the above response, the Respondent
stated that yes, it was for parole. Later in his
evidence, he stated that he
doesn’t know what the Address 4 address is. In response to the suggestion
by the Applicant that
he had moved there after leaving Address 3, the Respondent
stated that he doesn’t recall. The Applicants noted that as of December
2016 the above information indicated the Respondent was living in a converted
garage. At that same time, he had claimed to Centrelink
he was sole carer for
AP’s two children. When asked whether they were living in the garage with
him, the Respondent stated
he doesn’t recall. He stated another child was
with him in the garage. When asked whether four children were living with him
the converted garage, he stated he doesn’t recall. When the Applicants
submitted that AP’s children were never in
his sole care, he stated he
doesn’t recall.
August 2016, the Respondent updated his cover photo on Facebook to an image of
himself and AP, smiling at the camera with their
heads close together. The
Respondent agreed the photo was of him and AP. A comment had been made by
AP’s mother, referring
to her baby and her partner. When taken to this
comment, the Respondent agreed that his mother-in-law considered them partnered.
The Applicants asserted that, given the way the Respondent and AP were
presenting themselves in the photo, it was a strong indicator
of a spousal
relationship. The Respondent replied that there was no denying they were
together, but a lot of times they weren’t
together; but he is not saying
they were never together.
updated her Facebook profile picture in October 2016 to a photo of herself and
the Respondent, smiling and with their heads close
together. The Respondent
agreed that the photo was of himself and AP.
Applicants had set out for the Tribunal a table of deposits between the
Respondent and AP’s bank accounts. This had been
sent to the Respondent
prior to the hearing, to enable him to identify the purpose of the relevant
transactions. The Respondent had
not provided this information to the Tribunal
prior to the hearing. He was taken to the following tables in particular, in his
at the hearing.
1 set out deposits into AP’s account, corresponding with withdrawals from
the Respondent’s accounts. A total of
21 transactions were identified,
between 16 June 2016 and 23 November 2016, and totalled $17,922. A further
amount of $3,100 had
been transferred on 10 August 2017. Descriptions attached
to the various transactions included references to “love u”
“me love you”. When taken to these transactions, the Respondent
agreed the deposits had been made in his name.
2 set out deposits into another of AP’s accounts, corresponding with
withdrawals from the Respondent’s accounts.
A total of 16 transactions
were identified, between 29 September 2015 and 27 July 2016, totalling $5,570.
Descriptions for the transactions
included “me no love u”,
“love you” and “realy no love u”. The Respondent did not
disagree with
the information presented in the table.
7 set out amounts totalling $3,605 from AP to the Respondent between 12 October
2015 and 28 January 2016, with references to
eBay, “rent” and
“two of you”. Part of Table 9 set out further amounts transferred
from AP to the Respondent,
totalling $3,278 for eight transactions between 18
February 2016 and 22 December 2016. The transactions referenced “me no
u”, AP’s children’s names and rent. The Respondent agreed
the deposits in question were made into his account.
As to his obligations to
report his circumstances to Centrelink, he stated that he doesn’t know
what they are for or if he
had reported them. He stated he could not recall
advising Centrelink or even if he had to advise.
Applicants asserted at the hearing that the Respondent had received family tax
benefit for AP’s children from 7 April 2016
and for two other children,
had also received parenting payment (single) during 2016 and had received child
care rebate in 2016.
The Respondent did not dispute this information. The
Applicants asserted that AP had received compensation payments from 9 April
2016, and the Respondent stated he doesn’t remember. He could not recall
whether he or AP were working during 2016. In response
to the Applicants’
assertion that he had not been entitled to child care rebate because neither he
nor AP were working, he
stated he doesn’t know the requirements.
Respondent was asked about unexplained deposits into his bank account, a summary
of which had been provided to him prior to the
hearing, to which he had not
responded. He was taken to bank account statements reflecting the deposits and
the Applicants observed
that payments made to him in 2016 totalled $53,930. The
Respondent stated that he had been selling things on eBay such as household
items, and other things he does not recall.
had completed an income tax return for the 2015/16 financial year, in which her
taxable income was declared to be $38,929. This
was from compensation payments
of $13,958, parenting payment (single) of $15,220, allowance of $416 and income
from a business of
$9,310. When asked whether he was aware AP was receiving
these amounts, the Respondent stated he had no recollection.
response to the Applicants’ assertion that he and AP had each been
receiving parenting payment (single) while in a relationship,
the Respondent
stated that their whole relationship had been him being wrong, cheating, going
in the relationship. They had been acting in
a relationship for his parole and they broke up a lot. A relationship to him is
being together, not living in different houses and having sex whenever
they saw each other. When asked about his relationship status
as of 2016 and
whether he was in a de facto relationship, the Respondent stated that he
doesn’t recall the exact dates but
presumes they were for some of that
Applicants asserted that the only evidence about a break up was contained in the
Department of Justice information, in which the
Respondent had reported having
separated for a month and living in a converted garage. The Respondent stated
that everything he had
done, had been for his parole and if they said he had to
be in a relationship, he did, but it doesn’t mean he was in a
relationship.
He and AP had had a lot of issues from the start and it
doesn’t mean they were together the whole time. In response to the
Applicants’ observation that the break up in 2016 had only been for one
month, the Respondent stated that anything done for
parole was for parole
purposes; he had been imprisoned five to six times for lying, deceiving, fraud,
and he would have said he was
married to 30 people to be out on parole. When
asked whether he had given truthful information to the Department of Justice, he
he doesn’t recall what he was doing and was not truthful that he
can recall.
Applicants noted that on 11 January 2017, the Respondent had advised the
Department of Justice he was reunited with AP and was
living between Address 1
and Address 4. Six days after that date, he submitted a “Details of child
care arrangement”
form to Centrelink, in which he stated he was living at
Address 1, had separated in 2010 and divorced in 2016. The Respondent agreed
this appeared to be referring to a previous relationship, and he had been
married once before and in a long-term relationship with
another partner, having
had two children from each relationship. The Respondent stated he had not been
married to AP at that time.
In response to the observation that he had not
mentioned AP in the form, the Respondent stated that he doesn’t recall; he
Year 7 at school and during Year 9 was hospitalised and did not attend
school. He disagreed that it had been a deliberate omission
in the form because
he knew his relationship would affect any benefits he received.
28 April 2017, AP contacted Centrelink and the Applicants assert that the person
she had with her during the phone call was the
Respondent, using an alias. The
record of the contact reflects that AP phoned Centrelink and stated that her
friend was a person
permitted to enquire for Centrelink purposes. When taken to
the record, the Respondent stated that it could be him, he is not sure
has no memory of AP ringing about this. As to whether this was an indication of
a marriage-like relationship, the Respondent
stated he could have been helping
AP and he used to speak to Centrelink for 10 other people, including his family
asked whether the lease on Address 4 had ended in mid-2017 and he and AP had had
to move out of the property because the property
was purchased by a new owner,
the Respondent stated he doesn’t recall. The new owner of the property had
provided information
to Centrelink that he had purchased the property on 2 June
2017 and he and his wife were living alone in the property at that time.
owner advised that he had received mail after first moving in, for a female with
the last name of AP, and other mail was
coming to the property for a male with a
name of a similar ethnicity to the Respondent. The Respondent stated that there
was nothing
there with his name, but the new owner is entitled to say what he
likes. He again asserted he did not know anything about that particular
When asked whether he had returned to Address 1 when Address 4 was sold, the
Respondent stated he had always been at Address
1 for 18 months after his
release from prison.
September 2017, AP posted to Facebook their excitement over their pregnancy.
When taken to this post during the hearing, the Respondent
stated that he
doesn’t recall, there were “kids everywhere”, he was not happy
the pregnancy.
22 September 2017, the Respondent completed a form for Centrelink, stating he
had had his daughter in his care from 10 August 2017.
He stated in the form that
his current relationship status was divorced. When asked whether this was
incorrect as he was partnered
at the time, he stated no and that having a baby
with someone doesn’t mean he is with them. When asked whether it was
to describe himself as divorced, he stated that what AP was feeling
wasn’t what he was feeling. He stated that he was not wise
in knowing what
Centrelink was asking for in every question and he didn’t perceive his
divorce was superseded by a relationship
with AP as he was free for other women
at that time.
2 October 2017, the Respondent contacted Centrelink by phone. The record of the
one of AP’s children had
returned to her care as of 26 September 2017. When taken to this record at the
hearing, and in response
to the Applicant’s assertion that the information
was not correct as the child had always been in AP’s care, the Respondent
stated that he doesn’t recall. As to whether the other child of AP
remained in his sole care, he stated he didn’t recall.
As to whether this
information had been provided because AP’s compensation payments had
ceased at that time, the Respondent
stated he doesn’t recall. As to
whether there had no longer been the incentive to maintain a charade (about the
care), the Respondent stated he doesn’t recall.
Respondent contacted Centrelink on 7 December 2017 on behalf of AP and, during
the conversation, is recorded as having stated
that AP was living at Address 3
and was also working from that address. The Respondent was advised that AP could
not claim rent assistance
for the portion that was a business expense. The
Respondent was also advised that AP couldn’t claim she had an assistant
proof was provided that the individual had been issued with a group
certificate. When this record of contact was put to the Respondent
hearing, he stated he doesn’t recall.
Respondent was asked about bank transfers from AP to his account during 2017,
described variously as “rent”, “I
love you” and
“car”. When asked to explain the purpose of the transactions, the
Respondent stated that if that’s
what it shows, then yes. The Applicants
observed that the transactions totalled $7,790 and that other transfers from the
to AP totalled $3,100. The Respondent did not dispute the
transactions.
Respondent agreed he had been sent notices from Centrelink through 2017,
advising him of the requirement to notify of changes
to his circumstances and
this included having a spouse and advising of income. As to whether he had told
Centrelink about his relationship
or AP’s income, he stated that he could
not recall.
asked about his receipt of family tax benefit for four children, including
AP’s two children, to April 2017, the Respondent
stated he couldn’t
recall. When asked about the receipt of family tax benefit in respect of another
child, the Respondent seemed
unclear as to who the child was, stating that it
was none of his children and his daughter was in Department of Health housing at
the time. He didn’t dispute that he had claimed family tax benefit and
child care rebate for that child in 2017, or that he
had received parenting
payment (single) if that was what the Centrelink records reflected.
Respondent was asked about deposits into his bank account during 2017 which had
totalled $101,532. When asked about the deposits
(which had been summarised in a
table by the Applicants), he observed that there were about five different
accounts. When asked whether
he had received the amounts in question, he stated
not that he could recall. He stated that a number of entries had been loans for
court and lawyers and that he had had a gambling habit. One individual in
question had assisted him with a couple of hundred thousand
dollars and had lent
him money. When taken to specific entries, he was unable to explain what they
related to. When asked whether
he had reported these amounts to Centrelink, he
stated he doesn’t recall. When asked whether he accepted he was required
report the amounts in question, he stated not that he knew of.
gave birth to a child in February 2018 and the hospital patient registration
form reflects the Respondent as her “husband/male
partner”. When
taken to this record, the Respondent stated he was not disputing he was with AP
at times, but they were not
together for long periods and he doesn’t know
what her intention was as he can’t recall. The form also reflected
marital status as de facto and the Respondent stated they were
perhaps living together at Address 1 at that time. The child was given
Respondent’s family name and, in response to the Applicant’s
assertion that this was evidence of a de facto relationship,
the Respondent
stated it could also be due to people following the use of a father’s
name. As to whether the child is now seven
years of age, the Respondent stated
he thinks so.
Applicants state that the Respondent made an application for a trade industry
licence in March 2018, and a copy of an application
was contained in the
documents before the Tribunal. The Respondent stated that he couldn’t
recall and that the name the application
was in was not one of his names. The
application had the Address 1 address, and when this was put to the Respondent,
he stated he
doesn’t recall. The application also had the
Respondent’s mobile number, in response to which he stated he
May 2018, AP posted a photo to Facebook for Mother’s Day, of herself with
the Respondent and seven children. In response
to the observation that they were
posing as a family, the Respondent stated it seems like it, and he is not
disputing he was with
Respondent lodged his income tax return for 2017/18 on 3 July 2018, in which he
declared nil income. When asked whether that was
incorrect, he stated that if he
states nil income, he has nil income. The Respondent declared he had no
dependent children in the
income tax return and, when asked about this, stated
not that he could recall but everything was pre-filled. When asked whether that
was incorrect, he stated that the ATO could chase him and he has no
recollection. In response to the indication in the return that
he had no spouse,
he stated that he cannot recall the dates.
Respondent was sent a series of questions by Centrelink about the children in
his care and responded to the questions by form
dated 3 September 2018. He
indicated in the form that he had seven children living with him and, when asked
at the hearing whether
that was correct or whether the information in the above
income tax return had been correct, stated that if that was for Centrelink,
all of the children were with him. As to whether the information he had provided
to the ATO had been wrong, he stated he doesn’t
know what he said to the
ATO. In response to the Applicants’ assertion that he was happy to tell a
different story depending
on who was asking, the Respondent stated he
didn’t deny he was a bad person, a criminal and deceiver, and there are
out there without his surname, but he was not with AP the whole time
and they have separated and broken up a number of times. He
then stated that it
is all about his parents, about keeping the family together, and for him it is
all about fun. He is a “conner”
and didn’t ask to be involved
in an accident the previous year and was responding to questions put to him by
October 2018, an individual with a variation of the Respondent’s name
applied for a credit card, using the Address 1 address.
When taken to a copy of
the application, the Respondent stated that it was not him, he doesn’t
recall having that name and
doesn’t recall but has used a lot of fake
names in his life and doesn’t remember it being his change of name. He
the address in the application was his address. He did not respond to the
Applicants’ observation that, in the application,
income of $2,280 per
week and Centrelink payments of $1,810 per fortnight were declared.
Respondent was also taken to a personal loan application in the same name, with
the same Address 1 address used. The Respondent
stated he doesn’t remember
if it was him. As to whether the declaration in the application that he was
single was incorrect,
he stated he doesn’t recall. The application stated
the applicant was a labourer, working in a particular industry (the trade
industry) since 2018, to which the Respondent stated he doesn’t recall. As
to the indication in the application of $9,800 per
month income, the Respondent
stated if it was a credit card application, he would have to tell the bank what
they want to hear, but
he doesn’t recall this statement.
Respondent made a claim for newstart allowance on 5 November 2018 and in the
form declared he was also known by two other names.
When taken to the claim
form, the Respondent stated that there should be seven names there and that
Centrelink had been provided
his seven changes of name. In the claim form, the
Respondent stated he was divorced and when asked about this, stated he
remember the dates he was with AP, but most of the form was
pre-filled.
21 December 2018, the Respondent provided a rent certificate to Centrelink in
which he stated he was paying $220 per week to live
at Address 1. He stated that
the landlord listed in the form is his father. When asked whether there was a
residential rental agreement
or lease, he stated not that he remembers and he
doesn’t know how the system works.
Respondent was taken to Table 3 of the appendices to the Applicants’
Statement of Facts Issues and Contentions, being a
summary of transactions from
AP’s account to an account in a variation of the Respondent’s name.
When asked whether it
was his account, he stated not that he could recall. When
asked about the references in the transactions to “rent”, “bad
husband”, “evil”, “lover” and
“goodbye” he stated that he doesn’t recall; they kept
up and fighting.
Respondent was also taken to transactions to another account in a variation of
his name, to which AP had transferred amounts totalling
“bday” and “car” (Table 4), and stated he doesn’t
recall. When taken to a further table
(Table 9) showing deposits from an
account in a variation of the Respondent’s name to AP’s account for
items such as
“rent” and “poo”, he stated he is not
sure. When asked about another account that was initially in his name
changed to the variation to his name, he stated he could not remember and
didn’t accept the variation to his name was
him. When asked about
deposits into the account, totalling $89,918, he stated he doesn’t
remember. As to whether he had reported
any of these amounts to Centrelink, he
stated he has no recollection.
Tribunal had been provided bank statements for an account in a variation to the
Respondent’s name, which the Applicants
assert is the Respondent. When
asked about deposits into the account totalling $186,000, the Respondent stated
he doesn’t recall.
As to whether the amounts were business income, he
stated that he doesn’t know and he has no memory. When asked about the
for the trade industry, consistent with the application that had been
made for that qualification, the Respondent stated he doesn’t
recall. When
asked whether he had reported any of the income to Centrelink, the Respondent
stated he doesn’t recall earning
this so doesn’t think it’s
his account.
Respondent was asked about payments into another account in a variation to his
name, using the Address 1 address. The bank statements
for the account commenced
on 4 January 2018 and, aside from fraud adjustments into the account, deposits
into the account included
cash deposits, transfers from other bank accounts,
refund purchases, a direct credit for “IMA” for just over $32,000
and references to the trade industry. When asked about a total of $130,792 being
deposited into the account, the Respondent stated
that it was not his name and
not his account that he can recall. In response to the Applicants’
observation that the amounts
into the various bank accounts had totalled
$407,000, the Respondent stated that there was no document to show a name change
variation to his name (attached to various bank statements that had been
put to him at the hearing).
asked about notices that had been sent to him during 2018 by Centrelink, about
his obligations to advise Centrelink of specified
matters, he stated he
doesn’t recall receiving anything and doesn’t accept he received
anything. When asked if he wanted
to be shown the notices during the hearing, he
stated that even if he was shown the notices, he has no memory of it. As to
he had reported any income to Centrelink in 2018 he stated he
doesn’t recall. As to whether he had been receiving family tax
benefit and
parenting payment (single) during 2018, he stated he doesn’t recall.
asked whether both he and AP had been living at Address 1 in 2019, the
Respondent stated he doesn’t recall. When asked
whether he had purchased a
property in February 2019 (Address 5), he stated he doesn’t recall.
27 February 2019, an individual with a variation to the Respondent’s name
applied for a variable loan, using the Address
1 address. When taken to the loan
document and asked if it was him, he stated he doesn’t recall. In response
to the Applicants’
observation that the mobile number was his, he stated
not that he knows of. In response to the information in the application that
individual had been working in the trade industry for six months, he stated he
doesn’t recall. In response to the PAYG
income declared of $148,720, he
stated he doesn’t recall.
5 March 2019, an individual with a variation to the Respondent’s name
applied for a first homeowners’ grant, using
the Address 1 address and
stating that his name at birth was the Respondent’s name. When taken to
the application, and to a
photo of the licence that had accompanied the
application, with the Respondent’s photo and in the varied name, the
responded by stating he doesn’t recall. As to whether he
accepted the photo was of him, he stated he doesn’t remember
the name and
has nothing to hide.
Respondent was taken to an Equifax report for an individual with the
Respondent’s varied name, the Respondent’s Address
1 address and
same date of birth declared to Centrelink. The report noted two driver’s
licences for the individual in question,
one in the Respondent’s name and
one in the varied name, with the same driver’s licence number and same
date of birth.
When asked about this information, the Respondent stated he has
one licence. When it was noted that the other licence, contained
in the papers
and shown to the Respondent during the hearing, was the same as the one in his
name, the Respondent stated he has nothing
to add, doesn’t recall and it
is not him.
respect of the first homeowners’ grant application, the Respondent was
asked about the witnessing of the application by AP
of Address 4. When asked if
that was a false address, the Respondent stated, how would he know? When asked
that had been opened for the Address 5 address on 13
March 2019, first in the varied name and changed to the Respondent’s name
on 28 May 2019, the Respondent stated that he doesn’t recall. When asked
whether he had occupied the address in question from
13 March 2019 as his
principal place of residence, the Respondent stated he doesn’t recall.
Respondent made a claim for carer allowance and carer payment with Centrelink on
7 May 2019 and, when taken to this claim, stated
he doesn’t recall. When
asked whether the Address 1 address declared in the claim was correct as of
2019, he stated he doesn’t
recall. In response to the two variations to
his name declared in the claim, he stated it was pre-filled. When asked whether
Address 1 address had been sold in June 2019, he stated that he
doesn’t remember the exact date but agreed it had been sold;
remember the amount it sold for. When asked whether his use of the Address 1
address from 28 June 2019 was incorrect,
he stated he doesn’t recall the
date but it was around 2020.
19 June 2019, a carer allowance and carer payment medical report was provided to
Centrelink in respect of the Respondent’s
daughter. The Respondent’s
details were in the carer details section of the form and the address given was
the Address 1 address.
In response to the Applicants’ assertion that he
had been living at Address 5 at the time, the Respondent stated he doesn’t
27 June 2019, an application was made for a personal loan under the varied name
of the Respondent, using his Address 1 address,
the Respondent’s date of
birth and stating the individual had worked in the trade industry for one year.
When taken to the
application the Respondent stated he doesn’t recall. In
response to the “other” assets declared in the form, which
$916,000, the Respondent stated he doesn’t know what they were. The
“loan schedule” for the loan was witnessed
by AP, who stated her
address was Address 4. When asked if he agreed that AP had been out of that
address some two years earlier,
the Respondent stated he doesn’t recall.
Respondent lodged his 2018/19 income tax return on 5 August 2019 and declared
income of $17,750, government allowances of $9,989
and government pensions of
$6,879, in addition to $882 in interest. When asked about the income declared he
stated he doesn’t
recall. When asked about no spouse or dependents
declared in the return, he stated he doesn’t recall.
13 August 2019, a property was purchased adjacent to Address 5 (Address 6) and,
when the Respondent was asked whether his family
had purchased Address 6, stated
that he doesn’t recall.
26 September 2019, an application for a planning permit was made to the local
council for Addresses 5 and 6, in the varied name
of the Respondent and using
the Respondent’s mobile number. When asked whether it was his mobile
number, the Respondent stated
he doesn’t remember. When a carer allowance
and carer payment claim he had submitted in September 2015 was shown to him,
the same mobile number, he agreed the claim had been in his name. He
agreed the second name on the planning permit application was
his sister’s
October 2019, a loan application was made in the Respondent’s varied name,
using the Address 1 address and the Respondent’s
date of birth. The
application stated the person was employed full-time in the trade industry and
his employer’s contact name
was the same name as his sister’s first
name. When asked whether the applicant was him, the Respondent stated he
remember. As to whether the information in the application that he
was “single” was false, he stated he doesn’t
know. As to
whether the information stating he had no dependents was also false, he stated
he doesn’t know. When asked whether
he had worked in the trade industry,
he stated he doesn’t recall. When asked about the income information in
the application,
indicating monthly income of $14,213, he stated he
doesn’t remember. When asked about the information stating the applicant
was a homeowner with a house worth $700,000, and whether this was a reference to
Address 5, the Respondent stated he doesn’t
Respondent was taken to a psychiatric report he had provided the Tribunal, which
described him as having a successful business
in the trade industry. When asked
if that was correct, the Respondent stated he doesn’t recall if that is
right. As to how
his doctor would know that information, he stated it was maybe
from conversations he had had.
Respondent was also taken to notes provided by his local council, indicating
that an individual in another varied name to his
phoned on 15 October 2019 and
referred to Address 5 and to an architect and customer attending the council.
The Respondent agreed
that, while the name was spelt differently, it was one of
his aliases. When asked whether he accepted it was him that contacted the
council, he stated he doesn’t remember.
March 2021, Centrelink was provided information from a financial institution,
regarding the Respondent. The financial institution
stated that the Respondent
had opened a loan account with them and had also opened an account in the varied
name. The Respondent
was recorded as having lived at Address 1 and then Address
5 and both addresses had the Respondent’s mobile number attached
When asked about the information provided by the financial institution, the
Respondent stated he doesn’t remember
and doesn’t remember having a
second account in the varied name.
May 2019, the Respondent’s sister attended the AAT for an unrelated
matter. The statement of reasons reflects that an individual
Respondent’s surname gave evidence on behalf of his sister and that he
told the Tribunal his sister was overseas at
the time of the hearing; that she
was an ABN holder in name only; that he runs a company in the trade industry and
it is less of
a headache for him if the ABN and legal requirements are in his
sister’s name as he has had some family difficulties, and any
involvement
in the company may see an impact to any benefits he wishes to claim. He also
told the Tribunal that there is a business
account in his sister’s name
and some vehicles registered in her name for the purposes of the businesses he
operates, that
his sister does not have day-to-day operation of the business, he
is solely responsible, and the ATO is okay with the arrangement.
The statement
of reasons also reflects that the AAT was told that, because of disabilities, he
did not do any physical work, but
managed two staff members.
Respondent was taken to the AAT’s statement of reasons and, when asked
whether he had previously attended the AAT for his
sister, stated not that he
could recall. When asked whether it was him reflected in the statement of
reasons, he stated he doesn’t
recall. When the details of the evidence
that had been given about the trade industry business were put to him, he stated
recall. When asked about the messy family dispute referred to
in the evidence, he stated he doesn’t recall. When asked about
physical disabilities referred to in the evidence, the Respondent stated he
doesn’t recall. When asked about the findings
of the AAT that he had made
day-to-day decisions for the business, was responsible for payroll, taxation,
insurance and quotes and
sourcing work, he stated he doesn’t recall. He
confirmed that he was not intending to call any family members as witnesses
the hearing, “because he is a stuff up to the family”.
20 June 2022, the ATO wrote to the Respondent, providing the findings of an
audit it had undertaken. The audit period was the 2020
and 2021 income years and
the relevant facts listed in the letter were that:
- The Respondent
had received tax free government pensions of $22,762 in the 2019/20 financial
received tax free government pensions of $23,058 in the 2020/21 financial year;
- He had lodged
a “return not necessary” advice for the 2020 and 2021 income years;
- He had worked
for the trade industry company in the 2019/20 financial year and the director of
the company was his sister;
- He was the
authorised contact for his sister and for the company;
Respondent’s bank statements had been reviewed and deposits from unknown
sources had been identified. These were set out
in the letter and included
deposits between 22 August 2019 and 14 November 2019 totalling $137,000;
deposits into a second account
between 5 July 2019 and 1 November 2019 totalling
$53,480; and deposits into a third account between 13 July 2018 and 19 April
totalling $56,095.
letter noted that the Respondent’s responses had been taken into account,
and that this included his explanation that receipts
reflecting the trade
industry work were wages he had received and other receipts were from sales that
he had collected. He had also
explained that cash deposits were his money and
were from other family members, including his mother. He had provided his
bank statements and the ATO had been unable to see cash
withdrawals just prior to the Respondent’s deposits into his account.
Respondent’s taxable income for 2019/20 was assessed as $190,480 (compared
to his declared income of nil) and a penalty
of $32,263.70 was imposed.
asked about the correspondence, and in particular about the ATO being unable to
see withdrawals from his mother’s account
and the findings of his taxable
income as $190,480, the Respondent stated that he doesn’t remember.
Respondent was asked about information provided by hipages, being invoices for
work performed through hipages in the varied name,
with reference to the trade
industry and Address 5, between October 2018 and October 2021. When asked about
the invoices, the Respondent
stated he doesn’t recall. The Respondent was
also asked about hipages reviews for the varied name, also contained in the
before the Tribunal, most of which expressed customer satisfaction,
and stated he doesn’t remember. As to a complaint that
had been made by a
customer, he stated he doesn’t remember.
Respondent was taken to a summary of bank account transfers in the variation to
his name and was asked about the source of 12
deposits in 2019 totalling
$69,177.73, to which he stated he doesn’t know. When asked about a second
account with deposits
totalling $4,288 in 2019, he stated he doesn’t
remember. When asked about a third account with transfers totalling $26,000,
stated he doesn’t recall. When asked about a fourth account with deposits
totalling $23,795.19, he stated he doesn’t
recall. When asked about a
fifth account with four transactions totalling $14,750 in 2019, he stated he
doesn’t recall. When
asked about a sixth account, he stated he
doesn’t recall. When asked about accounts with another institution, also
in the varied
name and showing deposits referring to the trade industry and
whether this was his pay, he stated he doesn’t recall. As to
had any other explanation, he responded by stating he doesn’t recall. He
was unable to explain various repayments
and other credit into the accounts
during 2019. When asked whether he could comment on references to CommSec being
from sharetrading
activity, he stated no. When asked about one particularly
large deposit of $380,292, he stated he was unable to say what it related
When taken to transactions for accounts with a third institution, he was
similarly unable to explain transactions in the accounts.
He was unable to
explain whether a $40,000 transaction was from a cousin or brother (of the same
name as that referred to in the
transaction) or whether CommSec amounts of
$38,000 related to a series of trading events. When asked whether he had
reported any
of the deposits to Centrelink, he stated he doesn’t remember.
When asked if he accepted he had received the amounts reflected
in the bank
statements, he stated that he didn’t accept that and, even if shown these
amounts, he doesn’t remember.
Respondent stated he could not remember whether he was paid family tax benefit
during the first half of 2019. He stated “yes”
in response to the
question as to whether he had received carer allowance and carer payment for his
daughter during 2019. As to whether
he was aware he couldn’t have been
entitled to the payments in 2019 due to the deposits and earnings into his
accounts, he
responded by stating he doesn’t remember.
Respondent lodged a claim for parenting payment (single) with Centrelink on 25
March 2020. When taken to this claim, he stated
he didn’t remember
claiming the payment. When asked whether the Address 1 address indicated in the
claim form was a false address,
he stated he doesn’t recall. In response
to the Applicants’ observation that the Address 1 address had been sold
months earlier, he stated he doesn’t recall. When asked whether the
indication in the claim form that his marital status was
was incorrect, he stated that he doesn’t recall. When asked whether he
remembered lodging claims for
family tax benefit two days later on 27 March
2020, and on 4 April 2020, he stated he doesn’t remember.
Respondent lodged a further claim for parenting payment (single) with Centrelink
on 30 June 2020 and, in the claim, stated he
had five children in his care. He
gave evidence at the hearing that the children were his son and daughter and his
sons and daughter.
gave birth to a child in July 2020. The hospital’s notes from 2020
indicate that she attended hospital on 8 July 2020 and
advised the physician at
the time that: “partner working long hours away from home”. When
asked if that was a reference
to him, the Respondent stated he doesn’t
recall, and he doesn’t recall the dates he was her partner. When asked
he was her partner when AP gave birth to their second child, he stated
he doesn’t remember. When the Applicant submitted that
his responses were
not making sense as he doesn’t have a severe brain injury, he stated he
doesn’t accept that.
hospital’s records also reflect AP as attending on 22 July 2020 for an
antenatal visit and advising the hospital that: “discussed
situation: 3x children husband working for insurance and often away would like
to ensure care for children organised and hubby
able to attend birth as also had
precip birth last times”. When asked whether he worked in insurance, the
Respondent stated
he doesn’t recall and not that he remembers. When asked
whether he was in a relationship with AP when she gave birth to their
child, he stated he doesn’t recall the child’s date of birth but it
sounds familiar.
Respondent was asked whether he had had a sexual relationship with AP and he
stated he wouldn’t call it a relationship,
it was on and off, they were in
a relationship a few times and had sex here and there.
Respondent had given evidence at the first review hearing that he accepted he
was in a de facto relationship with AP from 18 July
2020, being the date of the
birth of their second child. When asked whether he still accepted that, he
stated he doesn’t remember
the dates, but yes.
Respondent was taken to a payment made to an account in his varied name from AP
between 31 December 2019 and 2020 totalling $3,800
for a Ford Ranger and, when
asked about this, stated he could not recall.
asked whether he was living at Address 5 as of 2020, the Respondent stated he
doesn’t recall where he was living. He was
taken to a notice of entry for
the property, issued to his varied name, dated 27 May 2020. When asked whether
the document assisted
his memory, he stated no, he doesn’t recall. When
asked about the hipages invoices to the same property and to financial
institution
documents for the same property, he agreed they reflected that
Applicants submit that the Respondent received deposits from his sister into a
bank account in his varied name during 2020. When
asked about the transactions,
the Respondent stated he doesn’t recall but if it’s there,
it’s there. He was unable
to explain other transactions relating to
dishonour, a deposit of $3,000 or transfers that appeared to reflect share
trading. When
asked about a transfer in the amount of $133,739, he stated he has
no memory of this. When asked about a $60,000 bill for his sister,
he stated he
doesn’t recall. When asked about notices sent to him by Centrelink in 2020
of changes to his circumstances and
his income, he stated he doesn’t recall receiving anything. He was
offered, but declined,
to be taken to the specific notices during the hearing.
As to whether he had advised Centrelink about any of the bank deposits, he
stated he doesn’t recall. When asked whether he was receiving family tax
benefit for four children during 2020, he stated he
doesn’t recall. He
claimed not to remember a one-off payment of $750 in March 2020 or a crisis
payment of $430 on 18 September
2020, which was paid on the basis of claimed
extreme circumstances. When asked about any receipt of carer payment, he stated
know exact dates. When the Applicants asked him to comment on
the receipt of deposits and income, and that this meant a nil entitlement,
stated he doesn’t agree and doesn’t recall if that was even him
Respondent was taken to a complaint that was made through hipages following a
job completion by an individual with a variation
to the Respondent’s name.
When asked whether the Respondent had used that particular surname, he stated he
doesn’t recall.
The complaint outlined that a quote had been given for a
cash payment and, when asked whether that was a strategy to preserve his
entitlement to Centrelink payments and to avoid paying tax, he stated he
doesn’t recall.
Respondent submitted a claim for a crisis payment with Centrelink on 12 February
2021. In the claim he stated his address was
Address 1 and he provided a post
box number as his postal address. When asked whether he had used the post box
number because he
was unable to collect mail from Address 1, he stated he
doesn’t recall and all of the other documents have the same post box
number from years before. In the claim form, the Respondent stated he had $200
in savings and, when asked whether this was correct,
stated he doesn’t
recall. When asked whether his claim to have been in severe financial hardship
was correct, he stated he
doesn’t remember what the hardship was. The
Respondent agreed he had made another claim for crisis payment two days later,
on 14 February 2021.
Respondent was sent correspondence by Centrelink on 27 August 2021, where he was
advised that Centrelink needed more information
to make the right decision about
his carer allowance and carer payment. He was asked to complete three forms and
provide relevant
supporting documents to the forms. The Applicants asserted at
the hearing that the Respondent had not provided two of the three forms
requested, to which the Respondent stated he doesn’t recall. The
Applicants asserted that he had not completed a “SA010”
the level of care and an “SA332A” form relating to carer payment and
that in consequence his carer payment
had been suspended on 19 December 2021
from 9 December 2021, and was ultimately cancelled on 3 February 2022. When
asked why he had
not completed the forms, the Respondent stated he doesn’t
Respondent claimed jobseeker payment on 17 December 2021. When asked whether he
had completed the claim form he stated he doesn’t
recall. When asked about
the aliases declared in the claim form, he stated he didn’t fill it in and
queried whether there was
a phone record showing he had said that. In the claim
form, the Respondent stated he had been living at Address 6 from 4 July 2021
and, when asked about this, stated he doesn’t recall. He had claimed in
the form to be in a de facto relationship with AP but
unable to live together
due to illness, to which he stated he doesn’t recall. When asked what the
illness or disability was,
he stated he doesn’t recall. When asked about
the indication in the claim form that they would live apart temporarily to 25
February 2022, he stated he doesn’t recall. In relation to the reference
to AP living at Address 5, and whether this was next
door, he stated there are
two houses.
first review decision noted that the Respondent had been married to AP in
December 2021 and, when asked whether this was correct,
the Respondent stated he
doesn’t know exact dates but yes.
to whether he agreed there had been nine notices sent to him by Centrelink in
2021 about his notification obligations, he stated
that if they were sent, then
Respondent was asked about a deposit into an account with a variation of his
name in 2021, and about deposits into another account
from his sister, and he
stated he doesn’t recall any of them. As to whether he informed Centrelink
he stated he doesn’t recall. As to whether he
advised Centrelink he was married in December 2021, he stated he doesn’t
recall. Later in his evidence he stated it had been a religious marriage
ceremony in a “shop” and they had then applied
to register the
marriage. When asked about a divorce, he stated that AP had told him they had
divorced but he forgot they had. They
had separated when he had his accident.
Respondent gave evidence that he doesn’t recall receiving family tax
benefit in 2022. When asked whether he remembered making
a jobseeker application
and receiving two jobseeker payments in 2022, he stated he doesn’t recall.
When asked whether he remembered
receiving eight notices from Centrelink during
2022 about his reporting obligations, he stated he doesn’t recall.
Applicants put to the Respondent at the hearing that one of his methods was to
use a number of aliases, to which he stated he
doesn’t recall using the
variation to his name. The Applicants also put to the Respondent that the
evidence suggested he was
listing residential addresses that were out of date
and had used this to deliberately claim benefits, to which he stated he
recall and doesn’t agree. In response to the
Applicants’ assertion that he had provided false information to
Centrelink,
he stated he doesn’t know. In response to the
Applicants’ assertion that the only evidence relating to a head injury
that it was mild, the Respondent stated he is not a doctor.
Findings in relation to the Respondent’s relationship with
Applicants have urged the Tribunal to find that the Respondent was partnered
with AP from 30 November 2015 and, in so finding,
to place weight on the
documentary evidence before the Tribunal in preference to the oral evidence of
the Respondent given at hearing.
Tribunal has set out in detail, above, the evidence given by the Respondent at
the Tribunal hearing. The Tribunal hearing itself
was conducted over a number of
days and the Respondent was provided breaks from giving evidence, given the
medical issues he has
raised before the Tribunal.
of the Respondent’s answers to questions put to him were that he
didn’t recollect or didn’t remember. He asserted
that he had been
involved in an accident which had left him with memory loss. He provided a range
of medical documents to the Tribunal,
and from these the Tribunal accepted the
Respondent was admitted to hospital following a motorbike accident on 3 July
2024. His injuries
consisted of a lumbar spine injury, right third and fourth
rib fractures, a grade 2 splenic laceration, a retroperitoneal haematoma,
fracture of the right scapula and extensive displaced pelvic fractures. He
underwent multiple surgeries, was discharged to rehabilitation
readmitted for further surgeries during the second half of 2024.
Respondent underwent MRI brain, performed on 16 May 2025, which showed
encephalomalacia in the left frontal and right temporal
lobes, most likely
related to prior trauma, and a small number of prior microhaemorrhages in the
superior right frontal and left
parietal lobes in keeping with mild grade I
diffuse axonal injury.
Respondent attended a consultant psychiatrist on 22 May 2025 and, in a report
prepared by the psychiatrist, it was noted that
the Respondent was living with
“constant physical pain, significant disability, profound emotional grief,
and a collapsed sense
of agency”. The psychiatrist stated that the
cumulative effect of these had “disrupted” the Respondent’s
memory, speech fluency and emotional regulation.
Respondent participated in a neuropsychological assessment and a feedback
summary prepared by a psychologist on 5 June 2025 noted
the following, in
relevant part:
...you completed a neuropsychological assessment as
part of your inpatient rehabilitation to characterise the strengths and
in your cognition (thinking skills). After a mild traumatic brain
injury, an individual may experience changes to cognition, mood
behaviour. You reported experiencing difficulties with memory, slower thinking,
concentration and fatigue since the accident.
On assessment you completed a
number of tasks looking at your various thinking skills. Your assessment results
showed that you struggled
on tasks across domains; however, tests of validity
indicated that your test results should be interpreted with caution. This
that your test result is not a good reflection on your current
cognitive functioning. Nonetheless, you demonstrated good persistence
when they got challenging...
Respondent also provided the Tribunal a letter prepared by his treating
psychologist, who stated he had been treating the Respondent
since October 2024.
The psychologist noted, in relevant part, that the Respondent had been involved
in an accident that had resulted
in a mild traumatic brain injury and that his
injuries have left him with “ongoing physical damage, significant tissue
and chronic health challenges that continue to affect his
independence”. The letter further noted the following relevant
Following the accident, [the Respondent] remained
unconscious for approximately three and a half weeks. Upon waking, he
experienced
retrograde amnesia and found that he had lost memory of a meaningful
period of his life preceding the accident. This was further
compounded by the
distressing revelation that his wife had left him during that period and that
their marriage had faced serious
conflict – a phase of his life containing
information which he cannot remember. This has created a sense of profound
disconnection
from his own personal history and complicated his adjustment
His formal diagnoses include:
Post-Traumatic
Stress Disorder (PTSD)
Neurological Disorder
Chronic Pain
Neurocognitive Disorder
Perhaps the most disabling consequence of [the Respondent’s] injury has
been his cognitive and memory difficulties. These have
emerged as a dominant
theme in therapy and are consistently reported as one of his greatest
Key difficulties include:
Memory loss and
retention problems: [the Respondent] has significant difficulty consolidating
new information. Strategies, coping
tools, and psychoeducation introduced in
therapy frequently need to be repeated, and entire sessions are often dedicated
to reviewing
material he has already been exposed to.
Daily routine
management: He struggles to maintain structure in his day. Remembering to take
medications at the correct times is a
frequent challenge, and without external
reminders, he risks missing doses or duplicating them. He also struggles to keep
scheduled appointments, often requiring assistance from others to
ensure he attends.
consolidation: Even when [the Respondent] demonstrates an understanding of
therapeutic strategies during session, he often struggles
to recall and apply
them outside of therapy. This severely limits the transfer of learning into his
daily life.
Word-finding and
communicative difficulties: His communicative skills have been notably affected.
He will often search for words or
lost his train of thought mid-sentence,
particularly when trying to express abstract or complex ideas. In therapy, this
as frequent interruptions in his speech, pauses to “search”
for the right words, and visible frustration when he cannot
express himself as
fatigue: Engaging in cognitively demanding tasks quickly leads to exhaustion.
This means that he struggles to sustain attention
for extended periods, further
limiting his ability to learn and retain new skills.
These issues
are consistent with his diagnosis of mild neurocognitive disorder, and their
impact is severely debilitating in terms
of his day-to-day functioning and
quality of life.
Respondent sought time following the hearing to provide further evidence to the
Tribunal about his cognitive difficulties. Several
weeks after the hearing was
concluded, the Respondent provided a document setting out a series of
appointments that had been scheduled
for him between October and December 2025,
for occupational therapy, physical education, physiotherapy and psychology
contrast to the Respondent’s assertions, the Applicants submit that the
Respondent’s claimed level of impairment is
not supported by the medical
evidence before the Tribunal. The Applicants noted the comments of the AAT in
Zablotsky and Secretary, Department of Social Services
[2020] AATA 374
in which the AAT noted that, in assessing the relevant criteria, “the
decision-maker must necessarily take into account the
credibility of persons
giving evidence, whether that be the parties themselves or those in a position
to speak about them”.
The Applicants further noted that “assessment
of credibility is frequently of vital importance in determining whether a person
is a member of a couple” (
RFZX and Secretary, Department of Education,
Employment and Workplace Relations
[2010] AATA 35
) and that where a
person’s evidence is inconsistent with objective or independent evidence,
the Tribunal should generally place
greater reliance on the objective or
independent evidence (
Day and Secretary, Department of Education, Employment
and Workplace Relations
[2009] AATA
Tribunal’s concerns about the Respondent’s claimed inability to
remember a lot of details were put to the Respondent
at the hearing. The
Tribunal noted that the Respondent had claimed to be unable to remember
purchasing a property in 2019, to making
carer payment and carer allowance
claims, to obtaining planning permits, to working as a tradesman in the trade
industry or to giving
evidence on behalf of his sister at a previous AAT
hearing. The Tribunal noted at the hearing it was having difficulty accepting
this level of impairment of memory. The Tribunal further noted the Respondent
had not responded to directions to explain transactions
into his bank accounts.
He had described himself during the hearing as having lied, being a conman and
having been in jail for fraud
and that he had described himself similarly to the
authorised review officer. The Tribunal noted that all of the above caused the
Tribunal significant concern about his overall credibility and that, in
consequence, the Tribunal may not accept the oral evidence
he had given at the
hearing. The Respondent was given an opportunity to respond to this and declined
to comment on the Tribunal’s
observations.
regard to all of the above information, the Tribunal considered it reasonable
that the Respondent would be unable to recollect
details of specific dates he
had resided at particular addresses, details of letters that had been sent to
him up to 10 years earlier
or particular periods he had received family tax
benefit. However, the Tribunal did not consider that the medical evidence
established
that the Respondent would be unable to recall more significant
details of his life. The medical evidence indicates the Respondent
was admitted
to hospital in July 2024 for physical injuries, although accepts that subsequent
MRI and neuropsychological testing
refers to a mild traumatic brain injury. The
Tribunal is mindful of the comments, in particular, in the neuropsychologist
that caution against the reliability of the testing results, suggesting
some manipulation of performance during the testing. While
Respondent’s psychologist attests to a range of diagnoses and functional
difficulties, the source of the diagnoses of a
functional neurological disorder
or mild neurocognitive disorder was unclear to the Tribunal. The difficulties
described by the psychologist
appear to be largely self-reported by the
Respondent. Other difficulties the psychologist had observed were not observed
by the Tribunal
in the lengthy hearing proceedings. The Tribunal did not accept
that the medical evidence supported the extent of memory difficulties
the Respondent.
In consequence, the Tribunal did not accept as plausible that the Respondent
could not remember details of his long-term family residence
at Address 1, such
as whether there were two houses on the property or how many bedrooms were in
the houses. The Tribunal did not
accept as plausible that the Respondent could
not remember purchasing a property in 2019 that was his principal place of
having arranged a second driver’s licence in a varied name,
attending a previous AAT hearing, his family purchasing a property
own principal place of residence or whether he had been divorced. Similarly, the
Tribunal did not accept as plausible
that the Respondent could not recall
whether he worked for a number of years in the trade industry. The Tribunal
found that the Respondent
did not give full and frank evidence to the Tribunal
before the Tribunal, the Tribunal has placed greater weight on the documentary
evidence before it in this matter. The Tribunal has
not placed significant
weight on any of AP’s oral evidence at the hearing in making a decision in
the Respondent’s matter,
on the basis of the Tribunal’s reliance on
the documentary evidence in this matter and given that little evidence not
of the Respondent’s position, given by AP at the hearing, was
put to the Respondent by the Applicants at the hearing.
making its findings about the Respondent’s overall credibility, the
Tribunal has also ultimately accepted the submissions
of the Applicants that
various bank accounts held by an individual with a variation to the
Respondent’s name were held by the
Respondent himself. While the
Respondent acknowledged having a number of aliases, there was a variation to his
name, in particular,
that he claimed to not remember using. The Tribunal noted
that the varied name was declared as an alias by the Respondent on a jobseeker
claim form submitted on 17 December 2021, was used on a driver’s licence
with the Respondent’s photo and details, and
was used for accounts also
using the Respondent’s name for an energy company and first
statements in question used the
Respondent’s family’s address. Taken as a whole, the evidence leads
the Tribunal to find
that the bank accounts in the varied name were accounts
held by the Respondent.
Tribunal has also accepted the Applicants’ submissions that the Respondent
did work in the trade industry in the period
under review. The Tribunal has had
particular regard to payments for the trade industry work made into the bank
account in the Respondent’s
varied name, the representation by the
Respondent in various loan applications that he was employed in the trade
industry, the representation
to a psychiatrist of running a successful business
in the trade industry, the representations made to the AAT in a previous hearing
on behalf of his sister and the ATO audit conducted for the 2020 and 2021
financial years. This evidence, in cumulation, leads the
Tribunal to find that
the Applicant earned income from running a business in the trade industry.
to the relevant considerations as to whether the Respondent was partnered with
AP in the period under review, the Tribunal
noted the transfers of amounts from
AP to the Respondent while he was in prison. The Respondent and AP applied for
a joint bank
account in September 2015, shortly after the Respondent was
released from prison. The bank statements for the Respondent and AP,
in evidence
before the Tribunal, show significant amounts moving between their accounts from
June 2016 onwards, with descriptions
such as “love you” and
“bad husband” indicating the presence of a de facto relationship.
Other transactions
reference car, rent and children’s names and indicate
that there was a sharing of day-to-day household expenses between the
and AP during the period under review. The financial arrangements between the
Respondent and AP support the presence
of a de facto relationship from November
2015 onwards.
evidence before the Tribunal as to where the Respondent and AP were living
between 2015 and 2022 is contradictory and irreconcilable.
The Tribunal
considers that the best evidence before it is that the Respondent and AP were
residing together, with various family
and children, at Address 1 upon his
release from prison, as evidenced by home visits conducted by Community
Correctional Services
in the following months. The Tribunal considered that AP
was not residing at Address 2 as was asserted in a rent assistance form
submitted to Centrelink, on the basis that the Respondent was not her landlord
as claimed in the form.
Tribunal finds that the Respondent and AP signed a lease for Address 3 on 20
November 2015 and that this property was vacated
on 22 June 2016. The Respondent
had a parcel sent there and was in contact with the landlord through his mobile
number and the Tribunal
considered that this suggested the Respondent was
residing at the property, on at least a part-time basis. The Tribunal noted that
the Respondent was present at Address 1 during this period for visits by
Community Correctional Services staff.
Tribunal considered that the Respondent and AP were then living at Address 4 for
a period of time, until mid-2017 when the property
was purchased by a new owner.
It was unclear to the Tribunal where they were as of mid-2017 but considered it
possible they had returned
to Address 1 for a period of time.
Tribunal finds that the Respondent purchased Address 5 in February 2019 and that
his family purchased an adjacent property in
the same street (Address 6) shortly
thereafter. The Tribunal considered that AP was at the property, or the adjacent
property, during
this period of time.
Tribunal noted that the above findings are complicated by the Respondent’s
use of the Address 1 address for postal purposes
for a number of years,
different representations made by the Respondent and AP to Centrelink about
where they were residing at various
points in time and the lack of clear oral
evidence given by either the Respondent or AP to the Tribunal about their living
arrangements.
There was limited evidence before the Tribunal about the
functioning of the household, such as sharing of chores, roles taken with
respect to children in the household or other similar matters. The evidence
overall, however, suggests that they were sharing a household
in the period
under review, for some periods possibly on a part-time basis. The Tribunal was
not persuaded that they were living
separately for prolonged periods of time.
Facebook accounts of the Respondent and AP reflect that they represented
themselves as in a relationship from October 2014 onwards.
Subsequent entries in
May 2016, August 2016, October 2016, September 2017 and May 2018 also
represented them as being in a committed
relationship, engaged with each
other’s children and, in the September 2017 post, as excited to announce
the pending birth
of a child. Comments by AP’s mother to various posts
indicates that AP’s mother considered the Respondent and AP to have
partnered and the Tribunal noted that in his evidence at the hearing, the
Respondent acknowledged that his mother-in-law considered
them to be partnered.
Respondent and AP represented themselves to the Adult Parole Board and Community
Correctional Services as in a committed relationship,
with an intention to marry
after the Respondent’s release and as residing together with the
Respondent’s family and a
number of their children.
her hospital admissions for the birth of their children, in February 2018 and
July 2020, AP represented herself to the hospital
as partnered with the
Respondent, as evidenced by the records reflecting the Respondent as her
“husband/male partner”
and records of discussions with AP about her
“partner” working away from home.
Tribunal accepted that, aside from representing themselves as not partnered with
each other to Centrelink, the Respondent also
represented himself as single in a
personal loan application and in income tax returns prepared for the ATO.
overwhelming indication from the documents, however, was that the Respondent and
AP held themselves out as partnered from October
2014, on social media, to
friends and family and the wider community, and to organisations they dealt with
including the Adult Parole
Board and the hospital where AP gave birth twice to
their children. The Tribunal found that the social aspects of the relationship
strongly suggested the presence of a de facto relationship from October 2014
the Respondent and AP acknowledged in their evidence to the Tribunal the
presence of a sexual relationship during the period
under review and the
Tribunal found accordingly. The Tribunal found that this factor is indicative of
a de facto relationship.
to the nature of the commitment between the Respondent and AP, the Respondent
represented himself as committed to being married
to AP upon his release from
prison and AP’s correspondence to the Adult Parole Board indicated they
had, at that point in time,
already been religiously married. Their children
were born in February 2018 and July 2020 and were given the Respondent’s
name. The Tribunal accepted the evidence of AP, given at the hearing,
that they had been married in December 2021, by a religious
figure and then with
the marriage registered. While the Respondent asserted that the relationship had
been characterised by being
on and off, by him cheating and him returning to his
former partner, the only documentary evidence of this was contained in a
of Justice note, reflecting the Respondent as having advised they had
temporarily separated in December 2016 before reuniting in
January 2017. The
evidence of the level of commitment between the Respondent and AP is reflective
of a de facto relationship.
to other evidence before the Tribunal, the Tribunal considered that the
Respondent acting as a “person permitted to enquire”
for AP with
Centrelink did not add weight either for or against the presence of a de facto
relationship, on the basis that persons
act in this role in many different
circumstances and for different reasons. There were a number of tip-offs in the
evidence before
the Tribunal, that were discussed with the Respondent at the
hearing. While the Tribunal accepted the tip-offs contained a level
who had provided the information or their
motivation for doing so, the Tribunal
has placed little weight on this information in making a decision in this
Tribunal found that, when considered as a whole and when the relevant factors
are weighed, the totality of the evidence before
the Tribunal supports a finding
that the Respondent and AP were members of a couple, for social security
purposes, from November
2015. As the evidence before the Tribunal supports that
the Respondent and AP provided money to one another during the period under
review, the Tribunal finds that they had the ability to pool resources and that
a section 24 determination should not be made in
the circumstances of this case.
Tribunal therefore sets aside this aspect of the first review decision and
substitutes its decision that the Respondent was partnered
with AP from 30
November 2015.
Cancellation of carer payment as of 3 February
Tribunal accepted that the Respondent received carer payment in respect of care
provided to his daughter from 7 May 2019. He was
sent a notice by Centrelink on
27 August 2021, requiring him to provide three forms relating to his receipt of
carer payment by 10
September 2021. The letter stated, in relevant part:
Request for information
We are writing to ask for
more information to help us make the right decision about your Carer Payment and
Carer Allowance.
What you need to do
You need to provide
the following information
by 10 September 2021:
• a completed
form and all supporting documents
• a completed
form and all supporting documents
• a completed
form and all supporting documents
If you do not provide this information
If you do not provide this information to us by
Carer Payment payments may be stopped. If you cannot provide the information
by the due date you need to contact us.
Tribunal accepted the notice was sent pursuant to
Security (Administration) Act 1999
(Cth) (the Social Security Administration
Act), which allows the Secretary to notify a person receiving a social security
that they are required to give information within a specified time.
64(1) of the Social Security Administration Act sets out the circumstances in
which a payment is not payable where a notice
sent under section 63 has not been
complied with. Subsection 64(1) states that:
(a) a person is receiving, or has made a claim for, a social security
payment; and
(b) the Secretary notifies the person under
(2AB) or (4); and
(c) the requirement in the notice is reasonable; and
(d) the person does not comply with the requirement; and
(e) except if the person is receiving, or has made a claim for, a
participation payment--the Secretary is not satisfied that the
person had a
reasonable excuse for not complying with the requirement; and
(f) the Secretary is satisfied that it is reasonable for this
apply to the person;
the payment that the person is receiving or has
claimed is not payable.
noted above, when taken to the correspondence during the hearing, the Respondent
was unable to provide an explanation for not completing
the forms, stating to
the Tribunal that he didn’t recall why he had not completed them. The
Tribunal found on the evidence
before it that the Respondent was receiving a
social security payment and was notified under subsection 63(2) of the Social
Administration Act of a requirement to give information to the
Secretary. The Tribunal considered that the requirement in the notice
reasonable, on the basis that it was reasonable for the Secretary to seek
information about the care being provided and care
needs of the care receiver.
The Respondent did not comply with the notice, as he returned only one of the
three forms requested.
Having regard to the Respondent’s explanation given
at the hearing, the Tribunal finds he has not provided a reasonable excuse
not complying with the requirement. The Tribunal further finds that it is
reasonable for the subsection to apply, on the basis
of the importance of the
information to a proper assessment of the Respondent’s ongoing
qualification for carer payment and
his inability to provide any reasonable
explanation to the Tribunal for failing to provide this information.
the circumstances described in subsection 64(1) of the Social Security
Administration Act apply, carer payment was not payable
to the Respondent.
80(1) of the Social Security Administration Act then states
(1) If the Secretary is satisfied that a social security
payment is being, or has been, paid to a person:
(a) who is not, or was not, qualified for the payment; or
(b) to whom the payment is not, or was not, payable (other than because of
the operation of Division 3AA);
the Secretary is to determine that the payment is to be cancelled or
carer payment was not payable to the Respondent, subsection 80(1) of the Social
Security Administration Act provides for the payment
to be cancelled or
suspended. The Respondent was sent a letter on 17 December 2021 notifying him
that his payment was suspended because
of the non-provision of the information
sought. Further correspondence was sent on 31 January 2022, cancelling the
payment because
the information had still not been provided.
circumstances where the information was necessary to ensure the Respondent
remained qualified for carer payment and the information
was not provided,
following a period of suspension of the payment, the Tribunal accepted the
preferable decision was to cancel the
Respondent’s payment. The Tribunal
accepted that the Respondent’s carer payment was correctly cancelled from
Raising of carer payment, newstart allowance
and parenting payment debts
rate of carer payment is worked out in accordance with the Rate Calculator in
section 1064
Social Security Act
. Note 3 to the Rate Calculator states
that the rate calculation for a member of a couple is affected by the operation
of points 1064-A2
and 1064-A3. Section 1064-A2 of the
Social Security Act
that where two people are members of a couple, they will be treated as pooling
their resources (income and assets) and sharing
them on a 50/50 basis, and will
also be treated as sharing expenses, for example rent, on a 50/50 basis.
basic rates payable are set out in
section 1064
-B1 and vary depending on whether
a person is not a member of a couple, is partnered, is a member of an
illness-separated couple,
is a member of a respite care couple or is partnered
(partner in jail). A higher rate of payment is payable to a person who is not
member of a couple than for a partnered person.
rate of parenting payment is calculated by the Rate Calculator in
section 1068A
if a person is not a member of a couple and by the Rate Calculator in
if a person is partnered. Where a person is partnered and their rate is
calculated in
section 1068B
Social Security Act
, Module D provides that
their partner’s income is relevant to determining the rate payable to
the time the Respondent was paid newstart allowance,
section 1068
Security Act
provided the Rate Calculator to determine the rate payable to them.
The Rate Calculator also provided a lower rate, and a lower rate
pharmaceutical allowance, for a partnered person than for a person who was not a
member of a couple, and provided that a person’s
partner’s receipt
of a social security payment also affected the rate payable to the person.
Applicants state that the debts of carer payment, parenting payment and newstart
allowance are for the following reasons.
30 November 2015 and 6 April 2016, AP was receiving business income. Because of
the level of income, the Respondent had nil
entitlement to newstart
7 April 2016 and 25 September 2017, the Respondent receiving parenting payment
(single). During this period, AP received business
income from 7 April 2016 to
25 April 2016, then received compensation payments from 9 April 2016 to 24 April
2017. The Respondent
received unexplained deposits from 25 April 2016 to 25
September 2017. The Respondent had nil entitlement to parenting payment (single)
in this period.
26 September 2017 and 19 June 2018, the Respondent received newstart allowance.
He received unexplained deposits throughout
this period. He had nil entitlement
to newstart allowance.
20 June 2018 and 1 October 2018, the Respondent received parenting payment
(single). He received unexplained deposits throughout
this period. He had nil
entitlement to parenting payment (single).
1 November 2018 and 6 May 2019, the Respondent received newstart allowance. He
received unexplained deposits throughout this
period. He had nil entitlement to
newstart allowance.
7 May 2019 and 8 December 2021, the Respondent received carer payment. He
received unexplained deposits throughout this period.
He had nil entitlement to
carer payment.
9 December 2021 and 30 March 2022, the Respondent received newstart allowance.
He was paid at the single rate of payment and
also received unexplained deposits
throughout the period. He had nil entitlement between 9 December 2021 and 19
January 2022, and
a partial entitlement between 20 January 2022 and 30 March
regard to the documents before it, the Tribunal accepted that AP received
business income during 2015 and 2016, based on her
2015/16 income tax return and
a payment history report covering the period 30 November 2015 to 14 August 2016,
and that the income
was calculated by reducing the gross income indicated on the
payment history report by expenses claimed in the income tax return,
section 1075
Social Security Act
Tribunal accepted that AP received compensation payments totalling $65,610.33
between 9 April 2016 and 9 April 2017. As she was
not receiving a compensation
affected payment during this period, the Applicant has treated the amounts
received as ordinary income
pursuant to
subsection 8(1)
Social Security
. The Tribunal sees no reason to depart from this approach on the information
of the reason for the raising of the debts was unexplained deposits into
accounts the Applicant states were paid to the Respondent
between 26 April 2016
and 30 March 2022. For the reasons set out above, the Tribunal has accepted the
Applicants’ submissions
that various bank accounts in a varied name are
accounts held by the Respondent and that the Respondent undertook work in the
industry during the period under review.
Respondent was provided the opportunity to explain the various deposits into his
accounts and was unable to explain to any satisfactory
level the reasons for the
deposits. The Tribunal noted that “income” for the purposes of the
Social Security Act
includes amounts earned, derived or received by a person for
their own use or benefit. In the absence of any evidence to the contrary,
Tribunal found that the various deposits were income within the meaning of
Social Security Act
and are assessable as income for the
purposes of calculating the Respondent’s rate of social security payments.
The Applicants
submit, and the Tribunal accepts, that these amounts totalled
$1,967,484.45 between 26 April 2016 and 27 January 2021.
calculating the overpayment in relation to the amounts deposited into the
Respondent’s accounts, the Applicants have attributed
the deposits in line
subsection 1073(1)
Social Security Act
. This provision states
(1) Subject to points 1067G - H5 to
1067G - H20 (inclusive), 1067L - D5 to 1067L - D16
(inclusive), 1068 - G7AF to 1068 - G7AR (inclusive),
1068A - E2 to 1068A - E12 (inclusive) and
1068B - D7 to 1068B - D18 (inclusive), if a
whether before or after the commencement of this section, an amount that:
the meaning of Division 1B or 1C of this Part; and
(b) is not:
the form of periodic payments; or
from remunerative
for the purposes of this Act, taken to receive one fifty-second of that amount
each week in the 12
on the day on which the
entitled to receive that amount.
Tribunal accepted that the majority of the payments into the accounts of the
Respondent were unable to be explained by him and
are not, on the evidence
available to the Tribunal, income in the form of periodic payments, ordinary
income from remunerative work
or an exempt lump sum.
deposits referred to the trade industry. The Respondent was unable to explain
these at the hearing and asserted that they
had not been from employment in the
relevant period. The Applicants assert that these should be treated as
unexplained deposits under
section 1073
Social Security Act
on the basis
that the Respondent has not provided a satisfactory explanation for the
deposits, that he had previously asserted to
an Agency investigator that the
money was paid by his sister to look like he had employment for a home loan and
the payments are
not supported by any sufficient evidence. On the evidence
before it, and given the Respondent’s evidence given at the hearing,
Tribunal accepted the submissions of the Applicants on this issue.
Tribunal is satisfied that, in treating the amounts deposited into the
Respondent’s accounts as amounts received pursuant
section 1073
Social Security Act
, the following amounts were overpaid to the
Respondent:
(i) Overpayment of newstart allowance totalling $6,415.50 for the period 30
November 2015 to 6 April 2016;
(ii) Overpayment of parenting payment (single) totalling $30,403.52 for the
period 7 April 2016 to 25 September 2017;
(iii) Overpayment of newstart allowance totalling $11,606.21 for the period 26
September 2017 to 19 June 2018;
(iv) Overpayment of parenting payment (single) totalling $7,534.66 for the
period 20 June 2018 to 1 October 2018;
(v) Overpayment of newstart allowance totalling $8,092.59 for the period 1
November 2018 to 6 May 2019;
(vi) Overpayment of carer payment totalling $65,011.58 for the period 7 May 2019
to 8 December 2021; and
(vii) Overpayment of newstart allowance totalling $2,837.18 for the period 9
December 2021 to 30 March 2022.
Tribunal accepted that the above amounts included supplementary payments made to
the Respondent, which had included pensioner
education supplement, education
entry payment, income support bonus, telephone allowance, energy assistance
payment and crisis payment
for national health emergency. Debts relating to the
supplementary payments also arise because of the Respondent’s lack of
entitlement to the substantive social security payments in the above periods.
Tribunal accepted that the combined amount of overpayment for these periods was
$131,901.24.
Social Security Act
provides that an overpayment of a social
security payment is a debt due to the Commonwealth and is taken to arise when
obtained the benefit of the payment. The Tribunal finds that the
above amounts, totalling $131,901.24, are debts due to the Commonwealth
section 1223
Social Security Act
Family tax benefit
rate of family tax benefit is calculated through the Rate Calculator in Schedule
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) Act 1999
(Cth) (the Family
Assistance Act). A person’s adjusted taxable income is relevant to
determining their rate of family tax benefit
and, where partnered, their
partner’s adjusted taxable income is also relevant to determining the rate
payable. As the Respondent
was partnered with AP in the periods under review,
AP’s adjusted taxable income was relevant to determining the
Respondent’s
qualification for, and annual rate of, family tax benefit
Part A and Part B. In addition, AP’s receipt of a social security
also affects the Respondent’s rate of family tax benefit.
Applicants submit that, in the event that the Respondent was not entitled to
newstart allowance, parenting payment and carer payment,
and that AP was
receiving income and was not entitled to a social security benefit or pension
(dealt with separately in AP’s
decision), the Respondent’s family
tax benefit would be subject to an income test. The Applicants further noted
that the Secretary
had made different findings as to the quantum of family tax
benefit debts since the authorised review officer decision was made.
Given this,
while the Tribunal accepts the Respondent was overpaid family tax benefit during
the 2015/16, 2016/17, 2018/19 and 2020/21
financial years, the Tribunal accepted
the submissions of the Applicant that the quantum of any overpayment to the
Respondent in
the four financial years in question will be required to be
recalculated by the Applicant on the basis of the income test.
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
(Cth) (the Family Assistance Administration Act) provides that an
overpayment of family assistance is a debt due to the Commonwealth.
The Tribunal
finds that any recalculated overpayment amounts for the 2015/16, 2016/17,
2018/19 and 2020/21 financial years are debts
due to the Commonwealth.
Child care benefit and child care rebate debts
the time the Respondent received child care benefit, in the 2017/18 financial
year, the payment was intended to assist with child
care costs and was
calculated under Schedule 2 to the Family Assistance Act. In addition,
different hours of sessions of care for
a week were determined, in part, by
whether a person had met a “work/training/study test”.
Tribunal accepted the Applicants’ submissions that, in circumstances where
a social security payment was not payable to
the Respondent or AP, the
Respondent’s adjusted taxable income became relevant to determining his
rate of child care benefit.
In addition, the Tribunal accepted that AP did not
meet the work/training/study test while the Respondent was receiving child care
benefit and he was not entitled to child care benefit for a limit of 50 hours
was not disputed, and the Tribunal accepted, that the Respondent was overpaid
child care benefit totalling $1,251.86 in the 2017/18
financial year. The
Tribunal finds that this amount is a debt due to the Commonwealth under section
71C of the Family Assistance
Administration Act, in force at the time the debt
Tribunal further accepted the Applicants’ submissions that, as a result of
the above, the Respondent was not eligible for
more than 24 hours of care per
week and was not entitled to child care rebate. The Tribunal accepted that the
Respondent was overpaid
child care rebate totalling $1,065.86 in the 2017/18
financial year and that this is also a debt due to the Commonwealth.
Are the debts recoverable by the Commonwealth?
Social Security Act
and section 95 of the Family Assistance
Administration Act allow for write off of a debt for a period of time
(a) The debt is irrecoverable at law; or
(b) The debtor has no capacity to repay the debt; or
(c) The debtor’s whereabouts are unknown after all reasonable efforts have
been made to locate the debtor; or
(d) It is not cost effective for the Commonwealth to take action to recover the
Tribunal finds that the debts are all recoverable at law, the Respondent’s
whereabouts are known and it is cost effective
for the Commonwealth to take
action to recover the debts, given the quantum of the overpayments.
to whether the Respondent has the capacity to repay the debts, the Applicants
submit that his annual income is currently recorded
as $396,771, as based on the
“FAO Income for Previous Year (FIPY)” screen contained in the
papers, being the taxable
income for the 2023/24 financial year. The Respondent
agreed that had been his taxable income for 2023/24 and referred in his evidence
to having put a deposit on a house and having lost the house. The Respondent
asserted he currently has no money in the bank. No financial
documents were
provided to support this assertion. Given the Respondent’s most recent
taxable income, the Tribunal finds that
he has the capacity to repay the debts
by negotiating a reasonable rate of repayment with the Applicants.
of the provisions for write off of the debts are met and none of the debts are
able to be written off for a period of time.
Administrative error
Social Security Act
provides for waiver of a debt where the debt
has been caused by sole administrative error by the Commonwealth and the debtor
the payments in good faith. Section 97 of the Family Assistance
Administration Act provides the same requirements, in addition to
requiring that
there would be severe financial hardship to the Respondent if the debt were not
Tribunal has found that the Respondent was partnered, for social security
purposes, with AP between November 2015 and March 2022.
He did not assert that
he had advised Centrelink that he was partnered with AP at any time during the
period under review.
Tribunal has, further, found that the Respondent received amounts into his
various bank accounts during the period under review
and that these are to be
treated as income for the purposes of calculating his rates of payment. He did
not claim to have advised
Centrelink of any of the amounts being deposited in
his bank account.
circumstances where Centrelink was not advised of the relationship with AP and
was not advised of amounts treated as income for
the purposes of calculating the
Respondent’s rates of social security and family assistance payments, none
of the debts can
be considered to have been caused by sole administrative error
by the Commonwealth. The newstart allowance, parenting payment (single)
carer payment debts are unable to be waived under
section 1237A
Security Act
. The family tax benefit, child care benefit and child care rebate
debts are unable to be waived under section 97 of the Family Assistance
Administration Act.
Waiver – Special
circumstances
Social Security Act
provides for discretionary waiver of a debt
in the following circumstances:
The Secretary may waive the right to
recover all or part of a debt if the Secretary is satisfied that:
(a) the debt did not result wholly or partly from the debtor or
(i) making a false statement or a false representation; or
(ii) failing or omitting to comply with a provision of this Act, the
Administration Act or the 1947 Act; and
(b) there are special circumstances (other than financial hardship alone)
that make it desirable to waive; and
(c) it is more appropriate to waive than to write off the debt or part of
101 of the Family Assistance Administration Act provides the equivalent
provisions with respect to discretionary waiver of
family assistance debts.
Wall and Secretary, Department of Education, Employment and Workplace
[2010] AATA 740
(at [28]-[29]) the AAT stated
Taylor’s Central Garages (Exeter) Ltd v Roper
[1951] WN 383
Devlin J considered the meaning of “knowledge” and found that actual
knowledge can be inferred form the evidence
and the nature of the acts done.
Further, in
RCA Corporation v Customs Cleared Sales Pty Ltd
(1978) 19 ALR
at 125, the Court of Appeal in the Supreme Court of New South Wales said:
In inferring knowledge, a court is entitled to approach the matter in two
stages; where opportunities for knowledge on the part of
the particular person
are proved and there is nothing to indicate that there are obstacles to the
particular person acquiring the
relevant knowledge, there is some evidence from
which the court can conclude that such a person has the knowledge. However, this
conclusion may be easily overturned by a denial on his part of the knowledge
which the court accepts, or by a demonstration that
he is properly excused from
giving evidence of his actual knowledge.
Following the decision in RCA Corporation, it is open to the Tribunal to
infer that a person had actual knowledge of their obligations
under the Act
where there were opportunities for them to gain that knowledge and where there
were no obstacles to them acquiring
the knowledge. In the present case, the
respondent sent letters to the Applicant notifying him of his obligations under
Tribunal accepted from the information presented by the Applicant that the
Respondent was sent a number of notices between 2015
and 2022. These contained a
requirement for the Respondent to notify of any change in circumstances and also
set out the definition
of “income”, relevant to the payments he was
Tribunal notes that, aside from the specific obligations set out in notices sent
to the Respondent, subsection 66A(1) of the Social
Security Administration Act
provides a general obligation on a person who has made a claim for a social
security payment, which has
either been granted or not yet determined, to advise
of any event or change of circumstances that might affect the payment within
days of the event or change occurring.
Tribunal finds that AP provided a rent certificate to Centrelink on 4 November
2015 in which she represented that the Respondent
(in one of his aliases) was
her landlord. The Tribunal finds that this information was incorrect and that AP
knowingly provided a
false statement to Centrelink in the rent certificate.
Tribunal further finds that AP contacted Centrelink on 7 April 2016 to advise
that her children had left her care and moved into
the care of the Respondent.
The Respondent appeared to have no recollection of having AP’s children in
his care at any time.
AP gave clear evidence that her children had never been
out of her care. The evidence before the Tribunal suggests that the Respondent
and AP were residing together at Address 3 at the time. The Tribunal finds that
on 7 April 2016, AP provided a false statement to
Centrelink and – given
her assertion that the children had never left her care – this statement
was made knowingly.
Tribunal has found that the Respondent was partnered with AP between November
2015 and March 2022. The Respondent acknowledged
in his evidence at the hearing
that, while the relationship had been on and off, there were periods they were
partnered. The Respondent
did not advise Centrelink over the seven-year period
of being partnered with AP. He received parenting payment at the single rate
payment during 2016. He provided information to Centrelink on 22 September 2017
that his marital status was divorced, some nine
days after announcing on
Facebook that he and AP were expecting a child. He made claims for parenting
payment (single) while partnered,
on 25 March 2020 and 30 June 2020, stating in
both claims that he was divorced. The Tribunal noted that the latter claim was
one month before AP gave birth to their second child. The Respondent
provided written information to Centrelink that his marital
separated/divorced, six days after advising the Department of Justice on 11
January 2017 he and AP had reconciled after
a brief period apart.
Tribunal finds that the Respondent made false representations to Centrelink that
his marital status was divorced and/or separated.
In so doing, the Respondent
represented himself as not in a relationship at the time the various claims were
made. Having regard
to the totality of the Respondent’s evidence,
including the findings the Tribunal has made about the Respondent’s
credibility, the Tribunal finds that these representations were made
Respondent made a further claim for jobseeker payment on 17 December 2021 in
which he indicated he was de facto but that he and
his partner were unable to
live together due to illness. The Respondent was unable to explain this
representation at the hearing
and there is no evidence before the Tribunal that
either the Respondent or AP’s state of health at that particular time
they were an illness-separated couple. Rather, the evidence suggests they
were residing together with their two biological children
in a home purchased by
the Respondent in 2019. The Tribunal finds that the representation made by the
Respondent in December 2021
that he was unable to reside with his partner was a
false representation that was made knowingly.
Tribunal finds that the Respondent received amounts into his bank account during
the period under review that are income for social
security purposes and that
none of the amounts received were declared to Centrelink. As put to him at the
hearing, these amounts
included $53,930 worth of deposits during 2016 and
$101,532 worth of deposits in 2017. The ATO assessed his 2019/20 income as
The Tribunal does not accept that the Respondent was not aware he was
required to declare these amounts, for the purpose of assessing
his rates of
payment. The obligation was one imposed by sections 63 and 66A of the Social
Security Administration Act and its equivalent
provision in section 25 of the
Family Assistance Administration Act. The Tribunal finds that the Respondent
failed to comply with
a provision of the relevant legislation, being an
obligation to advise of changes to his circumstances including to his income,
that this was done knowingly.
Tribunal finds that the debts in this matter have arisen, at least partly, from
the Respondent and another person knowingly making
false statements or false
representations, and failing or omitting to comply with a provision of the
relevant social security and
family assistance legislation. The social security
debts are unable to be waived under
section 1237AAD
Social Security Act
The family assistance debts are unable to be waived under section 101 of the
Family Assistance Administration Act.
are no other provisions in
Social Security Act
relating to
non-recovery of debts that apply in the circumstances of this matter. The
Tribunal therefore finds that the above debts
are recoverable by the
Commonwealth.
Dates of hearing:
11 August, 12 August, 13 August, 9 September 2025
for the Applicant:
Ms L Martin of counsel
Instructed by Ms K Lieschke, Sparke Helmore
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Self-represented
Cited in Applicant’s
Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions (SFIC) at paragraph 4.56.
Cited in Applicant’s SFIC
at paragraph 4.57.
Cited in Applicant’s SFIC
at paragraph 4.58.
Cited in Applicants’ SFIC
at paragraph 6.35.
Applicant SFIC at paragraph
Cited in Applicant’s SFIC
at paragraph 10.34.
RTF format (13.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format