Danes & Danes & Anor [2013] FMCAfam 281 (28 March 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
DANES & DANES &
[2013] FMCAfam 281
FAMILY LAW – Parenting – application
by maternal grandmother – problematic relationship between mother and
grandmother – maternal grandmother’s lack of insight into
impact of her behaviour and current litigation on the mother
consideration of best interests of subject children – application of
maternal grandmother dismissed – otherwise
consent orders as between
mother and father.
Family Law Act 1975
[2012] FMCAfam 22
Overton & Anor
[2008] FamCA 965
[2009] FamCA
Goode v Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346
(2007) 36 Fam LR 422
(2006) FLC 93-286
[2010] HCA 4
First Respondent:
Second Respondent:
File Number:
SYC 6705 of 2011
Judgment of:
Hearing dates:
17, 18 & 19 December 2012, 21 February 2013
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Mr Greenaway
Solicitors for the First Respondent:
Norwest Family Law
Counsel for the Second Respondent:
Self Represented
Solicitors for the Independent Children’s Lawyer:
Legal Aid Sydney
(1) That the Application of the Applicant Maternal
Grandmother be dismissed.
(2) That the applicant spend time with and communicate with the children as
agreed between the mother, the father and the applicant.
(3) That the parties be restrained from subjecting the children to any form of
hitting or physical striking and they shall use their
best endeavours to ensure
that no other person does so.
(4) That the parties be restrained from using or being under the influence of
any illegal drug or from being under the influence
of alcohol to excess when the
children are in their care.
(5) That the parties be restrained from bringing the children into contact with
any person who is using or is under the influence
of any illegal drug or any
person who has consumed alcohol to excess.
(6) That the mother do all things necessary to engage in the Brighter Futures
Program and continue to attend until such time as she
and the children are
discharged from the program and during the continuance of her engagement in the
said program obey all reasonable
directions given to her as to her engagement in
the program or engagement in any other program or counselling as is
recommended.
(7) That the Independent Children’s Lawyer file and serve short
submissions as to costs sought by the Independent Children’s
Lawyer within
14 days from this date.
(8) That each of the parties file and serve short submissions as to costs sought
by the Independent Children’s Lawyer within
a further 14 days.
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the
Danes & Danes & Anor
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYC 6705 of
First Respondent
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
The Proceedings
are proceedings in relation to the children [X] born [in] 2007 and [Y] born [in]
2009 (“the children”).
Proceedings
were commenced by the applicant maternal grandmother by application filed on 1
November 2011.
that application the applicant grandmother sought orders that in summary
provided for the children to live with her, that she and
the mother and father
of the children have joint parental responsibility and that the children spend
time with the mother and father
as agreed between the parties. The applicant
grandmother also sought various specific issue orders.
first respondent to the application is the mother of the children and the second
respondent to the application is the father of
the children.
her amended application filed on 10 December 2012 the applicant grandmother
substantially amended the orders sought by her in that
she no longer sought for
the children to live with her but that the children have time with her as
the first weekend of each month from 5.00pm Friday to 5.00pm Sunday;
odd years from 5.00pm Christmas Eve until 5.00pm Christmas
even years from 5.00pm Christmas Day to 5.00pm Boxing
the Greek Easter weekend from 5.00pm Easter Thursday to 5.00pm Easter
the Christmas school holidays from 5.00pm Boxing Day until 5.00pm on 12
such other periods as are agreed between the parties.
applicant asserts that this change was a consequence of the release of the
family report although she had considered it since
children in September 2012.
applicant grandmother also sought orders in relation to time with the child [Z]
born [in] 2011. This child is a child of the respondent
mother's present
relationship. The father of this child is not a party to the current proceedings
and at hearing the applicant grandmother
abandoned any orders sought in relation
to this child.
trial the applicant grandmother relied upon the following
initiating application filed on 10 December 2012;
of the applicant grandmother filed on 10 December 2012.
first respondent mother filed an amended response on 26 June 2012 and in that
response the mother sought in summary the following
the mother and father have equal shared parental responsibility in relation to
the children;
the children live with the mother;
the children spend time with the father from 9.00am to 5.00pm one Saturday and
Sunday each month and at such other times as agreed
between the
the father have telephone contact with the children each week between 6.00pm and
7.00pm and on other special days;
the father’s time be supervised by the paternal grandparents;
the father’s time be spent with the children in [T];
the children spend time with the applicant grandmother as agreed between the
applicant grandmother and the mother.
trial the mother relied upon her affidavits filed on 2 May 2012 and 26 June 2012
together with an affidavit from her present partner
Mr M filed on 26 June
respondent father filed a response on 10 January 2012 and in that response
sought orders that in summary provided for:
mother and father to have equal shared parental responsibility for the
the children live with the mother;
the children spend time with the father one weekend each month from 4.00pm
Friday to 5.00pm Sunday, during school holidays at
the conclusion of terms 1, 2
and 3 for one week and for a period of three weeks during the Christmas school
holidays, the Father’s
Day weekend from 4.00pm Friday to 5.00pm Sunday and
otherwise as agreed between the mother and father;
the children spend time with the applicant grandmother as agreed between the
father and mother;
father also sought various specific issues orders that would facilitate the
children's time and entitle him to information in
relation to the children's
trial the father relied upon his affidavit filed on 7 December 2012.
proceedings first came before the court on 20 February 2012 on the application
of the applicant grandmother. On 9 March 2012 the
court made a location order so
as to facilitate the whereabouts of the mother and children being known in order
that service could
be effected.
29 March 2012 following service the proceedings were again listed before the
court. On that date the mother appeared by phone and
the father in person.
Proceedings were adjourned to 3 May 2012 for directions or interim hearing if
necessary. The mother and father
were ordered to file and serve a response and
affidavit in support of any orders sought by 27 April 2012. The parties were
to attend a child dispute conference with a family consultant on 17
April 2012 and the mother was granted leave to attend that conference
matter was again before the court on 3 May 2012 on that date an independent
children's lawyer was appointed for the subject children
and proceedings were
adjourned to 26 June 2012 for further directions.
26 June 2012 the matter was adjourned for hearing commencing Monday, 17 December
2012, a family report was ordered with release
of that report requested by 26
October 2012 and the matter was listed for directions on 26 November 2012 to
facilitate directions
for trial being made. Otherwise the court ordered by
consent that the applicant grandmother be at liberty to communicate with the
children by card or letter and that the mother do all things necessary to bring
such cards or letters to the children's attention
and read the contents of such
to the children in an appropriate manner.
5 November 2012 the family report was released by the court to the parties and
the independent children's lawyer. On 26 November
the court made trial
directions and confirmed the matter for hearing commencing 17 December
oral evidence in these proceedings was given in the context of relationships
that over a long period of time have been waxing
and waning. There is no doubt
that particularly the applicant maternal grandmother and the respondent mother
have a relationship
that is conflictual and emotionally charged. The court deals
in detail with the nature of this relationship and its history in the
set out below. As to the evidence of the applicant maternal grandmother and the
mother the court is not satisfied completely
that they presented to the court as
witnesses of absolute truth. However with the overshadowing nature of their
relationship, the
lengthy history that was cross-examined upon and the adverse
emotional underpinning of that relationship the court is not satisfied
all the circumstances it should prefer the evidence of one as against the other.
The court is satisfied that mostly they
were frank with the court and did their
best to give evidence as to their recollections as accurately as possible.
However the court
is satisfied that the accuracy and reliability of their
respective recollections was compromised by the emotional circumstances of
relationship and particularly the litigation in which they have found
themselves.
applicant grandmother is presently aged nearly 48 years. The applicant is now
married to Mr W who is aged 47 years.
subject children are aged five and three.
respondent mother is presently aged 26.
applicant grandmother has had a significant involvement in the lives of the
subject children since the birth. That involvement
came about by reason of the
difficult circumstances experienced by the father and mother with two young
children and as a consequence
of the applicant’s interest in the welfare
of the children.
applicant gives detailed evidence of her involvement in the lives of the
children and the mother and father. Her affidavit runs
to some 221 paragraphs
and in disturbing minutiae she deals with almost every aspect of her
relationship with the children and the
mother and father over the short lives of
these young children.
applicant grandmother makes trenchant criticism of the mother, her parenting
capacity and the circumstances the children found
themselves in during the
continuation of the relationship of the mother and father.
relationship between the mother and father commenced in 2006. When the mother
fell pregnant with the eldest child in February
2007 she was living at home with
the applicant grandmother. At this time the mother acknowledges that she was
struggling with the
pregnancy. She says that the applicant grandmother said to
her "well if you can't handle it, I'll take the child".
the impending birth of the child in late 2007 there was conflict between the
mother and the applicant grandmother about the child's
surname. The mother
indicating that she would give the child the father’s surname and the
applicant opposed that course alleging
that the mother was disrespectful of her
by not giving the child the mother's surname. This was a significant issue
between the mother
and the applicant during the mother's pregnancy. In October
2007 the mother and father obtained a rental property together at [N].
mother did not give the applicant her new address in an endeavour to distance
herself from the applicant for a period of time.
the applicant was able to ascertain the mother’s address and attended at
those premises uninvited. The mother describes
her relationship with the
applicant at this time as toxic with the applicant attending at the [N] property
uninvited on a regular
the birth of the child in November 2007 the mother remained at home caring for
the child whilst the father was in employment
supporting the household.
father had a significant role thereafter in the day today care of the children.
early 2008 the mother and father and young child stayed in the applicant’s
witnessed an incident between
the applicant and her husband and observed them spitting in each other's
applicant asserts that the mother and father left her home by reason of unpaid
rent due to the applicant notwithstanding they
were young parents with a young
Subsequently
the mother and father lived at various premises and on occasions in the
applicant’s home.
mother says that from March 2008 over the next two years the applicant would
babysit the eldest child almost on a weekly basis
despite her objections. The
mother says that she felt dominated by the applicant but notwithstanding that
she perceived her to be
a good grandmother.
June 2009 the youngest child [Y] was born. During this year the mother asserts
there were some domestic violence incidents between
herself and the father
although it is acknowledged that such incidents were instigated by both of
the birth of the youngest child the applicant did not babysit that child until
the age of six or seven months but thereafter
the applicant would assist with
the care of the child on a fortnightly basis.
in December 2009 the mother witnessed a domestic incident between the applicant
and her present husband and became concerned
that whilst in the care of the
applicant the children might be exposed to domestic violence. At this time the
applicant said to the
mother "[Mr W] and I have had some pretty bad
at his parent’s home with both children.
The youngest child remained in
the father's care at his parent’s home until August 2010 and during this
period the father enrolled
the child in day care.
mother asserts that she arranged for the father to mind the children at his
parent’s home until such time as she was able
to obtain her own
independent accommodation. The mother and father agreed to meet each Sunday to
spend time with the children together.
this period the mother stayed with her sister for a few weeks and the eldest
child was with her for about three days a week,
with the father for two days and
with the applicant for two days. The applicant placed the eldest child in day
care without the mother's
mother also became aware that the applicant was attending at the father's home
and demanding that she take the eldest child. This
circumstance is confirmed by
the father.
this period there was an argument between the applicant and the mother during a
phone call. The applicant criticised the mother’s
parenting in
circumstances where the mother replied that she was having difficulty obtaining
rental accommodation as a single mother.
The mother informed the applicant that
she would be attending the applicant’s home to pick up the eldest child.
The applicant
responded words to the effect of
"no I'm keeping her. She is
more my daughter than yours... I'll see you in court, she's always been mine.
Don't you dare come over."
evening the mother attended at the applicant’s home with the police and
recovered her daughter. It was at this time that
the applicant first threatened
court proceedings against the mother.
the incident the mother did not permit the applicant to have contact with the
children for several weeks but thereafter with
the eldest child
intermittently.
occupied that property with both children in her care.
was about this time that the mother's present partner, whom she had known since
2002, became engaged with the children and to the
mother’s observation
there were positive changes in the children now that she was more settled and in
a regular relationship.
M, the mother’s present partner is presently enrolled in a Masters course
at [omitted]. His father is a self-employed businessman
in [omitted], near [T].
His stepmother is a [occupation omitted] in [T] and his mother works for
[omitted] in Sydney.
mother says that the relationship with the applicant improved and to her
observation the volatility in the applicant’s relationship
husband had settled. She permitted the applicant to babysit from time to
mother facilitated the children seeing the father each weekend from about 6.00pm
on Friday until about 5.00pm Sunday.
long after this arrangement commenced the applicant commenced returning the
eldest child to the mother on Sundays and the father
would separately drop off
to the mother the youngest child. The mother ascertained that the applicant
would attend the father’s
child. This was against the mother's wishes as she believed that the children
be spending time together with their father.
Notwithstanding
the mother's wishes the father continued to accede to the applicant’s
demands in relation to the eldest child.
The father asserts that he felt
powerless in relation to the applicant demanding the child. The mother expressed
her concerns to
the applicant and the applicant was dismissive of her.
the mother asserts that the applicant commenced to attend at the mother’s
occasion the applicant arrived with
"court papers" and demanded that the mother sign the papers saying
state that I have rights and will have regular weekly contact with the children
on the weekend".
The mother refused to sign the documents.
the applicant attended at the mother’s premises regularly with repeated
requests for the mother to sign the documents.
Ultimately the act applicant told
"I'll take you to court and then you'll have to sign the
September 2010 the applicant attended at the mother’s home. Present at the
present partner. The
applicant demanded to see the children. The mother explained that they were
otherwise engaged. The applicant
commenced screaming at the mother to open the
door and pounding her fists on the door, and threatened to kill the mother. The
applicant's
behaviour escalated to the extent that the mother threatened to call
the police and did so. The applicant had left the mother’s
premises. The
police attended and advised the mother to take out an apprehended domestic
violence order. This incident is referred
to in documents comprising Exhibit
Subsequently
the applicant pressured the mother to withdraw the apprehended violence
complaint. Ultimately the mother was apprehensive
not appear and as a consequence the apprehended violence complaint was
to this incident the applicant did not contact the mother for some months but
the applicant continued to impose on the
father's time with the children. The
relationship between the mother and the applicant gradually restored.
November 2010 the youngest child was taken to hospital by the father. The child
was later diagnosed with a broken collarbone. The
applicant planted seeds of
doubt in the mother’s mind as to the father’s conduct saying
think [Mr Bray] has done something to [Y], you know how violent he is. I spoke
with him and he sounds like he is hiding something".
understandably became somewhat cautious about the father.
December 2010 the applicant commenced demanding time with the children. The
mother asserts that when spending time with the children
the applicant
overindulged them with clothing and toys to the extent that the eldest child
became critical of the mother referring
to the applicant’s home as
"that's where all my nice toys and clothes are
our house is
yucky, it's too small
". The child [X] commenced throwing temper tantrums on
return from the applicant’s home with the applicant asserting that the
child was exhibiting separation anxiety from her. The mother subsequently became
concerned about the nature of the relationship between
the eldest child and the
applicant, particularly when the applicant said to the child
"I am your mummy
March 2011 the mother had managed to wean the eldest child off her dummy and
bottle. The mother notified the father and the applicant
of her success in this
regard. However shortly thereafter the child returned from the applicant’s
mouth and the child disclosed to the mother that the
applicant had also provided the child with a bottle.
April 2011 the mother moved in with her present partner and a male friend of her
present partner in share rented premises in [omitted].
The mother did not
provide to the applicant her address for about a month. Upon resuming contact
with the applicant, the applicant
once again raised the question of her making a
court application for orders in relation to the children. The applicant said to
"don't think of ever not giving me your address, [Mr W] works at
[omitted], we’ll find you on camera. You can't run from me.
I'll spend as
much as I need to track you down. I've got a whole file and you, I'll have you
prosecuted. This will go to court".
applicant resumed spending some time with the children and the eldest child
became more disparaging of the mother and her partner
following time at the
applicant’s home. The strong inference is that the applicant was
denigrating the mother, her partner
and the mother's circumstances to the
Subsequently
in August 2011 the applicant alleged to the mother that the eldest child had
disclosed that the mother's partner had
smacked her on the head and violently
attacked her and that the child did not want to go home as she was scared. None
of the child’s
alleged disclosures had been independently witnessed.
Surprisingly the applicant returned the child to the mother's care.
relation to these alleged disclosures by the child [X] the applicant made a
notification to the Department of Family and Community
Services (Exhibit L). In
addition to the immediate complaint she asserted that the father of the children
had been stopped from seeing
the children, that the mother and her partner were
marijuana smokers, that the eldest child had a speech delay and that she
to have the child assessed and that the mother was suspected of having
diagnosed depression. On a history check the department noted
there had been 14
previous reports in relation to the eldest child between 4 November 2007 and 2
August 2011 and that such reports
made complaints about medical treatment not
being provided, psychiatric disability of the carer, domestic violence, the
child being
exposed to domestic violence and the emotional state of the carer.
The strong inference is that all of these notifications have been
made by the
documents admitted into evidence from the Department of Family and Community
Services show that on 15 August 2011 the applicant
made a further notification
to that department in relation to the youngest child [Y]. The applicant informed
the Department that
some time prior she had taken her concerns to the Family
Relationship Centre and following the non-attendance by the parents had
a certificate permitting her to commence family law court proceedings. This was
according to the applicant due to the father
of the children being abusive to
the mother.
applicant asserted that the mother's new partner also displays emotional abuse.
The applicant further asserted that the mother's
current partner has withdrawn
the mother from her family. The applicant also complained that a year previously
the youngest child
had a broken collarbone which was not noticed by the mother.
She further complained that the mother was living in premises also occupied
drug user, that her present partner uses marijuana and that the mother had
previously used cocaine.
applicant further asserted to the Department that the mother's present partner
displayed emotional abuse, displayed anger by breaking
things, would raise his
voice and made threats to harm the mother if anyone takes the child away. She
further complained that the
mother left the children with people she did not
really know. She asserted that the mother's partner had had a previous mental
breakdown and that the mother had paranoia.
appears that upon reflective assessment the Department took no action in
relation to the applicant’s notifications.
relationship with the applicant was most strained at this time. The eldest child
was having sleeping problems and behavioural
issues after returning from time
with the applicant. The mother became more and more concerned about the
applicant's favouritism
towards the eldest child.
father. Then in July 2011 the mother informed the father
that as the children
were going to dancing school on the weekends he would not be able to spend time
with them for about two months.
father became concerned about his lack of time with the children particularly
when he became aware that the applicant had seen
the children. The father
attended the Family Relationship Centre in [omitted] to try and facilitate
mediation between him and the
mother. The mother refused to participate in
mediation telling him that she would never sign anything in relation to the
and wanted arrangements to be sorted out between them.
this time the mother was nearing the end of her pregnancy with the child of her
relationship with her present partner. They discussed
together moving to [T] New
South Wales to be nearer to her partner’s family that the mother perceived
would be more supportive
of her and the children than her circumstances in
mother’s relationship with the applicant deteriorated further. The
applicant sought the mother’s consent to open bank
accounts for the
children and the mother refused. The applicant sought to take the children on
holidays and the mother refused. In
August 2011 therein issued SMS communication
between the applicant and the mother and such communication reveals the
disturbing mindset
of the applicant.
late August 2011 the mother, her partner and the children relocated to [T]. Once
in [T] the mother contacted the applicant and
the mother asserts that the
applicant behaved in a hysterical manner when told that she would not be
provided with the mother's address.
to the mother's relocation with the children to [T] the applicant contacted the
mother’s partner’s family members
seeking to obtain information as
to the whereabouts of the children. The applicant asserted to those family
members that the children
were in danger.
20 September the mother telephoned the father and advised him that she and her
partner and the children had moved to Queensland.
The mother refused to give the
father her new address.
25 September 2011 the applicant attended at [omitted] police station seeking
information about the mother's whereabouts. The applicant
asserted that she had
concerns as to the welfare of the children. The police contacted the Department
of Family and Community Services
that confirmed that a file had been created for
the children although there had been no history of violence and there were no
for taking any action and that the Department had no fears for the
children's well-being at that time. The mother when contacted
by the police
confirmed that she did not wish to have contact with the applicant nor to
disclose her whereabouts to the applicant.
(Exhibit K)
November 2011 the father filed a missing persons report with the New South Wales
Police Service (Exhibit K)
Regrettably
in her move to [T] the mother failed to have regard to the interests of the
children's father in maintaining regular contact
with the children. However the
mother and father subsequently implemented an arrangement that facilitated the
children resuming their
relationship with the father. The mother observes that
the children settled well after the move to [T].
April 2012 the mother contacted the father and on 18 May 2012 the mother
facilitated the father having time with the children at
his parents’ home.
Since then the father has had regular contact with the children speaking to them
by phone weekly.
July 2012 the father had time with the girls in [T] and the relationship between
he and the mother in relation to the children
was on a much firmer footing.
Thereafter the father has seen the children on a monthly basis and on occasions
more regularly prior
to hearing. The father expresses satisfaction with the
arrangements that have been made between himself and the mother.
the course of proceedings the issues as between the mother and father in
relation to the father's time with the children were
resolved by consent orders
made on 19 December 2012. Those orders provide in summary:
the father and mother have equal shared parental responsibility for the
the children live with the mother;
the children spend time with the father during school term each alternate
weekend from 5.00pm Friday to 5.00pm Sunday, half of
school holidays as agreed
between the mother and father, Father’s Day, each Boxing Day and at other
times as agreed between
the mother and father.
consent orders also provided that the children spend time with the applicant as
agreed between the mother, the father and the
7 December 2012 the mother and her partner and the children returned to reside
in Sydney. They have taken a 12-month lease on
a home in Sydney's northern
suburbs. The father has had overnight time with the children at his
parents’ home since their return
to the mother and her partner returning to reside in Sydney there was an
incident at their residence in [T] on 12 September
2012. As a consequence of
that incident the mother was charged with common assault, damaging property and
use of an offensive weapon
to commit an indictable offence. Those proceedings
are as yet unresolved. The mother gave evidence as to the circumstances of the
incident in respect to which she was granted a section 128 Certificate. It is
clear that the incident was regrettable but also clear
that the mother and her
partner have put the issue behind them.
NSW Police Service Documents
produced on subpoena by the New South Wales police service were admitted into
evidence as Exhibit K.
is of note that:
on 8 April 2010 police attended the home at the applicant and her present
husband as a consequence of a domestic violence incident
between them;
on 27 March 2010 police attended the home at the applicant and her present
husband in relation to a domestic violence incident
between them. The police
notes reveal a recent history of domestic incidents between the applicant and
her husband of both verbal
and physical nature the more recent being in late
on 6 September 2009 the police attended the home of the applicant and her
present husband in relation to a domestic violence
incident between them. On
this occasion the eldest of the subject children was present in the household,
asleep upstairs. On this
occasion the applicant was advised by the police to
leave the home and stay elsewhere overnight. The police and the observed that
both parties appear to be slightly intoxicated;
on 5 April 2009 the police attended the home of the applicant and her present
husband in relation to a domestic violence incident.
The applicant’s
husband was observed to be slightly affected by alcohol, smelt of intoxicating
liquor and was unsteady on his
on 16 August 2008 the police attended the home of the applicant and the husband
in relation to a domestic violence incident.
On this occasion the eldest of the
subject children was in the household. The police observed that both parties
appear to be slightly
intoxicated;
on 25 April 2010 following an argument with the mother the applicant attended at
[omitted] police station alleging that the mother
was not a responsible parent
and often under the influence of drugs. The applicant wanted the children to
stay with her prior to
the children going to the father’s. The police
attended at the mother’s premises to find there were beds in the home
the children, plenty of food and clothing and nil concerns for the children's
The Family Report
17 April 2012 the parties attended upon a family consultant for the purposes of
a child dispute conference. The subsequent memorandum
was admitted into evidence
as Exhibit E.
memorandum noted that as between the mother and father there had been agreement
in relation to the children's time with the father
and that accordingly the
prime area of dispute was between the mother and the maternal grandmother. At
the time of the memorandum
the maternal grandmother had no contact with the
children since September 2011 and the mother requested that there be no orders
respect to the maternal grandmother spending time with the children.
was noted a disagreement between the parties as to the extent of the maternal
grandmother's involvement with the children historically.
memorandum noted the maternal grandmother's suggestion that the mother could
relocate to Sydney with the children and live in
the maternal grandmother's home
although presumably not with her current partner. The mother considered this
proposal to be highly
unrealistic in view of their problematic relationship and
her perception of the maternal grandmother as a controlling person who
effectively take the mother’s place in relation to the children.
memorandum notes that the maternal grandmother alleges, in summary, that the
mother uses drugs as does her current partner, fails
to supervise the children
properly, has exposed the children to domestic violence in her past relationship
with the father and in
her relationship with her current partner, fails to
protect the children from her partner who according to the maternal grandmother
picks on the children and has significant mental health issues. The mother, it
was noted, denied these allegations. The memorandum
also notes that the maternal
grandmother had made a child protection report.
Subsequently
the court released the family report on 5 November 2012. The family report was
prepared in the context of the mother
at that time living in [T] with the
children. The report writer noted that the agreement as to the children's time
with the father
as noted in the memorandum above had been implemented and had
been in place for about six months.
the report was prepared in the context of the applicant grandmother’s
original application whereby she sought that
the children live with her.
interview with
the applicant
the report writer noted the
applicant’s concern about the children living within the mother's present
relationship with her
partner Mr M. She had retained the services of two private
investigators in an endeavour to find the mother after the mother’s
unilateral relocation out of Sydney.
applicant's own domestic circumstances involved an initial marriage where
alcohol and domestic violence were a factor. It is clear
from the police
material before the court that the applicant’s present relationship also
has the same hallmarks.
applicant asserted to the family report writer that she and the mother are "very
close" in spite of the difficulties in their
relationship. The applicant was
dismissive about the possibility that her current court action may adversely
affect her relationship
with the mother. It was the applicant's view that if the
mother resided with her that she and her present partner would separate.
applicant described a vacillating relationship with her daughter, noting that
only shortly prior to the report interviews she
had travelled to [T] at her
daughter’s request as a consequence of the serious incident that took
place in the mother’s
household in September.
applicant asserted that the mother's current partner had bashed her black and
blue when she was pregnant with her most recent
child and she attributed the
violence in the relationship between the mother and the father in these
proceedings to the mother as
being the instigator of most of the incidents. The
applicant spoke very negatively about the mother's relationship with her present
partner and that the mother had started hiding her relationship with the mother
from her partner from the beginning of 2012. This
assertion seems somewhat
inconceivable as a consequence of the evidence referred to above. The applicant
also asserts that the mother's
partner is controlling of her and these
proceedings.
applicant contrary to the evidence at trial asserted that the mother's new
partner was staying home full-time to help the mother,
as she was unable to care
for the children without his assistance. The applicant further asserted that the
mother does not have a
close relationship with either of the children and
asserts that the mother has told her that both children were
"not born of
The applicant further asserts that the mother was never there for the
children. The applicant acknowledged that she was aware that
reports had been to
the to the Department of Family and Community services in relation to the
mother’s care of the children.
This knowledge is not surprising as it was
the applicant that made such notifications.
on interview said she would rather that neither she nor her children
had any contact with the applicant. She asserted a very difficult
relationship
with the applicant since she was 12 years of age. This assertion is supported by
the police material in evidence.
importantly the mother regarded the applicant as a compulsive liar and said she
was emotionally dominating of her and often reduced
her to tears. She felt that
her mother was unsupportive particularly in relation to the mother’s
complaint of inappropriate
sexual behaviour by her maternal great-uncle when she
was younger.
mother expresses a sense of powerlessness in the context of her relationship
with the applicant. She finds it difficult to stand
up to her. She asserts that
the applicant has wanted a parental role ever since the birth of the first child
and the applicant has
no respect for the mother as a parent. The mother also
expressed disappointment that the applicant had endeavoured to turn her against
the father by suggesting that he might present some risk of harm to the children
with this occurring in relation to the broken collarbone
Appropriately
the mother conceded that the children had spent frequent amounts of time with
the applicant although the mother was
critical of the applicant’s tendency
to favour the older child and to neglect the younger.
in interview described the applicant as "controlling and annoying"
and her relationship with the mother as "up and down". He said
that they would
clash and there were times when they would not speak to each other.
Significantly
he acknowledged that the mother's partner had a beneficial influence on the
children. He thinks that by reason of having
less time with the applicant the
eldest child is now no longer having tantrums as she did previously and that
both children seem
to be more relaxed. To the father’s observation the
children appear happy to be with the mother's partner and often run to
reassurance and comfort, describing him as a great father figure for the girls.
father also identified the disparity in the relationship between the applicant
and each of the children.
applicant’s present husband
was interviewed and was disparaging of
the mother’s present partner and the nature of their relationship.
Regrettably he did
not reflect upon the nature of his relationship with the
applicant as demonstrated by the police records in evidence.
mother's partner Mr M
informed the report writer that he had known the
mother for many years. He acknowledged that they argue because of the stress of
the current proceedings. He acknowledged the more recent incident in their
relationship and his willingness to attend relationship
counselling with the
informed the report writer that in the early stages of his relationship with the
mother he had encouraged her to repair her relationship
with the applicant but
that once the applicant had made allegations that he had assaulted the eldest
child he "gave up".
regarded the applicant as a compulsive liar and perhaps even "a
semi-psychopath".
presented to the family report writer as healthy and well cared for
children. The report writer observed that both appeared to be
meeting their
developmental milestones although the eldest child’s speech was at times a
little hard to decipher. In observation
there was nothing unremarkable.
when observed with the applicant she made a number of comments about how much
she loved the children including
"who loves you this much"
while holding
her arms wide apart. The children failed to respond to this gesture. The
applicant also asked the children a number
of questions about what they
remembered about what they have done with her previously.
the report writer concludes that whilst there has been
considerable instability in the mother's life it does not appear that the
children are at risk of harm while in her care. The report writer noted that
there was nothing in the subpoenaed material that suggested
that the Department
of Family and Community Services have ever held the view that the children are
at risk of serious harm in their
mother's care, although at times as conceded by
the mother they have been exposed to domestic violence.
applicant believes that the mother should separate from her present partner for
the children's sake.
report writer notes that it is evident that the mother has had major
difficulties in her life from an early age and that these
difficulties may
relate to her exposure to family violence in her mother's household, her
parent’s separation and sexual abuse.
Her relationship with the applicant
has been difficult and conflicted since she was a young adolescent and the
mother seems to have
found it hard to establish herself independently from the
mother and seems to have turned to her for assistance when she has felt
applicant, observes the family report writer, seems to hold a rather conflicted
view of her daughter that has existed for many
years. On one level she appears
to be supportive especially when her daughter is vulnerable but uses those
occasions against her
is clear from the applicant’s oral evidence that she has great difficulty
in accepting that her daughter may wish to live
her life independently of her
and has no understanding of the nature of her daughter’s troubled
relationship with her, asserting
that her daughter’s concerns are due to
some external force that is setting her up.
did not see that she had done anything to warrant the parent’s opposition
to her time with the children and conceded that
her affidavit failed to say one
positive thing about the mother yet conceding positive things in
cross-examination. The applicant
accepted that the allegations and criticisms in
her affidavit of the mother would have had a damaging effect on the
relationship with her, suggesting that some aspects were included
on legal advice. The applicant asserted that her daughter was a
liar in denying
many of the applicant’s allegations and in her own evidence.
applicant still professes concerns as to the mother, saying that the children
need to be protected from various men in the mother’s
life, that the
mother does not react in a reasonable way and the mother needs to be protected
because of her partner’s control
of her and that she would do anything to
keep her present partner. The applicant did not concede that orders sought by
the children were intrusive.
report writer concludes that the applicant seems to lack insight into the effect
that her input is having on her daughter’s
parenting capacity. She seems
to either not be aware of, or is choosing to ignore the effect that her action
in seeking orders that
the children live with her is having on her daughter.
report writer notes that it is not in either the parents or the children's best
interests that a grandparent’s involvement
undermines a parent’s
capacity. This is of particular significance in circumstances where the mother
presents as a very vulnerable
young woman.
the report writer recommends that the children's time with the applicant be in
accordance with the parent’s wishes.
The Family Report Writers Oral Evidence
response to the Independent Children’s Lawyer the report writer
said in your report that in the course of your assessment you identified a
further issue, and that was the extremely
poor relationship between the maternal
grandmother and the mother. Can you tell us how this impacts the relationship
between the
children and the maternal grandmother? --Well, if – I think,
given the difficult relationship between the mother and the grandmother,
sometimes I think the grandmother may undermine the mother’s parenting
capacity, and I think that’s – and
that obviously affects the
children, in terms of their relationship with their mother, and also their
relationship with their grandmother,
and so there’s a split, I think, that
the grandmother may attempt to place between the children and their mother, and
her in a more favourable light than their
At the present time, the children’s
primary attachment is with the mother; do you agree with that?---Yes,
And this undermining that you’ve described does threaten that
attachment?---Yes, it does. Yes.
We can assume that that would have serious consequences for the children on
a long-term basis?---Yes, it would.
Could you elaborate at all on that?---Well, children’s – the
that children have to their primary carer provides the
basis of their future
relationships, especially close personal relationships as they grow older, so
that if attachments are undermined,
or if they’re not secure, then that
can make it very difficult for children to have positive relationships in later
report writer gave evidence in cross examination of:
adverse impact on the mother of court ordered time for the children with the
applicant continually denigrating the mother and her
applicant’s inappropriate attempt to video the children whilst questioning
them in an attempt to throw a poor light on the
relationship of the mother and
her present partner;
applicant’s lack of insight as to the consequences for the mother of her
cross examination by Counsel for the mother, that the court assumes was on
instructions, the applicant showed little understanding
or insight into the
impact of her behaviours and indeed the course of the litigation on the
Notwithstanding
counsel for the applicant approaching his client’s case from different
angles in cross examination of the report
writer, the report writer remained
steadfast in her recommendations.
following sections of the
Family Law Act 1975
s.64B(2)(b):
(2) A parenting
order may deal with...
...............
(b) the time a child is to spend with another person or other persons;
s.64B(6)(b)
...............
( b) a parenting order that provides that a child is
to spend time with a person is
made in favour
of that person;
“A parenting order in relation to a child may be made in favour of a
parent of the child or some other person.”
“ A parenting order in relation to a child may be applied for by:
(ba) a grandparent of the child....
sections indicate that the applicants have standing to bring the subject
application.
was observed by Coker FM in
[2012] FMCAfam 22
commencing at
“.........rather
the starting point must be in this instance where the parents remain together,
the provisions of
Family Law Act
is in these
TO BE APPLIED BY COURTS
The Family Court
shall, in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this
Act, and any other court
exercising jurisdiction under
Act shall, in the exercise of that jurisdiction, have regard to:
need to preserve and protect the institution of marriage
as the union of a man and a woman to the exclusion of all others
voluntarily
entered into for life;
need to give the widest possible protection and assistance to the family as the
natural and fundamental group unit of society,
particularly while it is
responsible for the care and education
of dependent children;
need to protect the rights of children
and to promote their welfare;
need to ensure safety from family
violence; and
means available for assisting parties to a marriage
to consider reconciliation or the improvement of their relationship to
other and to their children.
reference specifically to that particular aspect of the matter, because
is directive insofar as any court exercising jurisdiction under
the Act is concerned and in its approach.
notes that the court
shall, in the exercise of its jurisdiction, have regard to the need to preserve
and protect the institution
of marriage as the union of a man and a woman, to
the exclusion of all others and, additionally, to have regard to the need to
the widest possible protection and assistance to the family as the natural
and fundamental group unit of society and,
specifically:
...particularly while it is
responsible for the care and education of dependent children.
It is noteworthy that there is reference to the term, “family”,
of the Act there is no specific definition of what
constitutes a family........
I make reference specifically to this aspect of the matter, because the
reference to the family unit (what is sometimes described
as the nuclear family)
is, in my assessment, the unit of society comprised of a man and a woman and the
children of that relationship,
whether they be adoptive children or the
biological children of the parties.”
Church v T Overton & Anor
[2008] FamCA 965
, Benjamin J made comment
communicate with grandchildren.
Honour said commencing at [25]:
“Do grandparents have
special entitlements to see or communicate with grandchildren?
Family Law Act
places parents in a special position in respect of
their children. The objects and principles
supra) clearly set out their
importance. The primary considerations
of the Act) weight the
importance of a meaningful relationship between child and parent against the
need to protect a child from
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Act 2006
amended various sections of the
Family Law Act
in relation to parenting orders
and made explicit reference to grandparents.
27. On face value the amended Act does not invest grandparents with a
special category of rights or position over and above other
people who might be
significant to a child’s care, welfare and development. The only people
in such a special category are
parents. The principles which support the
of the Act – the part dealing with children - refer to
grandparents.
Section 60B(2)(b)
children have a right to spend time on a regular basis with, and
communicate on a regular basis with, both their parents and other
significant to their care, welfare and development (such as grandparents and
other relatives).
Grandparents
are included with “other relatives” as an example of the class of
people who may be able to establish that
they are significant to a child’s
care, welfare and development, and if that is the case and it is in the best
interest of
the child then the child has a right to see that
grandparent.
Explanatory Memorandum accompanying the 2006 amendments explained as to
“39. Paragraph 60B(2)(b) is amended to
specifically refer to children having a right to spend time on a regular basis
with grandparents
and other relatives who are significant to their care, welfare
and development. This amendment recognises the important role that
grandparents
and other relatives play in a child's life. It implements recommendation 43 of
the LACA Report and is consistent with
the other amendments in the Bill to
facilitate greater involvement of extended family members in the lives of
legislation specifically empowers a grandparent to apply for a parenting order.
Section 65C
of the Act states (emphasis added):
parenting order in relation to a child may be applied for by:
(a) either or both of the child's parents; or
(b) the child; or
(ba) a grandparent of the child; or
(c) any other person concerned with the care, welfare or development of
the child.”
orders can be made in favour of grandparents, who are given a specific inclusion
section 64B
of the Act. This is not surprising as sometimes grandparents are
the sole stable feature in the lives of some children.
Grandparents
are also referred to
section 65G
of the Act, in which the legislature imposes
some conditions upon a court if a residence order is to be made otherwise than
of a ‘parent, grandparent or other relative of the child.’
This gives grandparents some special significance in terms
the 2006 amendments the Explanatory Memorandum said in respect of
s60CC(3)(d)
“60. Paragraph 60CC(3)(d) replaces
existing paragraph 68F(2)(c) with a modification. Subparagraph 68F(2)(c)(ii) has
been modified
to make an explicit reference to grandparents or other relatives.
The existing provision provides that, in determining what is in
interests of a child, the court should consider the likely effect of any change
of the child's circumstances particularly
in relation to separation from his or
her parents and other persons with whom the child has a relationship. New
subparagraph 60CC(3)(d)(ii)
makes an explicit reference to grandparents or other
relatives. This change ensures that the court recognises the importance of the
relationships that the child has with wider family in particular grandparents.
62. Paragraph 60CC(3)(f) replaces existing paragraph 68F(2)(e) with a
modification. Paragraph 68F(2)(e) has been modified to make
an explicit
reference to grandparents or other relatives. This provision provides that in
determining the best interests of the child,
the court should consider the
capacity of the parent or of any other person to provide for the needs of the
child, including emotional
and intellectual needs. The amended paragraph
60CC(3)(f) recognises the importance of the relationships that the child has
family, in particular grandparents.”
his second reading speech to the Bill in the House of Representatives on 8
December 2005 the Honourable Phillip Ruddock said:
bill contains changes to better recognise the interests of children in spending
time with grandparents and other relatives,
who also play an important role in
the raising of children.”
the literal reading of
if the particular grandparent is not significant to
the child’s care, welfare and development it seems the child has no
statutorily
enshrined right to spend time with them on a regular basis. Given
the paramountcy of the child’s best interests, however,
regular time might
be ordered. Reading the totality of the amendments in the context of the
explanatory memorandum it is clear that
the legislature was endeavouring to
acknowledge the importance of grandparents and other relatives in the lives of
for the grandfather submitted that the community is increasingly aware of the
role and importance of grandparents in children’s
lives and that this is
reflected by the 2006 amendments. He further submitted that whilst it would be
unusual for a stranger who
has had no relationship with a child to apply for a
“time” order, it would not be unusual for a biological relative such
as a grandfather to seek a parenting order for a child they had never seen,
They have a relationship with that child by virtue of
their biological/genetic connection. That connection is the cultural, family
and genetic heritage of the child and the court should not lightly disregard the
importance to the child of “knowing”
their family background
especially where that parent or grandparent has the capacity and is willing and
able to provide that connection
The independent children’s lawyer said in his closing
submissions:
There has been recognition of the role of
grandparents for some time in the
Family Law Act
. It’s an implicit
recognition of their role because they have been specified as people who can
make applications but at no
stage has the legislation given them any rights over
and above any other person to make an application for contact, or indeed, for
parenting order. They are there as an example and no doubt the legislation had
in mind bringing the particular position of grandparents
as significant persons
to the attention of the court, but the important words are “people
significant to their care, welfare
and development...
is clear that the Act has been specifically amended to refer to grandparents at
various points. The legislative intent is that
interested grandparents should be
specifically considered and recognised when determining which orders to make in
the best interests
of a child.
[2008] FamCA 176
, O’Ryan J said at [32];
In my opinion, the importance of children having a relationship with
extended family including grandparents was recognised even prior
amendments made by the
Family Law Amendment (Shared Parental Responsibility) Act
. A number of cases dealt with issues regarding applications by persons who
were not biologically related to a child but were people
significant to the
care, welfare and development of a child.
40. The Act supports the generally regarded view in the Australian
community that children should be entitled to have a relationship
grandparents, provided it is in the child’s best interests. However, any
determination of the best interests of
a child or children should be informed by
the family dynamics between the children’s parent/s and grandparent/s. In
that regard,
the views of the parents are significant but not necessarily
determinative.
Honour further said commencing at [60]:
court is satisfied that an approach to the upbringing of a child by a parent or
parents in whatever way is contrary to that
child’s best interests, then
the court should interfere by putting in place appropriate orders. In the
absence of substantive
issues as to the child’s best interests, it is not
the role of a court to peer over the shoulders of functional parents and
guess the decisions they make regarding the upbringing of their children. A
court should only intervene in such decision-making
in a cautious, careful and
thoughtful manner and consider whether a better approach is to make no order at
61. That is not to say that a parent who
acts capriciously in isolating a child from a grandparent with whom the child
had a meaningful
relationship ought not be the subject of orders, nor should
this derogate from the role of the many grandparents and relatives who
taken up the care of children in circumstances where the parents were unable or
unwilling to care for them.
Honour Justice Ryan in
[2009] FamCA 28
considered exhaustively
the impact of the 2006 amendments to the
Family Law Act 1975
and whether
they elevated parents over others in determining the child’s best
interests and concluded at [141]:
the pathway and list of factors by which the Court determines a child’s
best interests is somewhat altered
under the present
it is critical to
the resolution of the parent’s submission that the Court must regard the
best interests of the child as the
paramount consideration. Consequently the
Court’s capacity and obligation to deliver individual justice for the
not been compromised. While the Court must consider the various
rights, principles and factors identified in
these remain
subject to the child’s best interests. The logic of the approach adopted
by the Full Court in B v B:
Family Law Reform Act 1995
(supra) to the
significance of the best interests principle as the ultimate determinate applies
with equal force to parenting cases
decided under the current
cases in which parents are parties those objects, principles and factors which
refer to parents must be considered in so
far as they apply to the child’s
parents. Those which apply to all parties apply to parents and non-parents
alike. Those
which refer to other specific categories of people, for example
grandparents, apply specifically. However by virtue of s 60CC(3)(m)
may decide that s 60CC(3) factors which refer solely to parents, for example s
60CC(3)(c) ought to be considered having
regard to other important people in the
child’s life. Another example might be that reliant on s 60CC(3)(m) the
Court considers
the benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship
with a grandparent who has been significantly involved in the child’s
life. This makes the various factors inclusive not exclusive. By virtue of s
60CA the Court will determine the weight to be given
to the various factors, be
they primary or additional considerations or considerations identified as issues
arising in the particular
case but not specifically referred to in the Act. In
a similar vein the Court’s capacity to rebut the presumption of equal
shared parental responsibility where the evidence satisfies the Court that it
would not be in the child’s best interests refutes
any notion that the Act
elevates parents above others in parenting cases decided under the present
My conclusion that the 1 July 2006
amendments have not
statutorily introduced a presumption in favour of parents accords with the
conclusion reached by Young J in Davis
v Davis & Anor (supra) and by
O’Reilly J in Kay, Jasper and Green (supra).”
proceedings are governed by the provisions of
Family Law Act
provides that in deciding whether to make a particular parenting order, the
Court is to regard the best interests of the child as
the paramount
consideration.
of the Act outlines the objects and principles underlying
Act. The objects of
are to ensure that the best interests of the child
are met by both parents having a meaningful involvement in their child’s
lives; that the child is protected from physical or psychological harm; that
they receive adequate and proper parenting; and the
parents fulfil their duties
and meet their parental responsibilities.
determining what is in a child’s best interests the Court must consider
the matters set out in
Section 60CC
outlines the primary (sub-s.(2)) and
additional (sub-s.(3)) considerations that the Court is to take into account in
determining
what is in the best interests of the child.
of the Act provides that when making a parenting order, the Court must
apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the
child for the
child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility unless that
presumption does not apply in circumstances
of abuse, family violence or where
it is not in the best interests of the child. This provision does not apply in
the context of
this matter and thus the provisions of
Full Court in
Goode v Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346
(2007) 36 Fam LR 422
(2006) FLC 93-286
mandated that this legislative approach must be followed in all parenting cases.
The High Court in
[2010] HCA 4
affirmed the legislative
of the Act provides that when making a parenting order, the Court must
apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the
child for the
child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility unless that
presumption does not apply in circumstances
of abuse, family violence or where
it is not in the best interests of the child. This provision does not apply in
the context of
this matter and thus the provisions of
Section 60CC
to the overriding principles and objects referred to above this matter falls to
be determined by reference to the best interest
considerations set out in
of the Act.
court has had regard to all of the factors set out in the section, both the
primary considerations and the additional considerations.
is appropriate to have regard to the relevant
additional considerations
before returning to consider the primary considerations set out in
to the subject children’s wishes in considering what weight should be
given to the child’s wishes if expressed, the
court has regard to the
children’s ages and the overarching issues arising out of what can only be
seen as the toxic relationship
between the applicant and the child’s
parents. The risk of the children being enmeshed in the conflict between the
and the mother is significant. In all the circumstances the court
could afford little weight to any wishes even if expressed by inference
considering the nature of the relationships that the children have with the
parents it is clear that they have a primary attachment
to the mother. The
children’s relationship with their father has been restored following the
mother’s temporarily relocation
to [T] and orders have been made by
consent as to the father’s time with the children. The children’s
father considers
that the mother’s partner represents to the children a
beneficial and significant father figure.
applicant’s relationship with the children for the reasons canvassed above
can at best be described as problematic and at
worst manipulative, obsessive and
presenting a risk to the children’s well-being in the context of their
primary relationship
with the mother.
factor clearly favours the orders sought by the mother.
parents have taken a position that clearly evidences no willingness or ability
on their part to facilitate or encourage the children’s
relationship with
the applicant unless by agreement. They seek an order that the application
before the court be dismissed.
applicant seeks orders that would see her have the ability to become again
involved in the children’s day-to-day lives.
The impact of the reigniting
of her relationship with the children and the significance of any time with the
children as it impacts
upon the parents, particularly the mother is of great
concern to the report writer and to the court.
applicant maternal grandmother lacks insight into her own personality and
behavioural issues as they impact upon the relationships
in her life,
particularly with perhaps the most important figure in the lives of the
children, the mother. The court is satisfied
that the applicant has no ability
to empathise with the needs of the mother and of the children.
is of concern that should the applicant have some form of relationship with the
children restored by court order the impact upon
the relationship between the
mother and the children would be that the parental capacity of the mother is
adversely affected and
compromised to the detriment of the children.
to the likely effect of any changes in the children’s circumstances the
children at present have no time with the applicant
save for what appears to
have been some coincidental contact. A change in this circumstance that sees a
resumption of some form of
contraindicated for the children. The children will on all indications again
become immersed
in the relationship issues between the applicant and primarily
the mother. The reporter writer expresses concerns as to the adverse
impact this
will have on the mother and in oral evidence regrettably strongly supports there
being no time with the applicant.
is no question in the context of the present proceedings that there is any
practical difficulty and expense in relation to the
children spending time with
and communicating with the applicant. However this matter is to be determined by
other considerations.
terms of capacity to provide for the needs of the children including emotional
and intellectual needs there is no serious issue
in this regard as to the
mother, her partner and the father.
applicant has resiled from her application that the children reside with her.
Inherent in that position is a concession by her
that the children should reside
with the mother in her present circumstances.
as to the applicant’s capacity in this regard the court has grave
reservations, particularly in considering the evidence
of the family reporter
and the factual matrix of the relationship history between particularly the
mother and the maternal grandmother.
As opined by the family report writer it is
clear that the applicant maternal grandmother lacks insight into her own
personality
issues and reflective capacity so as to appropriately consider the
issues raised by her own conduct and emotional responses insofar
as they impact
upon the children and more particularly the mother.
court is satisfied that there is a strong prospect that a resumption of the
relationship between the children and the applicant
would be a negative for the
to maturity, sex, lifestyle and background issues the court notes that the
children are of tender years with developing attachments
and psychological
responses to social and emotional circumstances and stressors. The impact of
these issues is considered in the
context of the court’s consideration of
other relevant considerations.
are no relevant indigenous issues for the court’s consideration.
issues of violence in a domestic sense have been the subject of evidence the
court is not satisfied that this consideration
is to be afforded any significant
weight in determining these proceedings. The applicant seeks no order as to
residence and parenting
issues as between the mother and father were resolved by
mother has demonstrated an appropriate attitude to the children and to her
responsibilities of parenthood in that she has been
perceptive as to the issues
raised by the conduct and emotional responses of the applicant. She has been
perceptive as to the damaging
effect of the applicant’s conduct as it
impacts upon the mother and the prospect of that impacting adversely upon the
and the mother’s household. It is of note that the parents
themselves resolved to cease the children’s time with the
applicant, a
cessation of time that in considering all of the evidence was appropriate.
applicant on the other hand has shown little insight into the cumulative effect
of the background circumstances, her relationship
with the mother and her
determination it appears at all costs to restore her relationship with the
children notwithstanding that
such a restoration may have significant adverse
impact upon the mother’s household, the mother and the children
themselves.
the context of these proceedings it is difficult for the court to contemplate
whether orders can be made that would be least likely
to lead to the institution
of further proceedings in relation to the children.
primary considerations
are firstly the benefit to the children of having
a meaningful relationship with both of the children’s parents and by
of the application of
section 60CC(3)(m)
the court can consider this also
in the context of the children’s relationship with the applicant. The
second primary consideration
which looms large in the context of these
proceedings is the need to protect the children from physical or psychological
being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
importance of the children’s relationship with the parents in particular
in the context of the mother’s intact household
with her partner is
significant. The court refers in this regard to the observations made above. The
court has significant concerns
as to the likely impact of the children having
time with the applicant in circumstances where it is abundantly clear that such
have an adverse effect upon particularly the mother both emotionally and
psychologically. The family reporter expresses concerns
that as a consequence
the mother’s parenting capacity will suffer and thereby the children will
suffer. Whilst the concerns
and the prospect of an adverse impact upon the
parent’s household can not be expressed in absolute terms the strong
possibility
that such a circumstance would ensue requires the court to proceed
with caution.
to the children’s relationship with the applicant the court notes the
well-settled view and that in the context of a “meaningful
relationship” the court is to consider that relationship not in temporal
terms but in terms of the value of that relationship
to the children. The
evidence before the court is indicative of the prospect of there being a
superficial, controlling and manipulative
relationship between the children and
the applicant that causes the court to have serious concerns as to the children
relationship with the applicant absent agreement with the parents and
on their terms. The reasons for this concern are referred to
particularly arise from the evidence of the family reporter.
applicant contended that the restoration of the relationship with the children
by reason of court orders would in some way provide
a protective overarching for
the children. Implicit in this submission is the ongoing criticism by the
applicant of her daughter’s
parenting and her daughter’s domestic
circumstances. The court in all of the circumstances rejects this contention and
the view that such a contention only reinforces the court’s view as
to the applicant’s lack of insight into her past
behaviours and her
relationship with the mother to the extent that the court considers that the
applicant is devoid of empathy in
relation to the mother and her circumstances.
The applicant’s contention in this regard was rejected by the family
report writer.
is clear that in considering the need to protect the children that there is a
risk as referred to above of the children particularly
the eldest child being
subjected to improper influence by the applicant maternal grandmother in such a
way as is likely to impact
on the children in psychological terms adversely.
risk is exacerbated by the further risk that the children having contact with
the applicant will place inordinate emotional and
psychological pressure on the
mother in such a way that will diminish the mother’s parenting capacity so
as to compromise her
relationship with the children. This risk is of significant
concern to the court and was appropriately considered by the family reporter
the context of her evidence.
Independent Children’s Lawyer in submissions seeks orders in that in
summary provide for:
the applicant to spend time with and communicate with the children as agreed
between the mother, the father and the applicant;
the parties be restrained from subjecting the children to any form of hitting or
physical striking and they shall use their best
endeavours to ensure that no
other person does so;
the parties be restrained from using or being under the influence of any illegal
drug or from being under the influence of alcohol
to excess when the children
are in their care;
the parties be restrained from bringing the children into contact with any
person who is using or is under the influence of any
illegal drug or any person
who has consumed alcohol to excess;
the mother engage in the Brighter Futures Program and continue to attend until
such time as the mother and children are discharged
court is satisfied that such orders are in the best interests of the
court is mindful of the words of Benjamin J referred to above:
absence of substantive issues as to the child’s best interests, it is not
the role of a court to peer over the shoulders
of functional parents and
second-guess the decisions they make regarding the upbringing of their children.
A court should only intervene
in such decision-making in a cautious, careful and
thoughtful manner and consider whether a better approach is to make no order at
all...... That is not to say that a parent who acts capriciously in isolating a
child from a grandparent with whom the child had
a meaningful relationship ought
not be the subject of orders.......,
parents, particularly the mother in this matter has not acted capriciously or
without thought. The circumstances leading to their
decision as to the
children’s relationship with the applicant has clearly derived from a long
and complex pathway referred
to in these reasons.
was contended by counsel for the applicant that the provisions of the Act as
amended specifically provide for orders to be made
in favour of grandparents if
no agreement can be reached. With respect to counsel that submission ignores the
overarching considerations
as to the best interests of the children. Each matter
of course turns upon its own individual facts and a reference to previous
where orders may have been made as to children's time with
grandparents are of little utility to this court in determining an appropriate
outcome having regard to the best interests of the subject children.
court is required to make such orders as are in the best interests of the
children and it has carefully weighed the considerations
set out above. The
course adopted by the court is one supported by the Independent Children's
court is satisfied that it is appropriate to dismiss the applicant’s
application and to make orders as sought by the Independent
I certify that the preceding one hundred and seventy-four
(174) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Foster
Date: 28 March 2013
RTF format (301 KB)
Signed PDF/A format