SZSEP v Minister for Immigration & Anor [2013] FMCA 241 (10 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SZSEP v MINISTER FOR
IMMIGRATION & ANOR
[2013] FMCA 241
MIGRATION – Review of Refugee Review
Tribunal decision – refusal of a protection visa – dismissal of
application
on account of the applicant’s non appearance.
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
First Respondent:
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP
Second Respondent:
REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNAL
File Number:
SYG 2622 of 2012
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
No appearance by or on behalf of the Applicant
Solicitors for the Respondents:
Clayton Utz
INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS
(1) The application is dismissed, pursuant to
13.03C(1)(c)
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(2) The applicant is to pay the first respondent’s costs and disbursements
of and incidental to the application, fixed in the
sum of $3,500.
(3) The Court directs that the Minister is to arrange to have these orders
entered and the Minister is to cause a sealed copy of
these orders to be served
on the applicant by ordinary pre-paid post at his nominated address for service,
together with a copy of
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYG 2622 of
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION &
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNAL
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(revised from transcript)
have before me a show cause application filed on 12 November 2012. The
application seeks judicial review of a decision of the Refugee
Review Tribunal
(Tribunal) made on 17 October 2012. The Tribunal affirmed a decision of a
delegate of the Minister not to grant
the applicant a protection visa. The
applicant is from Fujian province in China, and had made claims of religious
persecution at
the Tribunal; he was not believed.
applicant attended in person on 20 December 2012, when this matter was listed
before me for first court date directions. He was
assisted by an interpreter in
the Mandarin language. The applicant signed consent orders, including an order
listing the matter
for a show cause hearing at 2.30pm today. I was satisfied at
the time that the applicant understood the need to attend court for
today’s hearing. I also have before me as an
dated 8 April 2013 from the Minister’s solicitors to the applicant at his
nominated postal address for service, enclosing
an outline of submissions
prepared on behalf of the Minister, and reminding the applicant of today’s
court hearing at 2.30pm.
The letter warned the applicant that if he did not
attend today’s hearing either in person or by his legal representative,
the Minister’s solicitors were instructed to seek to have the matter
dismissed with costs.
has been no appearance by or on behalf of the applicant today. The matter has
been called twice outside court, and on each
occasion, there was no answer to
the call. There is no explanation for that non-appearance. In addition, my
deputy associate attempted
to contact the applicant by telephone on a mobile
telephone number nominated by him on his application, but the call was
unsuccessful.
The call was diverted to a message bank facility.
the circumstances, I accept the Minister’s submission that the application
should be dismissed on account of the applicant’s
non-appearance. I will
order that the application is dismissed, pursuant to
rule 13.03C(1)(c)
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(Cth) (Federal Magistrates Court
consequence of that dismissal, the Minister seeks an order for costs, fixed in
the sum of $3500. I will order that the applicant
is to pay the first
respondent’s costs and disbursements of and incidental to the application,
fixed in the sum of $3,500.
Court directs that the Minister is to arrange to have these orders entered and
the Minister is to cause a sealed copy of these
orders to be served on the
applicant by ordinary pre-paid post at his nominated address for service,
together with a copy of
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
I certify that the preceding six (6) paragraphs
are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Driver FM
Date: 12 April 2013
RTF format (87.4 KB)
Signed PDF/A format