EGH19 v Commonwealth of Australia [2025] HCATrans 69 (15 October 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 069
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Sydney No S55 of 2025
B e t w e e n
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
BEECH‑JONES
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA ON
WEDNESDAY, 15 OCTOBER 2025, AT 10.12 AM
of Australia
MS L.G. DE FERRARI, SC
please the Court, in this matter I appear with my learned friends
MR T.P. O’CONNOR
MR J.R.G. BLAKER
for the plaintiff. (instructed by
Zarifi Lawyers)
MR S.P. DONAGHUE, KC
Solicitor‑General of the Commonwealth of Australia
it please your Honours, I appear with
MR M.A. HOSKING
MS S. ZELEZNIKOW
for the defendant. (instructed by
Australian Government Solicitor)
GAGELER CJ:
you, Mr Solicitor.
Ms De Ferrari
MS DE FERRARI:
Your Honours will not be surprised to hear me say that the issue in this
case – the main issue in this case – is the
which the Commonwealth has been successful in amending the regulation that this
Court considered in a previous decision,
such that it no longer has
the vices that the Court found in the previous regulation. It is admitted by
the Commonwealth that the
prima facie punitive nature of the conditions, which
are exactly the same, is established.
So, the question really is the
extent to which the regulation has been successfully amended not to have those
vices any longer. Having
said that, your Honour, we advance two additional
propositions, I will come to them. They are paragraph 4 and
paragraph 15 of the
outline of submissions, but substantially, the question
is, analysing the different form of the clause, whether it still has those
Your Honour, the clause, as amended, can be found at
volume 1 of the joint book of authorities, at page 113. I am going to
go to that Subclass 070 and the relevant changes from the version
of that Subclass that the Court considered before turning to the
special case
book to look at the minute to the decision‑maker and the reasons for the
decision of the decision‑maker
and then come back to the statutory
analysis of the clause.
GAGELER CJ:
Why are we interested in the
reasons for decision of the decision‑maker?
One thing those reasons show is which one of the definitions of
“serious offence” the decision‑maker considered,
and also it
shows, by reference of the minute, the structured process that the
decision‑maker followed. Your Honours would
have appreciated that we
say some of the submissions of the Commonwealth actually pick up the structured
process that is set for
the decision‑maker, rather than what is actually
the text of the clause, in saying what is mandatory to be considered and what
not mandatory to be considered.
That, to some extent, is seen in
instructions that are given to the decision‑maker and the
step‑by‑step process
to analyse the issue, not in the text of the
provision itself. I will be brief on the special case, your Honour.
Your Honours,
the relevant changes – nothing else of relevance
has changed. There are minor changes at the margins, but they are not relevant.
The relevant changes are the definition of “serious offence” that
your Honours will find at page 113.
GAGELER CJ:
you tell us the clause, please? Some of us are working from a different
MS DE FERRARI:
This is clause 070.111. It now
includes the definition of “serious offence” that was missing from
the previous clause.
Your Honour, the old regulations – I will
not need to go to them, I do not think, but your Honours will find them in
joint book of authorities volume 1, starting at page 112.
Your Honours will see the definition of “serious offence”
two limbs, and I will come back to it.
For present purposes, I wanted to
note two matters. The first is that your Honours will see under
paragraph (b), (i) to (vi) are
also in the same terms within the definition
of “serious violent or sexual offence” in section 395.2 of the
Criminal Code
, which is part of Division 395 that deals with
community safety orders. Your Honours will see that at volume 2 of
the joint book
of authorities at page 166 and 167; your Honours will
see the definition of “serious violent or sexual offence” in exact
same terms.
What is missing from the approach to community safety orders
Criminal Code
, which is something obviously in the hands of the
Court, are going back to the definition of “serious offence” in
070.111(vii) to (x) inclusive. The other
difference ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
Sorry, could you just give me that section of the
again that you are referring to?
That is section 395.2, and the definition of
“serious violent or sexual offence”, which is at
BEECH‑JONES J:
MS DE FERRARI:
The other difference, your Honours, is
in clause 070.612A. It has been replaced as to paragraph 1 and
paragraph 2, and your Honours
will find that at page 115 of
volume 1. Now, your Honours will see – and as I said, I
will come to this in more detail in
a moment, but your Honours will see
that the preceding clauses which this Court considered contextually to find that
the previous
version of the impugned clause 612A was in invalid. The
preceding clauses – namely, 611 and 612 – are in
terms, as is the clause that follows that is on page 116, which
is 070.612B.
So, nothing has changed, save for the definition of
“serious offence”, which has been included, and the new test for
imposing those four conditions which are listed at paragraph 1 of the
impugned clause 612A. Namely, the monitoring condition. It
is the first
one that is mentioned there, 8621. The curfew condition is the last one
that is mentioned there, 8620, and then two
other conditions which this
Court also considered which go to financial dealings effectively. I will come
to what we say are the
problems with that definition shortly.
Ms De Ferrari, this was introduced on the day after the
decision, is that right?
MS DE FERRARI:
That is correct,
your Honour. Your Honours will note the obvious aspects of the new
clause 612A are clearly intended to address,
in the way that they have done
it, some of the concerns as they were expressed by the plurality in
in rejecting the arguments as they were then put.
Now, of course, we say
the plurality was not providing an advisory opinion that if the clause had been
restructured according to
those points that were raised that it would somehow
survive in validity, but it is clear that the drafters have attempted to address
some of the high points of the criticism that was made by the plurality, in
respect of the previous version of the clause.
Your Honours, I am
going to be brief. If your Honours can please turn to the special case
book, the minute to the decision‑maker
commences at page 123.
Your Honours, the point we would make is your Honours will see how it
is stepped through as to the process
by which the decision‑maker needs to
consider the text of the impugned clause 612A. What I wanted to highlight
presently is
what is said at paragraph 24, which is on
Your Honours will understand this is effectively a
legal advisory brief to the decision‑maker. Now, of course, that does not
guide the construction issue that is before the Court or the validity issue, but
it does, in our respectful submission, highlight
the uncertainties and problems
with the drafting, because even the legal advice to the decision‑maker has
to travel beyond
what is in the text to try and advise the decision‑maker
as to how to proceed. Your Honours will see that, in that paragraph,
decision‑maker is advised as to possible relevant consideration in a
“not limited” fashion.
A similar approach is taken on the
next page, 128, at paragraphs 29 and 30 where – at
paragraph 29 – again by way of
permissive ways of directing
themselves, the decision‑maker is advised that they might be assisted by
asking themselves those
questions. None of that is in the text of the
regulation. Again, at paragraph 30, it is said that:
The non‑exhaustive list –
that I have just taken
your Honours to on the previous page:
will assist in informing your consideration and conclusions.
question about the level of serious risk of harm occurring and how. That is the
stepped‑through legal process as advice
to the decision‑maker. The
other matter to note about the brief to the decision‑maker is that
although the explanatory
statement appears to contemplate there is still a role
for a board to advise the decision‑maker, we have not seen anything
this brief to the decision‑maker that in any way, shape or form refers to
input from a board.
Well, in fact, at page 141 it
said that “EGH19 has not been considered by the” board and
“has not been referred
to the CSOT by the” board.
That is right. So, that safeguard, if it was intended as a
safeguard previously, is obviously an optional
board has no statutory basis.
MS DE FERRARI:
No, it does not.
Now, then the actual record of the delegate’s decision starts at
page 132 of the special court book, and it
follows the exact steps as they
were advised. Your Honours will see the step numbered going down and then
on the right‑hand
side what, if anything, has been done in respect of
So, for example, at the bottom of page 133, the delegate
notes that all the mandatory conditions are going to be imposed. These
the prescribed conditions, but they were all the mandatory conditions, and I
will go back to the text of the regulation in
a moment. Then on the next page,
your Honours will see, at point 9, that the:
condition 8624 must be imposed on the visa.
So, there is already a condition that is specific and directed to the
particular past harm, which will be imposed before the delegate
considering the prescribed conditions. Then in paragraph 10, where it
commences consideration of the full prescribed conditions,
starts – because the text of the clause dictates it that it be done
in that order – with the monitoring condition,
and your Honours
will see what I mentioned before that, insofar as consideration was given to
serious offence, what has been selected
serious personal injury or serious risk of personal
Now, that is a predictive exercise that of course
does nothing more than pick up the past offending which has resulted in the
of condition 8624. Your Honours will
GAGELER CJ:
condition 8624?
MS DE FERRARI:
Yes, your Honour,
condition 8624 is set out at volume 1 of the joint book of
authorities, page 119.
GAGELER CJ:
DE FERRARI:
rule against contacting the victim’s family.
MS DE FERRARI:
It is a no‑contact. Yes, it is a no‑contact. Your Honours
would know from the facts that there was in fact what I
would describe
generically as an apprehended violence order in respect of the partner, and
your Honours would also know – again,
these are facts are not
relevant to the construction per se, but your Honours would also know
that at the time that the decision‑maker
made the decision to impose the
conditions, the plaintiff was still subject to parole conditions which also
included a specific related
to risk by contacting of the victim, being his
So, that condition,
your Honours – 8624 – must be imposed pursuant
to clause 070.612B, which is on page 116, subclause
Your Honours will recall that the existence of that clause in the scheme of
the grant of this type of visa – namely,
612B – was a
relevant matter to construction of the previous clause which was found to be
As I said, the scheme has not changed in that respect. So,
that mandatory imposition of a condition that relates to that particular
offending is still there, and it is the only offending – as
your Honours would have seen from the record for decision –
is the only offending that the delegate of the Minister considered for the
purposes of the risk with respect to future offending.
The final point I
wanted to make about the record for decision – and I am still on the
special case book at page 134 –
it is simply to
note – and again, of course, it does not go to the construction
question, but it is a relevant fact for understanding
the vagueness and, we say,
the arbitrariness of how the clause operates – that in
paragraph 10(b), the delegate says that they
are “satisfied”
would be imprisonment for a period, or maximum period, of at least five (5)
Now, there is nothing that advises the delegate as to
what is the particular offence, at either State, Territory or Commonwealth
in respect of which that state of satisfaction is reached. Nor is there
anything that identifies in particular an offence which
is an offence of causing
a serious risk of personal injury as opposed to actually causing personal
This is not a judicial
MS DE FERRARI:
No, it is not, your Honour, but
I am going to link that back now to the definition – I entirely
appreciate the point that
your Honour is making, but I am going to link it
the clause, because, in a sense, we say it is because of the
vices – the very vices of the clause that the Minister or the
delegate is forced to reason in the way that is, for example, shown in this
BEECH‑JONES J:
Ms De Ferrari, I
would be hard pressed to think of an offence that does not involve the
infliction of serious personal injury,
or a serious risk of personal injury,
under at least some State’s laws that do not involve at least a maximum of
five years.
MS DE FERRARI:
There is no doubt that the
offence of causing personal injury, which was the one in respect of which the
past offending he was
convicted of – that is, the assaults he pleaded
guilty to – there is no doubt that those sections of the
(NSW) have a maximum penalty of five years; we went and
checked the actual past offending. My point was that that is not
– that offence at least was not an offence of causing a
serious risk of personal injury, it was actually an offence of personal
I wanted to follow on from the point that your Honour
Justice Edelman has made. It is clear, and we accept, that the obvious
of how the clause 070.612A is now structured is to try and push all
questions to the judicial review stage to the extent possible.
Including, in
particular, whether the Minister is properly satisfied to what we say is the
constitutional limit, which is that the
imposition of the conditions is
(i) reasonably necessary; and
(ii) reasonably appropriate and adapted –
particular non punitive purpose. It is all intended to be pushed to judicial
review, we accept that, but that we say is still
relevant to how this Court will
consider the proper construction of this clause.
In that respect,
your Honour, now, I can briefly go through – I have dealt with
propositions 2 and 3 on our outline, I can
briefly mention
proposition 4. That is simply to say that the way in which the Court will
consider this issue is obviously, possibly,
as the Court has done in the
previous case of
, and that is by reference to, in a sense, the
deeming approach that this Court has adopted in a number of cases, including
We also say that it follows from the
test that the Court usually applies when considering a general
regulation‑making power,
which is the relevant statute in this case.
Namely, section 504(1). Before I move from that point, your Honour,
there is one further
point I wish to make about
section 504.
Is that just by way of saying that
section 504(1) is a broad power, and our concern with these regulations and
these conditions is
with the constitutional scope of application of that broad
statutory power?
MS DE FERRARI:
Correct. It is a broad power of
the general type that is found these days in all modern statutes of making
regulations that are
necessary or convenient, in a sense, but there is one
further aspect of that power in this case, which I wanted to note for the Court.
Again, I am in a sense ticking off some points that may have been made to the
– there may not. If the Court goes to
page 106 of volume 1 of the joint book of
authorities ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
What are we looking at?
MS DE FERRARI:
We are looking at the
text of section 504 of the Act, your Honour,
subsection (1).
GAGELER CJ:
Just so I understand it, is
this an independent statutory argument, or is it just the conduit by which we
get from the constitutional
propositions through to
MS DE FERRARI:
the conduit, your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
It is just a general
regulation‑making power, is it not?
MS DE FERRARI:
only point I wish to make is that when your Honours actually have a look at
that provision, it has two limbs. One is not just
the “necessary or
convenient to be prescribed” power but also an earlier limb which
all matters which are by this Act required or permitted to be
prescribed –
We think that the limb that is engaged in this
case is matters which by this act are permitted to be prescribed because the
is what is contained in section 41 of the Act, and
your Honours will find that at pages 80 and 81. To that extent,
when one looks
at the general power as a conduit for the constitutional
question, the way it is engaged in this case is by what is permitted, and
is permitted is only what is in section 41, either subsection (1) or
subsection (3).
If your Honours would now please turn again to
the text of clause 070.612A and the preceding two clauses, which is on
page 115, your
Honours will see – if I can start with
clause 070.611 – that in subsection (1)(a), for example,
there are a number of
conditions that are listed and the text says they
“must be imposed”. We think that means that it is
section 41(3) that
is engaged. That is, what the Minister may impose as
conditions. The actual imposing must be done by someone, and in this case,
must be by the decision‑maker.
Your Honours would know from
other cases under this Act that there are a number of regulations that simply
say, in respect of a particular
class of visa, it might have
clause 044.611, and the heading says “condition imposed”, and
then the simple text of the
provision just says: public interest
criterion 4001 – and that is all it says. So, it is imposed by
force of the provision
itself. A similar approach is taken in
clause 070.612. All of those conditions are imposed if the visa has been
granted under section
195A, which is not this case.
One then moves
to the impugned provision, 070.612A, which is in respect of those four
prescribed conditions, and again there is an
obligation to impose. This time,
the Minister is named. The Minister is named because there is a satisfaction of
the decision‑maker
part of the imposition of these clauses. Now, the
first paragraph, paragraph (a), requires that:
subclause (3) applies to the visa –
your Honours turn to subclause (3) on the next page, it deals with the
various conditions when the visa is granted. In this
case, the relevant one is
regulation 2.25AB. I do not need to take your Honours to it, but it
is imposed without needing to make
an application. Sorry, it is granted without
needing to make an application. So, that is satisfied. Then, in
paragraph (b), the
test requires that:
despite the other conditions imposed –
this subclass or another provision of this Division –
means, relevantly, also what follows – not just what precedes this
clause but what follows, which includes subclause 612B
on page 116,
which I took your Honours to, which is the one that imposes a
no‑contact provision. Despite any of those:
the Minister is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the holder
poses a substantial risk of seriously harming any part of
the Australian
community by committing a serious offence –
Now, that is the first part of the test which seeks to encapsulate
legitimate purpose insofar as that was the next step in the analysis
plurality’s reasoning, and obviously this Court’s decision in
, once it is accepted that the conditions in this case, curfew and
monitoring, are prima facie punitive, which is accepted.
You accept that the words “despite the other conditions” means
taking into account the other conditions the Minister includes,
or do you say
that “despite the other conditions” means ignoring the other
conditions?
MS DE FERRARI:
We say the latter. Not
only that, your Honour, but it is also the latter without the
knowledge – which I will come to, because
it says in which order it
has to be considered – without the knowledge or whether the Minister
will go on to impose the other
conditions, which – as in the case of
condition 8624 – must be imposed. So, we say the
BEECH-JONES J:
So, just to be clear, you say in
assessing, say, whether the monitoring condition is to be imposed, you ignore
that they are already
subject to a condition imposed by
MS DE FERRARI:
Yes, because that has not been
reached at all, in terms of the way in which this test is structured, in our
respectful submission.
BEECH-JONES J:
What, you mean the person
literally has to go through each regulation in numerical
MS DE FERRARI:
Well, your Honours will see
in particular ‑ ‑ ‑
Subsection (2) tells you the order.
MS DE FERRARI:
Subsection (2), yes.
BEECH-JONES J:
But that is those
four. I am asking about other conditions. The ones that have to be
imposed – you say ignore them, ignore
their effect on
MS DE FERRARI:
Well, your Honour, I stand
corrected. It is only respect of those four prescribed conditions that the
order is imposed, but here
is one of the vagaries, because nothing here tells,
the test does not tell the Minister in what order these are going to be
considered,
including ones that have to be mandatorily
No, but you accept, then, that the natural
reading or the words is that the Minister is to be satisfied that, despite the
of conditions other than these four – in other words, taking
into account all of those – then there is still a substantial
MS DE FERRARI:
Correct, but the vice in respect
of the prescribed conditions is that the Minister cannot do that, certainly not
with respect to
8621, because it cannot have
considered – 8621 is the monitoring condition; it cannot have
considered 8620, because it is proscribed
from doing that.
Your Honours will have seen in – I think it is in
BEECH‑JONES
That is because it is an escalating order. So, you start
with 8621, consider that in light of not those four conditions, the other
conditions, and then work your way through so that by the time you get
to 8620, which is the last, you would look at the risk of
that, depending
on whether you had decided to impose the monitoring and the other two, do you
not? That is how it works, is it not?
MS DE FERRARI:
is correct, but the point we make is this. How can the test of reasonably
appropriate and adapted be satisfied in respect
of 8621 if you do not know,
because you have not gotten to it, because you are prohibited from getting to
the point, whether the
other three prescribed conditions are going to be imposed
or not? Your Honours know that one of the vices as well, which was pointed
out by the plurality in
, is 8617 and 8618, which we accept
come before 8620, have nothing on their face to do with serious harm to
There was some argument in
and, I think, some differences of opinion in the reasons about what the purposes
of the $10,000 and the debt‑incurring provisions
and 8618 were.
MS DE FERRARI:
Yes, your Honour,
but now they have been firmly put as something that supposedly, by the time the
Minister comes to consider the
curfew condition, 8620, have been considered
as one that could be at least potentially imposed to deal with the only thing
they could deal with, which is a substantial risk of harming any part
of the Australian community, because they cannot be imposed
pursuant to any
other part of this regulation. That is the only way.
What is “this Division” in
070.612A(1)(b)?
MS DE FERRARI:
I am sorry,
your Honour?
In 070.612A(1)(b), the
second line, there is a reference to:
another provision of this Division –
What is “this Division”?
“This Division” – that is not a
word that is usually found in subclasses of
visas ‑ ‑ ‑
Division 2.5 is bridging visas in this area – in the
regulations.
MS DE FERRARI:
Yes, your Honour. I
do not know if one would read bridging visas as a definition for “this
Division”. Can I take
that on board? I must say, when I read it, I
thought it referred to 070.6. That is, the conditions.
Perhaps you could take that on notice.
Yes, I will, thank you,
your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
Ms De Ferrari,
I am just relating this to your outline. I am not asking you to speed up, I am
just trying to find out where we
MS DE FERRARI:
No, I understand, your Honour. I am, your Honours, effectively on
point 7, but it picks up some of the other proposition. That
trying to articulate why it is still uncertain and authorises some unpredictable
results by the actual way in which it seeks
to discharge the test or what
conditions might be considered to be reasonably necessary and reasonably
appropriate and adapted.
Staying on point 7, your Honour, we make the
same point, if I may.
If we go back to, really, the source of the vice
of this scheme, which is the definition of “serious
which is on page 113 –
your Honours, we make a number of points about that. In
particular – I am now on proposition
9, and I will come back and
touch on proposition 8 in a moment, but the way in which “serious
offence” is defined is
actually not by reference to specified offending as
it exists. It does mean:
an offence against a law of the Commonwealth, a State or a
Territory –
but there is absolutely no way of identifying what those laws might be.
That is relevant because of the requirement under paragraph
requires consideration of:
the particular conduct constituting the offence –
involving one of those consequences, where those consequences might not
actually eventuate at all in the way in which the test, seeking
to look into the
future at the possible offending, would eventuate; nor, if it eventuated, would
actually constitute serious harm,
which expression “serious harm” is
not defined anywhere. I see this for this reason, picking up some
Your Honours will see in (ii), for example, that on
its face – given that “serious harm” is not
one needs to guess that “serious risk of serious
personal injury”, stressing serious risk in and of itself constitutes
serious harm. So, one has to look at hypothetical offending against laws
unspecified and then look at the conduct potentially constituting
risk. That risk and only that risk never eventuating, but somehow that fits
into the definition of a serious harm that
is intended to be the protective
purpose, legitimate according the Commonwealth, in the test in
paragraph (b) of the impugned clause.
A similar matter,
your Honours, might be said about (vii). Now, as I mentioned
before, (vii) to (ix) are not actually within the
serious offences for
the purposes of Division 395 of the
Criminal Code
, but domestic or
family violence, including in the form of coercive control – now,
there is a very wide way in which domestic
violence is now defined in the laws
of many jurisdictions, and it certainly does not necessarily include either
physical or emotional
violence of any kind. It might include controlling of
assets, for example.
The problem with that is, as I say, on the one
hand a level of putting the test in the impugned clause at a very high level of
generality,
which is our proposition 8. I said it before, we accept that
the way test has been structured now, by reference to the two parts
satisfaction by the Minister, is intended to bring it down from the absolute
general level at which it was expressed in
, where it was imposed in
We accept that, but we do say it still casts at a very, very
high level generality. When you drill down into exactly how is this
apply, including by reference to the uncertainties and, we say almost impossible
to resolve, complexities of how is one
to assess what is the particular conduct
that would involve, in some cases, just a risk.
GAGELER CJ:
an individual “part of the Australian community” within the meaning
of this provision?
MS DE FERRARI:
Any part of the
Australian community comes – well, your Honour, that is a
relevant question, we think, for some of those,
because while one might
infer – but we do not say that is the test of construction that
should be adopted – that domestic
violence might be directed to part
of the Australian community. It need not be. For example, it could
be – especially of
coercive control – directed to someone
outside of the jurisdiction, by telephone calls, or letters or such other
things. Similarly,
people smuggling –
again, one might infer how that
offending is generally occurring in Australia. If that is the case, it
generally occurs by smuggling
people into Australia rather than outside of
Australia. So, it is difficult, again, to see how that could be about causing
harm to any part of the Australian
BEECH‑JONES J:
Sorry, does not serious crime of
that kind, even directed to and of an individual, constitute – for
want of a better phrase
– an affront to the community as a whole?
That is what criminal courts say time and time again, do they
MS DE FERRARI:
I understand, your Honour, but the
test as it is expressed is not about being an affront but about being of actual
serious harm.
I said – and your Honours will see that on
paragraph (1)(b) on page 115 – it hinges on, and
necessarily hinges on, this
notion of “serious harm”, and it had to
be drafted that way because the Commonwealth will not try and overcome some of
the problems that this Court – the plurality of this
Court – identified in the previous iteration of this clause, and
is it was not sufficiently tailored to a protective purpose.
protective purposes, here, cannot be affront to the community, accepting that
the offence is one that might affront the whole
community. It actually has to
be a serious harm.
BEECH‑JONES J:
No, I am not suggesting
that, but where the crime is committed – a serious crime is committed
against an individual, one
often talks about protecting the community.
Sometimes, you talk about, say, racial vilification is about part of the
community as
the victim or focus of the crime, in other contexts you might talk
represents a risk to the safety of the community. It is all
context‑dependent, is it not?
MS DE FERRARI:
is, and I accept that. We would go back to noting how untethered to any
particular offending it is and how unhelped,
and so untethered, to any
definition of what actually is serious harm.
it untethered to any offending? Because subsection (a) requires the
identification of an offence with a maximum penalty.
Did you mean past offending?
MS DE FERRARI:
future offending, your Honour, because – it is untethered
because there is no point in time whatsoever, in terms
of what are the offences,
and I know this might be more a question of judicial review but I am trying to
show the uncertainties and
why this provision suffers from the same
I took your Honour to the only way in which the delegate was
able to be advised about this, and it was not able to be advised about
identifying any particular offending in question. There was just a statement of
satisfaction, and that statement of satisfaction
in terms of (ii) could only
have been from the previous offending. There is nothing else. There is nothing
Well, it might, arguably. I mean, if one is looking at a substantial risk
of serious harm, it is arguable that perhaps someone who
has committed no
previous offending but is associated closely with others who have committed
serious offending, or whose social media
associates them with ideas that might
involve offending, that maybe even without any past offending that person might
be considered
to be a substantial risk on the balance of probabilities of one
MS DE FERRARI:
Yes, your Honour,
the point I was trying to – I am not trying to rule out the fact that
there could be a number of scenarios,
and there is nothing
necessarily – there is nothing at all in fact in this
Subclass 070 or elsewhere that links the application
of this power to
impose conditions to past offending, at all.
point is that there is no requirement or element that refers specifically to
past offending. So, someone can be someone who
has not offended and still, as I
understand your argument, be caught by the Minister being satisfied on the
balance of probabilities
that there is a substantial risk of harm of the kind
MS DE FERRARI:
Yes, but – yes,
your Honour, and my point is that also there is no description of
“substantial harm”. One has
that is your second complaint, there is no description of “substantial
harm”. Then your third, as I understand
your argument this morning, is
that “serious offence” has these subcategories in the
regulation, 070.111, but although:
it is an offence punishable by imprisonment –
there is no
need for them to identify – that is, for the Minister to
identify – a particular provision, whether it is
State, Territory or
Commonwealth.
MS DE FERRARI:
Correct, nor to identify why
the serious risk – in particular, the way in (i) and (ii)
in particular – is expressed
as “serious risk”; why that
serious risk would elevate the offending to anything even necessarily resulting
in imprisonment
at all, or some of the other matters.
One might say that
production, publication or possession of child abuse material these days will be
almost impossible to not result
in some serious imprisonment, but the point we
are trying to make is that it is still all expressed at a level of generality
that it cannot be – it fails at two levels, in the part of the
test that is still to be addressed in the one exercise of characterisation,
legitimate purpose, because although the incantation of the words are used,
there is nothing at all in the section that suggests
that what is going to be
protected is a serious harm, which is not
defined ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
Can I just ask, really, a question of construction, I suppose. The Minister
looking at paragraph (a) has to be satisfied, on the
probabilities, that there is a substantial risk of the visa holder committing a
serious offense in the future. Then,
what does the reference to:
seriously harming any part of the Australian
community –
add to that, in your
submission?
MS DE FERRARI:
It must add something which
is unspecified, because the serious offences that I identified are all capable
of being proven to be
committed in a way that still would not give rise to, not
only serious harm, but any harm to the community. For example –
I go back to the question of serious risk – if the offending,
assuming that there is such a law of the Commonwealth that
is punishing just the
creation of the serious risk, if the offending is the creation of a serious
risk, then, by that serious risk,
no one is substantially harmed.
Minister might do the exercise of trying to prove on the balance of probability
that that particular offending might be committed,
but still, nobody would be
seriously harmed by just the existence of a risk that did not eventuate. So,
there must be something
more. The other point we make about that,
your Honour, is that at least the rationale by which the Commonwealth
defends it as being
reasonably appropriate and adapted is the fact that the test
does not depend just on the possibility of future commission of a serious
offense but also of the existence by that future offending of the creation of
the substantial risk.
I think, as I understand the Commonwealth
submission, that goes to both satisfying the court that now there is a
legitimate protective
purpose, such that the prima facie punitive nature is not
the end of the matter – in fact invalidity does not
and also goes to:
(i) reasonably necessary; and
(ii) reasonably appropriate and adapted –
in terms of
conferring this power to impose otherwise accepted to be prima facie punitive
conditions.
One of the reasons why – at
least, can I just take the first condition, which is the electronic monitoring.
If one reads the
explanatory statement, it is described as being for the
as a condition is to deter the individual from committing further offences
whilst holding the BVR –
Then, again, on the next page it
the importance of reducing absconding –
to be fair:
and recidivism –
MS DE FERRARI:
Correct, and
accept that they are legitimate purposes? I mean, I can start
MS DE FERRARI:
no, your Honour, because it does not have – in our submission,
no – as we understand the analysis of this Court
at this point based
, and some subsequent decisions – because that does not
change it to a protective purpose from something that is prima facie
The explanatory statement is absolutely
explicit this is deterrent.
MS DE FERRARI:
And this Court’s doctrine is that the only
purpose of a civil penalties regime which on any view is punishment is
deterrence.
MS DE FERRARI:
Yes. We think that deterrence in
particular, the parts that your Honour has taken us to, deterrence from any
offending –
not necessarily serious offending as defined –
any offending at all is the purpose, or a purpose.
This Court has repeatedly said in civil penalties cases that the sole
purpose of deterrence is the purpose of punishment.
MS DE FERRARI:
Your Honour, we accept that and we follow that, and that is why we have
highlighted those passages in the explanatory statement that
show, we say, that
far from just being the one protective purpose that is advocated by my learned
friends, there are in fact a range
of diverse purposes, such of which in their
own terms show that this is deterrence and therefore punishment. That is, the
prima facie nature is not displaced at all.
Your Honours, I
think I have covered proposition 9, and I think your Honour
Justice Gordon has taken me to the other purposes as
they appear from the
explanatory statement. I do not propose to go the passages – we have
given the passages there. What
we have not highlighted in proposition 8 is
that the plurality in
expressly said that it is not just the matters
in the equivalent of the explanatory statement, it is not just the matters in
secondary materials, but it is the diverse purposes appears as well from how
clause 070.6 in its entirety is structured, including
something that I mentioned
That is, the prescribing of the conditions 8617 and 8618, which
are the financial conditions. The plurality relied on not just the
statement of
purposes as they appeared in the secondary material, which we say exists here as
well, but also the purposes as they
appear from the entire scheme,
including – and I know my learned friends take issue with
that – the punitive aspect by
prescribing the offence that is linked
to non‑compliance with these conditions, which include –
your Honours would note
– a mandatory sentencing of one year for
any breach, no matter how minor.
GAGELER CJ:
Ms de Ferrari, would that be a convenient time for the morning
adjournment?
MS DE FERRARI:
your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
We will take the morning
adjournment.
AT 11.15 AM
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 11.29
MS DE FERRARI:
Your Honours, I am about
to move on to paragraph 11 of the outline of submissions. Before I do
that, your Honours, in relation to
the question that I took on notice which
followed from what your Honour Justice Gleeson asked me, as far as our
researches have been
able to show, in Schedule 2 of the Migration
Regulations, which your Honour knows contains all the subclauses which
provide for different
be used in some places as synonymous with “Subclass”.
synonymous in this case with the whole of 070. In other places, it appears
to be used as synonymous with one level down in the
hierarchy, so with something
such as what appears on page 116 as 070.6, which is
“Conditions”. It is not defined anywhere;
we are just going by the
way it has been used throughout Schedule 2.
Your Honours, we
have addressed on what we wanted to say about legitimate purpose. We are now
moving on to the next question, and
that is for this part of the analysis we
have to assume that the hypothesised purpose that is pursued by this regulation
is a legitimate one that is non‑punitive. The next question is
whether the way in which the statute – relevantly, the
regulation in
612A – in context can be said to pursue that hypothetical protective
purpose in a manner that is reasonably capable
as being seen as necessary, and
we say that is not so for a number of reasons.
One is the same problems,
uncertainties and too high a level of intended abstract operation of a reference
of serious offence that
we have identified in respect of whether there can be
discerned a legitimate purpose, but also because it is made to depend, we say,
on a state of satisfaction reached by someone who is clearly – the
Court might infer – not an expert in assessing the
risk of future
offending, even on the balance of probability, and that known expert is not
informed mandatorily under this statute
by any relevant expert advice about
these matters.
We contrast that with the very prescriptive way in which,
in respect of the exact same serious offending up to (vi), the matters
to be approached when the task is given to a court under Division 395 of
Criminal Code
We have said in written submissions the
important aspects of that provision that we point out, but it starts, first and
from the fact that the Commonwealth, rather than being judge and jury,
is actually the moving party that will have the onus of persuading
the court of
all relevant matters as to why, in the application to the particular individual,
the order should be made, on proper
evidence and on proper approach to expert
evidence as well, and hearing from the affected person before the –
the person who
might be affected before the order is made, not after. Now,
GAGELER CJ:
So, part of the problem is a structural problem; section 76E of the Act
prevents that from occurring.
MS DE FERRARI:
your Honour. The structure of the whole scheme must, and in fact is
arguably what is most relevant in terms of the analysis
of whether it is
reasonable capable of being seen as necessary. Why is this scheme, as it is
implemented, the one that is reasonably
capable of being seen as necessary when,
clearly, a different scheme could not only be envisaged, it is envisaged, and it
suffer from the many of these flaws?
In particular, it does not
suffer from the last one that I mentioned. That is, it does not impose it and
then provide, seemingly,
an opportunity to say whether the punishment should
be – prima facie punishment imposed by the conditions should be
It imposes this for 12 months. So, yes, your Honour, part
of it is structural.
That is addressing both propositions 11
and 12, but structural also comes within the proposition at our
paragraph 12. I have already
addressed some of these matters. In
particular, the mandatory order in respect of the prescribed conditions and the
way it deals
with all the other conditions that must be imposed, in any
What I wanted to expand is a response to the Commonwealth’s
submissions, which your Honours will find more particularly at
paragraphs 57 and 58, where the Commonwealth there says, at
paragraph 57:
In considering that matter –
that is, reasonably
the Minister must have regard to –
and then it identifies a
number of matters:
the likelihood of that serious harm eventuating if the condition is not
imposed; and the extent to which the condition, if imposed,
is likely to
protect . . . from that serious harm.
I have already said
why that is not identified. Reference is made to the scheme considered and the
analysis in this Court’s
decision in
Vella v Commissioner of
Police for New South Wales
(2019) 269 CLR 219, your Honours
will find it in volume 8 of the joint book of authorities.
point – the Commonwealth, for the passage that I have just read out
of those submissions, refers to what Justices Bell,
Keane, Nettle and
your Honour Justice Edelman said at paragraph 47, which is on
page 2851 of that book of authorities and page 242
of the report. The
Court there talks about the necessity for a fourth step required by
section 5(1)(c).
If your Honours then look at the provision,
which is set out at paragraph 34, four pages preceding, the test there is
in fact expressly
stated, in a way that clearly links it to the reasonable
grounds for a belief of protection of that particular harm. Nothing, we
the way this regulation operates in fact, given the text of the regulation,
mandates that same regard to those matters –
mandates regard to all
of those matters as did the statutory test in
BEECH‑JONES J:
Which matters are you talking
which had the test.
MS DE FERRARI:
likelihood of that serious harm eventuating if the condition is not imposed;
and the extent to which the condition, if imposed, is
likely to protect the
relevant part of the Australian community –
Rather than do
that, it is all subsumed into what we say is effectively the language of the
constitutional test of:
(i) reasonably necessary; and
(ii) reasonably appropriate and
BEECH‑JONES J:
MS DE FERRARI:
Our point, your Honour, is simply
that – contrary to what the Commonwealth submits – there
is no statutory prescription,
as there is in
, to actually compel
the having regard of those precise matters. One has to assume that that would
be the advice that it would be
given as to how the decision‑maker may go
decision‑maker would
have regard to those.
I said before, when I
went to the memorandum to the decision‑maker, that obviously it does not
direct deconstruction of the
text itself, but your Honours might recall
that in fact the Minister was advised not – the Delegate was advised
not in terms
of mandatory considerations at all, but in terms of a
non‑inclusive list of things that they might have regard
BEECH‑JONES J:
But I think that was to
assess past risk. This is how you assess the factual risk presented by this
person, if that was the memo
with the reference to that person’s criminal
history and all those other matters.
MS DE FERRARI:
Your Honour, it went to that and then it also went in the later paragraphs,
29 and 30, to the considerations of whether that is
reasonably necessary and
reasonably appropriate. We make the same point in respect of what the Minister
says is mandatory considerations
under paragraph 58, and we say the statute
just does not say that.
I have dealt with the vice of no right to make
representations until the conditions have been imposed. We note, as well, the
that there simply is nothing that identifies in precise terms the
informational basis upon which the reasonable opinion – accepting
there will have to be a reasonable opinion, but there is nothing that specifies
the informational basis, nor the quality of that
informational basis as would,
by contrast, be the case if the matter was before the court and the evidence had
to be considered by
Finally we say – and again
accepting, as I have said before, that the one obvious intent is to try and
shift any review of
what has been done to a possible judicial review, or a
possible application for habeas – that the test in
paragraph (c), which
simply seeks to recite the language of the
constitutional test – simply doing that, having regard contextually
to all the other
problems that we have identified – and here we go to
the matters that your Honour Chief Justice Gageler put to me
context and the way in which it operates in respect of those provisions
in the Act itself is relevant.
Framing it that way does not save it from
invalidity. It does not save it, in particular – just by incantation
of the words
– from our analysis to say why this is not reasonably
capable of being seen necessary, even assuming that one can discern a
legitimate, that is, non‑punitive purpose. I now come to our alternative
analysis in paragraph 15.
GAGELER CJ:
How does this fit
with the questions in the special case?
MS DE FERRARI:
your Honour, we say it does because the questions as they were
expressed – and I will go to the
questions ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
this just another way of putting the Chapter III argument?
Well, not entirely. The power obviously must be construed
subject to the limitation in Chapter III, but we do also say that, even
construed in that way, there remains a question, and the question is whether in
this case you can also say that it is not anymore
within the power in
section 51(xix).
But if you lose on the test of
whether it is reasonably capable of being seen as necessary – put
aside why that test is being
imposed – do you say there is anything
left for this power argument?
MS DE FERRARI:
Well, there is in
this sense, your Honour, because the limitation in Chapter III also
goes to the fact as to why the conditions
are prima facie punitive. The
analysis then becomes – just focusing on the first part, which is
admitted – if that is
the case, if the conditions are prima facie
punitive – that is, they affect the liberty of this cohort of aliens
specific cohort of aliens, that is, they are otherwise lawful
non‑citizens, that
is, they are otherwise able to be in the community
in the same way that everyone else is – in respect of this particular
we say that the aliens power does not travel to impose prima facie
punitive conditions. So, we do say that that remains the
Is that any more than to reinforce what this
Court said in
, that the purpose must both be legitimate and
non‑punitive, and that, consistent with
, the legitimate
purposes of detention – and I know here we are dealing with different
kinds of conditions, but they were treated
in the way they were in
– must be regarded as exceptional?
It may not be, but we think there is a different emphasis in
terms of, in a sense, the way Justice Edelman put it. That is, even
lose on reasonably appropriate and adapted, the holding from
context to the fact that the aliens power in the core aspects of allowing
entrance into the community or removing from the
community in that core aspect,
the aliens power for this particular cohort of aliens has come to an end; has
necessarily come to
That is why we say – and we pick
up – we said in our written submissions, we picked up on why
Justice Hayne in
and Justice McHugh in
in particular thought that that might be why one gets to
the point as to when, in those particular circumstances, those core aspects
the aliens power accepting into the community or removed from the community have
come to an end; they are in the community and
they cannot be removed. In those
particular circumstances, the power is no longer available to impose punitive
conditions.
Of course, they can have visa conditions imposed by
reference of their status as a person. We do not deny that there can be
imposed that say, for example, that you may only work 20 hours
per week if you are enrolled in a degree, but that is no more than
an incident
of regulating activities that everybody does as a person otherwise at liberty in
the community, which these people ought
to be because they ought not to have
prima facie punitive deprivations of their liberty imposed upon them. So, that
is how we say
it advances the argument.
Unless there are any other
questions, your Honour, those are the submissions for the
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Solicitor.
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honours, I propose to
structure our oral submissions as follows: to start with the construction of
clause 070.612A in the
form it takes following
; second, and
very briefly, to address the analytical structure that governs the validity of
that clause under Chapter III; third,
to apply that analytical framework to
the curfew and monitoring conditions; and fourth, if necessary, to address the
head of power
We agree with our friend’s remark in
opening that, really, the sole issue in this case is whether the changes made to
the clause,
, provide a basis to distinguish the majority
decision in that case. We have provided, attached to our three‑page
a one‑page document that sets the old clause and the new
clause – the operative provision, just
subparagraph (1) –
side‑by‑side, so that
your Honours can see what has changed.
In our submission, it is
immediately apparent on looking at that document that there are three major
changes between the two provisions.
So, I want to start by identifying those
changes and identifying the reasoning in
that criticised the old and
has been remedied in the new.
The first change is that – as
you can see in the right‑hand column of that side‑by‑side
table – the
new provision allows the Minister to impose the impugned
condition only if the Minister is affirmatively satisfied on the balance
probabilities of the identified matters in both paragraphs (1)(b)
and (1)(c), which contrasts with the old clause, where the default
other way around: the conditions had to be imposed by the Minister unless the
Minister was satisfied they were not reasonably
That feature
of the old regulations attracted adverse comment from the plurality in
in a part of the reasons that was strictly obiter. It is
paragraph [85]. If your Honours have
(2024) 99 ALRJ 1, it is volume 10, tab 45. At
paragraph [85], the plurality was dealing with an alternative point not
reached because
your Honours had just concluded that there was no
legitimate non‑punitive purpose.
So, the clause was invalid on
that basis, but then you went on in [84] and [85] to say that, even if
there had been a permissible
purpose, the provision would have failed at the
reasonably necessary stage. The reason given in paragraph [85] was that it
was pointed
out that, because the clause involved:
a positive state of mind about a negative stipulation –
position was that:
if the Minister cannot be so satisfied the conditions must be imposed,
meaning that the provision resolves all doubt and uncertainty
in favour of the
imposition of the conditions . . . the power can be
exercised even where it cannot be and has not been established
imposition of the condition is reasonably necessary for the achievement of the
purported legitimate non-punitive purpose
because the default position is that
the Minister imposes the condition.
That was the core reason why the
plurality observed obiter that if step 2(b) – the reasonably
capable of being sentenced necessary
step – had been reached, the
clause would have failed it. We submit, quite evidently, that criticism cannot
be made of the
new form of the clause. That is the first point.
second point is that if your Honours look at the closing words of
subparagraph (b) right in the bottom‑right hand corner
of our table,
the purpose for which these conditions may be imposed is expressly identified
for the purpose of protecting any part of the Australian community from
serious harm by addressing that substantial risk.
So, we are protecting any part of the community from serious harm, and
when the clause says “by addressing that substantial
risk” it is
referring back to the words at the end of paragraph (b) above, where the
substantial risk in question is:
a substantial risk of seriously harming any part of the Australian community
by committing a serious offence –
GAGELER CJ:
Sorry, I am not quite sure what that means. I am
not quite sure what the connection between the harm
MR DONAGHUE:
GAGELER CJ:
Australian community and the offences need to
MR DONAGHUE:
I understand that, your Honour, and
we have identified that question of construction in paragraph 5 of our
outline, and I will
come to it shortly, but we appreciate that there is a live
question of construction in that respect. My proposition is that the
identified at the bottom of paragraph (c) is the purpose of protecting any
part of the Australian community from the risk
of serious harm arising from the
commission of serious offence as defined. You have seen the definition, and I
will come back to
If your Honours still have
you could go to paragraph [66] in the plurality’s reasons, you will
see there recorded a submission by the Commonwealth
that the old clause should
be construed as implying a condition along those lines. The submission was
that, as a matter of construction,
the clause should be read as meaning the
Minister had to be satisfied:
that it is not reasonably necessary to impose the condition for the
protection of any part of the Australian community “
from the risk of
harm arising from future offending
So, the purpose was put a
little more broadly than it is now recorded in expressed term in the clause. In
the paragraphs that follow,
from [67] through to [76], the plurality go through
a series of steps rejecting the submission that it was possible to imply that
protecting the community from harm arising from offending limit. So, you then
see at paragraph [76] the conclusion is reached that:
For these reasons, it must be accepted that cl 070.612A(1) means
precisely what it says, that its object is the “protection
of any part of
the Australian community” in the broad sense discussed above. The risk of
harm with which cl 070.612A(1) is
concerned must be taken to be designedly
unparticularised and indeterminate.
And it was the absence, in our submission, of a more specific purpose of
the kind that the Commonwealth had unsuccessfully asked the
Court to imply that
was then decisive of the no legitimate purpose conclusion at
paragraphs [81] through to [8]3. So, at [81] you
see the plurality
The fundamental difficulty with cl 070.612A(1) is that protection of every
part of the Australian community from any harm at all
“a concept of such elasticity that it is –
analytically unhelpful. Then the second half of the clause:
casts its net over all members of the class in circumstances where escape
from this net depends on the Minister forming an opinion
which the Minister is
legally entitled not to form in a broad and flexible, as well as uncertain and
unpredictable, range of circumstances
not necessarily connected to the existence
of any real risk of physical or other harm to any member of the Australian
And then in the next paragraph there is a counterfactual, even if you had
read in “from harm”, protection:
the plurality ask. The clause:
does not require the harm to be of a sufficient degree of seriousness to
involve the commission of a serious criminal offence.
In fact, it does not require any criminal offence, and it certainly does
not identify them specifically. I am paraphrasing. So,
that was the essential
reason that the old clause was held invalid.
It was purporting to
protect from any harm at all, it did not identify any criminal offence, let
alone a risk arising from a serious
criminal offence. Again, we
say – well, happily for me – unlike the situation on the
previous occasion when I was asking
your Honours to imply this requirement,
it is expressly there textually, at the high end of the range identified by the
in paragraph 82. It requires commission of a serious criminal
offence. So again, we submit the determinative reasoning against
the old clause
cannot be applied to the new.
Finally, we submit that in
paragraph (b) of the new clause, one sees an express identification of the
level of risk of harm that
the Minister must be satisfied exists – it
is a “substantial risk” – and of the, subject to the
constructional
point I am about to come to, the nature and degree of that harm;
it is serious harm by commission of a serious offence. Whereas,
if your Honours go back to paragraph [65], you see the plurality
record that in the old clause the purpose was:
at a high level of generality.
It does not:
for example . . . identify the nature, degree, or extent
of the harm sought to be protected against or the nature, degree, or extent
the required state of non-satisfaction by the Minister.
Sorry, which paragraph were you just
MR DONAGHUE:
Paragraph [65],
your Honour.
And our point is again that that criticism cannot be
made of the revised clause. In our submission, what I have already said is
enough to demonstrate that the plaintiffs when they submit against us, as they
did in writing in paragraph 22 and again this morning,
that the clause
retains the essential vices that in
were found to render the clause
incapable of justification is just wrong.
It does not retain those
essential vices at all. It is a fundamentally different clause, and not only is
that apparent from its
text but it is also apparent from its practical
operation. Your Honours will have seen in the special case there is some
information
, and you have in the special case book, on page 49, in
paragraph 41, figures about the extent to which conditions were imposed on
cohort members at that time – and it was
The cohort is
much larger but the number of people who were subject to the conditions is much
smaller. So, not only does it textually
look completely different, on the
ground it has produced a completely different practical outcome. Both in legal
operation and in
practical operation, we submit that the new clause is very
different from its predecessor.
Now, the question of construction
your Honour the Chief Justice raises, and I am looking here at
paragraph (b), and in particular
at the closing words of
paragraph (b). Our submission is that the preferable construction of the
seriously harming any part of the Australian community by committing a
serious offence –
is that the premise of the clause is that
the commission of a serious offence as defined – by
definition – harms either
the whole or part of the Australian
community. So, to adopt some of your Honour the Chief Justice’s
language from
, our primary submission is that there is an
accurate proxy between the identification of this category of offences, all of
are offences involving harm to persons and harm to the
GAGELER CJ:
So, provision could read, with identical
effect: the Minister is satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the
holder poses
a substantial risk of committing a serious offence?
It could, but if it had done that, it would not have exposed the
inherent harm identified in the offence, and it would have been
vulnerable to
the kind of reasoning that your Honour the Chief Justice and
Justice Gordon adopted in
GAGELER CJ:
MR DONAGHUE:
Our primary submission is that you could read
it in that way, and because there is an accurate proxy between the serious
as defined and harm to the community as necessary for the
constitutional test, then the provision would be valid.
underpinning that submission is the idea your Honour Justice Edelman
expressed in
in terms that Chief Justice Kiefel and
Justices Keane and Steward endorsed in
. I will not ask
your Honours to go to it, but the statement Justice Edelman made,
endorsed by their Honours in
“conduct is regarded as criminal for the very reason that its
commission harms society, or some part of it” and it is
rarely the role of
a court to second‑guess Parliament’s decision about the seriousness
of the harm that various crimes
will have to the community.
I think that
is the idea your Honour Justice Beech‑Jones was raising with my
What was the paragraph for that?
Minister for Home Affairs v Benbrika
at 228; Justice Edelman picked up in
at paragraph 82. So that, because – that
submission and the way I have just put it does depend on the content of the
of “serious offence” that you have seen and which I will
come to more when I come to develop the legitimate purpose.
I just have two questions, in that you called it the primary
submission, so I take it there is a fallback?
MR DONAGHUE:
I am about to put an alternative.
GAGELER CJ:
Just sticking with
the primary submission for a moment, “a serious
offence” – does that mean a particular serious
MR DONAGHUE:
No. Well, if your Honour means a
particular offence, it depends what the elements are, I suppose, but a
particular offence could
mean – so, taking there is a substantial
risk of rape; the person does not need to know what day the rape is going to
on, or who the victim of the rape is going to be, or the location where
the rape is going to occur, in my submission. It is a predictive
exercise as to
a category of harm that there are, on the balance of probabilities, it can be
concluded will occur.
So, do you have to be satisfied,
on the balance of probabilities, that the person will at some unspecified time
in some unspecified
place commit a
defined ‑ ‑ ‑
MR DONAGHUE:
No, there is a – you have to be satisfied, on the balance of
probabilities, that there is a substantial risk that they will.
Right. So, you are not suggesting by your construction the
transposition of the words “by committing a serious offence”
order, it is – you are splitting “substantial risk”. So,
the way you want it to read is: on the balance
of probabilities, that the
holder poses a substantial risk – is
MR DONAGHUE:
Of – and one could put brackets around the words “seriously
harming any part of the Australian community”, close
brackets, so you
could drop out those words. So:
the holder poses a substantial risk of . . . committing a
serious offence –
And my primary submission is that, because of the definition of
“serious offence”, if there is a substantial risk of
there is, by definition, a risk of seriously harming the Australian
Serious harm.
Well, those words are descriptive.
MR DONAGHUE:
descriptive rather than limiting, that is right.
is not that it needs to be more like – you do not need to reach a
state of satisfaction that it is more likely than
MR DONAGHUE:
No, that is correct.
‑ ‑ ‑ that there will be an offence
MR DONAGHUE:
You do not.
you do not.
MR DONAGHUE:
You just read it, but you read the
words that I put the brackets around as descriptive, and if the definition of
offence” is precise enough to identify harm of the kind
constitutionally necessary to justify not detention in custody –
, but the lesser restrictions involved
in curfews and monitoring conditions – you have satisfaction of the
constitutional test.
That is my primary submission.
Substantial risk is not – sorry to keep you –
substantial risk is something less than – what is substantial? It
more than real?
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, your Honour, the courts
in this particular kind of predictive context in my – sometimes it
says unacceptable risk,
sometimes it says substantial risk, and I think it is
perhaps the Court said, well, one cannot strive for an
unreasonable level of definition about this, it is
is certainly not more likely than not.
MR DONAGHUE:
more likely; it is not more likely than not.
Substantial is not more likely than not.
MR DONAGHUE:
you have to be satisfied on the balance of – it is clearly not a
minor or de minimis
MR DONAGHUE:
‑ ‑ ‑ but, in my submission,
there – in a case where it matters, a court will have to construe it
that line but, in my submission, it will not determine
Would you accept that, in the example that
I gave Ms De Ferrari, merely association might in some cases be
sufficient to pose a substantial
MR DONAGHUE:
accept that it is certainly possible on the facts. There is no requirement in
this regime that there be a past conviction
to enliven it, so one can imagine in
the current climes one might find perhaps strong evidence of a person
associating with an extremist
group and, indeed, engaging in statements in
online communities of a kind that might engage the vilification limb of the
of “serious office”.
So, there might clearly be a
substantial risk that the person is going to vilify some segment of the
community on the grounds of
one of the protected attributes and, in my
submission, that would enliven this power. That, in my submission, is
the premise that the reason these offences are serious
offences with serious penalties attached to them is because of the harm that
commission of those offences causes to the community, that construction that I
have put is a properly open construction and a
your Honours think either that it is not properly open on the text or that
it would produce invalidity, then we accept that
a possible alternative
construction – and I think this is the construction that our friends
advance – is that the words
that I put the brackets around earlier
could be read as imposing an additional requirement, so that you both had to be
that there was a substantial risk of the commission of an offence, but
that you also had to be satisfied that the kind of –
where the person
falls in the spectrum of the possible offence also causes serious
Perhaps to illustrate that point, if your Honours have the
regulations and look at 070.111, the definition of “serious
most of those offences are offences that, in my submission, can
comfortably be seen to involve – if all of the elements are
established, it is comfortably open to conclude that the commission of the
offence cause serious harm, but it might be said against
us if you look, for
example, at (vi) that it includes:
acts done in preparation for, or to facilitate, the commission of a sexual
offence against a person under 16 –
So, maybe someone who is
attempting to groom children. Now, I would still say in my primary submission
that that submission causes
serious harm to the Australian community, but in
, one of the lines that was drawn was between preparatory
offences, on the one hand, and the actual commission.
Now, that was
terrorism, I accept. So, I am not putting this a my primary submission, but if
your Honours were of the view that
there are versions of inciting violence
towards a group, or domestic violence or sexual assault that, where it is
possible to commit
the offence in a way that does not cause harm, then you could
read the clause if it was necessary to do so to preserve its validity
Residual Assco
kind of sense as having that additional
requirement.
GAGELER CJ:
That would be a matter of construction,
Residual Assco
MR DONAGHUE:
GAGELER CJ:
I have a little difficulty with the reference
to a “part of the Australian community” if, for example, one is
with (vii) of the definition. One can imagine a domestic
violence scenario – are you saying that one should say that the
for harm to a spouse or a child equals harming a part of the
Australian community?
MR DONAGHUE:
I am saying that. I am
saying that, both because – if I need to – because a
person themselves is a part of the community,
but also because the prevalence of
these – really, to pick up some comments
Justice Beech‑Jones made this morning, the
existence of domestic
violence in the community is harmful in a way that extends beyond the violence
done to the actual person.
GAGELER CJ:
Once we get to that
point, then your two arguments really almost collapse into one, because you give
such a wide – you have
such a wide approach to harm or harm to part
of the Australian community, that the – it is difficult for me to
imagine the
commission of an offence that will not cause harm, according to your
alternative submission.
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes. Well, my
alternative – you would not – I probably should split the
answer up. Given that the category of serious
offences includes an offence that
causes loss of life – so, it includes murder – there might
be a situation where there
is a visa‑holder who is identified as posing a
substantial risk to one or two identified people, but that risk is of killing
In my submission, it would be a surprising construction of this
regulation to say that one cannot impose conditions to guard against
So, I do submit that a part of the community can be quite
limited ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
It can be a person.
MR DONAGHUE:
‑ ‑ ‑ can be a person, and that some of
these offences – murder, the domestic violence offences
your Honour
puts to me – might be offences that harm only one
person or a small number of people.
Justice Beech‑Jones pointed out – and
paragraph (viii), incitement towards a group – are more
cases where the target really is a part of the community, or perhaps
with the child sex offences and the procuring‑type examples,
the part of
the community is young people who are exposed to the possible – so,
the part will go up and down, depending on
the type of offences that we are
talking about.
GAGELER CJ:
And people smuggling is one of the
offences – is that the whole community?
Well, is there a question about whether any of this kind of conduct can be
directed only to people outside the Australian community?
That particular category, people smuggling, I think is the one
that most acutely gives rise to that question, and my answer to
that would be
that the operative language of the section requires the Minister to be satisfied
on the balance of probabilities that
the offence will harm part of the
community. So, it might be that there – it might be difficult to be
so satisfied in relation
to that offence in particular, but that just means you
cannot impose the condition.
Mr Solicitor, can I
ask: would not the Minister need to consider the likelihood of serious harm
in (c) in any event, as part of doing
the (c) task?
Well, as part of doing the – at a more individualised
level, yes, for the
‑type reasons that I will come to in a
moment. The Minister has to be looking at, in our submission – your
you have satisfied (b), so there must be a substantial risk of
serious harm by committing the offence, and then the question is:
how does the
condition address that risk? Is it reasonably necessary to address that risk?
Is it reasonably appropriate and adapted,
having regard to the effect on
determining the reasonableness of the imposition, you would need to have a view
MR DONAGHUE:
not just how likely but try to be forming some view about the particular kind of
harm within the category of the offence.
That is so.
BEECH-JONES
Mr Solicitor, can I ask you – that, I think, picks up
the same point. The reference to the words “involve” or
“involves”, that is not looking to the likely elements of the
putative offence. It is looking to the likely result,
I think that that is so, your Honour. It is broad in the
sense that because, as you can see from the chapeau, we are talking about
offences against not just Commonwealth law, but State or Territory law, it is
ambulatory and it is trying to pick up a range of –
it is identifying
offence by category, but I think it is probably right to say that it is
generally focusing on the result rather
than the elements, although that might
not always be a very clearcut distinction.
BEECH-JONES J:
the particular conduct is some assessment of the potential conduct that could be
engaged in, and then a comparison of that
against that clause.
Against that clause and the State and Territory and Commonwealth
offences that it embraces, that is right.
BEECH-JONES J:
also your primary argument about (b), which I think in answer to the
Chief Justice you said, well, you could effectively put
brackets around the
seriously harming any part of the Australian community –
that is accepted does that mean that really (c) is asking for the purpose
of protecting the Australian community from the commission
of the serious
MR DONAGHUE:
The harm has to arise by committing the
offence, from the express words of (b).
BEECH-JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
So, (c) then is asking: is the Minister
satisfied that imposing the condition is necessary and appropriate and adapted
from that risk from the risk of – so it is
asking ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
From that risk, but of the offence. On your primary argument, there is
nothing – so, to take the people smuggling example,
if one was to
take the view, well, people smuggling affects part of the Australian community
in the way you refer to in
, then the relevant query asks: is
the relevant clause reasonably necessary and appropriate and adapted to
protecting against that
MR DONAGHUE:
BEECH-JONES J:
But if you took your alternative
construction and said, no, you have actually got to identify some particular
segment of the community
that needs to be harmed, you might be struggling. Is
that where we get to?
MR DONAGHUE:
If you have to identify a
kind of harm – if you have to – you are satisfied there is
a substantial risk of a serious
offence being committed, but if you have to go
further than that and say: I think that there is a risk of sexual assault, but
need to persuade myself that it is not intentionally brushing against a person
on public transport for sexual purposes of the offender,
because that might not
be “serious harm” of the kind that the clause requires, but more
obvious cases that many other
sexual assaults would be – if you have
to ask that kind of question, then it may well be that – and if that
is what the
Minister has to be satisfied about in order to tick (b),
then (c) would carry the same meaning and the condition would have to
with that more particular kind of offending.
But it does
become – the reason I have urged my primary submission upon the
Court, and it seems to derive some support from
the explanatory statement, is
that the attempt was to create what was described on page 6 of that
statement as:
an objective way of demonstrating whether the offences . . .
are serious or not.
So, it seems like the intention was that if
you – if there is a substantial risk of the commission of a serious
offence, the
idea was that that would be enough, but as I
There is a further difficulty with the alternative submission, and that is that
this is a – these serious offences are predictive.
So, it is very difficult to
drill down to any sort of – the public authority type of brushing up
example would almost, in
practice, be impossible to descend to that level unless
you have some very, very specific information.
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour, I entirely agree with that, which is why we put the primary
submission and why we say, in my submission, your Honours
would only get to
the alternative submission if you thought that the primary submission was
invalid, and then the question is: is
it possible to read this clause in a way
that imposes that super‑added element? In my submission, it would be
possible, but
it is not desirable because it will, in practice, render that
clause much harder to sensibly administer. That is why I have structured
in that way.
Your Honours, I do not want to say very much about the
construction of paragraph (c), but given that my friend took
your Honours
(2019) 269 CLR 219, I should just
ask your Honours to go back to it. It is in volume 8, tab 42.
Can I just ask your Honours to go
find at paragraphs 34 and 35, because, in my submission, this regime
– contrary to my friend’s submission, this
regime was far less prescriptive – far less – than the
that you are now concerned with.
regime for the court.
MR DONAGHUE:
This was a regime for the
court, it was.
Not for the Executive.
Not for the Executive, but in that regard, your Honours, we
do submit that the essence of the Chapter III limit since
been that if anyone is doing something for a punitive purpose, for the purpose
of punishment, that can only be done not only by
a court but only as an incident
of the adjudgment and punishment of criminal guilt, so that once we are not in
the context of adjudging
and punishing criminal guilt, both courts and the
Executive need to jump the
hoops. There needs to be a
non‑punitive purpose, and there needs to be proportionality to that
purpose. That limit applies
to the courts as well as to the Executive, once we
are not concerned with criminal punishment.
Part of the proportionality that is inherent in conferring
this sort of power on a court is procedural fairness.
There may be chameleon‑type ideas that mean that
you would reach different conclusions applying that framework, but, in my
submission, it does not follow just because a power is conferred on a court that
one does not have to engage in the same kinds of
Really my point about
is that – if
your Honours have the provisions and you look at section 6, which is
set out in paragraph 35 – we were not
concerned just with the
identified clauses. There was a very wide power to impose prohibitions,
restrictions and requirements, and
the limit was:
as the court considers appropriate for the purpose of protecting the
That test, construed in the context of this regime as a whole, then
supported the stepped reasoning that I will not take your Honours
through – but particularly 47 through to 51, we submit, is equally
applicable to the regime your Honours are now considering
it was a much less structured power to make a wide range of prohibitions that
just had to be appropriate in the circumstances.
BEECH‑JONES
I am not sure where this comes out, but the
adaptation – the reference to necessary, appropriate and adapted in
this subclause,
you had the
power to tailor the conditions and here you do not.
You do, but you had the power to tailor them even more
widely than these particular conditions.
BEECH‑JONES
You do not have the power at all here to tailor them. You
are either yes or no ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes, in the specified escalating
BEECH‑JONES J:
Well, for my part, I find this kind of analysis quite difficult,
because – as the Chief Justice put to you, and now
Beech-Jones put to you – there are very important
aspects of this scheme in relation to the imposition by the court which are
completely absent here, because they needed to be imposed in relation to the
So, we have procedural fairness, we have the ability to
tailor – I mean, if you go and look at the ones in relation to
and the other cases, there was a high degree of probability; the
test is different. I do not actually know how this helps
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, it helps me, your Honour,
because ultimately, what your Honours have said in
earlier cases in the line – in
– is not that there is a prohibition on regimes
designed to protect the public. Most of the cases – almost all of
cases, except
– have concerned detention in custody.
was detention orders,
was detention orders,
and even in the context of detention in custody, the Court has accepted that
protection of the community from
some kinds of criminal offending is permissible
under Chapter III.
Where one – and has accepted that in
the context of an analysis which, as your Honours explained in
is in part a means and ends analysis. So, if the end is the protection of the
community from various kinds of harm, and the means
is detention in custody,
that is a very onerous means, and it has the consequence that the circumstances
in which it can justifiably
be imposed are narrowed, so that your Honours
have said there has to be serious harm.
Two of your Honours, the
Chief Justice and your Honour Justice Gordon, have said grave and
specific harm is needed to justify a means
of protecting the community by that
kind of detention in custody, but where the means, yes, infringe liberty and
bodily integrity,
but do so in a way that is, in my submission, evidently less
intrusive in a whole range of different ways than detaining a person
in custody,
the means and ends inquiry suggests that the end that might be pursued by that
less intrusive means are somewhat wider.
Really, that is what I
That really
strikes at, at least one way in which
talked about, the
exceptionality of the imposition of those kinds of detriments. It was dealing
with detention, and I accept that,
but it referred to
in identifying
the exceptionality of it, and
MR DONAGHUE:
Which was also concerned with detention. Sorry,
your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, it was concerned with
detention for a very particular purpose. It was concerned with immigration
detention and purposive
immigration detention, but if this provision passes
muster under Chapter III, then it would be possible, would it not, to
an equivalent regulation – or let us make it a Commonwealth
statute in a Territory – that applies prophylactically to
executive officer to take measures considered by that executive officer to be
reasonably necessary and appropriate and adapted
to prevent the commission of
any serious offence of the kind that is referred to in this definition? That
is, ankle bracelets being
used on Australian citizens to prevent them from
committing serious offences.
MR DONAGHUE:
If the protective
measure that is taken is reasonably necessary and reasonably appropriate and
adapted to that protective measure,
other words, your end of protection of the Australian community is really just a
shorthand for deterring individuals or groups
of individuals from particular
serious criminal offences.
MR DONAGHUE:
I will need to say
something about deterring, but if it be a legitimate end – and in my
submission it is, and I will come
to some authorities on this fairly
shortly – to protect the Australian community from serious harm, and
says that that is a legitimate purpose, then
the question is not one of the legitimacy for the purpose, it is about whether
is sufficiently tailored to the identification of that
What I was endeavouring to do in my answers to the
Chief Justice and Justice Gordon was to say we accept that that
tailoring will
adjust, depending on the kinds of means that are being used to
provide the protection. So, if the regime said you must – if
is a substantial risk of seriously harming the community by committing this
serious offence and if it is reasonably necessary
and appropriate and adapted,
you must report to the police once every month, that will be easier to justify
than saying, in the same
circumstances, that you must be detained in custody,
and I might win on one and lose on the other because there is a differentiation
between means and ends.
We are obviously between those two extremes in
this case, and the question for your Honours is: does this regime,
sufficiently tailored,
the detriment that arises from the curfew and monitoring
does create – I mean, if that is right about the end, it does create
the extraordinary irony that, I think you would accept,
it would not be open for
a Commonwealth law to empower the Executive to, for example, imprison people or
subject them to curfews
for offences that they – criminal offences
that they have committed in the past, and yet it would be possible for a law to
empower the Executive to impose the same penalties for people for the
possibility of the commission of the same criminal offences
MR DONAGHUE:
Only by a law that is reasonably capable of
being seen and necessary for the protective purpose that has been identified,
might be very much easier for me to identify that if the power is imposed
in a court than in the Executive. That would be relevant
to the question of
whether I can clear that reasonably necessity test, but if the purpose be a
legitimate non‑punitive purpose
– and as I say the Court has
not hitherto doubted that, and I will take your Honours to some
authorities – then the question
is, as I have said, and as
your Honours have said in
: is it reasonably capable of being
seen as necessary?
Here, our friends say it sort of denigrates the
regime by saying, well, we are trying to push it into the level of
administrative
law challenge, but this regime self‑regulates by ensuring
that you cannot validly impose conditions under it unless they are
necessary in that way. So, it is not purporting to overreach the constitutional
limit, it is saying if you are a person
who is subjected to these conditions and
you think that cannot be justified, you can successfully challenge that in an
administrative
The reality is that the things
that we have been talking about and the things that are identified in
remain. That is, it is imposed without notice, information
available – we do not know what the basis of the information
– they are imposed on that person, they then have to apply to have
them or give submissions to the Minister to have it varied,
there is no internal
review itself, the limit is 12 months – all of those things are
things which were the subject of the earlier
scheme and the subject of the
decision in
MR DONAGHUE:
But not alone,
your Honour. They
no, I am accepting that.
MR DONAGHUE:
So, some of those
features – so, the natural justice feature, for example, was referred
to in the reasoning of the plurality
, but in the specific context
of a regime where, in the absence of information, the Minister had to impose the
condition, that was
the particular context in which the natural justice was
deployed by the plurality.
So, once one removes that feature of the
scheme, then the exclusion of natural justice has a different weight or import,
and it does
remain the case. Here, in the absence of information, the Minister
will not be able to be satisfied. If the Minister is satisfied
and imposes the
condition, then there is an obligation immediately to give notice and an
opportunity to make representations and
an obligation to grant a new visa
without the conditions if satisfied.
One has to, in my submission, look
at the whole package, and the package here is so different from the
package that one cannot, in my submission, take aspects of the reasoning in that
case that depended on features of the scheme that
BEECH‑JONES J:
Mr Solicitor, can I ask
you just one question, and I think you are coming to it. Whenever you use the
phrase “protection
of the Australian community”, you are excluding,
am I right, from that concept protection by way of general or individual
deterrence.
Is that right?
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour. We accept that one of the ways – possibly, even, a
significant way – in which the imposition of the
condition, for example, will reduce the risk of a person seriously harming the
community by committing an offence is that
it will likely deter them. That will
be one of the things that it does; it will deter them from committing the
BEECH‑JONES J:
But is that by a risk of
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, in part. Yes, it will
make the person think they are likely to be caught.
BEECH‑JONES
But there is deterrence and then there is deterrence. That
is, the risk of detection is that deterrence by way of punishment that
when you sentence someone.
MR DONAGHUE:
Indeed. So, it is not
that, in my submission, but there is – and I am conscious of the
question that your Honour Justice
Edelman asked my friend about civil
penalties, but in our submission, we respectfully contend that it is not the
case that deterrence
is always punishment.
We would contend that civil
penalties are an example of that, because in cases like
Court has identified the sole purpose, as Justice Edelman put to my friend,
that the sole purpose of the civil penalty is deterrence,
but that is not
deterrence not to punish the past contravention but to deter future
contraventions of the statute. It is to secure
compliance with the statutory
The very word
“penalty” – its etymology is punishment.
I understand that, your Honour.
And there is just decades of jurisprudence of people saying it is almost
impossible – perhaps impossible – to draw
a line between
civil penalties and criminal penalties. It just becomes a distinction that is
one of nomenclature, not of substance.
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour, I appreciate that jurisprudential debate, if I can call it
that, and that was one of the reasons that there was a
period in the
jurisprudence of this Court, around the time of
ASIC v Visnic
those cases which said it is an unstable distinction, but it is now a
constitutional distinction, reflected in
submission – I do not think your Honours have it,
actually ‑ ‑ ‑
But in some of the constitutional cases – there is one of
Justice Gummow’s decision I think in
, where he says
that it is an unstable distinction in the constitutional context as
MR DONAGHUE:
And your Honours said something similar
in particular, but in my submission, conformably with the
framework set by the majority of the Court, it is possible to pursue
– well, there cannot be an equation of the fact that something has
a deterrent effect. It discourages people committing crime
in the future, just
as encouraging people to comply with a statutory regime in a civil penalty
context does not cross the Chapter
III line because, to quote the judgment
of six members of the Court in
– you do not have it,
but paragraph 9 of that judgment says:
Under the civil penalty regime . . . the purpose of a civil
penalty is primarily, if not solely, the promotion of the public interest
compliance with the provisions of the Act by the deterrence of further
contraventions of the Act.
Indeed, you will recall from the
Penalties Case
that that case was an attempt to take the
reasoning from a criminal context and to apply it to civil penalties and the
Court said no, we are drawing
BEECH-JONES J:
is a deterrence by the imposition of penalty. The Court is not imposing a
monitoring regime on the putative anti‑competitor
to say: well, hang on,
if you go over the line again we will know you are fixing prices. It is just
giving them a fine to focus
their mind on not doing it again. That is a form of
deterrence, but there is a difference between that, arguably, than simply
well, hang on, we are monitoring you because if you go over the line we
will know you did it.
MR DONAGHUE:
BEECH-JONES J:
that is what I would have thought was individual deterrence and not general
deterrence.
MR DONAGHUE:
But you are not imposing a condition in
consequence of, or as punishment for, some prior contravention in this
framework, you are
looking at the risk of the person in future harming the
community by committing an offence and you are responding to that risk.
be the case, as I do not think I can deny, that one of the ways in which that
risk is reduced is because the person is discouraged
from offending –
similarly, with the curfew, they are discouraged from going out at night because
of the consequences that
will follow under the curfew condition if they do
Now, maybe the curfew goes further by actually preventing them from
going out at night without the commission of the offence, but
the mechanism does
not, in my submission, deny the protective purpose. So, really, the key
issue – which I will not be able
to come to until after lunch, but I
will come to straight after lunch – is the legitimacy of that
protective purpose.
In the couple of minutes that remain, can I just
remind your Honours of the framework – constitutional
framework – and
I can do it very briefly by asking you to take up
and going to paragraph [15]. So, in [15] of
volume 10, tab 45, there is a recognition in paragraph [15] that
the separation of powers does not mean that:
every interference with individual liberty or bodily integrity involves
punishment and, thereby, exclusively judicial power –
and that the common law observations in Blackstone and
and in other places about both liberty and personal integrity:
automatically:
translate into a free‑standing constitutional right –
So, in the last few lines of [15], their Honours
acknowledge:
There are many interferences with bodily integrity and liberty
authorised . . . both significant and insignificant, which
are non‑punitive
Then the way we tell is set out at
[16] through to [18]. At the end of [16] – I will come back to the
start, but at the end
of [16] you have a reference to the:
single question of characterisation –
is the power punitive? You answer the single question of
characterisation by reference to two subsidiary steps. The first of those
is the start of paragraph [16]: is the law prima facie punitive? Which it can
be either by default or otherwise.
So, that is question 1.
Step 1, it is conceded in this case, as your Honours know.
Step 2 is then paragraph [18], which is the
justification step. So,
the premise for the justification step is we have a law that is prima facie
punitive, and:
Justification involves asking if the power having a prima facie punitive
character (by default or otherwise) is reasonably capable
of being seen to be
necessary (in the relevant sense of “reasonably appropriate and
adapted” . . . for a legitimate and
non‑punitive
I then emphasise these next words:
in which event the power’s constitutional character is
non‑punitive.
Those words are then explained, or the idea is explained more, in
paragraph [64], under the heading:
Justification
where the plurality emphasised
The words “prima facie” in the conclusion of a prima facie
punitive . . . have work to do –
They convey
is not sufficient to establish that the power . . .
contravenes Ch III –
that the law has that character:
A law conferring the power may bear the character of being prima facie
punitive but be valid if the law is reasonably capable of being
necessary for a legitimate and non‑punitive purpose.
I emphasise that just because our friends have said, particularly in
their reply, that our concession that these conditions are prima
facie punitive,
involves in some way a concession that the purpose of this law is properly
characterised as punishment. It does
no such thing. It provides the premise
for the characterisation analysis which depends on identifying legitimate
non‑punitive
purpose and then proportionality to it. That is the
battleground in the case.
answer – I just want to make sure I understand the answer. The
Chief Justice put a question that if this passes muster,
the Commonwealth
could pass Territory legislation the purpose of which was protective and the
effect of which was that any person
– it does not matter whether they
are part of this cohort – in Australia could be subjected to similar
conditions if
the Executive was satisfied in the relevant sense of the
commission of a serious offence involving serious harm, et cetera. I
you answered that question: yes. I do not need you to answer the
question now, but is that ‑ ‑ ‑
Your Honour, I will reflect on it further over
lunch, but I did answer the question yes. The reason that I answered it yes is
that there is a – no doubt the reason that the Chief Justice put
the question to me in terms of the Territory is that there
is a head of power
question and there is a Chapter III question.
Chapter ‑ ‑ ‑
Both the Territory’s power and the aliens power
are subject to Chapter III. This regime depends on the aliens power, but
assuming a head of power, once one gets to the Chapter III analysis, it is
not easy to see why the Chapter III analysis is different
depending on
which head of power is in play.
What matters, in my submission, is that
there is a legitimate and non‑punitive purpose, and there
might – in the kind
of case that the Chief Justice puts to
me – be a real question about whether you could establish what that
purpose was.
The same purpose.
It might be that you would say we are protecting the
community from serious harm and so that you do have the same purpose. Then,
long as the law is appropriate and adapted to it, then it is hard to see how
Chapter III gives a different answer.
Now, I am not blind to the
unattractive nature of that answer, but in the end I fall back on a submission
that we made in
, which is that we do not have a Bill of Rights; we
have a separation of powers that imposes limits. In many respects, the
limitations
on what our Parliaments can properly do are political limitations.
The law the Chief Justice puts to me would be an extraordinary
kind that one would not expect the Parliament to pass.
Two questions coming out of that. One is: does the classification of a cohort
as aliens affect the reasonably appropriate and
adapted test? Secondly, are
there instances, particularly in the area of domestic violence, of Executive
Government – presumably
outside Australia, I am not sure that there
is within Australia – having a power to impose electronic
monitoring?
MR DONAGHUE:
Are there – I think the
answer to that question is: yes, there are electronic monitoring conditions
under a number of
But not imposed by a court, imposed by an executive?
MR DONAGHUE:
I will have to check that, your Honour. I will take that on notice. As to
your Honour’s first question: does the character
of aliens matter?
It has not mattered in the way that we have framed our purpose, but it may be
that it does have this bearing on
the question, that under the general scheme of
Migration Act
, your Honours are well familiar with the character
provisions that can lead to refusal of a visa, cancellation of a visa and
from Australia.
So, most of the time, where there is a risk to
the community perceived as arising from aliens, that is dealt with by excluding
aliens from Australia – either not letting them come or
cancelling their visa and removing them. This particular regime is
to a small cohort of aliens where that regime does not work, for the
reasons, so removal is not possible. So, it does
where they have committed an offence, you still have the benefit of the schemes
which are in place brought about by the criminal
law. You see, the problem with
this cohort is it is general. It includes people who have not committed an
offence, and so it extends
beyond that which ordinarily would be applied to
people, even in relation to the wider group of the Australian
Then the second is that they still have the
benefit – regardless of whether or not they are in just this cohort
or the general
public – of the other procedures which we have
discussed under criminal law. There is the parole, there is the other
preventative
detention regimes in relation to criminal conduct
MR DONAGHUE:
But none of those –
your Honour, if those regimes remove the substantial risk of the person
committing a serious offence
or mean that the imposition of a monitoring or
curfew condition is not reasonably necessary or appropriate and adapted to the
of the offence, then this regime will not affect those people. It is
only where, notwithstanding the other – the background
regime against
which this decision comes to be made that there is a risk of that kind, and it
is a proportionate response to that
risk that this regime does
Well, that is the question, because it may
very well be in the case of someone who has been convicted of their offence and
relevant State authorities have formed the view that it is not
necessary for those regimes to be imposed, and we have then got a
being imposed with a different set of rules and standards.
Well, in my submission – and I will develop it
immediately after lunch – if the power of the Commonwealth Parliament
to legislate for the protection of the community does have a – may
legislate to protect the community from serious harm, and
on that current
doctrine of the Court we submit that the fact that there are other regimes that
approach risk in different ways or
with different
decision‑makers – State decision‑makers – does
not ultimately detract from the question that
the Court needs to ask, which is:
is this regime reasonably capable – if that is the way
your Honours put the test, which
is usually not a strict test –
of being seen as responsive to that risk? Our submission is that it is, but I
note the time,
your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Solicitor,
I am not sure, from the submission you made in answer to a question from
Justice Gleeson, whether you are relying
on the characteristics of the
MR DONAGHUE:
Of the group.
I had not understood that to be part of your argument.
I have not, to date, and Justice Gleeson asked me if it was
relevant. I think I said it might be able to be relevant in that way.
frankly admit that we have not put it in that way. If I seek to put it
affirmatively in that way, I will make that clear immediately
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you. You might just check
because it sounds very much like a submission that did not work for you in that
MR DONAGHUE:
No, I – your Honour, I am
frankly admitting that I have not put it in that way previously, and it does not
presently seem
to me that it is an essential part of my argument to do
GAGELER CJ:
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Solicitor, do the parole authorities impose ankle
monitoring?
MR DONAGHUE:
In some places I believe they can,
your Honour, yes. Indeed, they clearly can because in the bail conditions
imposed in this case
– there is a standard set of New South Wales
bail conditions for some kinds of offences, not including the offence that the
plaintiff here ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES
Well, that bail procedure is commonly part of the judicial function. I
am just wondering about parole.
MR DONAGHUE:
Sorry, yes, I think
I – your Honour asked me about bail – or
BEECH-JONES J:
No, I asked about parole conditions.
Take it on board.
MR DONAGHUE:
I think the answer I gave you was
an answer ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
MR DONAGHUE:
‑ ‑ ‑ about parole.
BEECH-JONES
MR DONAGHUE:
But I will confirm
GAGELER CJ:
We will take the luncheon
adjournment.
AT 12.54 PM LUNCHEON
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 2.15
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honours,
tidying up some matters from before lunch, I am not seeking to reframe or narrow
the purpose that I have identified
by reference to the aliens power.
Your Honour Justice Gleeson and your Honour
Justice Beech‑Jones asked some questions around
bail and parole and
the use of electronic monitoring.
The answer is that there is quite
extensive use of electronic monitoring in other western liberal
democracies – Canada, the
United Kingdom and the United
States – particularly in immigration contexts. In the Australian
States and Territories, there
is also widespread use of electronic monitoring by
police and other members of the Executive in both the bail and parole
As it happens, in the submissions that the Commonwealth filed
in paragraph 59, there is a paragraph directed to that
particular issue, and it has footnotes that collect a lot of the Australian
legislation going to both the bail and parole contexts.
There is also a
reference in that same paragraph – paragraph 59 of our
submissions – to the special case book in that case which
contained extensive extracts from the international material in relation
Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States. So, I am in
your Honours’ hands as to whether you are happy to access
material from the file or whether you would like us to provide it to you
GAGELER CJ:
There is no need to provide it to
us, but of course you should make sure that your opponent has it.
Indeed. I do not, myself, have it here at Court, but
we can do that. Your Honours, in terms of where I am, I am at
7 in our overall outline, and I am shortly to come to the
question of legitimate and non‑punitive purpose.
your Honours know, we accept – in light of the holding in
– that step 1 of the constitutional analysis, the
prima facie punitive character of the conditions, exists here. What I am
to say in no way seeks to cavil either with that characterisation or with the
plurality’s finding in
that the detriments occasioned by those
conditions are “material and relatively long‑term”. That is
what the plurality
said at paragraph [52].
But we do submit that to
accept that the two conditions are prima facie punitive is distinctly not to
submit that they can be equated
with detention in custody, and the differences
between detention in custody and the detriment occasioned by both the
overnight curfew and the monitoring condition were addressed by
your Honours Justices Steward and Beech‑Jones in dissent in
in terms that we submit are not inconsistent with anything that was
said by the majority.
Can I just ask your Honours to turn back to
to look at two paragraphs in the judgment, one in each of
Justice Steward and Justice Beech‑Jones’ reasons.
Steward, at paragraph [216] of the report, considering the
curfew, identified, a few lines down in that paragraph, that:
The two conditions are distinctly different –
detention of a person in custody, and then said, following
footnote 319:
Whilst in detention the liberty of a person is very greatly constrained; they
are in a foreign location, which is guarded, in circumstances
where each day is
largely controlled by the State. Inferentially, the architecture of a place of
detention will incline to a degree
of utilitarianism. In contrast, the
plaintiff’s curfew may take place at his home, with all the comforts that
he may wish
to avail himself of, many of which would be denied to him in State
detention. He is not guarded. Within the confines of his nominated
address, he
may do as he pleases. And the hours of curfew are limited to when a reasonable
person might be in bed asleep. For the
balance of the day (16 hours)
the plaintiff has his full liberty –
To similar effect, in
paragraph [316] Justice Beech‑Jones addresses the same question
and rejects a submission that:
during the eight‑hour . . . curfew . . .
the Commonwealth “exercises total control over [his] liberty”. With
that is not an accurate statement. There are a number of features of
the restrictions on the plaintiff’s liberty during that
period that are a marked contrast to the detention in
Those features include, going over the page, the
Commonwealth exercises no control over:
the place of confinement, being one of a number of
addresses –
that can be changed:
on short notice . . . The Commonwealth has no role in the
selection or approval of the address . . . the Commonwealth does
not exercise
any control over who else –
resides at the
does not exercise any control over what occurs at those premises.
does not have:
power to enter . . . or require notification of who
else . . . enters –
and it happens overnight.
So, in our submission, while we accept that the conditions are prima facie
punitive and need to be justified,
we do say, building on the submission that I
made before lunch, that in a means and ends inquiry the difference between the
of the interference with liberty or bodily integrity that arises under
these impugned conditions is substantially less than detention
in custody, and
that when we come to the case law, which almost invariably involves detention in
custody, that difference is potentially
immaterial.
The other reason
that I would add to the two passages that I have just read that has some bearing
on the intensity of the restriction
on liberty that arises, particularly from
the curfew, is that – your Honours will have seen in the special
case at paragraph
54 – there is capacity in the condition to
change the hours of the curfew, so that if there is a particular occasion
for any particular person – a good reason why the
default 10.00 pm to 6.00 am is particularly burdensome or
intrusive, the
person can apply to have those hours changed.
been 202 applications for such variation, and every single one of them in
practice has been approved. Again, as a matter
of the practical operation of
the scheme, there are those default hours but there is the capacity
to – the regularly‑used
capacity to change them. Having said
all of that, I am not quibbling with the prima facie punitive character, but I
am seeking to
have it calibrated.
Can I turn then to the purpose of the
scheme. We have identified that in paragraph 38 of our written submission,
and again in paragraph
9 of the outline: to protect any part of the
Australian community from serious harm of the kind caused by the commission of a
offence. We submit that we find that purpose clearly, both in the
concluding words of paragraph (c), and that it is reinforced by
criteria that one sees in paragraph (b), requiring ministerial satisfaction
of the existence, on the balance of probabilities,
of a substantial risk of
serious harm of that very kind.
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Solicitor, in the explanatory statement, there is a reference to, at
least so far as monitoring is, that it also reduces the risk
of absconding. I
cannot – I just speak for myself – see how that it is
embraced by the terms of the regulation.
MR DONAGHUE:
agree with your Honour.
BEECH-JONES J:
And those two
financial conditions, in terms of the offences, I mean, what scope do they have?
Are we talking about financing people
MR DONAGHUE:
Fairly limited scope, I think it is fair to say, because the identifying
characteristic of the serious offences is that they either
invariably, or close
to invariably, do involve harm to the person. So, it is not particularly clear
how those financial conditions
intercept with that requirement. It might be,
perhaps, for example, production publication, possession or supply for sale of
abuse material, then there might be some link in some way there, but I
agree it is not particularly clear. In my submission, it
does not really
matter, in term of the issues that your Honours have to
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Solicitor, the identification of the
purpose in paragraph 9 of your outline does not contain any reference to
risk. Is that deliberate?
MR DONAGHUE:
Where does the analysis of risk come into
MR DONAGHUE:
analysis of risk is part of whether the law is reasonably capable of being seen
as necessary to pursue that purpose, but the
purpose is protecting the community
from harm arising from the commission of the offences. That is done by saying
that, where there
is a substantial risk of that harm occurring, conditions can
be imposed to the extent reasonably necessary and appropriate and adapted
reducing the risk, but the risk is not part of the purpose.
proposing to detain your Honours by taking you to the explanatory
statement, but I just ask you to note that the part of
the explanatory statement
that deals particularly with the clause you are concerned with is from the
bottom of page 18 onto page
19 and, in my submission, it is entirely
consistent with the purpose that I have identified.
Did you say 18 to 19?
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, the bottom of 18 to 19,
that is right, your Honour.
Being the analysis
and summary of the subclause items?
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, that is
the part of the explanatory statement dealing with
clause 612A(1).
Can I turn then to
GAGELER CJ:
another way of putting your purpose, in light of your preferred construction,
simply preventing the commission of a serious
No, your Honour, I do not accept that reframing. The
purpose is protecting the community from the harm caused by the serious offence.
The serious offence is a way of giving concrete definition to the
GAGELER CJ:
MR DONAGHUE:
Moving then
to the next step of the
analysis, which is identification of a
legitimate, non‑punitive purpose, I have identified what the purpose is, I
to demonstrate that that purpose is a legitimate and non‑punitive
purpose. In seeking to develop that submission, I propose
your Honours in a little bit of detail to the decision of the Court in
Minister for Home Affairs v Benbrika
[2021] HCA 4
(2021) 272 CLR 68
which is in volume 6, tab 28.
This, of course, was a
court‑based regime, but it was not a regime which involved detention
orders – so, detention in
custody – but it was not a
regime where those orders were part an incident of the adjudgment and punishment
of criminal guilt
so that, because punishment – on
developed subsequently – can be imposed only as an incident of the
adjudgment and punishment of criminal guilt, the
regime would
have been invalid notwithstanding the fact that it reposed power in a court
unless the regime pursued a legitimate and
non‑punitive purpose. That was
a necessary condition of its validity. The Court held that it did pursue a
legitimate and
non‑punitive purpose.
We perceive a – I
do not claim any great acumen in perceiving this distinction –
difference between the reasoning of
the majority in that case and the reasoning
of your Honour the Chief Justice and Justice Gordon. Can I call
the majority the broader
approach and your Honour the Chief Justice
and Justice Gordon the narrower approach, and I propose to address them
both because,
in my submission, we can satisfy them both, but can I take them in
that sequence.
In terms of the joint judgment of
Chief Justice Kiefel and Justices Bell, Keane and
Steward – so, the majority approach –
if you could turn to
paragraph 32 in their Honours’ judgment, there is a discussion
which recognises – sorry, I said
32 but if your Honours could go
whether a court
or in the Executive Government, you need to find a legitimate
non‑punitive purpose because the majority notes that acceptance
would produce the consequence that no arm of the federal government may
authorise the detention of a person in custody for the purpose
of protecting the
community against the unacceptable risk of harm posed by a terrorist
That was identified as:
distinctly unattractive –
And then, over the page, having mentioned Justice Gummow’s
, the majority say:
It may be observed that the exceptions to the
principle involving
the involuntary detention of those suffering from mental illness or infectious
disease share a purpose of protection
of the community from harm.
His Honour did not explain why an appropriately tailored scheme for the
protection of the community
from harm that particular forms of criminal activity
may pose is incapable of coming within an analogous exception.
way that is phrased is not by reference to serious harm, it is protection of the
community from harm that may arise from particular
forms of criminal offending.
Your Honour Justice Gleeson in
, at paragraph 313,
expressed agreement with that observation that I have just read from
paragraph 32. Then, over the page, in paragraph
36 in the majority
judgment in
, it is said, about four lines down:
There is no principled reason for distinguishing the power of a Ch III
court to order that a mentally ill person be detained in custody
protection of the community from harm and the power to order that a terrorist
offender be detained in custody for the same
purpose. It is the protective
purpose that qualifies a power as an exception to a principle that is recognised
under our system
of government as a safeguard on liberty.
And then, at
the end of that paragraph:
As a matter of substance, the power must have as its object the protection of
the community from harm.
So, the majority repeatedly state the permitted
object in those terms and indeed, three pages on, in paragraph 41,
their Honours say:
This court has consistently held, and most recently in
detention that has as its purpose the protection of the community is not
punishment.
I am aware your Honour Justice Edelman has
criticised that distinction, but that is a distinction that we submit underlies
the majority
jurisprudence in this area.
BEECH‑JONES J:
What was that paragraph you just read from, Mr Solicitor?
Paragraph 41 was the last one.
BEECH‑JONES
MR DONAGHUE:
Now, it may be that that
statement, “protection of the community from harm” caused by some
forms of criminal offending,
has been qualified perhaps in
in – and I do not think I need to take you to
now, but I note that in paragraph 46 of
three members of the
majority in
, the Chief Justice and Justices Keane and
Steward, phrased the purpose at paragraph 46 as:
protection of the community from a proven unacceptable risk of serious
and cited paragraphs 36 and 41. So, it might be that the
jurisprudence has moved to that point.
GAGELER CJ:
the risk in the identification of the purpose.
MR DONAGHUE:
does. In that passage, it does include the risk. It may be that –
it is difficult to be conscious of not construing
judgments as legislation, it
may be that that is just reflective of the way the argument or the legislation
was being put, but, in
my submission, analytically it makes more sense and it is
more consistent with the structure of this provision to – and perhaps
in this regard it is worth noting the closing language of paragraph (c)
again of the regulation – the purpose is protecting
any part of the
community from serious harm by addressing the risk.
So, the “by
addressing” language suggests that that is the mechanism for achieving the
purpose of protecting the community
from harm. Certainly, in your Honour
the Chief Justice’s judgment and Justice Gordon’s judgment
which I will come to
in a moment, the problem was identified, as I read
your Honours, as failing to recognise that the legitimate object was
the community from harm as opposed to offending more generally. So,
in my submission, this drafting is informed by that
distinction.
What do we make of the last sentence in
paragraph 47 of the majority’s judgment?
MR DONAGHUE:
Div 105A is rightly characterised as directed to ensuring the safety and
protection of the community from the risk of harm posed by
the threat of
That is an accurate statement of what Division 105 was
doing. I do not think, your Honour, that should be read as a statement of
the purpose of the provision. It is a statement as to the effect of the
So, my proposition is that there is, even in the context of a
regime for the detention in custody for protective purposes, majority
this Court through
– perhaps slightly qualified or
narrowed by
– for the proposition that it is a
legitimate purpose of a law, not in the context of criminal punishment, to
authorise detention
in custody to protect the community from harm. If that be
right, then this law has at least that objective.
Now, I do not need to
win on that point, in my submission. I go there to demonstrate that there is
authority for support of the
proposition of that width, but here I have a
legislative provision that refers to “serious harm”, so I would not
your Honours to decide a principle that goes any wider than that. In
my submission, if
has already decided it, then it of course
includes the purpose I have framed.
The narrower view was explained in
some detail by your Honour the Chief Justice, and can I step through
what we identify as the key
parts of that reasoning starting at
paragraph 79 in your Honour’s judgment. Actually, perhaps I
should start at 78, because
it is in 78 that your Honour recognises that
the justification argument there advanced:
acceptance of any proffered justification for any detention in custody
otherwise than as a result of adjudgment and punishment of
guilt . . . must be that the detention authorised is
“reasonably capable of being seen as necessary for a legitimate
non-punitive objective”.
And your Honour then identified in paragraph 79 that
Prevention of harm is a legitimate non‑punitive objective, at least
where the harm is grave and specific.
Mere prevention of commission of a criminal offence is not.
And that grave and specific harm requirement your Honour repeated in
, and your Honour Justice Gordon used the same phrase in
at paragraph 190; your Honour the Chief Justice
at 145 and 148, and Justice Gordon at 190.
So, it was not
sufficient just to focus on preventing offences and, at paragraph 86,
your Honour the Chief Justice said – and
this is a respect
in which your Honour departed from Justices Gummow’s analysis in
– so, his Honour was wrong to have rejected a
particular argument the Commonwealth had then advanced, and your Honour
to the need for attention to:
be given to the harm inherent in the criminal conduct which the Supreme Court
needed to be satisfied that a prisoner posed –
BEECH‑JONES J:
Sorry, what paragraph are you
reading from?
MR DONAGHUE:
Sorry, that, your Honour,
was 86, and then – I apologise your Honours, I was skipping
through this too quickly, but then
at paragraph 90, having turned
particularly to the Division then in question –
Division 105A – the Chief Justice referred
which had been characterised by the majority as a form of
preventive justice, and your Honour said:
Consistently with the power to order continuing detention conferred by the
legislation in issue in
, what was sought to be prevented by an
exercise of the power was not occurrence of an offence but occurrence of an act
which of its
nature would cause serious harm.
So, “serious harm” there is the framing. This was protection
the public from a terrorist act, but the problem was then
identified at 92
and 93. So, with 105, the expressed object was to ensure the safety
and protection of the community by –
in paragraph 92:
“by providing for the continuing detention of terrorist offenders who
pose an unacceptable risk of committing serious Part 5.3
So, not who pose an unacceptable risk of causing serious harm but who
pose an unacceptable risk of committing the offence, and then
your Honour
explains at 93:
The difference would be of no constitutional moment if each serious Pt 5.3
offence . . . like each serious sexual
offence . . . in
, involved conduct which of its
nature gave rise to the serious harm which the offence was created to avoid.
The risk of commission
of a serious Pt 5.3 offence could then be treated as a
proxy for the risk –
So, when I referred before lunch to there being a sufficient proxy
relationship, my submission is that this definition does not suffer
defect that Your Honour identified in the definitions in that case. As
Your Honour goes on to explain in paragraph 93 –
a proxy for the risk of a terrorist act . . . Some serious Pt
5.3 offences involve conduct of that nature. Others do not. The prophylactic
approach taken to the imposition of criminal liability has the effect already
noted that a serious Pt 5.3 offence can involve conduct
many steps removed from
doing or supporting or facilitating any terrorist act.
Because the regime had been extended to preparatory acts, which fell
within the category of a serious Part 5.3 offence as it had been
So, that was the essence of the problem that was identified, and
your Honour said at paragraph 97 that what had happened
By adapting the model . . . in
Commonwealth Parliament has extrapolated from continuing detention to protect
against a narrow category of inherently harmful
criminal conduct to continuing
detention to prevent criminal conduct remote from the terrorist acts against
which protection is sought
to be provided.
The answer was then set out in
the conclusion, where your Honour emphasised that it was:
No part of my reasoning . . . to suggest that the power to
make a continuing detention order is incapable of reasonably being seen
necessary for the constitutionally legitimate non‑punitive objective of
protection against terrorist acts . . . no part
of my reasoning
is to suggest that a bright line can be drawn around –
offences that were okay, or valid or not, but your Honour then said what
would happen is that you would give a “distributive
construction” to
the offences such that those that fell on – if I can – I
am using my own words now, rather than
your Honour’s, but those where
there is a sufficient proxy between the seriousness of the offence and the harm
that is caused
would be valid, and those that would not would be invalid
under 15A, but your Honour said, as you were in the minority, there
no need to go through that exercise.
Now, in pausing there, that
would – we would say the same is true of the definition of
“serious offence” here.
So, if your Honours were to conclude
that this scheme is generally such that the way serious offences have been
defined are serious
enough to justify the regime but, for example, people
smuggling is an outlier that does not conform to that analysis, the answer
not be that the whole clause would be invalid, it would be that you would strike
out that paragraph – “people smuggling”
otherwise accept the validity of the regime.
The same would also be
true, in my submission, although the disapplication analysis is more
complicated, if you were to find –
and this is probably more raised
by my alternative construction, but if you were to find that some kinds of
sexual assault obviously
cause serious harm to the community but that it is
possible, under some State or Territory offence, to commit the offence of sexual
assault in a way that might be perceived as not causing serious harm, then you
would not, in my submission, strike out “sexual
assault” by
blue‑pencilling that line, because that would mean that rapes and other
matters that were obviously serious
and would satisfy the criteria would fall
outside of the scheme, but it would be possible to partially disapply by
reference to the
Chapter III limit identified in
offences of that very minor kind fell outside of the scheme.
not saying any of that is necessary and, indeed, really to get into the
severance detail would be to roam over the Act
in ways that have no present
relevance to this plaintiff because he was within (b)(ii) and he obviously
committed serious offences
involving personal injury, and that was the risk that
the delegate perceived. Insofar as your Honours might conclude that there
is a drafting problem, it does not bring down the whole scheme, we say, for the
same reasons that your Honour the Chief Justice explained
Your Honour Justice Gordon also held the
regime to be invalid but, in my submission, did not do so
because there was not a legitimate non‑punitive purpose, and you
that particularly from your Honour’s reasons at paragraph 163,
where your Honour said:
It is what follows that is determinative – the CDO regime in
Div 105A is not sufficiently tailored to its stated purpose of
ensuring the
safety and protection of the community . . . the relevant
criteria in Div 105A are not limited to a “terrorist
providing support for or facilitating a terrorist act.
your Honour goes on to deal with the offences. So, the problem
was – and I think your Honour says this expressly in terms
at 169 – that the range of offences was too broad:
Because the range of serious Pt 5.3 offences is so broad, the offences
and the conduct underlying these offences are not restricted
to offences or
conduct having an immediate harm to persons or property.
Again we submit
that obviously at the next step of the analysis I need to confront the tailoring
analysis, but in the context of –
well, the decision in this case was
avowedly in terms by the majority that were protecting the community from
serious harm was permissible
and, even on the narrower view, protecting the
community from harm arising of a grave and specific kind is a legitimate and
non‑punitive
purpose, even for a law involving detention in
I keep stressing that because, for the reasons identified by
Justice Steward and Justice Beech‑Jones, here the detriment is
not that. It is much less than that. So, there should, on a means and ends
analysis, be a corresponding broadening, which is really
just to say one can
readily understand why your Honours might conclude that if you are going to
lock someone up in detention for
something they have not done, that should be
because there is a risk of very serious harm being caused to the community,
I think a fair summary of what your Honour the Chief Justice
and Justice Gordon said.
GAGELER CJ:
Although, on one view,
it depends on what you make of paragraph 47 of
. All of us
were talking about an unacceptable risk.
MR DONAGHUE:
bearing in mind, your Honour, that the statute in that case used that
GAGELER CJ:
MR DONAGHUE:
unacceptable risk of – so, I take your Honour’s point that
obviously colours where exactly one draws the line,
and as your Honour
observed, in I think paragraph 100, this is not an area where bright lines
are easily found.
I think that is the point I was
putting to you before the break, is that the starting point for all of this
analysis, accepting that
these are not detention – so, I accept
that – is that in order to impose this kind of restriction it has to
be exceptional.
In that case, it was unacceptable risk. There has to be
something about it that is the prism through which you enter.
means and ends analysis is – as I understand your submission, is:
well, these are lesser impacts upon the individual
and therefore one can have an
adjusted or recalibrated means and ends analysis, and that also is affected by
the extent to which
one can then have this description of serious offence. I
think that there is two – at least two – potential
with that, given even the authorities you have just taken us
MR DONAGHUE:
In my respectful submission, the exceptionality
that is referred to in
is integrally connected to the fact that the
regime is a regime for detention in custody because underlying this whole area
of jurisprudence,
as it has developed over the last few years, is the
idea that in our system of government there are certain things that can only be
done by courts and only be done as part of the process
of punishing crimes, and
the exemplar of that is detention in custody.
In my submission, it just
is not the case that once one moves away from detention in custody to much less
severe infringements, and
the examples your Honours Justice Gleeson
and Justice Beech‑Jones asked for bear this out – in our
society at the moment
it is not the case that courts ordering the imposition of
electronic monitoring devices are the only people who can do it and that
can only do it as part of the criminal justice system. In fact, it is done by
the Executive for purposes of protecting the
community in a variety of other
contexts. So, the historical
truth ‑ ‑ ‑
So, what are those contexts?
MR DONAGHUE:
Immigration
contexts in a number of western democracies, bail and parole, at least I think
in Western Australia there is some expanded
police power contexts that allow
those conditions as well.
But they are all in the
context of enhancing in Australia. They are in the context of enhancing
liberty, not detracting from liberty.
They are people who would otherwise be in
prison, and they are conditions that are imposed upon the grant of
MR DONAGHUE:
I am not sure that that would true, at
least in the case of the expanded police powers in Western Australia. It is
true in the
bail and parole context that they are done in association with
judicial orders that might otherwise be restrictive, but nevertheless
done by the Executive.
Really, the point that I am seeking to make,
your Honours, is that when we are concerned with things that impose
restrictions on
liberty or bodily integrity of a kind well short of detention in
custody, there is – and that are not of a kind usually or
historically done by courts, which is the point, I think, your Honour
Justice Steward developed in your dissent in
is needed in identifying the Chapter III foundation for the
So, I can accept, as your Honour Justice Gordon
puts to me, that in the context of detention in custody, you need to have an
exceptional
or a good – a high – protective need; an end
of that kind that is capable of justifying the means, but as one loosens
interference – so, to take my reporting example from before
lunch – in my submission, it is not the case that you
would need to
have exceptional circumstances before you could impose a reporting condition to
protect the community from harm, because
that would bear no relationship, there
would be no proper relationship between means and ends in that
BEECH‑JONES J:
Mr Solicitor, the phrase
“unacceptable risk”, at least in the New South Wales
post‑sentence regime, has I think
been understood as effectively a little
bit flexible, in the sense of if there is a very small risk of a catastrophic
offence, that
is unacceptable, but if it is a less serious offence, to become
unacceptable ‑ ‑ ‑
It needs to be a greater risk, yes.
BEECH‑JONES
‑ ‑ ‑ it would need to be
greater. Does “substantial” have the same flexible quality, or is
set at a standard that might be above “unacceptable” in some
contexts and below it in others? Maybe take it on board.
Yes. In my submission – my first submission is that
the validity of the section will not turn on that question, or if it
did turn on
that question, you would have to answer that question you would have to answer
the question in a way that was protective
of the validity of the section. But
in one of the cases – it might be
, I might see if one of
my juniors can turn it up – there is a statement that says there are
a lot of different phrases –
“unacceptable risk”,
“substantial risk” – that are used in these protective
regimes and that one should
not get too hung up on the differences between them,
because they are all
flexible ‑ ‑ ‑
MR DONAGHUE:
thank you, your Honour – so that there would seem, as a matter
of principle, to be some force in interpreting “substantial
risk” ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
In the same way.
MR DONAGHUE:
‑ ‑ ‑ in the way your Honour puts to
GAGELER CJ:
There is attachment B to the explanatory
statement – it was a statement of compatibility with human rights,
and page 10,
it said that a substantial risk is a risk to the community
not remote, far‑fetched or insubstantial.
Shall we place any
weight on that?
MR DONAGHUE:
No, your Honour. It is
just an explanatory statement to a regulation; in my submission, it does not
really help.
So, do we take the parts that you rely
upon but not that bit?
MR DONAGHUE:
Well, your Honour,
I am relying on it ‑ ‑ ‑
There are other bits in there that are actually really interesting as
MR DONAGHUE:
Your Honour, that is a statement
made to this provision
is in the context of its purpose, and I have done that
only to reinforce what I get from the text of the provision. So, I am not
putting ‑ ‑ ‑
being naughty, Mr Solicitor.
MR DONAGHUE:
your Honour, I should not have bitten, and I did. So, applying that, what
one takes from
, to the definition of
“serious offence” that you have now seen, you can see –
this is clause 070.111 again –
as Justice Gleeson pointed
out in a question to my friend this morning, one needs to have an offence
against a law of one of these
It needs to be an offence
punishable by at least five years in prison and it then needs to fall within one
of the 10 categories that
are identified below, most of which are offences of a
kind that, in my submission, self‑evidently harm the community or part
the community when they occur. For that reason – and had been made
criminal for that very reason, consistently with Justice
statement in
as picked up in
has commonly been recognised as not the function of courts to make judgments
of criminal offence. If
Parliament has identified particular conduct as attracting a –
warranting a sentence of at least five
years in prison, then Parliament has said
these are serious offences, but it is all not offences that warrant five years
it is offences of a particular kind, all of which – with
the possible exception of people smuggling – involve harm to
and usually identifiable persons or groups; often vulnerable groups.
that reason, in my submission, one does not see any overreach by Parliament or
any departure from the proper purpose that I have
identified. Indeed, as my
learned friend noted, the first six of these offences are the same as the
offences in the protective regime
that one sees in the
Criminal Code
Division 395, and they are identified in the same way, by offence
punishable by at least five years, and then there is the list
of categories.
So, if the criticism that is made of this technique of identifying the kind of
harm that is being protected against
is right, it is right as between the two
I have already said – and I do not know that I need
to develop – that if your Honours think that there is a defect
some part of that definition because it goes broader than the
Constitution
will allow, the answer is to sever or partially disapply the
provision to the extent necessary to remove that constitutional problem
than to strike the provision down.
The last part of the analysis, then
is – the proportionality analysis – the section reasonably
capable of being seen
as necessary for the purpose of protecting the community
from that harm. In my submission, one travels a very long way to answering
question as a question as to the validity of this clause by recognising that it
does not even purport to authorise anyone to
impose the monitoring condition or
the curfew condition unless it is reasonably necessary and reasonably
appropriate and adapted
to protecting the community from the harm constituted by
those offences.
So, it is hard – the burden facing my
friends is, in my submission, very considerable. To demonstrate the legislative
that self‑regulates by saying that it stops short of being
disproportionate is nevertheless disproportionate. The answer should
conceptually, that if someone tries to do something disproportionate under this
regime, they have exceeded their power, not that
the regulation itself is
This section, as our friends I think concede, was clearly
drafted with a very close eye on the criticisms that were made of the former
defective provision. On this part of the case, I refer back to the submissions
I made in opening where I juxtaposed the clauses
and the criticisms that were
made for the, in my submission, express purpose of ensuring that the clause did
not go further than
was reasonably capable of being seen as necessary for that
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Solicitor, there were two
specific criticisms, I think, towards the end of – it is
paragraph [85] of the joint reasons
, and of course this was
on one view dicta, but there were two particular problems identified that seem
to me have not been addressed
in these new regulations. One is the effect of
section 76E and the other is the 12‑month period of the
conditions under any
circumstances. Are you going to address
MR DONAGHUE:
I am. I was, at least, going to
address the first and I will now address the second. Indeed, I am nearly at
that point and indeed
nearly at the conclusion of my submissions, but I do, just
before coming to that, seek to make a couple of other points.
that these powers are of course conditioned on the Minister being satisfied of
the relevant things, and so all of the familiar
administrative law limits that
come from a ministerial power of that kind are imported into it, including the
need to act reasonably
and rationally. There is a need to have regard to all of
the other conditions that are imposed both under this subclause and under
other provision of this Division. Your Honour Justice Gleeson asked
not know where one of those two usages came from, but certainly there is not a
definition of what “this Division”
means, but there are multiple
places in the regulations, including in the regulation that empowers the making
of a bridging visa
R – so that is
reg 2.25AB(2) – that refers to a division at the level of a
heading which has one decimal place after
it. So, the Division, in our
submission – for the purpose of 612A – is:
070.6—Conditions
All of the conditions under
that heading are the conditions to which the Division refers. You see that
usage, as I said, in regulation
2.25AB(2) but also if – I do not
invite your Honours to go to it now, but regulation 2.02 and
regulation 1.07
both support that same usage. The scheme seems to be, as
we understand it, the overall part, Subclass 070 – that is a
– the heading 1 under that is a division and the heading
under that are subdivisions, I think is how they are referred
Could I just ask you something, just about the
imposition of the conditions which you just touched on. Is it the position that
one reads 070.612A(1) and (2) – that is, the order
provision – that one reads the imposition of the condition for
in (1)(b) absent the curfew?
MR DONAGHUE:
And the same for (c)?
so I understand it, in my terms, one starts and one says: I have the imposition
of the mandatory conditions, I start with
monitoring and I work out whether or
not it satisfies (1)(b) and (c); I then move to the financing
conditions and I then move to
the curfew conditions.
MR DONAGHUE:
Yes, so that once you get to the curfew, you could only ever impose the curfew
if you have thought you needed – you have a
substantial risk of
serious harm from the commission of the offence, you have thought about whether
the monitoring condition will
concluded that it – no, you have to have – you do not have
to have imposed
it, but you have to have thought about it.
So, you have
to have turned your mind to whether or not the monitoring condition is going
to – is reasonably necessary and
appropriate and adapted. If it is,
then you have imposed a monitoring condition, and that, by definition, will have
reduced the
risk, which may mean you cannot impose the curfew condition because
the risk is not high enough anymore.
Conversely, you
cannot consider whether the curfew condition is sufficient for the monitoring
MR DONAGHUE:
Before the monitoring, you cannot,
because the drafter has taken a view that the effect on liberty that arises by
reason of the
curfew is an escalation from the monitoring condition, so that is
the sequence that has been mandated, reflective of the degree of
interference
that is perceived as between the monitoring and the curfew
Can I just ask you about the gap in what
you are describing as the self‑regulation? So, there is obviously a gap
the Minister being satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the
condition is reasonably necessary and reasonably appropriate
and adapted and a
appropriate and adapted.
MR DONAGHUE:
I accept that,
your Honour, but – and that, I think, takes me, really, to my
next point, which is that the test that the
Commonwealth needs to satisfy to
survive this last part of the
analysis is not a sort of correctness,
an absolute alignment of standard. It is not even a normal proportionality
test. It is a
wide proportionality test.
I think different language has
been used – Chief Justice French used to talk about a high
threshold and a low threshold proportionality
test – but the
“reasonably capable of being seen” language does give Parliament
some degree of latitude in the
regime that is created. The gap that
your Honour identifies, I accept that it exists, but it is not a gap that
means that means
that the regime is not capable of being seen as pursing its
And you fill that gap by the common
implication that “satisfaction” must be reasonable satisfaction, or
satisfaction
on reasonable grounds.
MR DONAGHUE:
I do. I do.
Reasonable and rationally‑formed satisfaction is, in my submission,
sufficient to meet the criteria. That
then I think leaves me with the two
points that the Chief Justice directed my attention to, the first being
procedural fairness,
and in paragraph [85], as the Chief Justice
pointed out, there is a reference to that requirement.
As I think I
alluded to in passing earlier, it immediately follows the statement, in the
first six or seven lines of paragraph [85],
mind about a negative stipulation – so, the reverse burden that
applied under the old regime –
so the Court said:
the provision resolves all doubt and uncertainty in favour of the imposition
of the conditions.
Of course, no longer true. Then the plurality
It does so, moreover, in circumstances where the person’s right to make
representations against the conditions being imposed
exists only after the
conditions have been imposed.
So, the denial or the exclusion of natural
justice was more serious than would otherwise have been the case, by reason of
the test had then been framed. That is my first point.
second point on natural justice is that, bearing in mind the protective
objective of this regime of protecting the community from
substantial
risks – well, no, from serious harm by the commission of the offence,
as your Honours know, this regime in its
original form, and subsequently,
is – in its original form it applied to a significantly large cohort
of people who had to
be released from detention almost immediately. It
continues to apply and, you can see from the practical operation facts that I
showed, the cohort has continued to grow over time.
If you need to go
through a natural justice process involving an invitation for representations
and then representations being prepared
and then being considered, one has built
into the regime a gap in a period of time where the person may have to be
released into
the community because
requires that to
occur without any protective controls in place. If the person really does pose
a substantial risk of seriously
harming the community in one of those ways, that
is a potentially important gap.
One no doubt can expect the
representatives of people who are affected by these regions to say: well, we
need time to assemble material
and put our submissions together
properly – and then there is a possible need for an iterative process
if natural justice is
to be fairly accorded when the protective purpose of the
regime is not being met.
In that circumstance, in our submission, and
again bearing in mind that the test is whether it is reasonably capable of being
as necessary, for Parliament to say, well – not to impose the
condition immediately and then to give you a chance to get rid
of it, but to
say, well, you can make the decision without natural justice, but as soon as you
have made the decision – and
this is 76E(3)
and (4) – as soon as you have made the decision – or
I think it is actually as soon as reasonably possible
decision – then you must give notice and you must allow the person to
make representations and, if following those
representations, you are not
satisfied, then you must grant a new visa that does not have the conditions.
That is a regime of a fairly familiar kind. Your Honours have
seen it in the visa revocation contexts, character cancellations where
a cancellation and then an opportunity to make decisions to have it revoked, but
also in court‑based regimes. You
commonly have interim orders followed by
a process where procedural fairness is accorded later on, part of the point of
that commonly
being to achieve protection in the interim. So, could Parliament
There are two distinctions, though, arguably, here. One is that most of
those – so, visa revocation and the court‑based
ordinarily do not affect liberty or interference with liberty of the person. It
is true that visa revocation will put you
into detention, but that is detention
for purpose of, arguably, removal. So, that is a category which is outside
The second thing is that – it is something I put to you
before lunch – it presupposes that the other regimes that have
the subject, especially where they have been the subject of a conviction, have
been exhausted already, in any event. That is,
parole has expired, that is why
they are in detention. Moreover, the other community prevention orders have not
been either accessed,
and then you have your own process under the
(Cth). So, we are really left with a narrower group of people, are we
not, where none of those measures have been available or been
MR DONAGHUE:
But they may not – well, a
few answers, your Honour. The first answer is that we would respectfully
disagree that visa revocation
does not affect liberty. It very
commonly ‑ ‑ ‑
I said it did.
MR DONAGHUE:
I accept the purpose is different,
but the consequence is you go from freedom to detention. As to the other
regimes ‑ ‑
For a purpose of removal, in most cases.
MR DONAGHUE:
cases, that is true. Sometimes there is consideration given to –
indeed commonly, actually, the initial purpose
is someone makes an application
for revocation and so they are detained for an admission purpose, deciding
whether or not they are
going to – and then it might become detention
for the purposes of removal.
As to the other regimes, there may or may
not be other regimes, and they may or may not be conviction‑based. So,
regime was not – it could be conviction‑based
but did not have to be; there was a capacity to make protective orders not
conviction‑based there. There is no particular reason to think that State
authorities who have not previously been engaged
in relation to the risk caused
by particular people who have been in Commonwealth immigration detention will be
activating their
own regimes.
In the end, in my submission, the
Commonwealth’s power to enact this regime does not depend on what other
governments may or
may not have done. It depends on whether this regime has a
legitimate non‑punitive purpose – which it does –
whether what has been done is reasonably capable of being seen as pursing
that purpose. In my submission, we meet both of those
requirements.
to the second matter that your Honour the Chief Justice
raised – the time limits – we would accept that, as part
the process of determining whether you are satisfied of the matters under
(c)(1) and (c)(2), the Minister would need to take account
of the duration of
the condition that is being imposed, so that a risk that was identified of a
transient temporal nature, if there
was such a thing, would be part of
reasonably considering that matter.
It is also possible for a bridging
visa holder to request revocation of conditions and for a new visa to be
granted. New visas can
be granted, as your Honours have seen from some of
the previous cases, at any time under these regulations without the conditions
being in place. So, if there was a change in circumstances that warranted that,
then the regime can accommodate it. A decision
that was made on any such
application would again be subject to usual administrative law
constraints.
So, in in our submission, 12 months is much shorter
than is commonly the case for some of these protective regimes. Sometimes it
three years or more that the time frame is reasonably capable of being seen as
necessary. So, in our submission, in answer to
the question I posed earlier:
distinguishable? The answer is that it is. Your Honours
are confronting a radically different, more tailored, narrower regime expressly
directed to protecting the community from serious harm caused by serious
offences, and the regime should be held to have responded
to the limits
identified in
in a valid way.
The last thing I need to do is
say something briefly about the head of power challenge. Our submission,
your Honour, is that it
is not before you. The questions that you have
seen on paragraph 54 refer in their terms to limits on power based on
Chapter III.
The application for a constitutional writ, which you have in
the book – and could I ask you to turn to it, it is at page 6
the special case book – seeks relief in terms in
paragraph 1.2:
A declaration that cl 070.612A . . . insofar as it
authorises . . . the imposition of
conditions . . . is invalid because
. . does not confer power to make any regulation
that infringes Ch III of the
Constitution
Then, in paragraph 4, it said:
The challenge is brought on a similar basis to how the plaintiff in
which had no head of power or aliens power argument in it. Then in
paragraph 32, on page 9, the entirety of the part of this application
that deals with the plaintiff’s argument in support says:
In brief, the Plaintiff says that the changes . . . do not
prevent substantially the same answers . . .
as . . . in
we are confronted with an argument in writing that
says that there is, as a
matter of characterisation, a question about the reach of the aliens power and
core or incidental areas
and matters of that kind.
No 78B notice has
been given about that. It is just not before you. So, in my submission,
your Honours should not touch it, and
I should not
say anything further
substance of the point. I am in your Honours’
GAGELER CJ:
No, we do not need to hear you on this,
Mr Solicitor.
MR DONAGHUE:
If the Court pleases,
those are my submissions.
GAGELER CJ:
Ms De Ferrari.
MS DE FERRARI:
Your Honours, I have six points in reply. The first one is, the
Commonwealth says that there is an accurate proxy between the
serious offences
as defined and harm to the community for the purposes of the constitutional
test. We say that is not the case for
four reasons.
First of all, the
harm to the community will depend on the seriousness of the conduct that would
attract a charge and conviction.
Secondly, the definition of “serious
offence” in this administrative scheme of the regulations
captures – in paragraph
(b) – a full range of conduct
that spans necessarily from the relatively less serious to the relatively more
serious; even
very serious, such as murder.
Third, we say that the
reasoning of the plurality in
at paragraph 46 clearly
reflected the nature of the legislative scheme at issue in that case. That, as
was said also by the plurality
at 44, critically provided for a judicial
process which operated in respect of:
“terrorist acts” and offences involving “terrorist
organisations”.
So, I refer to paragraphs 44 and 46 of the
plurality of
. Finally, and contrary to the
Solicitor‑General’s submissions, we say that any notion of proxy use
in this context would
fail – your Honour the
Chief Justice’s analysis in paragraph 93 of
similarly your Honour Justice Gordon’s view.
point in reply is that we do say that there is a live question of whether the
clause pursues a legitimate purpose. In
particular, the way in which my learned
friend has sought to address it, including by reference to previous cases, is
answered, we
say fully, by what the plurality said at paragraph [82] of
. I refer in that context to the passages that start from the
plurality saying:
Even if it did, where the Court has accepted that protection of the community
from the harm of criminal offending is a legitimate
non‑punitive purpose
for a Commonwealth law which authorises imprisonment, the harm to which those
laws were directed was a
more specific harm, such as –
referring to
the harm caused to the community by terrorism.
Concluding with these
If protection from any harm of any nature, degree or extent were a legitimate
non‑punitive purpose, the very point of the legitimacy
requirement would
be undermined.
We say that is consistent as well with what my learned
friend has defined as the narrow view in
. We do say that the
plurality view there is the current answer, but consistent with the narrow view
. This also, we say, supports again your Honour the
Chief Justice’s observation that in
it could fairly
be said that all the Justices were dealing with unacceptable risk that was
necessary because of the legislation question.
The final point we make
on this issue is that paragraph [82] supports rejection of an elision that
the Solicitor‑General has
made repeatedly between court‑ordered
systems of detention, or perhaps imposition of monitoring condition as a
bracelet and
this particular administrative one. There is a significant
difference.
The third point in reply is that – and this
follows from something that Your Honour Justice Jagot
raised – the clause
is also, we say, not appropriate and adapted when
one has regard to – it allows for the decision‑maker to impose
which are based upon a speculation of the risk of offending, which is
unlimited as to timeframe. It could be perception of risk
in five years, 10
years – one does not know. It is unlimited so far as the
decision‑making is concerned, and nor is
it limited in respect of
BEECH-JONES J:
Would it not be 12 months, because the
conditions are imposed for 12 months?
MS DE FERRARI:
That would have to be a reading that would have to be applied to otherwise a
provision that says absolutely nothing about that.
The only way it puts the
test is “reasonably appropriate and adapted”, and there is a
continuation, in the sense of
the system, by – I accept, again,
looking at “reasonably appropriate and adapted”, but that
continuation after
12 months might just say: the prediction that I
made 12 months ago, that the risk might eventuate in five years, remains my
at this point in time. Of course, there is that limitation for 12
The fourth point is that the Solicitor‑General made a
submission, in response to something that your Honour Justice Gordon
raised, that the escalation in the risk in the order in which the conditions are
to be considered is what the drafter intended, because
of recognition of the
greater severity of curfew as opposed to monitoring. That submission entirely
writes out of the actual test
of that part of the provision the fact that in
between monitoring and curfew there are the financial conditions 8617
The fifth point, your Honours, is that nothing has
been said by the Commonwealth about why the scheme in Division 395 is not a
appropriate scheme and that existence of it is therefore a matter
that cuts into the reasonable appropriateness of having an administrative
of this nature.
The final point – and I will be very
brief – is something on severance, which has been touched on very
lightly. We say
that the Court ought adopt the approach from
, in particular at paragraph 87 of the plurality’s
reasons. Without going to it, that requires two conditions to be satisfied.
The first is that the proposed severance would not alter “the operation of
the remaining parts”.
Now, as I understand it, what has been
floated is perhaps writing out a particular Roman numeral. That was not clear
but if it is severance by blue‑pencilling parts of each Roman
numeral, that becomes an almost impossible task, your Honours,
that first condition. The second one, that there would have to be a reason
based ‑ ‑ ‑
Sorry, it is impossible to rule out the Roman numeral, for example, in relation
to people smuggling?
MS DE FERRARI:
If that is the kind of
severance that is intended, then that might satisfy the first condition. That
is, it is a severance that
would not necessarily alter “the operation of
the remaining parts”. I accept that, but then the question is, and we
think it will fail, as to why – is there is a reason to be shown upon
the law itself as to why you would do that limitation,
you would do that
blue‑pencilling, as opposed to anything else?
I say that very
briefly because, really, there has not been developed, and I think the
Solicitor‑General rightly recognised
that it would be potentially a very
laborious task if that was something that had to be actually engaged by this
Court, particularly
in this particular context, but we would just make those
brief submissions on severance.
GAGELER CJ:
Which Roman numeral
is it that is applicable here? Is it just the one?
MS DE FERRARI:
No, I do not understand – so, my understanding of how severance has
been put orally is that it has only been conceived at the
level of severing by
blue‑pencilling an entire numeral. My learned friend did not say which
one. He said it would be a complex
there were two different submissions. One submission was that, if necessary,
the Court – in the Commonwealth’s
submission – could
sever the entirety of what you are calling a Roman numeral.
The other submission was if, in
some of the applications of particular Roman numerals – if in some of
those applications they
went too far, the Court could partially disapply that
application.
MS DE FERRARI:
And we say that would be an
impossible task and the first condition identified in
possibly be satisfied. It really would require the Court to engage in
legislative drafting, your Honours, as opposed to
a partial disapplication.
If the Court pleases, those are the submissions in reply.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Ms De Ferrari. The Court will consider its decision in
this matter and will adjourn until 10.00 am tomorrow.
3.31 PM THE MATTER WAS ADJOURNED
RTF format (1.62 MB)
Signed PDF/A format