Komljenovic v Chief of Navy [2017] ADFDAT 4 (5 May 2017)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Komljenovic v Chief of Navy
[2017] ADFDAT
Appeal from:
Defence Force Magistrate
File number:
DFDAT 4 of 2016
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), LOGAN (DEPUTY PRESIDENT) AND HILEY (MEMBER)
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
DEFENCE AND WAR
– discipline of
members of forces – conduct likely to prejudice service discipline –
what constitutes – acts
of physical intimacy between a male Lieutenant
Commander and a female Leading Seaman in view of subordinates while on temporary
leave in the course of an overseas deployment of the warship of which all
were crew members – holding by each person charged
of responsible, service
discipline related appointments on board ship – requirement for objective
assessment of conduct charged
in the context of surrounding circumstances
Defence Force Discipline Appeal Act 1981
(Cth), s 60(1)
DEFENCE AND WAR
– service tribunals – Defence Force
Magistrates – past simultaneous holding of appointments as Defence Force
and member of judge advocates’ panel by Defence Force
Magistrate appointed to try charge of a service offence and the Director
Military Prosecutions – Director of Military Prosecutions had signed
charge sheet concerned but did not appear personally
but instead by a legal
practitioner on the hearing before the Defence Force Magistrate – whether
circumstances gave rise to
a reasonable apprehension of bias and thus a denial
of natural justice by the Defence Force Magistrate -
Defence Force Discipline
Legislation:
Army Act 1881
Australian Military Regulations 1927
(Cth) r 203(1)(lx)
Constitution
Defence Act 1903
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Jervis Bay Acceptance Act 1915
Legal Profession (Barristers) Rules 2014
(ACT), rule 87A
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
(ACT), rule
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Rules 2007
(ACT) (repealed)
Legal Profession Act 2006
Cases cited:
Chief of the General Staff v Stuart
[1995] FCA 1746
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
Lane v Morrison
[2009] HCA 29
(2009) 239 CLR 230
Re Aird; Ex parte Alpert
(2004) 220 CLR 308
Re Nickols’s Appeal
(1966) 9 FLR 120
Re Tracey; Ex parte Ryan
[1989] HCA 12
(1989) 166 CLR 518
White v Director of Military Prosecutions
[2007] HCA 29
(2007) 231 CLR 570
Williams v Chief of Army
[2016] ADFDAT 3
Date of hearing:
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Appellant:
RJ Clutterbuck, RG Kaliminos and
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Bevan Bowe & Associates
Counsel for the Respondent:
J Renwick SC and J Nottle
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Director of Military Prosecutions
DFDAT 4 of 2016
MIRJANA IVA KOMLJENOVIC
CHIEF OF NAVY
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), LOGAN (DEPUTY PRESIDENT) AND
HILEY (MEMBER) JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
period within which the appeal and application for leave to appeal herein must
be lodged be extended to the date on which it was
appeal against the conviction be dismissed.
REASONS FOR
THE TRIBUNAL:
is a matter of history that, in May 1941, British, Australian, New Zealand and
Greek troops were heavily engaged in a desperate
but ultimately unsuccessful
defence of the Greek island of Crete from a German airborne and seaborne
invasion (Australian War Memorial
War History, Crete, Kreta: the battles of May
1941: https://www.awm.gov.au/atwar/crete.asp accessed, 28 April 2017). The
ground for the defence of the island comprised the airfields and ports
along the north coast of the island. The ports were at Souda
commonly spelled, “Suda”) Bay and at the city of Chania. Ships of
the Royal Navy and of the Royal Australian
Navy (“the RAN”) made
valiant efforts to interdict the seaborne elements of the invasion force and,
once it became apparent
that the invasion force had reached overwhelming
strength, to evacuate the defenders. For their service in the waters around
in the Mediterranean Sea between 20 May and 1 June 1941 HMA Ships Perth,
Napier, Nizam, Stuart, Voyager, Vampire, Vendetta and Waterhen
received the
Battle Honour, “Crete” (RAN website:
http://www.navy.gov.au/history/battle-honours/crete-1941 accessed,
74 years later, another Australian warship, HMAS ANZAC, came to Chania. The
port city and Souda Bay, as with the rest of Crete,
had long since reverted to
peace and tranquillity. The ship was en route to the Gallipoli Peninsula,
Turkey, where she and her crew
were to undertake representational duties, in
particular to participate in events related to the commemoration of the
centenary of
the Landing at ANZAC Cove on 25 April 1915.
recollection of this history is not irrelevant to the disposition of this
appeal. For it serves as a reminder that a warship and
her crew must sometimes
undertake roles which have no equivalent in civilian life and which
correspondingly demand related norms
of conduct by that crew, which also differ
from, and are more exacting than, those of civilian life. The very name,
indicates this.
was HMAS ANZAC’s first port of call after departing Australia and some
weeks at sea. Two of the then members of the
crew of HMAS ANZAC were then
Lieutenant Commander Nicholas Plenty and Leading Seaman Naval Police Coxswain
(Leading Seaman) Mirjana
Komljenovic. The then Lieutenant Commander Plenty
has since reverted to the rank of Lieutenant but, for convenience and
consistency,
we shall continue to refer to him by reference to the rank which he
held at the time of the incident charged. At that time, he was
Flying Officer and, as such, the head of HMAS ANZAC’s Aviation Department.
“Departments” are the
principal organisational units into which a
ship’s company is divided. Leading Seaman Komljenovic was the junior of
police assigned to the ship (the more senior being a Chief Petty
Officer). They were the representatives on the ship of the Naval
Coxswain’s Branch of the RAN. The two naval police also had whole of ship
co-ordination responsibilities aboard HMAS
Commander Plenty and Leading Seaman Komljenovic were amongst a group from the
ship’s company who were granted shore
leave in Chania. Early in the
afternoon of 18 April 2015, Leading Seaman Komljenovic disembarked and caught a
taxi to a hotel in
the centre of Chania where she and other crew members were to
stay overnight. She spent the balance of the afternoon swimming in
pool and drinking some Corona beer. She and her female crew member roommates
then changed into civilian evening attire
prior to going out for the evening.
Initially, they went to the Sports Bar, where they met members of the
ship’s Aviation
Department, including Lieutenant Commander Plenty. From
the Sports Bar, they all went to the “Klik” nightclub. The
nightclub had a large dancefloor and a disc jockey, as well as a bar. Over the
course of the evening, Leading Seaman Komljenovic
became progressively more
intoxicated. At some stage, either in the late evening of 18 April 2015 or the
early hours of the morning
on 19 April 2015, Lieutenant Commander Plenty and
Leading Seaman Komljenovic ventured on to the dancefloor. There, in full view
of other crew members, Leading Seaman Komljenovic was observed to engage in
intimate kissing and hugging with Lieutenant Commander
incident was reported to the ship’s commanding officer, who directed that
a preliminary investigation (termed a “Quick
Assessment”) be
conducted. Thereafter, the matter was referred to the Director of Military
Prosecutions (“the DMP”)
for consideration of prosecution under the
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) (“the DFDA”). In the
result, in August 2015, the DMP came to lay the following charge of prejudicial
contrary to
of the DFDA, against Leading Seaman
Komljenovic:
“Being a Defence member at Chania, Crete between 17 April 2015 and 20
April 2015, did behave in a manner likely to prejudice
the discipline of the
Defence Force, by engaging in intimate relations, namely kissing and touching,
with a superior officer, namely
LTCDR NE Plenty (as he was then), while in the
presence of HMAS Anzac’s ships
A like charge was laid against
Lieutenant Commander Plenty, save that the allegation concerned engaging in
intimate relations with
a subordinate rather than a superior.
October 2015, the Registrar of Military Justice (“the RMJ”) referred
the charges for hearing before a Defence Force
Magistrate (“DFM”),
Wing Commander Gregory Lynham. The hearing took place in Sydney, commencing on
30 November 2015.
Lieutenant Commander Plenty and Leading Seaman Komljenovic
each pleaded, “Not Guilty”. On 3 December 2015, the DFM
each of them guilty. He imposed on each the sentence of a “Severe
Reprimand”.
Leading Seaman Komljenovic has sought an extension of time within which to
appeal against her conviction. The Chief of Navy
who, as the relevant Service
Chief, is the respondent did not oppose the granting of that extension.
Initially, the grounds of appeal
included an alleged error on the part of the
DFM in failing to hold that a defence of involuntary intoxication had been made
On the hearing, only two grounds of appeal came to be pressed. These were
(a) in the circumstances prevailing, the DFM ought to have
recused himself on the basis that a reasonable apprehension of bias existed;
(b) the conduct charged did not constitute an offence against
our view, those remaining grounds of appeal raise questions of law alone such
that no grant of leave to raise them is required.
We shall consider the merits
of each of them in turn.
A reasonable apprehension of bias?
background circumstances said to give rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias
on the part of the DFM were not controversial.
August 2015, as now, the person holding the appointment of DMP was (and is)
Brigadier Jennifer Woodward CSC, a member of the Australian
Regular Army. Prior
to taking up office as DMP, Brigadier Woodward was a member of the judge
advocates’ panel and a DFM.
She came to hold these appointments as part
of the sequel to the judgement of the High Court in
Lane v Morrison
[2009] HCA 29
(2009) 239 CLR 230.
In that case, the High Court held that the Australian
Military Court (“the AMC”) was not validly established. Brigadier
Woodward had been one of the appointees to that court. A sequel to that case
saw the restoration of the system of trial of service
offences by court martial
or DFM. Another was that the appointees to the AMC translated to becoming judge
advocates (and one the
Chief Judge Advocate) and DFM.
a time prior to her appointment as DMP, Brigadier Woodward and Wing Commander
Lynham were each simultaneously members of the judge
advocates’ panel and
DFM. Brigadier Woodward relinquished her appointments as a member of the judge
advocates’ panel
and a DFM upon her appointment as DMP.
past coincidence of office holding was said to give rise to a reasonable
apprehension of bias on the part of the DFM. The point
was taken before the
DFM, who ruled on it adversely to Leading Seaman Komljenovic. The background
circumstances, that ruling and
the conclusion which Wing Commander Lynham
reached on the merits of the charge were then said before us to give rise to a
apprehension of bias.
was no dispute as to the applicable principle. As with the parties and the DFM,
we take that principle to be as stated by Gleeson
CJ, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
“a judge is disqualified if a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably
apprehend that the judge might not bring an impartial
mind to the resolution of
the question the judge is required to decide”. In respect of past
relationships, that principle
was more particularly described in this way in
that joint judgement in
“It is not only association with a party to litigation that may be
incompatible with the appearance of impartiality. There
may be a disqualifying
association with a party’s lawyer, or a witness, or some other person
concerned with the case. In each
case, however, the question must be how it is
said that the existence of the “association” or
might be thought (by the reasonable observer) possibly to
divert the judge from deciding the case on its merits. As has been pointed
earlier, unless that connection is articulated, it cannot be seen whether the
apprehension of bias principle applies. Similarly,
the bare identification of an
“association” will not suffice to answer the relevant
she signed the charge sheet in respect of Leading Seaman Komljenovic in her
capacity as the DMP, Brigadier Woodward did not
appear personally to prosecute
the charge laid. The duty of prosecuting officer was undertaken by another
legal officer. The present
case is thus one where it is possible to identify a
bare, past association and a tenuous one at that.
dispose of this ground, it is necessary to refer to a number of provisions of
DFDA mandates that there be a panel of officers known as the “judge
advocates’ panel”:
Officers are appointed to that panel
for a term of three years (which may be extended) by the Chief of the Defence
Force or a Service
Chief, in each instance upon the nomination of the Judge
Advocate General (“JAG”):
, DFDA. An officer
is not eligible for appointment to the judge advocates’ panel unless the
officer is enrolled as a legal
practitioner and has been so enrolled for not
less than five years:
, DFDA. Officers so appointed must make a
prescribed oath or affirmation before the JAG or an officer nominated by him:
, DFDA. The prescribed form of oath or affirmation adopts a
time honoured form taken by civilian judicial officers in the United
Australia and elsewhere in the Commonwealth: “I will do right to all
manner of people according to law, without fear
or favour, affection or
and Sch 5, DFDA).
office of JAG is established by the DFDA and must be filled by a person who is
or has been a Justice or Judge of a “Federal
Court” or of a Supreme
Court of a State or Territory:
of the DFDA. The DFDA does
not define “federal court” but evinces no intention to the contrary
of the application of
the definition of that term offered by
Interpretation Act 1901
Cth). That provision defines “federal
court” to mean, “the High Court or any court created by the
Parliament”.
Prior to the establishment of what is now known as the
Federal Circuit Court (“the FCC”), the application in practice
the definition resulted in symmetry in the appointment pool for JAG as between
the Federal, State and Territory judiciary in that
one of the eligibility
criteria was membership of a superior court. The FCC is not a superior court.
The present application of
that definition is therefore anomalous. Even so,
that does not detract from it being a feature of the system of military justice
established by the DFDA that particular, significant value judgements, described
below, are consigned to a person who also holds
a judicial office. A defence
member may be appointed as JAG: s 180(3), DFDA. The DFDA thus proceeds on the
footing that there
is no necessary antipathy between the holding of a judicial
office and membership of the Defence Force.
are appointed by the JAG from amongst the membership of the judge
advocates’ panel: s 127, DFDA. A DFM must also make
affirmation akin to the civilian judicial oath before the JAG or an officer
nominated by him (s 128 and Sch 4, DFDA).
There is no requirement that either a
member of the judge advocates’ panel or a DFM must be a member of the
Permanent Forces.
Wing Commander Lynham was a member of the Air Force Reserve.
the DFDA, the trial of a service offence by a DFM is an alternative to the trial
of that offence by a restricted court martial.
A DFM adjudicates both matters
of fact and law, as to the former performing a role akin to that of a court
martial panel and, as
to the latter, performing a role consigned to a judge
advocate in a court martial. More serious service offences must be tried by
general court martial. When acting as such, a judge advocate and a DFM each
enjoy the same protection and immunity as a Justice
of the High Court: s
193(1), DFDA.
DFDA does not establish a permanent Defence Force Magistrates Court. Rather, as
occasion requires, the JAG nominates a particular
DFM to try the charge(s) laid
against a particular defence member with the RMJ then referring the charge(s) to
that DFM for trial
accordingly: s 129C, DFDA.
is settled that the trial of a service offence by a DFM does not entail any
violation of Chapter III of the
Constitution
Re Tracey; Ex parte Ryan
[1989] HCA 12
(1989) 166 CLR 518
White v Director of Military Prosecutions
[2007] HCA 29
That does not mean that a DFM is not bound by the rules of natural
justice. One of those rules is that there ought not to be an
appearance of
bias, as described in
, on the part of the DFM.
becoming DMP, Brigadier Woodward ceased to hold office as both a member of the
judge advocates’ panel and a DFM, as each
would be incompatible with the
duties of her office as DMP. The DFDA assumes that incompatibility by providing
that the DMP ceases
to hold office if the DMP engages in practice as a legal
practitioner outside the duties of his or her office or, without the approval
the Minister, engages in paid employment outside the duties of his or her
office: ss 188GN(2)(c) and (d), DFDA. Further, the
DMP is subject to a
standing obligation to disclose to the Minister any interest, direct or
indirect, which could give rise to a
conflict with the duties of the office of
DMP: s 188GO, DFDA.
DMP has no command or supervisory functions in respect of members of the judge
advocates’ panel, including DFM.
tribunals, be they courts martial or DFM, are
tribunals, appointed
and convened as the exigencies of service discipline require. For that purpose,
it is necessary that there
be a pool of suitably qualified officers who can
serve as a judge advocate or, as the case may be, a DFM. That is why the DFDA
provision for the judge advocates’ panel. Each of the officers
appointed to that panel is also, by definition, a “legal
for the purposes of the DFDA:
- an officer who is a legal practitioner.
Subject to the exigencies of the service, an accused person awaiting trial
before a service
tribunal is to be given the opportunity of being represented
and advised by a legal officer: s 137(1), DFDA. It is in furtherance
right that the Director of Defence Counsel Services is obliged to maintain lists
of legal officers at prescribed places who
are willing to undertake these
duties: s 101F, DFDA.
every legal officer must be appointed to the judge advocates’ panel and
not every member of that panel must be appointed
as a DFM. The DFDA envisages
that the JAG will make a value judgement about the appointment of particular
officers to that panel
and, in turn, as a DFM. But that Act does not proceed on
the basis that an officer ceases to be a legal officer upon his or her
appointment to that panel or as a DFM.
is good reason not to construe the DFDA as if these appointments necessarily
gave rise to a reasonable apprehension of bias
if their holder undertakes other
duties of a legal officer.
is axiomatic that not every officer in the Defence Force is also a legal
practitioner and thus a “legal officer” as
defined by s 3 of the
DFDA. The DFDA is meant to govern the discipline of the Defence Force in peace
and war, both in Australia
and anywhere abroad. A construction which would
promote that purpose is to be preferred to one which would be subversive of it.
It is readily possible to envisage circumstances arising on overseas deployment
where the already limited pool of officers who are
also “legal
officers” would, at a given location, be very limited indeed, to say
nothing of those who are members of
the judge advocates’ panel, much less
also a DFM. In particular circumstances, it may well be necessary for a legal
who is a member of the judge advocates’ panel to act as a
defending officer in a given case, while another member of that panel
prosecutor and yet another serves as the judge advocate for a court martial or
even, if also so appointed, as a DFM.
And on another occasion in a theatre of
operations the roles might have to be reversed. The DFDA does also envisage
that representational
roles may be undertaken by legal practitioners who are not
“legal officers” but access to this wider class may be problematic
in a theatre of operations. Even in peacetime garrison duties in Australia, it
is also possible, particularly in places away from
the State or Territory
capitals, to envisage circumstances where no civilian legal practitioner is
accessible or has either interest
or inclination to appear in a service tribunal
and in which it would not be practical to administer the DFDA on the basis that
member of the judge advocates’ panel could never be a defending officer
or a prosecuting officer. Yet further, by not confining
those officers who may
be a member of the judge advocates’ panel or a DFM just to those who are
members of the Permanent Forces,
the DFDA necessarily assumes that suitably
qualified and experienced officers to undertake these duties may very well be
the Reserve Forces.
these features of the DFDA are understood, in particular that a service tribunal
is always an
one, that a judge advocate or DFM exercising that
office enjoys the immunities mentioned, must undertake that duty without fear,
favour or ill-will but can never simultaneously hold office as DMP, even though
he or she nonetheless remains a legal officer, there
could be no reasonable
apprehension of bias arising from the signing of a charge sheet by the DMP in
respect of a charge to be heard
by a DFM. And that is so even if that DFM had
once also been a member of the judge advocates’ panel and a DFM. Indeed,
provisions of the DFDA mentioned demonstrate that the Parliament has gone to
elaborate lengths to ensure that there could never be
any such apprehension.
was put on behalf of Leading Seaman Komljenovic that, nonetheless, a reasonable
apprehension of bias did exist because the DMP
was undertaking a function (the
signing of the charge sheet) in respect of a tribunal of which she was once a
member. This undertaking
of function was said to require that Wing Commander
Lynham recuse himself from his role as the DFM appointed to hear the
support of this submission, reference was made to the
Legal Profession
(Solicitors) Conduct Rules 2015
(ACT) (“Solicitors Conduct
Rules”), made under the
Legal Profession Act 2006
(ACT). This
reference was made on a twofold basis. It was first submitted that Brigadier
Woodward was admitted as a solicitor in
the ACT and held a practising
certificate as such. This was not proven but, as did the respondent Chief of
Navy, we shall assume
that these facts were established. The other basis of the
submission was that a DFM had, materially, the powers of the judge advocate
restricted court martial judge advocate (s 129(1), DFDA) and that such a
judge advocate was obliged to give any ruling, and
exercise any discretion,
that, in accordance with the law in force in the Jervis Bay Territory, would be
given or exercised by a
judge in a trial by jury (s 134(1), DFDA). The
Profession Act 2006
(ACT) and the Solicitors Conduct Rules were said to be
laws applicable in the Jervis Bay Territory. We accept that, even though
Jervis Bay Territory is separate from the ACT, the laws of the ACT apply in the
Jervis Bay Territory, in so far as they are
applicable and, providing they are
not inconsistent with an Ordinance, by virtue of the
Jervis Bay Acceptance
rule 38, the Solicitors Conduct Rules provide:
“38 RETURNING JUDICIAL OFFICERS
38.1 A solicitor who is a former judicial officer must not appear in:
38.1.1 any court if the solicitor has been a member thereof or presided therein;
38.1.2 any court from which appeals to any court of which solicitor was
formerly a member may be made or brought,
for a period of two years after ceasing to hold that office unless permitted by
the relevant court.”
though the DMP did not personally appear, it was put that she had appeared by a
legal practitioner (as s 188GB(b)(i) of the DFDA
this it was said to follow that, such an appearance having been made, Wing
Commander Lynham, in the exercise of an appointment
having like powers to those
of a judge in the Jervis Bay Territory, ought to have recused himself on the
basis of past association
with the office holder (the DMP) on whose behalf the
appearance was made.
are many difficulties, all fatal, with this submission.
and foremost, the Solicitors Conduct Rules were not, as the Chief of Navy
correctly submitted, in force at the time of the trial
before the DFM. They did
not commence until 1 January 2016. At the time of the trial, the relevant
rules were the
Legal Profession (Solicitors) Rules 2007
(ACT) (“the
repealed rules”). The repealed rules did not contain an equivalent of
rule 38 in the Solicitors Conduct Rules.
response, it was submitted on behalf of Leading Seaman Komljenovic that the
absence of express provision in professional conduct
rules meant that the common
law position was applicable. This was said to be as stated by Sir William
Boulton in his seminal work,
Conduct and Etiquette at the Bar (6th Edn, p [37]
– “Boulton”):
“The Bar Council does not approve as a matter of principle of former
Judges returning to practice at the Bar in any
refers (at [36]) to the Bar Council’s recognition of an exception to this
dogmatic position in respect of Recorders
and deputy Circuit Judges. In England
and Wales, these are part time appointments held by members of the Bar who
otherwise remain
in active practice. The exception recognised is that
barristers holding such appointments “ought not to act as such in a
Magistrates
Court or the Crown Court at a place at which he sits as a recorder
if a professionally embarrassing situation were liable to be created
doing so” (examples are cited but it is not necessary to refer to
to what was said to be the common law, we were also taken to Harrison’s
Law on Conduct of the Legal Profession in Queensland
(2nd Edn, 1984, G N
Williams – “Harrison”) in which, at 17, the following ethical
ruling of the Queensland Bar
Council is cited:
“A member of the bar who was formerly a judge (other than an Acting Judge)
shall not practice before the court of which he
position as stated in Harrison, notably including the exception in respect of
Acting Judges, is consistent with that set out in
Boulton. Even assuming that
this represents the common law position (which it is not necessary for us to
decide), there is no relevant
analogy to be drawn as between the position of the
DMP and that of the DFM. As we have mentioned, there is no DFM Court. All
tribunals are
. Further, a DFM sits alone. Brigadier
Woodward had never, and could never, have sat on a bench of which Wing Commander
a member. They were but once and simultaneously members of an
eligibility pool (the judge advocates’ panel) from which DFM
appointed and each had once simultaneously held such an appointment. Yet
further, even if there were an analogy, the position
of a DFM is akin to that of
a recorder or Acting Judge in respect of which office there has never been an
absolute prohibition from
practice as an advocate. The circumstances prevailing
as between Wing Commander Lynham as DFM and Brigadier Woodward as DMP and
former DFM gave rise to no “professionally embarrassing situation”.
Further again and more fundamentally, the bar
rules mentioned envisage that it
is the barrister, not the judge, who should withdraw. It was never
satisfactorily explained in
the submissions made on behalf of Leading Seaman
Komljenovic why it was, if there were an analogy, that the DFM had to recuse
we observed in the course of the submissions on behalf of Leading Seaman
Komljenovic, a corollary of them would be that no person
who had ever been a
member of the judge advocates’ panel or a DFM could ever be appointed as
the DMP. The DFDA does not expressly
mandate that prohibition in prescribing
the appointment criteria for the DMP (s 188GG, DFDA) but instead envisages
that it is not
possible simultaneously to hold office as DMP and retain
membership of the judge advocates’ panel and an appointment as a DFM.
experience required for that appointment might desirably include experience as a
legal officer not only in prosecuting and defending
service offences but also in
acting as a judge advocate or DFM. Given this, it would be odd to find such a
necessary implication.
the course of submissions, reference was also made to the
Legal Profession
(Barristers) Rules 2014
(ACT), rule 87A of which prescribes a less dogmatic
position in respect of return to practice by a former judge than that in the
rules set out in Boulton or Harrison. It is not necessary to refer to this rule
as, even making the very large assumption that it
had any relevant application,
the result of that application could be no different than that already
only comes to this; however one approaches this ground, it has no
An absence of prejudicial conduct?
s 60(1) of the DFDA it is provided:
Prejudicial conduct
(1) A defence member commits an offence if the member does an act that is likely
to prejudice the discipline of, or bring discredit
on, the Defence Force.
Maximum punishment: Imprisonment for 3
Seaman Komljenovic did not submit that it was beyond the constitutional
legislative competence of the Parliament for the application
of the DFDA to be
extended to the conduct charged. The ground is therefore not, in terms, one
which raises the same question as
that considered in
Re Aird; Ex parte
(2004) 220 CLR 308
). Even so, the conduct charged
having occurred on shore leave while the defence members charged were in
civilian attire at a non-military
venue, there may be some inherent tension with
respect to a charge such as the present between a submission which concedes
and yet denies that the conduct could be regarded as likely to
prejudice the discipline of the Defence Force. That is because, on
assumption (cf
Williams v Chief of Army
[2016] ADFDAT 3)
that it was
accepted in
that the mere status of the person charged as a
defence member at the time when the alleged service offence was committed was
insufficient
foundation under
Constitution
legislative competence, a relevant “service connection” would be
the present case, the service connection is very much stronger than that which
persuaded a bare majority in
that the offence charged fell within
the lawful application of the DFDA. In
, the defence member was
not just on leave and in civilian attire but in a different country, hundreds of
kilometres away from where
he was temporarily stationed abroad and had entered
that different country on his civilian passport. In the present case,
Commander Plenty and Leading Seaman Komljenovic were on short term
shore leave as crew members from a warship in the course of an
ongoing overseas
deployment and temporarily moored in the same port as where the alleged
offending conduct occurred. Consent does
not confer jurisdiction. Insofar as
it may be necessary for us to be satisfied on that subject, we are well
satisfied that a service
connection necessary to enliven the lawful application
of the DFDA is present.
concluding that the conduct charged constituted an offence against
the DFDA, the DFM reasoned:
(a) It was not necessary for the
prosecution to prove that the discipline of the Defence Force was prejudiced, it
being sufficient
if it were proved that this was a reasonable probability, as
opposed to a mere possibility.
(b) Such a reasonable probability arose because:
(i) Lieutenant Commander Plenty, as the head of a ship’s department
held an important position on board the ship for the enforcement
and maintenance
of discipline and the setting of standards for other members of the crew;
(ii) Leading Seaman Komljenovic was one of only two coxswains on board the
ship carrying out those duties and, by virtue of that position,
heavily involved
in the enforcement and maintenance of discipline on board the ship;
(iii) each of them, by virtue of their appointments, was subject to an
expectation that they would behave in an exemplary fashion;
(iv) the reaction (for which there was evidence at the trial) of some of the
witnesses who observed the kissing indicated that they
felt uncomfortable about
what they were observing Lieutenant Commander Plenty and Leading Seaman
Komljenovic to be doing; and
(v) passionate kissing between a Lieutenant Commander and a Coxswain, in
front of a number of the ship’s company, in a nightclub
environment, was
conduct likely to prejudice the discipline of those on board the ship.
might be thought that the fifth of the criteria mentioned by the DFM was itself
a conclusion rather than a separate fact leading
to a conclusion of the
requisite likelihood of prejudice. We take that reference by the DFM to the
ranks and appointments of the
two accused to carry with it recognition that the
rank of Lieutenant Commander is superior to that of Leading Seaman. So much is,
in any event, a matter of law:
Defence Act 1903
The DFM did not base his conclusion as to likelihood of prejudice solely upon
intimacy between persons having that difference
in rank but rather considered
that in conjunction with the appointments which each then held and their related
responsibilities,
the fact that the intimacy was observed by other crew members,
including subordinates and that both the accused and the observers
stationed aboard the ship where the responsibilities of rank and appointment
fell to be exercised. So viewed, the conclusion
of the DFM is an unremarkable
one and one which, on the facts found, we share.
lengthy provenance of
of the DFDA as it then stood in military law was
notably reviewed by Lockhart J in
Chief of the
General Staff v
[1995] FCA 1746
(1995) 58 FCR 299.
That was prior to amendments which expressly made
the offence created by
one of strict liability. As it previously stood,
Black CJ (Davies J agreeing) considered that the conduct alleged to be
prejudicial
had, objectively, to have that quality:
, at p 309.
This accords with a view earlier expressed by this Tribunal in respect of the
analogue offence once found in reg 203(1)(lx)
Australian Military
Regulations:
Re Nickols’s Appeal
(1966) 9 FLR 120
the Tribunal there observed, referring to the task at trial, “This
question must be considered objectively but
not in accordance with the unguided
whim of the tribunal. The answer is to be given after proper guidance as to the
meaning of insubordination
and the accepted standards of service
our view, the test remains an objective one. Making due allowance for the
slightly different wording of s 60(1) of the DFDA, an
annotation in the Manual
of Military Law (HMSO, 1907, at p 299) in respect of the analogue offence found
in s 40 of the
Army Act 1881
(UK) continues to be
“A court is not warranted in convicting unless of opinion that the conduct
charged (1) was committed by the accused, and (2)
was to the prejudice both of
good order and military discipline having regard to the conduct itself and the
circumstances in which
it took place.”
offence against s 60(1) of the DFDA is not committed unless, objectively, having
regard to the conduct itself and the circumstances
in which it took place, the
conduct charged is likely to prejudice the discipline of, or bring discredit on,
the Defence Force.
“Likely” does not entail a mere possibility.
Approaching the construction and application of the section in this way
exclude from its purview the trivial and also idiosyncratic conceptions of
likely prejudicial conduct. It is by virtue of this
understanding of the nature
of the offence charged that we share the conclusion of the DFM that it was
established in the circumstances
of the present case.
it be thought otherwise, we should add that it is nothing to the point (as the
submissions of Leading Seaman Komljenovic seemed
to assume) that the conduct
concerned, if viewed from the perspective of consensual intimacy between two
consenting adults, would
have been lawful if engaged in by civilians. The point
of the matter is that neither Lieutenant Commander Plenty nor Leading Seaman
Komljenovic were civilians but crew members of a warship on deployment holding
different ranks and very particular appointments who
chose to disport themselves
intimately in front of other crew members while on temporary shore leave. The
surrounding circumstances
will always give crucial context in respect of an
alleged offence against s 60(1) of the DFDA.
Objectively,
a conclusion of likely prejudice was clear to the point of demonstration in the
circumstances of the present case. Leading
Seaman Komljenovic was not a
passenger on a cruise ship who engaged in consensual intimacy with a fellow
passenger while on a shore
excursion. She was a serving member of the RAN,
posted in a particular capacity as a member of the crew of a warship on ongoing
deployment overseas, who engaged in an act of physical intimacy with a superior
officer posted to that same warship while each was
on short term shore leave in
the port where that ship was temporarily moored and in the view of other crew
members, some of whom
were subordinates of her or her superior officer.
these reasons, there is no merit in the other remaining ground of appeal.
consider that we should add the following. Acts of physical intimacy and even
socialising between persons of different rank in
any disciplined force can be
fraught with a potential likelihood of prejudice to the discipline of that
force. However, as has long
been understood in respect of the offence created
by s 60(1) of the DFDA and earlier analogues, it is always necessary to judge
likelihood of prejudice to discipline objectively not just by reference to
the conduct charged but also by reference to its surrounding
circumstances. The
outcome of such adjudication will, necessarily, be fact specific. It is
essential that such outcomes not uncritically
be elevated to a matter of
principle to the detriment of an objective consideration of the facts of another
follows that the appeal must be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding fifty-six (56)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision herein of the
Justices Tracey (President), Logan (Deputy President) and Hiley
Dated: 5 May 2017
RTF format (356 KB)
Signed PDF/A format