URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/FCCA/2014/2950.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:50
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Drake & Drake & Anor [2014] FCCA 2950 (17 December 2014)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
DRAKE & DRAKE &
[2014] FCCA 2950
Catchwords:
FAMILY LAW – Parenting
– competing applications for live with Order for six Aboriginal Children
by Aboriginal Maternal
Grandmother and Department of Family and Community
Services – Children removed from the Maternal Grandmother by the
during course of proceedings without notice – Maternal
Grandmother’s long history with the Department – poor communication
between the Maternal Grandmother and the Department – Maternal
Grandmother’s inadequate housing – superficial proposal
Department for the Children to connect with their culture – Order made for
the Maternal Grandmother to have sole parental
responsibility for the Children
and for Children to be returned to the Maternal Grandmother.
Legislation:
Law Act 1975
Burton & Churchin & Anor
FamCAFC 180
[1998] FamCA 239
Donnell & Dovey
[2010] FamCAFC 15
[1994] 19 FamLR 165
[1995] FamCA 30
(1995) FLC 92-598
Hort & Verran
[2009] FamCAFC 214
(2009) FLC 93-418
Marriage of B and R
(1995) FLC 92 636
Kitsannis & Netpoulis
[2010] FamCAFC 214
Lawson & Warren
[2011] FamCA
Malcolm & Monroe
[2011] FamCAFC 16
(2011) FLC 93-460
Mulvany & Lane
[2009] FamCAFC 76
(2009) FLC 93-404
R and R: Children’s Wishes
[2000] FamCA 43
Rice & Miller
(1993) 16 Fam LR 970
& Lacerra & Anor
[2013] FamCAFC 53
First Respondent:
Second Respondent:
Intervenor:
DIRECTOR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY
AND COMMUNITY SERVICES
File Number:
SYC 501 of 2012
Judgment of:
Judge Sexton
Hearing dates:
8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 22 September 2014
Date of Last Submission:
22 September 2014
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
17 December 2014
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Mr Anderson
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Speirs & Associates
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Solicitors for the First Respondent:
Jones Rolfe Rudd
Solicitors for the Second Respondent:
Advocate for the Intervenor:
Solicitors for the Intervenor:
Crown Solicitor’s Office
Advocate for the Independent Children’s Lawyer:
Solicitors for
the Independent Children’s Lawyer
Legal Aid Commission NSW
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
previous parenting Orders be discharged.
(2) The Children [U] born [omitted] 2003, [V] born [omitted] 2004, [W] born
[omitted] 2006, [X] born [omitted] 2007, [Y] born [omitted]
2008, and [Z] (known
by the Department of Family and Community Services as [Z]) born [omitted] 2010
live with the Maternal Grandmother.
(3) The Children [U], [W], [Y] and [Z] be returned to the Maternal Grandmother
by no later than 4.00p.m. on 19 December 2014 when
the Department of Family and
Community Services will arrange for the Children to be delivered to the Maternal
Grandmother’s
residence with their belongings.
(4) The Children spend time with the Mother by arrangement with the Maternal
Grandmother, but for no longer than 4 hours per day.
(5) The Children spend time with the Father (whether in Sydney or [C]) by
arrangement with the Maternal Grandmother, but for no longer
than 4 hours per
(6) The Applicant Maternal Grandmother have sole parental responsibility for the
(7) The Maternal Grandmother continue to engage with [M] Women’s Service
and accept all referrals and recommendations made
by her [M] caseworker in
respect of her attendance at counselling, participation in parenting courses
(including advice on nutrition),
attendance at further drug and alcohol
counselling, tutoring for the Children, nutrition, literacy assistance, and
respite care.
(8) The Maternal Grandmother ensure the Children are enrolled at [L] School
and/or [omitted] School or such other school as may be
recommended for each of
the Children pursuant to Personalised Learning Plans formulated for each Child
by the Aboriginal Education
Consultative Group of the NSW Department of
(9) Except in the case of an emergency, the Maternal Grandmother ensure the
Children and each of them attend at the Aboriginal Medical
Service Redfern
(“the AMS”) for management of their health needs and the Maternal
Grandmother accept all referrals made
for the Children to attend specialist or
other appointments as recommended by the Aboriginal Medical Service.
(10) The Maternal Grandmother forthwith:
(a) Make an
appointment with the AMS social worker to discuss arrangements to be made for:
(i) Coordination
of the Children’s attendance at, and transport to, specialist medical and
dental appointments; and
(ii) Advocating
for services to address the Children’s special needs; and
(b) In respect
(i) Arrange for
[U] to be assessed by an AMS doctor for the development of an asthma plan;
(ii) Take all
steps to arrange counselling, including sexual assault counselling, for [U]
through the Aboriginal Health Team at Royal
Prince Alfred
(11) The Maternal Grandmother continue to engage in the drug rehabilitation
program with the Aboriginal Medical Service.
(12) By no later than 10 January 2015, the Independent Children’s Lawyer
(or her agent) forward to the Aboriginal Medical Service
a letter to be placed
on each of the Children’s files detailing the following:
(a) That for
any specialist appointments the Children need to attend, the Maternal
Grandmother and Children will require assistance
with transportation;
(b) Requesting
assistance from the Aboriginal Medical Service social worker for the purposes of
coordinating appointments and transport
of the Children to appointments;
(c) Requesting
assistance from the Aboriginal Medical Service social worker in advocating for
services to address the Children’s
(and in particular [W]’s) special
(13) By no later than 10 January 2015, the Independent Children’s Lawyer
(or her agent) provide to the Aboriginal Medical Service
and [M] the
(a) A sealed
copy of these Orders;
(b) A copy of
the report of Mr R released by way of Order dated 4 September
(14) By no later than 10 January 2015, the Independent Children’s Lawyer
(or her agent) request in writing that the Aboriginal
Health Team at Royal
Prince Alfred Hospital arrange counselling, including sexual assault
counselling, for [U] and the Independent
Children’s Lawyer provide to the
Aboriginal Health Team:
(a) A sealed
copy of these Orders;
(b) A copy of
the report of Mr R released by way of Order dated 4 September
(15) By no later than 10 January 2015, the Independent Children’s Lawyer
(or her agent) provide to Aunty [name omitted] of
the Aboriginal Education
Consultative Group and the Principal of [L] School a copy of these Orders.
(16) The Independent Children’s Lawyer have liberty to provide a copy of
these Orders and Reasons to any Agency engaged to
assist the Maternal
Grandmother.
(17) Notwithstanding any other Order, the Mother and Father are authorised by
these Orders to obtain from any school that the Children
or each of them attend,
information as to the Children’s educational progress, welfare and
development, including but not limited
(a) Copies of
all school reports, awards, and information regarding the Children’s
achievements and activities;
remedial learning or behaviour correction strategies required by the Children or
each of them; and
photograph order forms so that each parent has the opportunity to order copies
of the Children’s school photographs.
(18) The Maternal Grandmother use her best endeavours to have the Children
involved in extra-curricular and/or team sporting activities
including, but not
limited to, the [omitted] or any of the child and adolescent sporting programmes
offered by the National Centre
of Indigenous Excellence.
(19) The Maternal Grandmother be restrained from:
(a) Using any
drugs except as prescribed by a medical practitioner;
(b) Removing
the Children’s residence from within a 15 km radius of the Sydney CBD;
(c) Allowing Mr
W to enter any place where the Children are living or spending time, and/or
allowing any of the Children to spend
any time with Mr W;
(d) Allowing Mr
S to enter any place where the Children are living or spending time, and/or
allowing any of the Children to spend
any time with Mr S.
(20) Order 19(b) does not restrain the Maternal Grandmother from visiting [C]
with the Children during the school holidays, on condition
they do not miss any
school days.
(21) The Mother and Father not consume alcohol and/or illicit drugs 12 hours
prior to and/or during the time that the Mother and
Father spend time with the
(22) The Mother be restrained from allowing the Children to spend any time with
(23) The Independent Children’s Lawyer remain in the matter for a period
of 12 months and have liberty to apply in relation
to implementation of these
Orders on 5 days’ notice.
(24) The Maternal Grandmother’s solicitor be responsible for reading these
Orders and Reasons to the Grandmother, or arranging
for another person known to
the Grandmother to do so, in full before the return of the Children
It is noted that
the Court requests the Independent Children’s
Lawyer to inquire of SDN Children’s Services, or the Benevolent Society
CatholicCare or similar agency as to whether that organisation can assist the
Grandmother to access the services identified in
Exhibit 17, Annexure A to these
It is further noted
that a copy of these Orders and Reasons will be
forwarded to the Director of Legal Services at the Department of Family and
(27) Pursuant to
section 65DA(2)
Family Law Act 1975
particulars of the obligations these orders create and the particulars of the
consequences that may follow if a person contravenes
these orders are set out in
Annexure A and these particulars are included in these
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment
under the pseudonym
Drake & Drake & Anor
is approved
pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT
OF AUSTRALIA
SYC 501 of 2012
First Respondent
Second Respondent
DIRECTOR GENERAL, DEPARTMENT OF FAMILY AND COMMUNITY SERVICES
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
six subject Children, [U], [V], [W], [X], [Y] and [Z], now aged between 11 years
and 4 years, belong to the [omitted] Group of
indigenous Australians, from [C],
in Far West New South Wales. The applicant Maternal Grandmother, (the
Grandmother) Ms J Drake,
is a [W] woman who was raised in [C] and maintains
strong family and community connections to the area. Her children were raised
[C]. Until July 2014, she lived in Redfern for over 10 years. She now lives in
[L], Sydney.
the date of this hearing, [U], [W], [Y] and [Z] were living in out of home care.
[V] and [X] were living with the Grandmother.
2011, the Children lived with their parents Ms K Drake (the first respondent)
and Mr Garwood (the second respondent), in [C].
As a result of the
Children’s neglect and regular exposure to drugs, alcohol and violence in
their parents’ household,
the Grandmother took the Children to live with
her in Redfern, the youngest four in mid-2011 and [U] and [V] in December 2011.
six Children remained in the Grandmother’s care in her small 2 bedroom
Redfern home until the April school holidays 2014, when
she took them to [C] for
the school holidays, and then decided to trial living there. They were all
staying at the home of Mr D (the
Grandmother’s former partner and
father/step father to her children) in [C], awaiting suitable housing. At 7.30
a.m. on 5 June
2014, the six Children were removed from the Grandmother’s
care by the Department of Family and Community Services (the Intervenor).
Order for removal of the Children
that the Maternal
Grandmother “
is exposing the Children to ongoing risk of immediate
harm, including but not limited to: not providing adequate supervision;
discharging
them into the care of people who are not assessed to be safe;
exposing the Children to persons who use alcohol; exposing the Children
verbal violence.”
proceedings were pending in this Court at the time of the Children’s
removal. However, the Department did not give notice
of their plan to remove the
Children to the Grandmother, or her solicitor, or to the Independent
Children’s Lawyer, nor did
the Department seek to relist the matter in
this Court before the removal. On 5 June 2014, the Department placed each Child
of home care arranged by a foster care agency known as the William
Campbell Foundation, located at Minnamurra (South Coast).
11 June 2014, this Court made interim orders for the Children to spend every
weekend with the Grandmother from Friday until Sunday
afternoon, against the
proposal of the Department for supervised limited day time. On 9 July 2014, the
placement for [V] (10) and
[X] (7) broke down. On 17 July 2014, after a defended
interim hearing, an order was made for [V] and [X] to be returned to the
Grandmother’s
full time care on 20 July 2014. The Department was seeking
to place the boys separately with new short term foster carers, which
involved each of them again changing schools. The final hearing was expedited.
issue for final determination is whether it is in the best interests of these
six Children to live in out of home care, probably
on the South Coast of New
South Wales or be returned to the care of their Grandmother in [L], Sydney. Both
the Mother and the Father
support the Grandmother’s application for the
Children to live with her.
C has been employed by the Department since 2009, and as Acting Casework Manager
[area omitted], since early August 2013. She had
delegated responsibility for
the Children’s medical care, financial support, place of living and
supervised the caseworker Ms K who was assigned to
the Drake/Garwood family in October 2013. Ms K is a recent graduate with a
in Social Work.
Grandmother was represented by Mr Anderson of counsel, the Department by
Solicitor Advocate Mr Harris, and the Mother by Mr Breeze
of counsel. The
Independent Children’s Lawyer was represented by Solicitor Advocate Ms
Wearne. The Father was unrepresented.
The Children
born on [omitted] 2003 is 11 years, [V] born on [omitted] 2004, is 10 years,
[W], born on [omitted] 2006 is 8 years, [X], born
on [omitted] 2007 is 7 years,
[Y], born on [omitted] 2008 is 6 years and [Z], born on [omitted] 2010 is 4
years of age. When removed
from the care of their Grandmother, the Children were
placed in four different homes between Campbelltown and Jervis Bay on the N.S.W
South Coast. [V] and [X] were placed together south of Nowra, [Y] and [Z]
together in the Campbelltown area, [U] on her own in the
Nowra area, and [W] on
his own in the Wollongong area. [V] and [X]’s foster father was
indigenous, but otherwise the Children
were placed with non-family and
non-indigenous foster carers.
Maternal Grandmother
Maternal Grandmother, aged 45 years, has recently moved from her two bedroom
she lives with [X] and [V],
and her youngest daughter, [T] (aged 16 years) who is under the care of the
Minister but self-placed
with her in November 2013. She has three other
daughters: Ms D (aged 18 years); Ms A (aged 27 years); and Ms K Drake (aged 29
Another daughter Ms B died in 2010. Ms K Drake is the Mother of the
Children in these proceedings. Ms A is the mother of [A], aged
12, [B], aged 8
and [C], aged 5 years who have been the subject of child protection concerns and
intervention by the Department.
Ms D have each given birth to
another child in the last year.
Grandmother was in a long term relationship with Mr W until April 2012. Mr W was
” to the Children and he was in the habit of
visiting the Grandmother’s home regularly after their relationship was
to bring presents for the Children. The Grandmother is now in a
relationship with Mr J, an Aboriginal man who lives in [C], and has
the care of
his two Children, aged 3 and 5 years. She is supported by a Disability Support
Pension and a family tax benefit. Until
de-authorised
carer by the Department when the Children were removed, the Grandmother was
receiving a carer’s allowance from
the Department as “
authorised carer
”. If the Children are restored to her care, the
Department tells the Court that she is unlikely to receive a Departmental
allowance again. Ms C said “
whatever the Court does will
not change the Department’s view
Mother, aged 29 years, is a [W] woman. She lived with various family members in
[C] during her childhood, including her grandmother,
an uncle, the Maternal
Grandmother and Mr D, her stepfather. She met the Father when he was 23 years
old and she was aged 15. They
lived together for 11 years and had the six
Children, exposing them to drug and alcohol abuse, neglect and family violence.
separation, the Mother moved from [C] to Sydney, and lived with the
Grandmother until September 2013 when she commenced her relationship
with whom she now lives at the [omitted] Hotel in Sydney’s CBD. The
relationship is characterised by drinking and
Mother is unemployed. She acknowledges continuing to abuse alcohol and to a long
history of illicit drug use, mainly cannabis
and occasional ‘ice’.
She told Ms M in July 2013
smokes marijuana every night. In cross examination, she said she has seen a
drug and alcohol counsellor at the Aboriginal
Medical Service on 2 occasions
recently. While she has a good relationship with the Grandmother, she is not
permitted into the Grandmother’s
drugs. In November 2013, the Grandmother called the police when the Mother
arrived intoxicated
and caused an altercation at the Grandmother’s home.
The Mother presently spends a few hours on 3-4 days a week at the
Grandmother’s
school and spends time with the other four Children at the Grandmother’s
Father, aged 37 years, is living with his step-brother’s family in [C].
He was one of 9 children all removed from their
parents’ care by the
Department. He described being placed from the age of 8 years in up to 15
different foster homes “
ranging from good to physically
using cannabis at the age of 12 years. At 16 he was back with his parents, with
whom he has now not had contact for some
years. The Father has worked as a
general labourer, but is presently unemployed, having had a
disagreement with my boss
.” He plans to remain living in
[C]. The Father said his maternal grandfather is a Torres Strait Islander, but
he has been unsuccessful
in having his heritage recognised by the Local Land
Mother and the Father commenced their relationship in [C] in 2001. In October
2012, the Mother obtained an Apprehended Violence
Order against the Father and
shortly afterwards the Father was charged with a breach of that Order. In
December 2012, the parties
Mother and the Father were involved with the Department and other support
services in [C] over many years because of allegations
alcohol abuse, family violence, neglect, failure to follow up medical treatment
for the Children, and lack of
appropriate
supervision.
find it noteworthy that it was the Grandmother, not the Department, who removed
the Children from the care of their parents because
of her ongoing concerns for
their safety.
Short History of Litigation
2 February 2012, the Grandmother commenced these proceedings seeking orders for
sole parental responsibility and for the six Children
to live with her.
21 February 2012, interim Orders were made for the Children to live with the
Grandmother in Redfern. The Mother and the Father
were each restrained from
removing the Children from the Grandmother’s care and orders were made for
the Children to spend
time with each parent in Sydney under supervision. By that
time, the school-aged Children were attending [A] School.
29 June 2012, Family Consultant Ms M recommended that the Department of Family
and Community Services be asked to intervene and
on the same day, the Department
was granted that leave.
April 2013, neither parent disputed the Grandmother’s application for the
Children to live with her. Both were seeking time
with the Children, though by
then, the Mother was proposing to live with the Children with the Grandmother.
2 May 2013, a final Order was made by consent for the Children to live with the
Grandmother and for the Grandmother to engage with
CatholicCare, or such other
program or organisation recommended by CatholicCare or the Department, for as
long as deemed appropriate
by those organisations. The Court noted that issues
of parental responsibility and the time the Children would spend with each
remained unresolved. Interim orders made by consent provided for the
Children to spend time with the Father under the supervision
of the Grandmother,
and with the Mother for short unsupervised daytime periods.
20 August 2013, Family Consultant M recommended that the Department share
parental responsibility for the Children with the Grandmother,
involved in both a support and a monitoring capacity. She recommended that the
Department conduct an assessment of the
Father’s home in [C].
3 March 2014, when the matter had been listed for final hearing, interim orders
were made by consent for the Grandmother to share
parental responsibility for
the Children with the Department. The Grandmother was ordered to accept
supervision and referrals from
the Department and engage with the Department as
required. The Grandmother was restrained from allowing her former partner, Mr W
into her home or from leaving the Children with Mr W unsupervised. The role of
the Department was outlined in the Orders as follows:
shall make the following referrals/arrange the following support services for
the Maternal Grandmother and the Children:
Arrangement
of an appropriate family support service to assist and support the Maternal
Grandmother in her parenting of the Children;
for the Maternal Grandmother to receive restorative parenting education, if
possible in her home;
paediatric assessments for each of the Children;
of the Maternal Grandmother to a drug and alcohol relapse prevention
support services to include respite care, after school and vacation care, if
appropriate.
The Court noted that the Independent Children’s Lawyer would use her best
endeavours to obtain assistance from the social work
department of legal aid to
expedite the Grandmother’s application for appropriate housing, and the
Department also agreed to
use their best endeavours to assist with the urgent
housing issue.
the April 2014 school holidays, for reasons later explained, the Grandmother
moved the Children to [C]. On 5 June 2014, the Children
were removed from the
Grandmother’s care pursuant to
Children and Young
Persons (Care and Protection)
The following day, the
Department filed an Application in a Case seeking Orders at short notice for the
Director General to have
sole parental responsibility for the Children and for
the Children to live as directed by the Minister.
11 June 2014, interim Orders were made for the Director General to have sole
parental responsibility for the Children, and for
the Children to live as
directed by the Director General. An order was made for the Children to spend
time with the Grandmother at
her home each weekend from Friday until Sunday, and
changeover was to take place at the [omitted] Community Services Centre. The
Grandmother was restrained from allowing Mr W into her property. The Court asked
the Department to actively seek placement of all
six Children together, or
within no more than two sibling groups.
17 July 2014, following the Department’s advice that [V] and [X]’s
placement had broken down on 9 July 2014, and after
evidence was given about the
Grandmother’s circumstances, interim orders were made for [V] and [X] to
live with the Grandmother.
She was ordered to engage with [M] Family Support
services, and to actively engage with Departmental caseworkers.
the end of the 5 day hearing on 12 September 2014, the matter was adjourned for
a further 10 days for the Independent Children’s
Lawyer to investigate and
make submissions on the practical supports that would be available to the
Grandmother if the Children were
returned to her care. On 22 September 2014,
the Court heard those submissions. On that day, the Court made an order for the
to spend the majority of the October 2014 school holidays with the
Grandmother.
Orders sought by the Maternal Grandmother (the
Grandmother)
Grandmother sought an Order for sole parental responsibility, or in the
alternative shared parental responsibility with the Department
in relation to
education and medical decisions, but sole parental responsibility for all else,
including, but not limited to, the
residence of the Children and cultural
She sought an order that
the Department use its best endeavours to ensure that an Aboriginal liaison
worker be engaged to work with
her, that a Family Support Service be engaged to
assist her with the care of the Children, and that respite care by culturally
appropriate
carers be organised as required.
the last day of hearing, the Grandmother’s counsel informed the Court that
the Grandmother supported the final proposal of
the Independent Children’s
Lawyer provided to the Court on the final day of submissions.
Orders sought by the Mother
Mother sought an order that the Children live with the Grandmother, and the
Grandmother have sole parental responsibility for
the Children. Her alternate
position was for the Grandmother and the Department to share parental
responsibility, but only in relation
to the Children’s health. The Mother
sought orders to spend time with the Children by arrangement with the
Grandmother, unsupervised.
The Mother agreed to be restrained from consuming
alcohol or drugs within 12 hours of spending time with the Children.
the last day of hearing, the Mother’s representative advised the Court
that the Mother supported the Independent Children’s
Lawyer’s final
Orders sought by the Father
Father agreed with the Orders sought by the Grandmother including that the
Children be permitted to spend time with him. He agreed
to the Children
spending time with him, either supervised or unsupervised, in Sydney or in [C]
when the Grandmother visits with the
Orders sought by the Intervenor (the Department)
the commencement of the hearing, the Department sought Orders for sole parental
responsibility, for the Children to live as directed
by the Minister, and for a
restraint against the Grandmother allowing the Children to be in the presence of
Mr W. The Department
asked the Court to note that it intended to place the
Children with authorised carers, and would endeavour to place the Children
together. The orders proposed would involve [V] and [X] being again removed from
the Grandmother’s care and for the other Children
to be moved from their
temporary foster care placements to long term foster placements, with the
possible exception of [U] who may
be able to remain long term in her present
placement. The Department sought a notation that in the event the Children were
in different
placements, they would facilitate time between the Children on at
least a weekly basis, or as frequently as was practicable. The
Department sought
another notation proposing time between the Children and the Grandmother for up
to four hours a fortnight; with
the Mother during times the Children were with
the Grandmother or alternatively, on at least six occasions a year for up to
hours a visit; with the Father, on at least four occasions each year for up
to four hours a visit during school holidays.
C said under no condition would the Department support the Children being
restored to their Grandmother’s care. The Department
proposed that all the
Children be placed somewhere on the South Coast, probably in the Nowra region.
Mr Harris for the Department
advised the Court that the William Campbell
Foundation would seek applications for carers to accept the six Children
together as
a sibling group, but he acknowledged that it was unlikely the
Children would be placed together given the number of Children and
their special
needs, and it was unlikely they would be placed with carers from their cultural
background. The Court was advised that
the recruitment process for long term
carers was not expected to begin until final orders were made in favour of the
Department.
Ms C could not say how many short term placements the Children might
experience before a long term placement was found.
the fourth day of hearing, the Department asked the Court to consider an
alternative proposal
in the event
its primary proposal was not accepted. In addition to supporting Orders sought
by the Independent Children’s Lawyer
for the Children to live with the
Grandmother, the Department’s alternative proposal set out in detail the
action they required
by the Grandmother, which included accepting referrals to
the following services, and engaging with those services:
Benevolent Society (or similar) in order to assess and increase her parenting
Child Protection Counselling Service;
drug and alcohol relapse prevention programme;
and numeracy assistance;
respite care service.
Department also sought Orders in relation to the Grandmother contacting the
Department about the following issues as soon as reasonably
possible after she
became aware of them:
dental or school appointments for the Children;
arising with the Children’s health, dental care or
arising with the Children’s behaviour;
that are involved with the Grandmother or the Children;
(including family members) staying overnight in the home;
Children spending time with the parents, and any issues arising;
Children spending time outside the home, including proposed trips to [C];
other concerns about the safety or welfare of the Children.
alternative proposal also set out action required by the Department, including
organising the Grandmother to be referred to the
services outlined above, and
arranging the following services for the Children:
for the Children’s medical, dental and developmental needs;
to and from medical, dental and education appointments as
for the Children as required; and
assault counselling for [U].
Department sought Orders to facilitate better communication between the parties,
including requiring the Grandmother (with a support
person if preferred) to
attend monthly meetings with caseworkers. They sought Orders in relation to
random drug testing of the Grandmother,
and noted that consideration would be
given as to whether a new casework team could be allocated to the
Orders sought by the Independent Children’s
the commencement of the hearing, the Independent Children’s Lawyer sought
an Order that the Grandmother and the Department
share parental responsibility
and the Children live with the Grandmother. During submissions at the end of
hearing the evidence,
the Independent Children’s Lawyer changed her
position seeking an order for the Grandmother to share parental responsibility
with the Department in relation to education and medical and dental issues only,
and the Grandmother otherwise have sole parental
responsibility for the
Children, particularly in relation to cultural issues. Ms Wearne submitted that
a final order should be made
for the Children to live with the Grandmother and
that she be restrained from relocating from Sydney for a period of 4 years.
further submissions were made 10 days after the hearing concluded, the
Independent Children’s Lawyer again changed her
position. She no longer
sought a shared parental responsibility order between the Grandmother and the
Department but rather that
the Grandmother be given sole parental
responsibility. She proposed that this
would be subject to several
conditions that required the Grandmother to engage with [M] Family Support
Services and to comply with
specific orders about the Children’s health
and education. The Independent Children’s Lawyer sought Orders for the
to live with the Grandmother, for the Grandmother to be restrained from
moving the Children’s residence from within a 15 km
radius of the CBD and
from allowing the Children to spend any time with Mr W. The Independent
Children’s Lawyer sought orders
providing for the Children to spend time
with each parent as arranged with the Grandmother, provided that any
unsupervised time did
not exceed 4 hours per day. She sought restraints on each
parent consuming alcohol or illicit drugs 12 hours prior to and/or during
the Children spent with them. The Independent Children’s Lawyer sought an
order that she remain in the matter for a 12
month period to monitor the
implementation of the Orders and to ensure the Grandmother’s compliance
with orders.
Recommendations of the Court experts
M, Family Consultant, interviewed the parties and the Children in July 2013. Ms
M has previously been employed by the Department.
In her report dated 9 August
Ms M recommended that the
Department share parental responsibility with the Grandmother, that the Children
live with the Grandmother
and that the Department remain involved with the
family in both a support and a monitoring capacity. Ms M recommended that the
conduct an assessment of the Father’s residence for the purpose
of future spend time with arrangements.
R, an Aboriginal forensic psychologist, prepared a second expert report for the
Court in August/September 2014
The Father did not attend for interview and despite extensive efforts, Mr R was
unable to contact him. At the conclusion of his
assessment, Mr R recommended
the return of the Children to the Grandmother.
Department did not accept the expert recommendations.
Department’s involvement historically with Maternal
Grandmother
C believes the Grandmother’s history with the Department is
incredibly relevant
there is a continuation of
the issues in the history”
since at least September
Department’s records disclose a long history of involvement with the
Grandmother dating back to November 1985, when she
was 16 years of age and her
first child, Ms K Drake was 2 months old.
1994, a number of risk of harm reports were received concerning Ms K Drake and
Ms A. The risk of harm reports alleged physical
abuse by the Grandmother,
exposure to alcohol and drug abuse, family violence and neglect. In December
2003, it was alleged that
the Grandmother’s partner, Mr W, had sexually
abused Ms A and the Grandmother was made aware of it, though the allegation was
not substantiated at the time. Ms A has recently reported to the Department that
the incident involved Mr W masturbating in her
Grandmother told Ms M she started drinking alcohol at the age of 12 and went on
to use a range of drugs, including marijuana,
cocaine and heroin. The
Grandmother was not focussed on her children when they were young, and her own
mother was the main carer
of her first three children (Ms K Drake, Ms A and Ms
B). It seems that Ms A and Ms B moved between the Grandmother, her mother and
foster care during their childhood and
adolescence.
A has four children, two of whom were removed by the Department while she was
living with the Grandmother in Redfern in 2011/12.
Ms M reported that the
Grandmother was not approved as a carer for those children because of drugs in
the home and the presence
of Mr W. Ms A’s third child was removed soon
after birth when Ms A was in jail. Her children were placed with the
Grandmother’s
sister [name omitted], who lives in Queensland. Ms A lives
with her partner in Sydney and has recently had another
was placed in temporary foster care at 10 years of age and she saw little of her
mother until 2002. Thereafter numerous further
reports were received about Ms B
concerning physical abuse, homelessness, inadequate supervision and
abandonment.
Ms B suffered from
schizophrenia and died approximately 4 years ago.
Grandmother’s youngest two children, Ms D and [T] were removed by the
Department in 2002 and placed in [C] with their father,
Mr D, known as
‘[Mr D].’ There were 44 risk of harm reports in relation to [T] and
37 reports in relation to Ms D recorded
between 1998 and 2012, (during periods
they were in the care of the Grandmother and Mr D) related to their exposure to
alcohol use,
physical abuse, poor supervision, family violence, neglect and
non-school attendance and risk of sexual abuse. In 2011, [T] was removed
her father and placed in foster care. That placement broke down. [T] is now
living with the Grandmother in [L]. Ms D, at 18
years, returned to live with the
Grandmother and then moved back to [C].
Grandmother acknowledges her failings as a parent of her own Children.
Department involvement with the Children in care of Mother
Mother said the Department became involved with her Children when [W] became ill
and suffered brain damage as a result of gastroenteritis.
acknowledged drinking alcohol to excess, being subjected to assaults by the
Father and leaving the Children unsupervised.
Ms N, caseworker for the
Department in [C], told Family Consultant M that there had been a number of risk
of harm reports related
to both parents’ abuse of alcohol and poor
supervision, for example, leaving the Children unattended while they were at the
local pub. Ms N described the Father as more focussed on the needs of the
Children and domestic tasks than the Mother who was often
intoxicated with drugs
and alcohol.
Mr R, a police
officer, formerly employed by the Department, was aware of the many verbal
arguments between the parents when using
Ms P, a family support
worker involved with the Mother in [C], reported serious domestic violence
between the parents.
deposed to reports of “
inadequate supervision, drug use, neglect,
emotional state of carer, inadequate shelter, risk of physical harm, alcohol
abuse by carer,
medical treatment not provided, and domestic
already noted, it was the Grandmother, not the Department, who removed the
Children from their parents.
Department involvement with Children in care of Maternal
Grandmother
Department conducted case work with the Grandmother and the Children from May
2012. Ms K is the fourth caseworker allocated to
the case since then, and Ms C
the third case manager.
22 May 2012, the year advisor at [A] School reported that the Grandmother was
working hard with the Children, was “
doing a great
job”...“agreed to supports and referrals for the
Children”...”to break up this family would
2012, the Department’s Safety Assessment
of the Children in the
Grandmother’s care was substantially positive.
June 2012, Ms D returned to live with the Grandmother. On 27 June 2012 the
Department assessed the Children as being at “
neglect in the Grandmother’s care. On 29 June 2012, the Department was
given leave to intervene in these proceedings.
August 2012, the Grandmother was supported by caseworker
CatholicCare. Ms C said the Department was receiving positive feedback from the
agencies and services involved with the
Children, and the Children were doing
well in the Grandmother’s care. At a meeting on 17 September 2012, Mr F
very positive feedback about [Ms J Drake’s] parenting,
and her ‘proactive, supportive and loving approach to caring for
Grandchildren
.” Mr F said the Grandmother’s level of support
could be reduced to providing her help with shopping and
The Grandmother had
reduced her use of Suboxone and cannabis.
3 October 2012, Mr F assessed the Grandmother as providing “
good enough
” and noted the significant challenges faced by the
Grandmother in providing adequate care for the Children, including the
size of her home, the Children’s learning difficulties and
extra medical requirements. His recommendations were for the Children
in the Grandmother’s care, for the Grandmother to use her current
supports, to follow up medical appointments for
the Children and to consider
respite care. His report
assessor concludes that Ms Drake has created a safe, secure and healthy
environment for the six children. She provides healthy
and appropriate
nutritional foods, houses the Children adequately in an inadequate home, budgets
her income so that she has enough
money to pay her bills and food and utilises
local services including medical and recreational.
assessor believes Ms Drake to have great parental capabilities, including the
appropriate use of discipline, good supervision
of the six children and
providing the six children with development and enrichment opportunities.
December 2012, the Mother and Father separated. With the knowledge of the
Department, the Mother moved in with the Grandmother
for 9 months. On 19
December 2012, caseworkers inspected the home and the Children’s sleeping
arrangements. Mr W was seen in
the home and caseworkers were informed by the
Grandmother that Mr W sometimes slept overnight on the
March 2013, CatholicCare closed their file as Mr F believed the Grandmother no
longer required the intensive level of support being
provided by CatholicCare.
The Department caseworker said “
CatholicCare has nothing but praise for
Ms Drake... her care of the Children is exemplary
.” CatholicCare told
the Department they wanted to use the Grandmother “
as a case study/role
for other Aboriginal clients”
within the area
Department offered the Grandmother a referral to SDN services (which can include
the Brighter Futures Programme) but “
she deemed it not
2 May 2013, the Department consented to final orders for the Children to live
with the Grandmother.
Department’s positive attitude towards the Grandmother changed to a
negative one from June 2013. Ms C deposed to the Grandmother
making allegations
had decided were malicious, and
to the Grandmother failing to follow Court
orders in relation to those children’s contact with her. She was
demanding contact
had misused funds...(allocated
for contact)”
“not been going through proper
9 August 2013, a risk of harm
raised concerns about the
Children’s exposure to the Grandmother and Mother’s daily cannabis
use, [U] being ‘choked’
by the Mother, Mr W visiting the house, Mr W
having used ‘ice’, the Mother’s boyfriend coming to the house
intoxicated,
the Grandmother speaking in a verbally aggressive manner. The
Grandmother tested positive for cannabis use on 18 October and 31 October
In November 2013, [T] moved back to live with the Grandmother with the
Department’s knowledge.
7 November 2013, the Department assessed the Children as “
safe in [Ms J
Drake]’s care
This assessment
noted Mr W’s presence from time to time. The Grandmother was seen to have
nutritious food in the house.
16 December 2013, Ms K was advised by [A] School that “
overall, the
Children ([Y], [X], [W] and [U]) had made many improvements, and were
socialising well with other
Department’s contact with the Grandmother during January 2014 focussed on
her missed drug test (the Grandmother said she
did not receive the message).
The Grandmother was upset to be told by Ms K on 31 January 2013 that a missed
test counts as “
a dirty test
”. Mr W was seen at the house
that day and a risk of harm report was raised in relation to the Children and
[T] because of
Mr W’s presence. At that time, the Grandmother’s
small two bedroom Redfern home was housing herself, her 6 grandchildren
daughters [T] and Ms D.
Grandmother’s focus in discussion with the Department was her urgent need
for a bigger house. The Department’s file
notes indicate its major
concerns did not include the Grandmother’s housing but rather Mr W’s
access to the Children
and the Grandmother’s drug use.
3 February 2014, the Grandmother told the Department that Mr W was only there
momentarily, and terminated the call. On 5 February
2014, the Grandmother again
hung up on Ms C but two days later initiated contact and a meeting was arranged.
11 February 2014, the Grandmother returned a negative drug test. On 12 February
2014, [U] was interviewed at school and said she
Mr W who used
drugs, had hit [Y] on the head and was often at the house. The Grandmother told
Ms K that [U] had never told her that
Mr W, but as a result of
[U]’s feelings, the Grandmother would no longer allow him into her home.
The Department then made
it clear to the Grandmother that Mr W was not permitted
in the Grandmother’s home.
13 February 2014 the Department assessed the Children as safe in the
Grandmother’s care.
3 March 2014, orders were made for the Department and the Grandmother to share
parental responsibility for the Children. The orders
required the Department to
make referrals and arrangements for various supports for the Grandmother and the
Children. In cross examination,
Ms C conceded that the Department had not met
any of its obligations under this Order.
C detailed the events which resulted in the Department’s decision to
remove the Children from the Grandmother’s care,
which I summarise:
April 2014: the Grandmother attended a meeting at the Department’s
offices. She said she would not move to [C] until she
had secured housing there.
She advised she would make inquiries about available services for the Children.
April 2014: risk of harm report in relation to [V] who was seen with a black
eye which he said was caused by the Grandmother.
The Grandmother said it was
caused accidentally. The Grandmother failed to provide a medical certificate
for [V] requested by Department.
[V] gave inconsistent versions of what
occurred. At interview at school on 8 April 2014, [X] told the caseworker that
Mr W had given
[Z] a glo-light the night before, and that the Grandmother had
thrown her mobile phone and it hit [V]’s
April 2014: the Grandmother advised the caseworker that Mr W was not heeding her
requests not to visit.
2014 holidays: the Grandmother took the Children to [C] and enrolled the
Children in school there after the holidays. She had
told Ms K on 27 March 2014
that she was considering moving and on 31 March 2014 the Grandmother told Ms K
she wanted to check with
the Department before arranging the
April 2014: Ms K was advised by a caseworker in [C] that the Grandmother had
decided to stay in [C] for a six month trial period
and was living with her
former partner, Mr D (‘[Mr D]’) while looking for accommodation
April 2014: Ms K recorded a conversation with [C] Public School when she was
advised services for the Children were limited in
2014: The [C] office of the Department visited Mr D’s home and found no
significant or immediate concerns. [T] was present
as well as [name omitted], a
child under the care of the Minister.
2014: Ms K informed the Grandmother the Department did not support her remaining
in [C] and there were concerns about where
the Children were living. The
Grandmother advised she would not stay if she could not find housing. When
questioned about it, the
Grandmother told Ms K that she and the Children
sometimes stayed with a man called “[Mr C]”. The Grandmother swore
Ms K and abruptly terminated their conversation.
May 2014: the Department received a risk of harm report in relation to a sexual
assault against [U] and another 10 year old girl.
Allegedly two boys touched
their breasts and bottoms. When the girls ran, the boys allegedly threw the 10
year old to the ground
and [U] went back to help her. The boys posted sexual
references about [U] and the other child on Facebook. [U] told [T] about
incident, but not the Grandmother and asked the police not to tell her
Grandmother as she had warned them they would return to
Sydney if there was any
trouble. A contradictory version of what occurred was given to the Joint
Investigation Response Team by
May 2014: Ms K advised the Department that she was concerned about the lack of
services in [C] and did not support her remaining
there. Ms K found the
Grandmother uncooperative, particularly in relation to the identity of
May 2014: a report was received by the Department that the Children were not
being supervised adequately. It was reported that
[V] and [X] had climbed the
side wall of the railway line. The caller alleged the Children were not living
with their Grandmother.
May 2014: there were further reports to the Department:
had been in a fight at school.
was upset at school because [V] had blood running down his leg. [V]’s knee
was missing a large amount skin. [V] required
medical attention which had not
been arranged.
was asked to leave the classroom to go to toilet because he smelt of faeces and
the school had concerns about his hygiene.
May 2014: the Department advised there had been a fight the day before outside
Mr D’s home involving [T], Ms D and up to
20-30 other young people who
were intoxicated and fought with
The school advised Ms C
that one of the children involved in the ‘fight’ was living with Mr
D (self-placed, though in
the care of Minister), the Children were walking home
from school by themselves and [U] was on suspension for 3 days because of poor
The Police advised
the Department they did not see the Children at the house at the time of the
street incident but believed it an
unsafe environment for Children. The police
reported an unverified allegation that Mr D had watched [T] have sex with boys
was younger.
Department then decided to remove the Children from the Grandmother’s
care, without notice to the Grandmother, her solicitor,
the Independent
Children’s Lawyer, or this Court, despite a period of 5 days elapsing
between the decision to remove and the
The Removal
5 June 2014, at 7.30 a.m. accompanied by two police officers and 3 other
Departmental officers, Ms C knocked on the front door
of Mr D’s home in
[C] to remove the six Children from the Grandmother’s care. The
Grandmother had no warning, and was
getting the Children ready for school. [X]
had just come out of the shower and had a towel around him. All the other school
Children were in uniform. There were school lunches lined up on the kitchen
[U] was crying and asking
why they were being taken away. The Grandmother, crying, was holding [Z]. [Y]
“clung” to Mr
D who then carried her to the car. Ms C conceded it
may have been “
quite traumatic
” for the Children, some of
whom were crying. The Grandmother says the officers told her they were taking
the Children to Parkes,
not to Sydney and would talk to her later. Two cars took
the Children to McDonalds Restaurant in Parkes and then by plane to Sydney.
F met the plane to take [U], [V] and [X] to their placements. At one point, [U]
told her brothers “
to behave like they would if [Ms J Drake] was caring
Children finally reached their various placements late the same evening, [V] and
[X] at 10.30 p.m. When asked by the Grandmother’s
counsel whether the
experience for the Children would have been “
said there was “
no outward sign of upset
cross-examination, Ms K said the Children appeared scared and were crying and
that [U] was particularly upset. [U] requested
to be placed with [Z] which was
denied. Ms K agreed the removal would have been traumatic for the Children.
When it was put to her
that it would have been a very long day for the Children,
Ms K said “
it was a long day for everyone
record Ms K’s
conversations with Ms O from the William Campbell Foundation on 6 and 10 June.
The Children “
were wonderful
”, [U] was “
great, sweet
and talkative
” and the Children were “
[U] had said “
tell the boys I love them
9 July 2014, [V] was reported to be exhibiting concerning behaviours towards a 3
year old girl in his placement, including threatening
to stab her; [V] and [X]
were fighting and using swear words but “
had settled well, were happy
at school”.
Children’s placements
Placement Rationale
involved a consideration of Departmental placement principles which apply when
an indigenous child needs to be placed in out of home
care. The principles set
out the following placement
member of the child’s extended family or kinship group; (all options
should be explored even if some distance away)
member of the Aboriginal community to which the child
member of some other aboriginal family residing within the vicinity of the
child’s usual place of residence;
suitable person approved by the Director-General after consultation with members
of the child’s extended family or kinship
group and aboriginal
organisations as are appropriate to the child.
C acknowledged that the Department Guidelines for the placement of indigenous
children were not followed. No inquiries were made
in the [C] area where the
Children have kinship ties. While the Department was prepared to assess Ms A as
a potential carer, she
was not in a position to accept the Children. (I note
here it would seem highly unlikely Ms A would have been assessed as suitable
given her history of involvement with the Department and given her own children
had been removed from her care). The Department advised
the William Campbell
Foundation that the Aboriginal Foster Care Agency did not have suitable
placements for these Children.
Department relied on the William Campbell Foundation to find placements for the
Children. The William Campbell Foundation recruits
carers from the South Coast
of New South Wales and the Department relies on the Foundation to communicate
with the carers. There
is no evidence before the Court as to the qualifications,
experience and training of the staff of the Foundation or the qualifications,
experience and training of the recruited carers.
already noted, the six Children were taken to four different placements and [U]
was not placed with [Z] as she had requested. As
earlier noted, the Children
were placed a long way from their family and from their kinship group, remote
from [W] country. Ms C
Ms K conceded that the William Campbell
Foundation was a long way down the hierarchy in terms of placement options.
C said she understood attachment principles and the need for the Children to be
together, but this could not be achieved. She
did not seek advice from the
Department psychiatrist as to how to best minimise damage to the Children when
placing them in out of
placement arrangements.
the orders of 17 July 2014 were made for [V] and [X] to be returned to the
Grandmother after the breakdown of their placement,
the William Campbell
Foundation had planned to move [V] into the care of a single male carer with no
other children. [X] was to be
placed with a couple. Again, no evidence was
adduced as to these carers’ experience, qualifications or training.
carers for [W] and for [Y] and [Z] both sought respite care in the September
school holidays, [W]’s carers for 5 days and
[Y] and [Z]’s carers
for 10 days.
When the need for
these further changes was raised at the end of the hearing, I made orders for
all the Children to spend the majority
of the September/October 2014 school
holidays with the Grandmother to minimise further changes to the
Children’s care arrangements.
the Children have been in care and spending weekends with the Grandmother, the
Department contends that the Grandmother’s
care of the Children has
continued to be inadequate. In particular:
used the Grandmother’s puffer instead of her own;
[V] and [X] have been returned to the Grandmother’s care, the Grandmother
has used physical discipline. The Grandmother
admits to slapping on the hand
and putting them on a mat. On 4 July 2014, [W] complained about being smacked by
the Grandmother.
On 18 July 2014, the records state that when told he and [V]
were returning to the Grandmother’s, [X] said he did not want
because the Grandmother smacked
reported to her carer that the Grandmother had caused an injury to her middle
finger causing swelling.
carer has also said that “
[Y] is very excited to see her Nan and
siblings as she becomes very talkative and loud on the Friday after school
before she is picked
up and runs out the door when it is opened and time for the
siblings to go.”
Legal principles
proceedings were commenced before 7 June 2012. Relevant amendments made to the
Family Law Act 1975
pursuant to the
Family Law Legislation Amendment
(Family Violence and Other Measures) Act 2011
therefore do not apply.
principles governing this case are set out in
Family Law Act
Section 60CA
provides that I must regard the best interests of the
child as the paramount consideration. To determine the child’s best
I must consider the primary considerations set out in
section 60CC(2)
and the 13 additional considerations set out in
section 60CC(3)
which includes
any other fact or circumstance the court thinks is
.” Some of these factors specifically refer to
” but the Full Court has stated that the Court would
be expected to consider all the factors (to the extent they are relevant),
whether under those provisions or under
(3)(m) when, as in this case, a
non-parent is involved.
Court states that the factors in
means to an
and are matters
to be considered and applied in a manner “
consistent with the
overarching imperative of securing the outcome most likely to promote the
child’s best
interests.”
additional considerations in
section 60CC(3)(b)
, (d) and (f) make clear that
grandparents can play an important role when considering a child’s best
requires me to consider also the extent to which each parent has
fulfilled his or her parental responsibilities, and has facilitated
parent in fulfilling his or her parental responsibilities. Although the two
primary considerations must assume greater
importance than the additional
considerations, when determining what orders are in the best interests of the
child, I must consider
the factors before making a determination. I
must ensure that any order I make is consistent with any family violence order
not expose a person to an unacceptable risk of family violence, to the
extent that it is possible to do so consistently with the
child’s best
interests being the paramount consideration.
primary considerations are firstly the benefit to the child of having a
meaningful relationship with both of the child’s
parents and secondly, the
need to protect the child from physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse,
neglect or family violence. I give these
matters very careful consideration because the Act provides that they are
primary considerations
and because they are consistent with the first two
objects of the Act set out in
section 60B
to which I must have careful regard.
objects of the parenting provisions of the
Family Law Act 1975
ensure that the best interests of child are met by:
ensuring that
children have the benefit of both of their parents having a meaningful
involvement in their lives, to the maximum extent
consistent with the best
interests of the child; and
children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed
to, abuse, neglect or family violence;
ensuring that
children receive adequate and proper parenting to help them achieve their full
potential; and
ensuring that
parents fulfil their duties, and meet their responsibilities, concerning the
care, welfare and development of their
although the first, third and fourth objects in
section 60B(1)
have no application to
non-parents.
is no presumption in favour of a natural parent “
or any entitlement of
a parent to a preferential position from which the decision making process
considering a child’s best interests, although the fact of parenthood is
an important and significant
. The Full Court
application for a parenting order by a non-parent is to be determined in the
same way as an application by a parent, namely,
according to its own facts and
having regard to the best interests of the child as the paramount
consideration.”
principles underlying these objects include that children have the right to know
and be cared for by both their parents; have
a right to spend time on a regular
basis and communicate on a regular basis with both their parents and other
people significant
to their care; parents jointly share duties and
responsibilities concerning the care, welfare and development of their children;
parents should agree about the future parenting of their children; and children
have a right to enjoy their culture. For Aboriginal
children this includes the
right to maintain a connection with that culture and to have the support,
opportunity and encouragement
to explore the full extent of that culture
consistent with the child’s age, developmental level and views and to
positive appreciation of that culture.
provides that when applying
to the circumstances of an Aboriginal
child, or identifying a person or persons who have exercised, or may exercise
parental responsibility
for such a child, the Court must have regard to any
kinship obligations, and child-rearing practices of the child’s Aboriginal
Evidence in relation to the Children
six Children each have a number of medical and dental needs, some of which are
significant. Exhibit 7 includes medical assessments
of some of the Children
since being in out of home care. Those reports identify [Z]’s need for
dental treatment, [Y]’s
need for dental x-rays, [W]’s developmental
delay, speech difficulties and need for dental care. It was recommended that [W]
have a hearing test, a speech pathology assessment, occupational therapy,
psychometric testing, an ophthalmology review, a blood
screen, and a cardiac
assessment. [V] received a clean bill of health in July 2014. Dr G recommended
a paediatric assessment for
[X], possible underlying dental sepsis, noted a
history of nightmares, and the need for his relationship with the Grandmother to
be informally explored because [X] had said he did not want to visit his
‘Nan’ each week.
Consultant M described all six Children having special needs including speech,
hearing and intellectual delay for the boys.
In her opinion, there will have
been a negative psychological impact on all six children as a result of neglect,
exposure to family
violence, drug and alcohol use, as well as changes in their
primary care during the early stages of their
development.
K was the Grandmother’s and Children’s treating general practitioner
at the Aboriginal Medical Service until the Children
were removed. Dr K prepared
a report dated 14 July 2014 from the Aboriginal Medical Centre notes but did not
have access to the clinical
notes when giving evidence, having recently left her
employment. She told the Court that all the Children were up to date with their
immunisations. [U] was due for her review with the ear nose and throat
specialist, had been diagnosed with asthma and had been referred
work. [V] had been assessed by a paediatrician, Dr O, in 2012 and did not meet
the criteria for attention deficit hyperactivity
disorder. He had had some
involvement with a speech pathologist. [W] had been referred to an
ophthalmologist at Sydney Children’s
Hospital for a squint and been
referred for dental work. [X] had had speech pathology at [omitted] Community
Health. [Y] had suffered
episodic asthma, had her hearing tested in November
2013, and had had a dental check-up. [Z] had surgery for an undescended
last year, had been referred for dental work and was due for a hearing
test. Dr K explained that dental services are offered to aboriginal
children at
the Medical Service dental clinic at Redfern, the dental hospital at Chalmers
Street, and Canterbury Hospital.
K was impressed by the Grandmother’s management of the Children and of the
Children’s behaviour and presentation at
appointments. Unusually, the
Grandmother had wanted all the Children fully medically checked. Dr K confirmed
that the Grandmother
had followed up all referrals to specialists, and was aware
of the damage caused by sugary drinks. Dr K explained the delays in accessing
public dental services.
K confirmed there had been no requests for information about the
Children’s medical histories from health professionals involved
Children since the Children were removed and that the Aboriginal Medical Service
had not been provided with any medical
information concerning the Children since
they went into care.
has been in Year 5 at [omitted] Public School since being placed in out of home
care. Some behavioural issues have been reported
at school but otherwise the
limited available evidence from the Department suggests she is settled in her
placement and enjoying
the company of the 12 year old girl living there, also in
foster care. When questioned as to what sexual assault counselling had
arranged for her, Ms C acknowledged nothing had been arranged, and should have
was 9 years old at observations/interview with Ms M who found her
compliant and somewhat hyper alert
She understood she
was living with her “Nan” because her parents did not look after
them properly with “
all the drinking and the pot. They just wanted to
She reported
staying at ‘[Mr D]’s’ place when [Z] was a baby and to being
involved in [Z]’s care with ‘[Mr
D]’ and [T]. She described a
chaotic lifestyle with her parents constantly drinking and smoking cannabis,
shouting and fighting
and her Mother once having a broken nose. Her Father used
to hit the Children with a belt. She reported that once, at the
Grandmother’s
” and she was
very frightened and her ‘Nan’ was going to hit her
She was aware the
Grandmother smoked cannabis from a bong. [U] described her ‘Nan’ as
strict but described feeling “
closest to her Nan, but seemed a little
sad, saying that Nan is not able to spend time with her and the other Children
because [Z]
[U] appeared to
Ms M to be content in her Grandmother’s care.
presented to Mr R in August 2014
as a confident, out-going young girl who presented as feeling somewhat
marginalised within her family. She openly stated that she
all her siblings and did not like being around them or spending time with them
at her Grandmother’s home.
” She was negative about her time with
the Grandmother each weekend and resented her “
controlling
” behaviour. However, she felt
” with her Grandmother and safe in her home. [U] felt
others of her siblings were favoured over her. She wanted to live with
‘[Mr D]’ in [C], without her siblings who are “
Grandmother told Mr R that [U] was challenging at times, “
going on 11
but thinking she’
She said that [U]
is not always compliant, and questioning of her authority which was probably
consistent with her stage of
development.
examination, the Grandmother said she believed that [U]’s attitude had
changed since she went into care. She sits
in her room all weekend
eating lollies
” brought with her from her foster care home.
She will not speak openly to the Grandmother and pushes her siblings away.
her counsel advised the Court at the end of the hearing that he was
instructed [U] was more settled recently. Ms M said that while
it is good for
[U] to have a sense of independence, it is also helpful for her to have an
appropriate level of responsibility. In
the view of both experts, [U] should not
be separated from her siblings.
has been attending [L] School since he returned to his Grandmother’s home
on 20 July 2014. A letter from the Principal dated
14 August 2014
and [X] have settled into their new school and are engaged in their learning.
They wear full school uniform, are punctual
and attend regularly. Both [V] and
[X] have specific learning needs which our school is addressing through a
variety of accommodations.
They are responding well to the teaching and
learning strategies.
10 September 2014, [V] received a bronze certificate for
‘Mathletics’.
the support of the Department, if he remains in the Grandmother’s care,
[V] will return to [omitted], a school he attended
previously for children with
an intellectual disability.
M said that [V]
then aged almost 9 years, “
had an intensity
adult instruction
Ms M understood he had been diagnosed with ADHD, speech and hearing
deficits, and an intellectual delay. [V] had seen his Grandmother
smoking pot through a bong. [V] was “
respectful of and obedient for Ms
presented to Mr R as a “
boisterous, out-going young boy who chatted
openly when
interviewed.
he was distractible and his responses were erratic. He missed his siblings and
hoped they could all live together, and
was positive about living with his
Grandmother. He was happy to earn pocket money from cleaning up in the house
and found his Grandmother
reasonable. He did not agree with [U] that the
Grandmother was “
”. [V] described his routine with his
Grandmother, his clean uniform and his Grandmother helping him to school. She
the water was not too hot in the shower. [V] gave Mr R the impression
that he felt safe with his Grandmother and enjoyed the stable,
functional nature
of her household. His only regret was the lack of outdoor space and his
inability to ride his bike in the yard.
Grandmother described [V] and [X] as active and energetic young boys who needed
to be entertained and diverted to manage their
needs. [V] and [X]’s
placement was said to have broken down because of [V]’s behavioural
is presently attending [omitted] Public School in Year 3. He suffers from global
developmental delay and struggles with his school
work. According to his
caseworker, while enrolled in Year 3 at school, he functions at Kindergarten
level. He was not interviewed
by Mr R because of his poor intellectual
development. Two weeks after his removal, [W] was reported to have settled into
his temporary
placement well.
However his “
living skills and personal hygiene skills
still developing and he suffered nightmares from time to time “
to his brother [V]
The placement report stated that [W] was placed with a carer who had extensive
experience working with people with high
M observed [W] (then aged 7) to be “
quite amiable and smiled
Departmental
records indicated his global delay was due to his parents’ failure to
provide appropriate medical care when he
was young. Ms M reported that he will
need a lot of support through his childhood, and given the limited resources
available for
disabled children, in Ms M’s view, he will require
a very committed parent or carer to advocate
While the parents did
not follow up medical appointments, the Grandmother had done so since she had
received additional support from
agencies, in particular CatholicCare. Ms M said
ongoing support and monitoring is likely to help her
Grandmother
] to obtain services for [W] as he
R reported [W]’s developmental delay, dental problems, some possible
hearing loss and speech difficulties. He was described
to him by his caseworker
open, happy, cheerful
[W] has told
his caseworker that he “
just wants to live with my Nan
Grandmother says he has been prescribed glasses by an ophthalmologist which need
to be changed each year, disputed by
an optometrist he has recently seen. The
Grandmother described [W] to Mr R as the most vulnerable of the Children due to
his developmental
delay and medical needs. She said he trusted anyone and
needed her attention and care more than the others.
has attended [L] School since he was returned to live with his Grandmother in
July 2014. On 15 August 2014 he received a Certificate
of Merit from the school
which reads “
for being a happy enthusiastic new member of our school
community. We are so happy to have
(then aged 6) appeared to Ms M to “
anger quickly if he did not get his
He had been
with his Grandmother since the age of 4 years. He suffered speech delay and the
school reported some behavioural concerns
which certain teachers were able to
Ms M said his lack of self-regulation might relate to his disability
or to the poor parenting he received in his formative years.
His emotional
development is delayed.
presented to Mr R as an active, outgoing young boy who was distractible and
difficult to pin down. He found him difficult to
engage in interview. [X] was
positive about living with the Grandmother and liked being with his siblings on
weekends. He described
his Nan as actively caring for them and “
attends [omitted] Public School in Year 1. In June and July 2014, the Department
was told [Y] had settled well into her placement,
though she exhibited
behavioural problems and had begun wetting her bed most nights after leaving her
Grandmother at the end of each
was observed by Ms M to sit quietly focussed on a game. She did not interact
with either the other Children or the adults
She had then
lived with the Grandmother from the age of 3 years. Ms M believed it likely
that the Grandmother is her primary attachment
figure, given the low level of
care she would have received from her parents, although Ms M found it likely
there had been a bond
between her and the
was not interviewed by Mr R but he was told by her caseworker that [Y] was
functioning well at school though struggled with maths
and writing. The
Grandmother said she was reading well. There was no evidence of any
developmental delay. Mr R was told that [Y]
could be argumentative and
difficult after returning to her carers from time with the Grandmother and her
siblings on weekends and
was bed wetting with her carers. [Y] was becoming
increasingly independent and challenging of adult authority. A report from the
William Campbell Foundation
reports that [Y] says “
she wants the (foster) home to be like her
Nan’s stating that Nan lets her watch TV whenever they want and they have
The Grandmother told Mr R that [Y] was settled in
has attended [omitted] Child Care since he has been in care. The reports from
the William Campbell Foundation of June and July
2014 said that [Z] was
progressing well in his placement, though using few words. He had started to
toilet train, brush his teeth
August 2013, when under 3 years of age, Ms M said that [Z] “
sought the attention of either the other children or the
living with the Grandmother from the age of 3 months. Ms M assessed his
Grandmother as his likely primary attachment figure
and the Mother a remote
figure to him.
Grandmother told Mr R that [Z] was doing well in her care. He was described by
his caseworker to Mr R as “
a very placid little boy who is content to
play on his own at
Mr R observed
[Z]’s siblings protective of him and the Grandmother “
and mindful of his
Mr R said [Z]
may suffer from a global developmental delay but awaits further assessment. He
was not toilet trained and still on
a bottle when taken into care. There were
concerns raised about [Z] not speaking when he went into care. The reports of
July 2014 to the Department highlighted his lack of speech. In cross
examination, Mr R said that [Z]’s lack of speech may relate
to the trauma
of his removal. The Grandmother said that [Z] still has a bottle at night when
in her care, but he does talk when with
her on weekends. Ms C had never heard
[Z] say an intelligible word but also conceded that she had not tried to engage
him in a play
situation. [Z] has poor dental health and may need most of his
teeth removed due to dental decay. Mr R said that [Z]’s poor
dental health
may be related to his Mother’s consumption of alcohol during pregnancy.
He said he may be affected by Foetal
Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) and refers
to a report
that 80% of Children
with FASD experience dental problems.
Maternal Grandmother’s parenting capacity
is a critical issue in this case. I agree with Mr R that, while relevant, the
Court’s primary focus should not be on the
Grandmother’s history of
involvement with the Department in relation to her own children, but rather on
the Grandmother’s
present capacity to care for her six Grandchildren.
Department has formed the view that the Grandmother’s parenting capacity
is so inadequate that the Children are not safe
in her care.
Department’s advocate summarised their particular concerns: her ability to
act protectively generally towards the Children,
including drugs, supervision,
and identifying risks posed by other people coming into her life.
Therefore, the Department removed the Children from her care for reasons
already set out. However, others involved with the Grandmother
and the Children
have complimented her parenting skills and attitude to her responsibilities.
K, the Grandmother’s general practitioner, assessed the Grandmother as
capably caring for the Children. Dr K said the Grandmother
had turned her life
around, having stopped using any form of illicit drug, capably caring for the
Children’s everyday needs,
dressing them well, providing them with
nutritious food, ensuring they attend school and instilling the right values.
of a limited number of trusted patients of the Aboriginal Medical
Centre’s Opioid Treatment Programme, being permitted monthly
collections
of Suboxone from the nurse unit manager.
F, now a caseworker for the Department, (as already noted) referred to the
Grandmother’s “
great parental capabilities
sufficiently impressed by her skills to recommend a substantial reduction in
external agency involvement with the
family. In cross-examination,
that the Grandmother presented as “
a woman committed to 6
”. He said when he was involved with the family, her overcrowded
” in the house, she kept it in neat piles “
as best she
.” She was running the Children’s day to day lives,
getting them to school, providing meals, taking them to medical appointments.
She was supportive of speech therapy for [V] and [W], and supportive of [Y] and
[X] continuing speech therapy. Mr F raised no concerns
Grandmother’s caregiving during that period. Mr F was aware of the
Court’s request to the Department for him
to be assigned to the family
when he was employed by the Department, but declined to accept that role
because, firstly he believed
it would have destroyed his relationship with the
Grandmother, and secondly, he would have found it too hard to follow decisions
made by the Department’s management in this case.
already noted, staff at [A] School have remarked on the fine efforts made by the
Grandmother to care for the Children.
G, a retired Director of Nursing and friend of the Grandmother’s, said
[Ms J Drake] earned the respect of the community because she
turned her life around”
I’ve observed these
Children being well behaved whilst in [Ms J Drake]’s care and I can say
she does a wonderful job.”
H, a friend of the Grandmother’s from her church said that “
may not be so refined but I admire her for her commitment and how totally
dedicated she is to the care of her
Grandchildren
F, friend and former neighbour of the Grandmother, who assisted her to obtain
housing, said “
as a parent, I would not hesitate to leave my children
in her care...I know her to be a strict disciplinarian. I have watched how
mannered her grandchildren are...her care of the children in my opinion ticks
all the boxes
M, Family Consultant, observed the Grandmother to manage the Children’s
behaviour “
quickly, quietly and
effectively
observed all the Children showing respect for and obedience to the Maternal
Grandmother’s instruction on the day of the
assessment interviews.
However, despite these observations, Ms M also found it necessary to notify the
Department Helpline that the
Children were at risk in the Grandmother’s
care as a result of Mr W’s presence at the home, their exposure to ongoing
drug use by the Grandmother and the Mother, and their exposure to violence by
the Mother and her boyfriend.
P, a family support worker in [C] told Ms M she had seen the Children during
visits to [C] and they “
look lovely since being in
Grandmother’s care.
Another support worker in [C], Ms R said “
whilst [Ms J Drake] has been
back in [C], there have been no concerns raised to us of the care given to [Ms J
grandchildren.
Ms Drake displays considerable resilience in the face of the
hardship that she has experienced throughout her
impressed by the Grandmother’s thoughtful and considered assessment of
each of the Children. He recognised that the
Grandmother is part of a complex
family environment which makes demands on her and at times intrudes on her
parenting tasks. Mr R
did not excuse the Grandmother’s conduct in allowing
Mr W into the house, knowing that Mr W may pose a risk to the Children,
that the Grandmother did attempt to exclude him from the home and is now willing
to accept a restraint to keep him away.
already noted, the Children presently have medical and/or dental problems which
need to be addressed and will need to be addressed
well into the future. While
the evidence discloses that the Children have consulted various medical
practitioners in out of home
care, the Court does not have a clear picture of
what has been done for each Child by way of treatment and therapy in out of home
care since those assessments were undertaken, and what immediate action is
required to address each Child’s medical needs.
And because there has been
no sharing of information regarding the Children’s medical histories
between the Aboriginal Medical
Centre in Redfern and practitioners consulted
since the Children have been in out of home care, it is difficult to
categorically
state which of the Children’s medical and dental needs the
Grandmother has endeavoured to attend to, and which she has not.
For example,
concerning [W] confirm
that the paediatrician who assessed [W] on 18 July 2014 had no knowledge of past
medical/dental interventions
for [W]. According to the assessment, [W] requires
a hearing test, a speech pathology assessment, occupational therapy, a dental
review, psychometric testing, an orthopaedic review, an ophthalmology review and
referral to a paediatric cardiologist. However,
Dr K reported that at least some
of these assessments for [W] had already been done, so where the Grandmother has
fallen down in
her responsibility to [W] is not clear.
the Grandmother has certainly addressed some of the Children’s medical and
dental needs, I find it likely that she has
not yet adequately identified and
addressed every medical issue for every Child. However, I am not persuaded that
the myriad of
medical/dental problems from which these Children suffer should
all be blamed on the Grandmother’s lack of capacity to parent.
example, as Mr R pointed out, [Z]’s extremely poor dental health may well
result from his Mother’s consumption of
alcohol in pregnancy.
is no dispute that the Grandmother has not used alcohol for many years. While
she has a long history of illicit drug use, she
has not used hard drugs for a
long time, has not used cannabis since late 2013, and is determined not to use
again. Her latest drug
test on 16 September 2014 was clear. I am satisfied that
the Grandmother is using Suboxone responsibly and under appropriate medical
supervision, which includes regular drug testing. And while there will always be
a risk of relapse when a person has suffered a long
history of drug addiction, I
am satisfied the risk in the circumstances here is not significant.
Grandmother has permitted Mr W to spend time in her home with the Children when
she was aware he was a drug user and aware of
her daughter’s allegation
that Mr W had sexually abused her. I agree with the Department that the
Grandmother showed a limited
understanding of the safety reasons for keeping the
Children away from Mr W, despite a Court order requiring her to do so. However,
I accept the Grandmother’s evidence that the Children would run up to Mr W
if they saw him in the street, that he would pick
up [Z] for a cuddle, and that
Mr W was in the habit of dropping off gifts to the Children at the home which
made it difficult for
her to strictly enforce the restraint. I do not find that
the Grandmother flagrantly breached that order.
Nevertheless,
I am not satisfied that the Grandmother sufficiently appreciates the critical
importance of ensuring the Children are
supervised by a responsible adult and
protecting the Children from persons who may be unsafe. I find the Children were
adequately supervised when in [C].
Ms M and Mr R assessed the Grandmother’s need for ongoing practical
support in managing six Children with a range of health
and educational
challenges. While the Grandmother told Mr R she has support from community
agencies, church groups and other community
acknowledged at hearing that she would need ongoing support into the future to
adequately meet her care obligations.
find it necessary to consider the Grandmother’s parenting capacity in the
context of her living circumstances and the practical
support she was receiving
when the events which resulted in the Children’s removal took place.
June 2014, the Grandmother was caring for her six Grandchildren, and two of her
own daughters at different times, in a small
cluttered two bedroom house in
Redfern. All parties agreed that this accommodation was grossly inadequate for
hers and the Children’s
needs. It was abundantly clear to all the parties
from the commencement of these proceedings that the Grandmother was in urgent
of a larger home to accommodate the Children. The Court requested the
Department more than once during the course of this litigation
to do all in its
power to locate a larger home for this family to avoid the breakdown of the
family which has since occurred. The
Grandmother was understandably struggling
to manage six Children, with special needs, who came into her care from living a
lifestyle with severely impaired parents, in a very small home designed
for 2 or 3 people.
the Department became involved, it arranged the CatholicCare Agency to provide
support for the family, and Mr F was assigned
as the caseworker. This
intervention was successful. Mr F and the Grandmother related well to each
other. The Grandmother trusted
him, and Mr F was positive about the
family’s progress when his file was closed in the first half of 2013.
Thereafter, the
Grandmother did not receive the same intensive level of support,
and still remained in inadequate housing. The Department was monitoring
family in relation to the Children’s safety, but was not providing her
with practical assistance to perform day to day
tasks in the way provided by Mr
F. The Grandmother was receiving some limited support from her church and from
neighbours and friends.
By the end of 2013, the Department had serious concerns
their welfare. However, the Department was still unable to find suitable housing
for the Grandmother, which was one of the
main reasons the Grandmother decided
to stay in [C] after the April 2014 school holidays for a trial period, which in
turn led to
the crises which precipitated the Children’s removal in June
find that there is more than one aspect to the question of the
Grandmother’s capacity to parent these Children and to whether
adequately resourced to protect the Children and to meet their other needs.
Firstly, it is accepted that the Grandmother
would not be able to adequately
manage the Children’s health and educational needs without substantial
practical support.
But secondly, the Court must be satisfied that the
Grandmother has the insight, skill and commitment to put the Children’s
safety ahead of all else. I agree with Ms C that ‘support services’
are not necessarily ‘safety’. The Grandmother
must make safe
choices for the Children, which she has not always done in the past. This
includes being able to exclude people from
her life who pose safety risks to the
Children, such as Mr W. I agree with Ms C that the Court must be satisfied that
the Grandmother
has the capacity to make the choice to keep the Children safe,
and I understand the Department’s major concern that the
Grandmother’s
capacity to make safe choices is limited by her own life
experiences. What the Grandmother sees as ‘normal’ might not
‘normal’ and might expose the Children to
I agree with the
Department that the Grandmother must learn to be more vigilant and discerning in
relation to those with whom she
chooses to associate and allow into contact with
the Children.
have sufficient parenting capacity, I find that the Grandmother not only needs
ongoing practical support, as she acknowledges,
but needs counselling and
parenting education to learn how to be truly protective of the Children.
Grandmother has had suitable housing since July 2014, found through her local
friend Mr F, (not the Department) and is caring
for [X] and [V]. The Department
has assessed her home and found it suitable to accommodate the Children. It is a
4 bedroom home with
beds for all the Children, close to the [omitted] Swimming
Centre. The Grandmother is engaging well with services, in particular
counsellor, Ms S from [M] Aboriginal Women’s Centre in [omitted]. Ms S
will make appropriate referrals to other Aboriginal
agencies. The Grandmother is
gratefully accepting weekly visits from Sisters [names omitted] from her church
community, who help
[X] and [V] with their homework.
agree with Mr R that it is not without risk, but the Grandmother’s
capacity is likely to be at least adequate in her current
circumstances, and
much improved if she is provided with greater financial, practical and
social-emotional supports to manage so
many Children with so many challenging
needs. The supports which would be available to the Grandmother if the Children
were returned
to her care will be addressed later in these Reasons.
accept Mr R’s opinion that the Grandmother is focussed on the
Children’s individual needs and understands their issues,
having had the
Children in her care for nearly 3 years. I find a clear example in the
Grandmother’s response to a request
for [U] to miss her birthday weekend
with the Grandmother so she could sleep over with a friend. The Grandmother, in
my view quite
properly, did not permit [U] to spend the weekend with people she
knew nothing about, and said in any event, it was important for
[U] to celebrate
her birthday with her family.
agree with Mr R that the Grandmother has tried hard to keep the Children safe
and her attitude, in many respects, has been commendable.
She initially
struggled to stop Mr W from coming to the home, and said his frequent presence
at her former home was one of her reasons
for going to [C] in April this year.
At hearing she expressed relief that he does not have her new address and said
she would call
the police if he ever arrives at her door. I am satisfied she
understands the importance of keeping him away from the Children.
I find that
the Grandmother was wrong to keep the Children in [C] after the April school
holidays. While I accept she had a basis
for pessimism about finding suitable
accommodation in Sydney, I find that the Grandmother failed to properly
prioritise the importance
of the Children living in a stable, consistent and
predictable routine and remaining in the same schools.
give significant weight to my findings here.
THE PRIMARY CONSIDERATIONS
The benefit to the children of having a meaningful
relationship with both the child’s parents
factor has no application to the Grandmother because she is not a
but does apply to the Mother and Father.
Consultant M reported that the Children did not react when the Mother entered
the child care room at interviews in July 2013.
She then observed the Mother
move from child to child during her assessment, “
but not to engage or
play with them
observations in August 2014, Mr R observed the Children approached the
Grandmother rather than the Mother if they needed anything.
They appeared
highly unresponsive to their Mother and did not acknowledge or respond
to many requests that she made of them
.” Mr R made this
relationship between the Children and their mother is more akin to that of a
relationship with an elder sister than that of a
mother. The children were
affectionate towards her, and [V] and [X] both reported enjoying time with her,
but she is not accorded
the same level of respect that the children have for
their grandmother.
interview with Ms M, the Children were excited to greet the Father who engaged
with the Children one on one, while “
oblivious to what the other
children were
pleased to see his Father at Court, but spoke negatively about witnessing his
Father’s violence including choking his
R was unable to assess the Children’s relationships with the Father
because the Father failed to participate in the assessment
process despite Mr
R’s extensive efforts to contact him. Mr R noted, however, that all the
Children described the Father in
positive terms and reported they enjoyed time
with him when he visited. Mr R drew the following conclusion:
likely that due to his infrequent contact with the children he has become a
marginal figure in their lives who comes and
goes.... It is also likely that
there is some degree of anxiety and distrust present in their relationship with
their father.
Grandmother has been able to effectively negotiate time between the Children and
each parent. Both parents recognise that neither
has the capacity or resources
to have the Children in their care. The Mother accepts that the Children cannot
stay with her overnight
but believes she has the capacity to care for the
Children during day time hours on an unsupervised basis. The Father wishes to
a relationship with each of the Children on any terms imposed by the
Court. He understands the Children (except [Z] who does not
know him as well as
the others) enjoy seeing him when he travels to Sydney.
Mother and the Father in this case have dysfunctional histories. Both were
poorly parented, and have been poor parents themselves.
Neither has seriously
addressed their substance abuse issues, or their propensity to expose the
Children to violence or other unsafe
behaviours.
the Grandmother’s proposal, the Children would spend time with the Mother
each week and time with the Father when he travels
to Sydney, and also when the
Grandmother and the Children travel to [C] during school holidays. I am
satisfied the Children’s
relationships with each parent would be
maintained and possibly improved under this regime.
the Department’s proposal, the Children would spend four occasions of four
hours under supervision with the Father each year,
and six occasions of four
hours under supervision with the Mother. If the Children were living in the
Nowra region, given the geographical
distance and the poor resources of each
parent, I have no confidence the Children’s relationships with either of
be maintained in any meaningful way.
take these findings into account.
The need to protect the child from physical or psychological
harm from being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
is not defined in the
Family Law Act
and therefore must be given its
ordinary meaning.
was, at the relevant time, narrowly defined in
as sexual abuse or an assault of a child which is an offence under the
law. As already noted, [U] was sexually assaulted in [C]
whilst in the
Grandmother’s care.
” was defined at
of the Act, (at the relevant time)
as conduct, whether actual or threatened that causes the person to reasonably
fear for, or to
be apprehensive about, his or her personal wellbeing or safety.
already noted, it is common ground that the Children were exposed to family
violence and neglect in the care of their Mother and
their Father for many years
before being removed by the Grandmother, who took over their care. While the
Mother and the Father suggest
that the cause was their chronic alcohol and drug
abuse, it is likely their poor parenting was a direct result of being so poorly
parented themselves. The Father lived in foster care for 8 years and describes
being moved from placement to placement, at times
abusive. The Mother was
neglected as a child by her own mother (the Grandmother) and exposed to the same
environmental disadvantage
as her own Children. Both say they are endeavouring
to address their substance abuse issues and change their lifestyle, but on the
evidence available, I am not persuaded they have made much progress. The Mother
is currently living in an abusive relationship in
crisis accommodation. She is
depressed and realises her need for professional assistance. The Father did not
make himself available
for interview with Mr R, failed to cooperate with
Department efforts to assess his living arrangements, and is currently
unemployed.
have already addressed the Grandmother’s capacity to protect the Children
from abuse, neglect or family violence.
have given my findings under this factor significant weight.
THE ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS
The children’s expressed views and the weight those
views should be given
interview with Ms M in July 2013, [U] seemed content in her Grandmother’s
At interview with Mr R
14 months later, [U] firmly expressed the view that her siblings were
”, her Grandmother was “
and she wanted to live with Mr D (‘[Mr D]’) in [C] without any of
her siblings. Mr R said [U] was troubled by
[Y] and [Z] being favoured ahead of
her and by being denied the opportunity to have friends to sleep over when with
her Grandmother
on weekends. [U] spoke positively about both her parents but
appeared to view neither of them as in a position to care for her.
Full Court in
R and R: Children’s Wishes
said the wishes of
children are important, and proper weight should be attached to any wishes
expressed by a child, depending on
their basis and the maturity of the child:
...including
the degree of appreciation by the child of the factors involved in the issue
before the court and their longer term
implications. Ultimately the overall
welfare of the child is the determinant.
R said [U]’s views should be considered in the context of [U] being the
eldest of six siblings and at a developmental stage
when she wants more
independence and is challenging of adult authority. He found a number of likely
reasons for her discontent:
as the eldest, and as part of an Aboriginal family,
he says there are expectations placed on her in relation to caring for her
siblings and assisting her Grandmother to care for them; it is likely
that she is reacting against and challenging this expectation;
she has only one
sister in her sibling group, who is much younger than she is; [U] has had
greater exposure to the chaotic and neglectful
parenting of her parents which is
likely to have had a more marked impact on her than the others; it is likely few
boundaries have
been imposed on her in the past. Despite her protests, and while
saying her Grandmother is controlling of what she does, she also
acknowledged
being properly cared for by her Grandmother, and feeling safe in her home.
agree with Mr R that [U]’s stated wish to live with Mr D is not an option
supported by any of the parties involved in the
proceedings. Issues were raised
by the Grandmother and by the Department about his capacity to care for other
children in his care.
That placement is therefore not an option for [U]. I note
that [U] did not express a wish to remain in her current placement.
R says the Court should not place any weight on [U]’s complaints about
living with her siblings and Grandmother. [U]’s
focus appears to him to be
maximising her independence and autonomy when she is not equipped to deal with
such a change. He finds
her resentment of her siblings understandable and
believes the Grandmother should try to give [U] her own room if possible so she
can enjoy some privacy.
and [X] like living with the Grandmother and, according to Mr R, want their
siblings to come home. On his assessment, both boys
experience their Grandmother
as a caring and positive influence in their lives.
[Y] and [Z] were not interviewed by Mr R. In any event, given [W]’s
developmental delay and the ages of the youngest two,
their expressed views
would have minimal weight.
Grandmother says the Children ask when Court will be over “
come home.”
The nature of the relationships between the children and
each parent and between the children and other persons including any
grandparent
have nothing to add about the Children’s relationships with each
relation to the Children’s relationships with the Grandmother, I accept Mr
R’s view that [U]’s present attitude
to her Grandmother needs to be
considered in the context of her stage of
development.
Mr R assessed
positive respectful relationships between the younger children and the
Grandmother. They greeted her warmly at the
assessment interviews and were keen
to engage with her. They displayed a warmth and trust towards her while being
respectful and
compliant in responding to her requests. Mr R noted that [V] was
very happy living with the Grandmother, viewing her as caring and
protective of
him and his siblings.
Mr D was not involved in the expert assessments, given the time they have spent
with him when living with their parents and
since, I find it likely that the
Children have a comfortable relaxed relationship with him. It is noteworthy that
[U] nominated ‘[Mr
D]’ as the person she wanted to live with and [Y]
clung to him when the Department were attempting to remove her from her
Grandmother’s
R observed the Children to enjoy a close relationship with each other, and said
[U]’s expressed views should not be construed
as demonstrating that she is
uncaring or indifferent to matters concerning the welfare of her siblings. I
agree with Mr R’s
assessment which is consistent with other evidence. When
[U] was removed from her Grandmother’s care only 3 months before being
interviewed by Mr R, she was observed by caseworkers to be “
caring and protective of her
wanted a message passed onto the boys that she loved them, and made a special
request for [Z] to be placed with her. She was
worried about how [Z] would be
The willingness and ability of each parent to facilitate and
encourage a close and continuing relationship between the children and
factor is not relevant in the circumstances of this case, because neither parent
will have the care of the Children.
given the complexities of the issues, I find it convenient to address the
Grandmother’s willingness to encourage close
relationships between the
Children and each parent under this heading, rather than under
s.60CC(3)(m)
where these matters would in the normal course, have been included.
parent acknowledged that the Grandmother has been flexible and supportive of the
Children’s time with each of them. She
has permitted the Father to stay
overnight at her home when visiting the Children from [C], and while adamant
that the Mother cannot
enter her home if under the influence of an intoxicant,
the Grandmother has otherwise permitted the Children frequent time with the
Mother. I agree with
Mr R that the Grandmother has displayed a willingness
to support the Children’s relationships with both the Mother and the
despite her serious concerns about their conduct, particularly in the
presence of the Children. While mindful of the protective
needs of the Children
in the care of each parent, the Grandmother has recognised the Children’s
need to spend time with their
parents. I agree with Mr R that the Grandmother
has acted in a manner demonstrating a willingness to protect the Children, by
and supervising the Children’s interaction with each parent.
take these findings into account.
The likely effect of any change in the children’s
circumstances, including the likely effect on the children of any separation
from either parent or any other children or other person with whom the children
have been living
early June 2014, all the Children were settled in the care of the Grandmother,
having been removed from the care of their parents
2-3 years earlier. Then
suddenly, without warning, and while the Grandmother was preparing them for
school, four Departmental officers
and two police officers arrived at the door
and took them away. Approximately 15 hours later, the Children were living with
in four different placements, a long way from their home. Ms C
conceded reluctantly that the removal may have been “
” for the Children, while Ms K was prepared to acknowledge
the trauma to the Children. Mr R, with whom I agree, was in no doubt
distress these Children would have experienced when removed, and the difficult
adjustments they have since been required
as stated by Mr R, the primary consideration must be the impact on the Children
of long term separation from their Grandmother
and siblings and their ongoing
placement in out of home care. The Children have a respectful warm relationship
with their Grandmother
and view her as providing a safe and caring home. The
unknowns about long term care include the Children’s capacity to make
transition to alternative longer term placements, the quality of care provided
in those placements, the frequency and viability
of contact with the
Grandmother, their siblings and significant others, cultural factors relating to
their Aboriginality, and the
Children’s overall capacity to adapt to
change. I agree with Mr R that [Z], in particular, is likely to experience
from the Grandmother extremely challenging as he has lived with her
since infancy. But I agree with him that if separated from the
Grandmother long
term, all the Children would miss the Grandmother acutely. Also, the Children
would suffer loss due to their inability
to be together as a sibling group day
likelihood exists that the Children would experience a considerable degree of
psychological distress at such a separation that
would possibly be expressed
through some degree of emotional and behavioural disturbance that could include
anxiety, depression and
give substantial weight to my findings here.
The practical difficulty and expense of the children
spending time with and communicating with a parent
the Children were living in the Nowra region, and the Grandmother in the city or
in [C], I am satisfied there would be significant
logistical difficulties in
maintaining the Children’s regular contact with her, and with the Mother.
There are practical difficulties
for the Father spending more than intermittent
time with the Children in Sydney because of distance and
so I am satisfied the
Children would see him even less frequently if they lived on the South Coast.
The capacity of each parent and any other person to provide
for the needs of the children including emotional and intellectual
have already addressed the Grandmother’s capacity to provide for the needs
of the Children.
is common ground that neither the Mother nor the Father has the capacity to
adequately parent the Children. The Mother recognises
her inability to care for
any of her Children and strongly supported her mother’s efforts to have
the Children restored to
her care. Mr R observed her poor parental capacity
during assessment interviews.
Mr R believes that the Mother’s mental health is likely to be impacting on
her parenting capacity. However, I accept that
the Mother is providing the
Grandmother with some domestic assistance and help with the Children for a few
hours several times a
the Father attended all but one day of the proceedings, he took almost no part.
He was courteous and respectful at all times,
and appeared interested and
focussed on the evidence. He recognised his poor parenting capacity by readily
accepting an order for
supervision, if the Court thought it necessary, when the
Children spend time with him.
Court has only limited evidence about the foster parents of [U], [W], [Y] and
[Z], and there has been no independent assessment
of the foster parents’
capacities to meet the Children’s needs. In any event, with the exception
possibly of [U], it
is unlikely the Children’s current carers would be
their long term carers, and the identity of their long term carers is not
4 September 2014, Ms C requested a response from the William Campbell Foundation
to a number of concerns raised by the Grandmother
Children’s care. Exhibit 4 discloses the concerns raised and the responses
However, as the
relevant carers did not give evidence, I make no findings about them.
The attitude to the children and to the responsibilities of
parenthood demonstrated by each parent
factor has no application to the Grandmother as she is a non-parent.
already noted, I find that neither parent has shown a willingness or capacity to
accept the responsibilities of parenting their
six Children and their attitude
has not changed in any meaningful way since the Grandmother took over the care
of the Children. Each
parent has indulged in extensive drug and alcohol use, and
exposed the Children to violence and neglect. I find that both parents
been, and remain, poor role models.
Mother has not shown a commitment to addressing her substance abuse issues, has
chosen to remain in another violent relationship
and has shown poor insight into
the impact of her dysfunctional lifestyle on her Children. Yet she seemed to
recognise the awful
impact of violence on her Children when she said that the
Children become deeply upset when they see fighting adults, and she has
[M] for counselling. I strongly urge the Mother to remain in counselling and to
accept referrals from [M] for other professional
assistance.
Father seems to have some understanding of the impact of his past violent
behaviour on his Children and says he has significantly
reduced his drug and
alcohol consumption (to a “
few beers on a Thursday night
which was always the trigger for the fighting between himself and the Mother.
As already noted, the Father told the Court
child, frequently moving between schools and foster placements. The Father has
made some efforts
to improve himself. He undertook a literacy course at the age
of 19 years and has been engaged in casual work from time to time.
poignant to hear him quietly tell the Court that he did not want such a life for
his own Children. However, while I accept
that the Father cares a great deal for
his Children and would like to take a more active role in the Children’s
lives, it is
practically difficult for him to do so from [C]. He does not drive
and only visits Sydney intermittently. I find it unlikely this
will change in
any significant way. It was, however, pleasing to hear that he and the Mother
are getting on better and have been
communicating with each other more
constructively in recent times.
The extent to which each parent has fulfilled or failed to
fulfil his or her responsibilities as a parent including spending time
communicating with the children, participating in decision–making about
major long term issues in relation to the
children, and facilitating the other
parent to do the same, and the extent to which each parent has fulfilled or
failed to fulfil
his or her obligation to maintain the children
have nothing to add under this factor.
The maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the children
and of either of the children’s parents and any other relevant
characteristics
of the children
have earlier addressed the evidence about each of the Children and have nothing
further to add here.
If the Children are an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Island
Child: the Children ’s right to enjoy his or her Aboriginal or Torres
Strait Islander culture (including the right to enjoy that culture with other
people who share that culture) and the likely impact
any proposed parenting
order under this Part will have on that right
six Children are Aboriginal. [U], [W], [Y] and [Z] are presently living with
non-Aboriginal foster carers and spending weekends
with their Aboriginal
Grandmother. While [W] has been taken to the Illawarra Aboriginal Medical
Service and to NAIDOC week events,
the Department adduces no evidence of the
Children having the opportunity to enjoy their Aboriginal culture in more than a
superficial
way, in out of home care. The Department noted that “
the moment”
ongoing family and sibling contact will support
[U]’s cultural
already noted, the Department did not comply with Aboriginal placement
principles when the Children were removed from the Grandmother
and placed in out
of home care. The Department said it was unable to identify Aboriginal foster
carers at the time of the Children’s
removal and acknowledged that it
could produce no evidence of efforts made to find the Children a placement in
[W] country. Ms C
conceded that it is unlikely an Aboriginal placement would be
found for the six Children if the Department’s proposal were
implemented
and understood that the proposed location of the Nowra region for the
Children’s long term placements would place
the Children many hours travel
from family or their kinship group.
the Children were to live in out of home care, I find that they would have very
limited time with their Aboriginal Mother and Grandmother,
given the practical
difficulties of bringing six Children together out of school hours on a regular
basis, and given the travel difficulties
involved for the Grandmother if the
Children were living in Nowra. The Department contends that the Children would
have a connection
with their culture, relying on reports from the William
Campbell Foundation. The reports include attending the Aboriginal Medical
Service, making carers aware of significant ATSIC events in the calendar,
providing the Children with Aboriginal stories and activity
books. The Children
have been given Aboriginal life story books to collect photos and memorabilia.
[Z]’s carer has been given
website addresses to help her care for [Z] and
[Y] and tips about caring for Aboriginal
cross examination, Ms M highlighted the significance of cultural issues in this
case. Mr R emphasised the Children’s need
to spend time with other [W]
family members and to participate in community events involving [W] people. In
his opinion, if the Children
were denied contact with their own people, they
would not be able to fully explore their culture. In his view, the
Department’s
proposal for cultural engagement is very superficial.
the Department says it understands the importance of the Children remaining
connected to their Aboriginal culture and their
right to enjoy that culture, I
find no basis to conclude that the Children’s needs in this regard will be
met if they remain
in out of home care. For example, in the Department’s
Safety Assessment Reports of November 2013 and February
the section
cultural identity
” was marked “
” for each Child, an entry Ms C was unable to explain. On
the Department’s proposal, I find it unlikely that the Children
the opportunity to enjoy their culture or to participate in activities with
others who share that culture. The authorities,
as set out below, confirm Mr
R’s view that the Department’s proposal in relation to connecting
the Children to their
culture does not meet the legislative requirements.
In the Marriage of B and R
(1995) FLC 92 636 stated at
just that Aboriginal children should be encouraged to learn about their culture,
and to take pride in it in the manner
in which other children might be so
encouraged. What this issue directs our minds to is the particular problems and
difficulties
confronted throughout Australian history, and at the present time,
by Aboriginal Australians in mainstream Australian society. The
Aboriginal Australians is a unique one, as is their current position in
Australian life...
Hort & Verran
[2009] FamCAFC 214
(2009) FLC 93-418
the Full Court considered how the
factors applicable to Aboriginal children are to be
Their Honours
Davis & Davis and Anor
(2008) 38 Fam LR 671
[2007] FamCA 1149
Young J said:
[1998] FamCA 239
, Moore J considered the scope and meaning of the term
‘connection’. At 29-30 her Honour stated:
it, the requirement to maintain a connection to their lifestyle, culture and
traditions involves an active view of the child's
need to participate in the
lifestyle, culture and traditions of the community to which they belong. This
need, in my opinion, goes
beyond a child being simply provided with information
and knowledge about their heritage but encompasses an active experience of
lifestyle, culture and traditions. This can only come from spending time with
family members and community. Through participation
in the everyday lifestyle of
family and community the child comes to know their place within the community,
to know who they are
and what their obligations are and by that means gain their
identity and sense of belonging.
Donnell & Dovey
[2010] FamCAFC 15
the Full Court said:
...[W]e consider that an Australian court exercising family law jurisdiction in
the twenty first century must take judicial
notice of the fact that there are
marked differences between indigenous and non-indigenous people relating to the
concept of family.
This is not to say that the practices and beliefs of
indigenous people are uniform, since it is well known that they are not.
it cannot ever be safely assumed that research findings based on
studies of European/white Australian children apply with equal force
indigenous children, even those who may have been raised in an urban
322. In our
view, judicial officers dealing with cases involving an indigenous child should
be expected to have a basic level of
understanding of indigenous culture, at
least to the extent that this can be found in what the Full Court in B and R
(supra) called
‘readily accessible public information’. It should
not be expected that parties must approach the court on the basis
presiding judicial officer comes to the case with a ‘blank canvas’.
also to be expected, in our view, that judicial officers will be familiar with
the reported decisions of the Full Court
dealing with indigenous children, as
well as the policy considerations that have informed the significant changes
made to the legislation
pertaining to indigenous children.
the Grandmother’s proposal, the Children would live with her, spend
regular time with their Aboriginal Mother and time with
their extended family
and the wider [W] community during school holidays. This would enable the
Children to have “
an active experience of their lifestyle, culture and
traditions.”
give substantial weight to these findings.
Any family violence involving the children or a member of
the children’s family and any family violence order that applies to
children or a member of the children’s family if the order is a final
order or the making of the order was contested
have no additional matters to raise here.
The orders which would minimise the risk of there being
further court proceedings about the children and whether those orders would
have addressed this factor later in these Reasons when discussing the options in
relation to who should have parental responsibility.
Other relevant factors
her new home, it is agreed by all parties that the Grandmother could accommodate
the six Children. There are six beds in the boys’
room, three beds in the
girls’ room and the Department has inspected the home and found it
adequately equipped and organised.
However, while her inadequate housing in
Redfern was a major concern to her when she made the decision to look for
accommodation
in [C] prior to the Children’s removal, the Grandmother does
not suggest that the resolution of the housing issue eliminates
her ongoing need
for other external supports.
Mr R said, there are risk factors inherent in these Children’s
circumstances. It is common ground, supported by both the
experts, that if the
Children were in her care, the Grandmother would need to actively engage with a
number of services for herself
and each of the Children. She would need
practical assistance with transport to medical appointments, (as she does not
drive), assistance
with the Children’s educational needs (as her own
literacy is limited), including tutoring for the Children, parenting education
to respond to the special needs of the Children as they develop, and the
provision of respite care.
17 is a spreadsheet prepared by the Independent Children’s Lawyer, after
the conclusion of the evidence, and before
finalisation of these proceedings,
which details the services/resources identified and proposed for the Grandmother
if the Children
were restored to her care, and she had sole parental
responsibility for the Children without Departmental involvement. These services
include the Aboriginal Medical Service, [M] Aboriginal family support service,
the Aboriginal Health Team at the Royal Prince Alfred
Hospital, the Aboriginal
Education Consultative Group from the Department of Education, [omitted],
National Centre of Indigenous
Excellence in relation to sporting programmes, [L]
School, Glebe PCYC, Sydney Dental Hospital Aboriginal Unit.
responses to the inquiries of the Independent Children’s Lawyer’s as
to what each service would offer is attached
to these Reasons and marked
earlier noted, the Grandmother has demonstrated her willingness to seek support
and to cooperate with support services. She sought
legal advice to bring these
proceedings to protect the Children from exposure to violence and drug and
alcohol abuse, and to stabilise
their living arrangements. She worked closely
and effectively with Mr F of CatholicCare with whom she developed an excellent
relationship. She has effectively engaged with the Aboriginal Medical
Service and the [M] Family Support Service.
S is the Casework Manager and the Grandmother’s counsellor at [M], a
family support programme which provides an Early Intervention
Programme for
Aboriginal families with Children under 12 years. Their services are provided
for a 3 to 12 month period. They then
refer to existing services for aboriginal
families with long term funding. They offer transport, court support, assistance
to medical appointments and advocacy. Ms S is preparing an individual
family service and support plan for the Grandmother, who is
on a 12 month
The Grandmother
has identified her need for a health support plan for each child, tutoring,
respite care, practical parenting skills,
parent education, counselling support
for drug and alcohol issues, grief and loss and a cultural support plan. The
Grandmother has
kept all her weekly counselling appointments to date. They have
discussed a care plan for [V] and [X]. Ms S was positive about the
Grandmother’s reliability, commitment and competence. Ms S will ensure
the Grandmother is referred for ongoing assistance
as necessary at the end of
the 12 month programme, but if the other four Children are restored to her care,
the 12 month time period
for their services would start again. Ms S highlighted
the difficulties faced by the Grandmother living so far from her family
and having nobody from an Aboriginal background involved in her life.
I was impressed by Ms S as a witness. She gave her evidence
in a balanced,
matter of fact manner, not seeking to understate the extent of the
Grandmother’s need for professional help.
Parental Responsibility
definition of “
parental responsibility
all the duties, powers, responsibilities and authority which, by law,
parents have in relation to children
provides that each parent has parental responsibility for the child, but
section 61C(3)
the joint parental responsibility is subject to any order the
court may make.
Section 61C(2)
provides that the parental responsibility that a
parent has is always subject to any other parenting
requires the court to apply a presumption that it is in the best interests
of the child for the child’s parents to have equal
shared parental
responsibility for the child.
Section 65DAC
applies whenever a parenting order
provides for shared parental responsibility and requires the parties to consult
the other person
and to make a genuine effort to come to a joint decision about
any major long term decisions concerning the children. The presumption
apply if there are reasonable grounds to believe that a parent of the child (or
a person who lives with a parent of the
child) has engaged in:
of the child or another child, who at the time, was a member of the
parent’s family (or that other person’s family);
presumption may be rebutted by evidence that satisfies the court that it would
not be in the best interests of the child for the
child’s parents to have
equal shared parental responsibility. The presumption of equal shared parental
responsibility only
applies to parents. It has no application to orders for
parental responsibility made in relation to other people. The Full Court
stated that
section 65DAC
section 65DAA(1)
do not apply
. The Court is
therefore not mandated to consider equal time or substantial and significant
time if an Order for equal shared parental
responsibility is made to a
non-parent. The Court does, however, have power to allocate parental
responsibility to persons other
the Mother nor the Father in this case seeks an order for parental
responsibility, and in any event each admits to exposing
the Children to family
violence. The presumption therefore has no application in this case.
question for determination is whether the Minister for the Department has sole
parental responsibility, (as it does currently)
or the Grandmother has sole
parental responsibility or the Department and the Grandmother share parental
responsibility in some way.
The Grandmother, the Father, the Mother and the
Independent Children’s Lawyer seek an order for the Grandmother to have
parental responsibility. The Department seeks an order for the Minister to
have sole parental responsibility until each Child attains
18 years. In the
alternative (Mr Harris emphasised that this was not the Department’s
preferred position), the Department
seeks an order for equal shared parental
responsibility with the Grandmother on specific conditions.
Fundamental
to the outcome of this case is the question of which of the three options is in
the Children’s best interests. I
have given each option careful
consideration.
Shared parental responsibility between the Grandmother and the
3 March 2014, interim consent orders were made for the Grandmother to share
parental responsibility for the Children with the Department.
The Grandmother
was ordered (inter alia) to accept supervision and referrals from the Department
and engage with the Department as
required. The role of the Department was
outlined in the Orders as follows:
shall make the following referrals/arrange the following support services for
the Maternal Grandmother and the Children:
Arrangement
of an appropriate family support service to assist and support the Maternal
Grandmother in her parenting of the Children;
for the Maternal Grandmother to receive restorative parenting education, if
possible in her home;
paediatric assessments for each of the Children;
of the Maternal Grandmother to a drug and alcohol relapse prevention
support services to include respite care, after school and vacation care, if
appropriate.
Department’s advocate acknowledged that the Department did not comply with
any part of this order. Ms K did contact [B]
Housing to follow up the
Grandmother’s urgent housing application, but took no steps to provide
practical support to the Grandmother
as required by the order. The Department
claimed its caseworkers made attempts to meet the Grandmother after the order
but the Grandmother was resistant to attending a meeting to organise a
case plan. The caseworkers did not make clear to the Court
why a meeting was
needed given the prescriptive nature of each party’s obligations set out
in the order, which had already
been agreed. I find it noteworthy that nearly 2
months after the order was made, having taken no steps to comply with the
order, Ms K asked the Grandmother what she wanted by way of
. At this time the
Grandmother was in [C]. Given the prescriptive nature of the shared parental
responsibility order, I am not satisfied
that it was appropriate for the
Department to shift their clearly stated responsibilities onto the Grandmother
in this way.
find that the Department has not established a cooperative and supportive
relationship with the Grandmother, since Mr F and CatholicCare
were no longer
involved in a supporting role. The Department caseworkers have found the
Grandmother difficult to relate to and unreasonably
resistant to their attempts
to engage with her. Ms C acknowledged always personally having trouble relating
to the Grandmother. This
negative opinion of the Grandmother was evident
throughout Ms C’ cross examination.
Grandmother told Mr R that she found the Department unreasonable, demanding and
judgmental in its attitude towards her. “
conversation
” the Department interrogated her about Mr W, even though
she had not permitted him to come to her home since restraining orders
by the Court in March 2014. She resented being asked intrusive questions by an
inexperienced caseworker, particularly about
her relationship with Mr J, and
felt consistently undermined, not supported. The Grandmother could not
understand why the Department
had not returned the Children to her, given her
accommodation had now been approved. The Grandmother complained to Mr R that the
Department had given her no advice as to what she needed to do to get the
Children back. Mr R said the Grandmother was “
confused and resentful
of the Department’s current intervention and the attitude displayed
towards her
Nevertheless, the
Grandmother told the Court that she would be willing to
work with the Department because “
I want my grandchildren
Mr R’s view, the difficulties in the Grandmother’s relationship with
the Department can be addressed through respectful,
open and clear consistent
communication, from clear unambiguous expectations of what is required of the
Grandmother for the Department
to restore the Children to her care, and the
standards to be adhered to in caring for them. Mr R said there is a need for
consistency
and clarity around roles. Ms M agreed that there is a need for
ground rules and clear guidelines.
cross-examination, both Ms C and Ms K acknowledged the need for clear, open,
honest communication, and the use of uncomplicated
language when working with
any Aboriginal client, which they claimed to employ. However, in cross
examination, Ms C acknowledged
that it may have been helpful for the Department
to have communicated its position more clearly. I find a number of examples of
or poor communication by the Department which left the Grandmother
without a clear understanding of the Department’s expectations
and made it
appear, unfairly in my view, that the Grandmother was ignoring the
Department’s concerns. Examples include:
January 2014, the Department accused the Grandmother of ignoring a request for
urinalysis, and afterwards explained its policy
that a failed response to a drug
test request is treated as a “
This information
confused and distressed the Grandmother who said she had not received the
Department’s request. Ms C agreed
it would have been helpful to have made
the Grandmother aware of their policy much earlier.
Department caseworkers were aware that Mr W spent time in the
Grandmother’s home from at least the end of 2012. The Department
took many months following a notification from Family Consultant M in August
2013, to give a clear directive to the Grandmother
to keep Mr W away from her
Grandmother in October 2013,
but file notes of meetings/conversations on 10
October, 31 October 2013 and 3 December do not refer to Mr W. On 31 January
Ms K saw Mr W at the Grandmother’s home and asked how often he was
at the home. On 3 February 2014, Ms C rang the Grandmother
to discuss concerns
to ensure Mr W had no contact
with the Children. On 11 February 2014, six months
from the date of the notification, the Department clearly stated to the
Grandmother
for the first time that it did not approve of Mr W being around the
Children. The following day, the Grandmother willingly entered
into a protection
plan which included not allowing Mr W into the home.
the end of March 2014, the Grandmother told Ms K that she was considering moving
they would find a suitable
house there more quickly than in Sydney. Ms K said the Grandmother should keep
her informed of plans and
that Ms K would speak to her Manager. On 31 March
2014, the Grandmother told Ms K she
“wanted to check with Community
Services to make sure it was ok to move to
She gave as
one of her reasons keeping Mr W (who kept ignoring her requests to stay away)
from coming to her home.
did not tell the Grandmother she could not relocate, but rather Ms K had a
conversation with [U] who said she wanted to move
to [C] because there were more
parks and her cousins lived there. On 2 April 2014, the Grandmother met Ms C at
the Department’s
[omitted] offices. The Grandmother said her wish to move
only arose because of her inadequate housing, and she would not move until
found a house in [C]. She asked permission to speak to Ms B at [B] Housing to
start the process of finding a house for them in
[C]. Ms C said “
she would need to speak with legal
The Grandmother said to
“I’m trying to do the right thing”.
the meeting believing she had the Department’s support to move. The Mother
recalled the Grandmother being happy about
the Department’s position after
that meeting. On 28 April 2014, Ms K was advised by the Department in [omitted]
that the Grandmother
intended to remain in [C] for a 6 month trial period. Ms K
said the Department did not know the Grandmother was planning to stay
On 30 April 2014, Ms K spoke to the Principal of [C] Public School to confirm
the Children’s enrolment, and advised
the Principal that the Sydney
Department did not approve the move. Ms K spoke to the Grandmother who said she
would not stay in [C]
if she could not find a house. Ms K stressed the
Grandmother’s need to consult her caseworkers about every decision she
The Grandmother said,
“You don’t help me, you just tell me
what to do so. I’m the one doing all the hard work.”
2014, Ms K clearly told the Grandmother for the first time that the Department
did not support her move to [C] and had concerns
living and their access to services. On 20 May 2014, Ms K asked the Grandmother
for an update on her
housing situation, and the Grandmother said she was still
looking. She said she was keeping her home in Sydney and only living in
a 6 month trial. Again Ms A said the Department did not support the move.
However, the Department did not tell the Grandmother
she must immediately return
to Sydney with the Children.
Ms C acknowledged in cross examination that
“in hindsight we could have
given clear guidelines around that”.
satisfied that the Department made clear to the Grandmother at any time she was
in [C] that she had to immediately return
with the Children to Sydney, or risk
the removal of the Children from her care. Nor do I find that the Department
gave the Grandmother
any assistance in obtaining housing or accessing services
for the Children in [C], despite its advice to the Grandmother that these
arrangements were a pre-requisite to their approval of the relocation and their
knowledge of her seriously overcrowded living conditions
in Redfern. The
Department left all the responsibility for making arrangements the Department
would approve to the Grandmother, who
had the care of six Children, despite the
existence of an order for shared parental responsibility.
Grandmother was not warned/advised that failure to address concerns raised by
the Department from April 2014 was likely to result
in her losing the Children,
and was not given an opportunity to respond to these numerous concerns, which
included [V]’s ‘black
eye’; reports of Mr W continuing to turn
up at the house; living with Mr D in [C]; allowing the Children contact with Mr
a sexual assault against [U] when left unsupervised; inadequate supervision
of [V] and [X] seen near the railway line; doubts about
where the Grandmother
was staying; [U] fighting at school leading to suspension; [V]’s injured
knee not being adequately treated;
[X]’s hygiene at school; the Children
witnessing a fight outside Mr D’s home involving 20-30 intoxicated young
including the Grandmother’s daughter [T] and Mr D’s conduct.
The Grandmother said she was confused by the Department’s
decision to
remove the Children as a result of any of these issues, and had never been given
the chance to explain. She could not
understand why she was blamed for the
fight down the street from Mr D’s in which none of the Children were
involved, especially
as they went inside when the fight started.
[V] and [X] have been in her care, the Department has had limited involvement
with the Grandmother. They have inspected and
approved her home. There has only
been one request for a drug test.
already noted, I find that the Department’s primary focus has been
monitoring for child protection concerns, intervening
when risk of harm
notifications have been received, rather than supporting the Grandmother in her
care of the Children. Though the
Department has provided financial support, its
caseworkers have provided little by way of practical assistance/encouragement to
Grandmother in her parenting responsibilities since CatholicCare ceased its
involvement. I am satisfied from the Department’s
file notes that the
Grandmother had a reasonable relationship with Ms K and Ms C, always keeping
appointments, letting them into
her home when asked, until early this year.
Since then, the Grandmother has found their relationships difficult. I accept Mr
opinion that the Grandmother’s relationship with the Department
is affected by the long history of her involvement with them,
her distress at
their decision to remove the Children in circumstances she believes were
unjustified, and as Mr R says
by a level of frustration, distrust and resentment that seems to have
arisen largely from poor communication between her and the
Department.
C is pessimistic about the Department’s ability to work collaboratively
with the Grandmother in the future, based on their
dealings since early 2014. Ms
C produces file notes of conversations with the Grandmother when she has said,
all you do is nag and harass me
and do whatever you like”
and hung up. Ms C has a profoundly negative
opinion of the Grandmother whom she believes will never have the capacity to
the Children, whatever conditions are imposed on her. While the
Department says it would recommend a different team be allocated
the case if the
Court made an order for shared parental responsibility, Ms C could not guarantee
this would occur. Unfortunately,
the Department has no indigenous caseworkers in
its [omitted] team. I agree with Mr Harris that the evidence does not support
Grandmother working cooperatively with the Department if Ms K and Ms C
remain assigned to this case.
despite this submission on the likely poor cooperation between the Department
and the Grandmother in the future, Mr Harris
provided an alternative proposal
from the Department which provided for the Children to live with the
Grandmother, for shared parental
responsibility between the Grandmother and the
Department with the obligations of each party spelt
Under this proposal, the
Grandmother would be required to do as she was told by the Department, and to
keep the Department informed
of day to day issues:
referrals organised by the Department to The Benevolent Society (or similar),
the Child Protection Counselling Service, a drug
and alcohol relapse prevention
programme, literacy and numeracy assistance, a respite care service.
the Department about all medical, dental or school appointments for the
Children, issues arising with the Children’s
health, dental care or
education, or the Children’s behaviour, services involved with the
Grandmother or the Children, people
staying overnight in the home (whether
family or otherwise), the Children spending time with the parents and any issues
the Children spending time overnight outside the home, including
proposed trips to [C], housing problems, financial problems, any
other concerns
a meeting with the Department each month (with a support person if required) to
discuss issues arising with the Children, services
for the Grandmother, services
for the Children, other services required by the family, to prepare a case plan
and make lists of action
required by the Grandmother and the
Department.
urinalysis within 24 hours of any request to do so, with a missed test to be
treated as a positive result.
her mobile phone charged and switched on during business hours, answer or return
calls and messages from caseworkers, and inform
the Department if there is any
problem with her hone as soon as possible.
Department would consider changing the casework team, work on better
communication strategies with the Grandmother, attend meetings
Grandmother, organise referral to services for the Grandmother and the Children,
arrange transport as required, tutoring
as required and sexual assault
counselling for [U]. The Department would be required to liaise with the
Children’s previous
health providers to coordinate appropriate referrals.
Ms M said that the Department needed to coordinate the supports required to
ensure the Grandmother is supported to support
the Children, she did not support
the Department overseeing every aspect of the Grandmother’s day to day
life as contemplated
by the Department’s alternative proposal. Ms Wearne
submitted that Ms M would not therefore have supported the Department’s
alternative proposal.
said the caseworker needs to be there to help, rather than to intimidate and
compel, and should be identifying what supports
are required to enhance the
Grandmother’s strengths. I find this has not been the pattern in the past,
is not contemplated
by the Department’s alternative proposal, and is
unlikely to be the pattern in the future.
Sole parental responsibility to the Grandmother
Grandmother acknowledged that she needs help to care for the Children and
welcomes the assistance she is receiving from Ms S at
[M] and the sisters from
her church in Redfern, as she welcomed the assistance provided by Mr F when
CatholicCare was involved. If
the Grandmother had sole parental responsibility,
the question is whether she would access the necessary services without a
with a coordinating agency, such as the Department or another agency.
In such circumstances, the Grandmother would be solely responsible
coordinating help for herself and the Children, including liaising with a number
of services to meet each Child’s needs
as well as her own. I agree with
Mr Harris that the Grandmother needs more than just referrals; she would benefit
from case management
and day to day support. Mr Harris doubted whether the
services presently available to the Grandmother through [M] would be enough.
already noted, the Independent Children’s Lawyer proposes that the
Grandmother have sole parental responsibility. She has
investigated the
services the Grandmother is likely to need and prepared a spreadsheet of those
services and how they would be
On this plan, [M]
family support services would be the coordinating agency.
Sole parental responsibility to the Department
Department seeks a sole parental responsibility order because it has been unable
to implement a shared regime with the Grandmother,
and believes the Grandmother
lacks the capacity to parent.
Wearne submits that the Court should be concerned about the manner in which the
Department has exercised equal shared parental
responsibility with the
Grandmother since 3 March 2014. As already noted, the Department failed to
comply with its obligations though
prescribed in that order. Ms Wearne is
critical of the Department for failing to arrange sexual assault counselling for
not ensuring the coordination of the Children’s medical histories
or continuity in the Children’s medical care.
Ms C conceded that the Department should have arranged sexual assault
counselling for [U], she did not accept the Department
had otherwise failed in
its duty to the Grandmother under the shared parental responsibility order.
the Children are to remain in the care of the Department, an order for sole
parental responsibility to the Minister would follow.
Discussion and Determination
are multiple uncertainties in this case, compounded by the number of Children,
the paucity of evidence about each Child’s
current circumstances, and the
inability of the Department to provide detail about the Children’s future
arrangements if its
primary proposal is accepted. At the outset of his final
submissions, Mr Harris conceded, properly in my view, that it was a major
weakness in the Department’s case that it could not identify with
precision where the Children would be if sole parental responsibility
allocated to the Minister. The evidence disclosed that the Children would almost
certainly live on the South coast of New South
Wales, probably in the Nowra
region, a long distance from their family in Sydney and community ties in [W]
country. The Court does
not know whether the Children would live as a sibling
group, or in what sibling groupings (if any) they would be placed, or whether
suitable indigenous carers could be found. The importance of keeping siblings
together has long been recognised by the
authorities.
The Court does
not know how many times each Child would be required to move before a long term
placement could be identified, where
that placement would be, or with whom each
child would ultimately live. There is no evidence before the Court as to the
capacity of the likely carers, their training, qualifications or
experience, and no evidence about whether the medical, dental, support
required by each Child exist in the region in which that Child would live. Dr K
was clear that the medical services in Sydney
are far greater than any local
region of New South Wales. The evidence discloses the likely absence of cultural
connection. I find
the extent of these unknowns very troubling, and have given
this finding considerable weight in reaching my decision.
the other hand, there are obvious problems on the Grandmother’s side,
which have been canvassed at length in these Reasons.
It is an enormous task to
parent six Children, quite apart from managing their history of disadvantage and
their special needs, and
the Grandmother has lapsed in her caring
responsibilities in the time she has had the care of the Children. While I have
noted reasons
for these lapses, they cannot be overlooked. The Grandmother has
had a hard life marked by drug addiction, problems with alcohol,
violence, homelessness and bereavement. Her own children are troubled as adults
and the subject of child protection concerns.
However, the Grandmother has shown
resilience. She removed the Children from their parents when she saw the cycle
of unsafe and neglectful
parenting repeating itself. She sought legal advice and
initiated proceedings in this Court to secure the Children’s living
arrangements. She now has stable suitable accommodation and draws on a broad
base of social and counselling support to deal with
the challenges of caring for
her six Grandchildren, presently two full time and six each weekend. I am also
encouraged by her management
of [V] and [X] since their return to her care in
July, and her consistent commitment to collecting and returning the other
each week despite the logistical difficulties and distance. The
Independent Children’s Lawyer has had liberty to relist this
matter, but
has not done so since [V] and [X] have been returned to the Grandmother’s
care, nor while the parties have awaited
this judgment.
Department’s proposal for contact does not adequately address the
emotional needs of these Children. The Grandmother is
almost certainly the
primary attachment figure for [Z] and [Y]. Yet the Department proposes limited
supervised time with the Grandmother,
which is not likely to be sustainable. In
addition, the Department’s proposal disregards the Children’s need
for relationships
with each other, with their Mother and the Father and for a
meaningful connection with their culture. The Department is unable to
many placements each Child would experience if they remain in the
Department’s care.
Department has never established a cooperative working relationship with the
Grandmother, who has a long troubled history with
the Department, and has felt
intimidated rather than assisted when questioned about child protection
concerns. I am not persuaded
that this Grandmother would succeed in her
parenting role if she felt she was constantly under the Department’s
scrutiny. This
Grandmother needs family support services, rather than constant
Children display a range of physical and psychological needs and have had poor
parenting in the past. This makes the Grandmother’s
role particularly
difficult. Each child’s individual needs require a level of organisation
and commitment that is likely to
be highly challenging. But the Grandmother has
a close relationship to the Children and they are generally respectful,
and responsive to her parenting. She has demonstrated a genuine
focus on each child’s needs and interests and is sensitive
to those needs.
While there are potential risks to the Grandmother’s capacity from
financial hardship, ill health and dealing
with issues arising from other family
and community members
Grandmother has shown a willingness to accept help.
the protective factors against the risk factors, Mr R formed the view that the
Grandmother’s care of the Children
does not constitute a significant risk
of physical or psychological harm to the extent that the welfare of the Children
to be promoted by them living in alternative care. In general, he
believes that the Grandmother is capable of protecting the Children
and caring for them to at least an adequate
R says that placement of the Children in long term out of home care may also
constitute a significant risk factor for the Children,
particularly as placement
stability is uncertain. [V] and [X] have already experienced a breakdown in
their placement after a matter
of a few weeks, and Mr R says that multiple
placements are not uncommon in the course of children being in care, more so in
of Aboriginal
Mr R highlighted
the social and emotional risks to the Children if they are required to
transition between placements and adjust
to different care arrangements. In
cross-examination, Ms M said it was necessary to balance the child protection
concerns against
the risk of breaking up the sibling group and the risk of
losing cultural identity.
Grandmother offers cultural connection, meaningful relationships with the Mother
and the Father and a home all together. The Grandmother
shows an understanding
of her mistakes and insight into her failures as a parent. Numbers of those
involved with the Grandmother
compliment her parenting. While she has made
errors of judgment, including remaining in [C], the Grandmother has been largely
in protecting the Children from the drug and alcohol issues of their
Mother and Father. The Grandmother herself has turned her life
around, having
given up alcohol and drugs, accepted the support of the drug rehabilitation
service at the Aboriginal Medical Service
and earned the respect of many in the
community. Neither Ms M nor Mr R support the Department’s proposal for the
Children to
live in out of home care. Ms M said fortnightly contact between the
Children and the Grandmother would not meet the Children’s
including their need for each other and for their cultural identity. Nor in her
view, would such an arrangement be sustainable
in the long term. She said the
Children should live with the Grandmother who should be properly supported.
Court must weigh its findings to determine each Child’s best interests. On
balance I have decided to end the present dispersion
of these Children around
New South Wales, and to reunite the family under the one roof in a calculated
attempt to restore some degree
of stability, happiness and mutual support
amongst the Children, under the care of their Grandmother. I am not persuaded
Grandmother has been demonstrated to be so inadequate as to justify the
uncertain future for each of the Children proposed by the
Department. I
acknowledge that this decision contains an identifiable risk of failure, and
there are many challenges inherent in
such a move. However, I have decided it
is a risk worth taking in the best interests of these Children. The Department
required to arrange each Child’s return to the Grandmother’s
orders being made.
This will give them the opportunity to enjoy preparations for Christmas all
succeed, the Grandmother will need to maintain a courageous level of commitment
and discipline. I do not doubt her will or energy.
However, the task ahead of
her may well prove to be beyond her best efforts unless she remains strongly
supported by the commendable
people who have appeared in this Court and attested
positively to the Grandmother’s past efforts in a very difficult
have given careful consideration as to whether the Department should have shared
parental responsibility with the Grandmother for
the Children, as submitted by
the Department in their alternative proposal. If there was stronger evidence of
the Department assisting
and supporting the Grandmother in the past, that
arrangement would have been this Court’s preferred outcome. However, I am
not satisfied that the Department has demonstrated a willingness or capacity to
play a supportive role. Ms C presented as fixed
in her negative opinion of the
Grandmother. While Mr Harris submitted (in his alternative proposal) that the
Department would give
consideration to changing the team allocated to this
family, I have little confidence that this would occur. As already noted, I
that the Department caseworkers involved in this case have shown poor knowledge
of and insight into how to build a cooperative
working relationship with this
Aboriginal Grandmother. I am not satisfied this is likely to change. I find the
Department’s
requirements of the Grandmother in its alternative proposal
unrealistic and overly onerous, given the demands of six Children day
find it likely the ongoing involvement of the Department is more likely to
undermine, rather than enhance the Grandmother’s
chance of success. The
Grandmother will therefore have sole parental responsibility for the Children.
Independent Children’s Lawyer has prepared a carefully crafted and
comprehensive plan for the Grandmother moving forward
which I find thorough and
appropriate and propose to adopt. (Annexure A to these Reasons). She has
arranged grief counselling for
the Grandmother through the Aboriginal Medical
service and for each of the Children to have a health check when in the
Grandmother’s
care. Her plan includes arranging sexual assault counselling
for [U]. If the Grandmother is to succeed in keeping her family safely
the Grandmother will need to accept these supports well into the future. I have
noted the Court’s request to the
Independent Children’s Lawyer to
inquire as to whether one of the larger family support agencies, preferably an
agency with
indigenous family support workers (for example, the Benevolent
Society or CatholicCare), may be able to assist this family. While
I find that
[M] will be involved for some time to come, it is only a small agency with few
staff. Given the significant benefits
of CatholicCare’s previous
involvement, I have requested the Independent Children’s Lawyer to inquire
as to whether one
of the larger agencies, such as SDN Children’s Services,
CatholicCare or the Benevolent
would assist in the
coordination of the services detailed in Exhibit 17. The Independent
Children’s Lawyer will have liberty
to provide a copy of these orders and
Reasons to any Agency involved in assisting the Grandmother.
agree with the Independent Children’s Lawyer, not opposed by the
Grandmother or either parent, that the Grandmother must remain
living in Sydney
to ensure access to the wide range of services she will require for herself and
the Children. Should she wish to
relocate at any time in the future, she will
need to make an application to the Court. This does not however, prevent her
time with the Children in [C] during school holidays.
Mother sought unsupervised contact with the Children as arranged with the
Grandmother, an order agreed by the parties in March
2014. She accepts a
restraint in relation to consuming alcohol or drugs before or during any contact
periods. The experts supported
the Children spending time with the Mother on
these conditions. I have made the Order sought by the Independent
Lawyer that time with the Mother be arranged with the
Grandmother. I am satisfied that the Grandmother would not permit the Children
to be exposed to the Mother if intoxicated and would limit their time with her
if she believed it appropriate, but I will limit the
Children’s time with
the Mother to 4 hours a day.
Father sought time with the Children on any conditions. He was not assessed by
Mr R as he did not make himself available. However,
I am satisfied that the
Children enjoy seeing their Father and should have the opportunity to spend time
with him when he travels
to Sydney or the Children travel to [C]. I support the
Independent Children’s Lawyer’s proposal that time with the Father
occur by arrangement with the Grandmother for up to 4 hours a day.
Mother and the Father will be permitted to obtain information from each of the
Children’s schools upon their request.
Mother and the Father agreed to a restraint being imposed on each of them in
relation to consuming drugs or alcohol prior to or
during the Children’s
time with them, and I have included that order.
Grandmother agreed to a restraint on her permitting Mr W to have any access to
the Children and I have included that order. I
have also made an order
restraining the Mother and the Grandmother from permitting Mr S to spend any
time with the Children, given
the Mother’s concession that he has been
violent towards her, and given the Mother’s counsel’s submission
the Mother accepts such a restraint is likely. Given the
Grandmother’s long history of illicit drug use, I have restrained
Grandmother from any drugs except as prescribed by a medical practitioner.
Independent Children’s Lawyer will remain in the matter for 12 months, as
she has proposed, to ensure the orders are implemented
and will have liberty to
apply during that period.
have been critical of some aspects of the Department’s management of this
matter, and critical of the caseworkers responsible.
These proceedings were on
foot when the Department removed the Children from the Grandmother’s care.
The Department’s
decision to take such a serious step without notice to
this Court when proceedings were pending, was never adequately explained.
have therefore decided to bring this matter to the attention of the Director of
Legal Services of the Department to consider whether
additional training may be
the Grandmother has limited literacy, I have made an order requiring her
solicitor to arrange for these orders and reasons to
be read to her.
all these Reasons, I am satisfied that the Orders made at the beginning of these
Reasons are in the Children’s best interests.
that the preceding two hundred and fifty two (252) paragraphs are a true copy of
the reasons for judgment of Judge
Date: 17 December
[MS J DRAKE]
HOW BEING ADDRESSED AT PRESENT
WHAT IS NEEDED TO ADDRESS IF ANYTHING
Past drug and alcohol abuse
Program at AMS
[Ms J Drake] to continue in program
Parenting skills
Triple P program commencing in October with [M]
Program commencing October 2014.
[Ms J Drake] to attend program
Grief arising out of death of daughter [Ms B]
[name omitted] fromm the Aboriginal Health Team at RPA. Will meet with [Ms
J Drake] and ascertain needs.
ICL will notify [M] of involvement so that they can support
attendance.
Assisting with homework for children
Spoke to [name omitted] from Department of Education member of the
Aboriginal Education Consultative Group. The children will be
allocated a
personalised education plan. [L] Public School is the area that [name
omitted]’s section covers. She is aware
of [V] and [X] and has been
liaising with [name omitted] the Principal at [L]. Upon [Y] starting in
kindergarten she will become
part of the [omitted] program a learning support
Copy of final orders to be released to [name omitted].
Getting children to medical appointments
Spoke to [name omitted] at the AMS. ICL to do letter to AMS to be placed
on each of the children’s medical files indicating
that transport is
needed for any specialists appointments and the appointments should be organised
when the AMS can assist with transport.
Copy of final orders to AMS attention [name omitted]. ICL to do letter to
be placed in each child’s file. Copy of report of
[Mr R] released to
Getting children to extracurricular activities
[omitted] do not currently have upcoming competitions. Rugby League and
Netball possible next year. Waiting on response from National
Indigenous Excellence re available programs.
Children’s involvement in extracurricular activities
Advocating for the children with special needs
This should be covered by the AMS co-ordination of appointments.
Letter by ICL to AMS advising that advocacy required. Copy to be placed on
each child’s file. Copy of report of [Mr R] to
Meeting the special needs of the children ie., implementing recommendations
of health professionals and teachers.
Combination of AMS and [L] Public School.
This should be covered by the AMS co-ordination of appointments. [L]
Public does not have tutors that can attend at home but with
personalised
education plan this should be met.
Waiting on information from [M].
Sexual assault counselling
Kihri Euloo-wiree from the Aboriginal Health Team at RPA. Will meet with
[U] and ascertain needs. Will do initial meeting at home
to assess all needs.
Counselling can take the form of talking whilst walking. Will do away from
hospital so that less intimidating.
Possible counselling program being held at
Glebe PCYC for teenage girls re keeping safe and sexual assault counselling.
Will assess
once met [U]. Determine whether appropriate for [U]. Will contact
sexual assault unit at RPA re what they can provide. Can link
into adolescent
programs once undertaken assessment.
ICL to notify [omitted] once final orders made and [U] in [Ms J
Drake]’s care. ICL will notify [M] of involvement so that they
support attendance. Copy of [Mr R]’s report released to [omitted].
Counselling re exposure to chaotic parenting style, domestic violence and
drug and alcohol abuse by parents.
AMS to have copy of final orders
Extracurricular activities
[omitted] do not currently have upcoming competitions. Rugby League and
Netball possible next year. Waiting on response from National
Indigenous Excellence re available programs.
Big brother big sister program
No aboriginal worker nor placements available for aboriginal child.
Not available at present.
Educational needs
Transfer to [omitted] School at the commencement of Term 4 2014.
School wanting final orders before placement to ensure [V] is not moved out
of [omitted] once there.
School to be provided with copy of final orders
[name omitted] – Sydney Dental Hospital Aboriginal unit.
Waiting on a response.
Extracurricular activities
[omitted] do not currently have upcoming competitions. Rugby League and
Netball possible next year. Waiting on response from National
Indigenous Excellence re available programs.
Global Development delay
Combination of AMS and [L] Public School. Once commences at [L] will have
personalised education plan overseen by Aboriginal education
consultative
Copy of final orders to AMS
Dental problems
[name omitted] – Sydney Dental Hospital Aboriginal unit.
Waiting on a response
Hearing loss
See comments above re AMS
Speech therapy
See comments above re AMS
Occupational therapy
See comments above re AMS
Eye problems
See comments above re AMS
Extracurricular activities
[omitted] do not currently have upcoming competitions. Rugby League and
Netball possible next year. Waiting on response from National
Indigenous Excellence re available programs.
Learning difficulties
Has personalised education program. [X] no longer considered necessary to
go to [omitted] school.
School provided with copy of final orders.
Possible diagnosis of ADHD
[Ms J Drake] to take to AMS
Extracurricular activities
[omitted] do not currently have upcoming competitions. Rugby League and
Netball possible next year. Waiting on response from National
Indigenous Excellence re available programs.
[name omitted] – Sydney Dental Hospital Aboriginal unit
Waiting on a response.
Extracurricular activities
[omitted] do not currently have upcoming competitions. Rugby League and
Netball possible next year. Waiting on response from National
Indigenous Excellence re available programs.
[name omitted] – Sydney Dental Hospital Aboriginal unit
Waiting on a response.
[name omitted] – Sydney Dental Hospital.
Waiting on a response.
Possible developmental delay
[Z] to be reviewed by AMS at appropriate time.
Pursuant to section 43(1) of
Children and Young Persons (Care and Protection) Act
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
Evidence of Ms C in
cross-examination
A8 to affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
At paragraph 13 of
At paragraph 39 of
affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
At paragraph 44 of
affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
At paragraph 9 of
affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
Ibid at paragraph
Annexure D to affidavit
of Ms C sworn on 25 August
Annexure E and
paragraph 56 of affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
Annexure F of affidavit
of Ms C’s sworn on 25 August
Annexure GG of
affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
Annexure HH of
affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
Ibid at paragraph
Ibid at page
Ibid at paragraph
Ibid at paragraph
Ibid at paragraph
Ibid at Annexure
Ibid at Annexure
Ibid at Annexure
Ibid at Annexure
Ibid at Annexure
Ibid at Annexure
Ibid at Annexure
Ibid at Annexure
Ibid at Annexure
Ibid at Annexure
Ibid at Annexure
Ibid at paragraph
Evidence of Ms K in
cross-examination
Annexures A6 and A7
paragraph 113
Annexure A21
Annexure A10 of affidavit
of Ms C sworn 25 August 2014
Ibid at page 248
[2011] FamCAFC 16
(2011) FLC 93-460
approved by the Full Court in
Valentine &
Lacerra & Anor
[2013] FamCAFC 53
at paragraph
At paragraph 53 of
Valentine & Lacerra & Anor
[2013] FamCAFC
Per May and Thackray JJ
Mulvany & Lane
[2009] FamCAFC 76
(2009) FLC 93-404
at paragraphs 76 and 77 –
cited with approval at paragraph 53 of
Valentine & Lacerra & Anor
[2013] FamCAFC 53
Kitsannis & Netpoulis & Anor
[2010] FamCAFC 214
at paragraph
At paragraph 53 of
Valentine & Lacerra & Anor
[2013] FamCAFC
Rice & Miller
(1993) 16 Fam LR 970
At paragraph 43 of
Valentine & Lacerra & Anor
[2013] FamCAFC
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
Ibid at paragraph
Ibid at paragraph
Ibid at paragraph
Exhibit 3 at page
Ibid at page
Ibid at page
Ibid at page
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
Ibid at paragraph
Exhibit 3 at page
At paragraph 128 of the
affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
Ibid at paragraph 128
and Annexure A22
Annexure A21
Exhibit 2 at
paragraph 59
paragraph 80
paragraph 82
Exhibit 3 at
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
Exhibit 3 at page
At paragraph 133 of
affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
Ibid at paragraph
At page 248 of affidavit
of Ms C sworn on 25 August
Ibid at paragraph
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
Exhibit 3 at page
Ibid at page
Ibid at page
At paragraphs 5 and 11 of
affidavit of Ms G sworn on 1 August
At paragraph 4 of
affidavit of Sister H sworn on 27 August
Affidavit of Ms F sworn
on 29 August 2014
at paragraph 56
Exhibit 2 at
paragraph 51
Annexure F to
affidavit of the Grandmother sworn 29 August
Exhibit 3 at page
Annexures A26 and A27 of
the affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
Exhibit 3 at page
Cross-examination of Ms
Annexure D to affidavit
of Grandmother sworn on 29 August
Churchin & Anor
[2013] FamCAFC 180
at paragraph
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
Exhibit 3 at page
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
Exhibit 3 at page
Exhibit 2 at paragraph
Exhibit 3 at page
[1995] FamCA 30
(1995) FLC 92-598
[2000] FamCA 43
3 at page 16
At page 190
of affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
Exhibit 3 at page
Affidavit of the
Father sworn on 21 February
Exhibit 3 at page
At page 239 of
affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
Annexure A24 of
affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
At pages 112 and 133
of affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
[2011] FamCA 38
per Moore J at
At paragraph 41 of
Valentine & Lacerra & Anor
[2013] FamCAFC
Kitsannis &
[2010] FamCAFC 214
at paragraph
Section 64B(2)(c)
Family Law Act
At paragraph 23
of affidavit of Ms K sworn on 6 June
Exhibit 3 at page
Evidence of Grandmother
in cross examination – 9 September
Annexure MM1 of
affidavit of Ms C sworn on 25 August
Annexure M of
affidavit of Ms K sworn on 6 June
Ibid at Annexure
Ibid at annexures Q and
Exhibit 3 at page
[1994] 19 FamLR 165
Exhibit 3 at page 14
See Exhibit 3 at
page 14 - footnote
Benevolent Society assist [name omitted] according to file note at page 196 of
Ms C’s affidavit sworn on 25 August 2014
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.19 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter