han robert v Shanghai High Niche Investment Co Ltd [2025] ATMO 213 (16 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by han robert to
registration of trade mark application number 2444843 (class 15) - NEXSTAND - in
the name of Shanghai
High Niche Investment Co., Ltd.
Anne Makrigiorgos
REPRESENTATION:
Self represented
LexGeneris Pty Ltd
2025 ATMO 213
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) – opposition under
pursued – no ground established – trade mark to
proceed to registration
decision concerns an opposition under
Trade Marks Act 1995
by han robert
’) to registration of the following trade
Trade mark number
Application
Shanghai High Niche Investment Co., Ltd.
Filing date
22 April 2024 (‘
Relevant Date
Specification
musical instruments; stands for musical instruments; music
stands; carrying cases for musical instruments; cases for musical instruments;
pedals for musical instruments; guitars; straps for musical instruments; musical
boxes; chin rests for violins (‘
Applicant’s
Trade Mark was examined and advertised as accepted for possible registration on
23 September 2024.
14 October 2024, the Opponent filed a Notice of Intention to Oppose the
Application. On 17 October 2024, the Opponent filed a Statement
of Grounds and
Particulars (‘
’) (later rectified by this office). The
Applicant filed a Notice of Intention to Defend the opposition on 4 December
No evidence was filed by either of the parties.
parties were given the opportunity to either request an oral hearing or to file
written submissions. While neither party elected
to be heard, the Applicant
requested a decision without a hearing. I am a delegate of the Registrar of
Trade Marks and this matter
has been allocated to me to determine. I have
decided this matter based on the particulars set out in the
Grounds and onus
SGP nominates grounds of opposition under
The Opponent
carries the burden of establishing this ground of
on the balance of
probabilities.
The date at which
the rights of the parties are to be determined is the Relevant
relevantly provides (some notes omitted):
Identical etc. trade
(1) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), an application for the
registration of a trade mark (
applicant’s trade mark
respect of goods (
applicant’s goods
) must be rejected
(a) the applicant’s trade mark is substantially identical with, or
deceptively similar to:
(i) a trade mark registered by another person in respect of similar goods or
closely related services; or
(ii) a trade mark whose registration in respect of similar goods or closely
related services is being sought by another person; and
(b) the priority date for the registration of the applicant’s trade
mark in respect of the applicant’s goods is not earlier
than the priority
date for the registration of the other trade mark in respect of the similar
goods or closely related services.
Note 1: For
deceptively similar
section 10.
Note 2: For
similar goods
subsection 14(1).
SGP nominates trade mark registration number 2358840 (‘
’). Details of this trade mark appear
Priority date
Class 11: Air-conditioning installations; Hydrants; Burners for lamps;
Lamps; Coffee machines, electric (‘
Xiangyang Zhang
successfully oppose the Application pursuant to
, the Opponent must
establish each of the following requirements:
Opponent’s Mark has a priority date which is earlier than the Relevant
Date and is held in a name other than that of the
Applicant (‘
requirement
the Trade Mark
is substantially identical with or deceptively similar to the Opponent’s
second requirement
Applicant’s Goods are closely related to the goods of the Opponent’s
third requirement
am satisfied that the priority date of the Opponent’s Mark is earlier than
the Relevant Date and that the Opponent’s
Mark is in a name other than the
Applicant. I am also satisfied that the Trade Mark and the Opponent’s Mark
are identical.
Therefore, the first and second requirements are satisfied.
now consider the third requirement, whether the Applicant’s Goods are
similar to the Opponent’s Goods.
are ‘similar to other goods’ if they are the same or of the same
description as the other goods.
factors relevant to the consideration of whether goods are similar include their
nature including their origin and characteristics,
uses made of the goods
including their intended purposes, source of manufacture, respective trade
channels and whether the ordinary
consumer of the goods would regard the goods
as being from a single source.
These can be conveniently summarised as: whether the respective goods are of the
same nature; whether they are used by the same people
for the same purposes; and
whether the trade channels are the same. No single consideration is conclusive
fuller explanation of trade channels as approved by the High Court in
Southern Cross Refrigerating Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty
considers whether the goods
are usually produced by one and the same manufacturer or distributed by the same
wholesale houses, whether
they are sold in the same shops over the same counters
during the same seasons and to the same classes of customers, and whether
those engaged in their manufacture or distribution they are regarded as
belonging to the same trade.
question is one of fact
phrase ‘goods of the same description’ ought not to be given too
restrictive a construction so as to be limited
to goods substantially analogous
in kind, or commonly used as mere substitutes or alternatives, the one for the
am not satisfied that the Applicant’s Goods are of the same description as
the Opponent’s Goods. The Applicant’s
Goods are musical instruments
and accessories such as stands, cases, pedals, straps and chin rests, and
musical boxes. In my view
there is absolutely no nexus between these goods and
the Opponent’s Goods which are air-conditioning installations, hydrants,
burners for lamps, lamps and electric coffee machines. The inherent natures,
characteristics, uses and trade channels of the respective
goods markedly
differ. Therefore, the third requirement is not satisfied and the
Trade mark similar to trade mark that has acquired a
reputation in Australia
The registration of a trade mark in respect of particular goods or services
may be opposed on the ground that:
(a) another trade mark had, before the priority date for the registration of
the first‑mentioned trade mark in respect of those
goods or services,
acquired a reputation in Australia; and
(b) because of the reputation of that other trade mark, the use of the
first‑mentioned trade mark would be likely to deceive
priority date
section 12.
relies upon a likelihood of consumer confusion and/or deception occurring
because of the reputation of another trade mark. What must
be shown by the
Opponent is at least one trade mark which had a reputation in Australia at the
Relevant Date, and because of that
reputation, use of the Trade Mark would be
likely to confuse or deceive.
SGP identifies the Opponent’s Mark as the trade mark supporting this
ground of opposition and makes the following unsubstantiated
the absence of evidence of use of the Opponent’s Mark, I am not satisfied
that the Opponent had developed the necessary
reputation in the Opponent’s
Mark at the Relevant Date amongst a substantial number of consumers in any
market. Thus, the
ground of opposition fails.
relevantly provides:
(1) Unless subsection (3) applies to the proceedings, the Registrar
must, at the end, decide:
(a) to refuse to register the trade mark; or
(b) to register the trade mark (with or without conditions or limitations)
in respect of the goods and/or services then specified
in the application;
having regard to the extent (if any) to which any ground on which the
application was opposed has been established.
limitations
Opponent has failed to establish any of the grounds of opposition it nominated
in the SGP. Trade mark application number 2444843
may proceed to registration
not less than one month from the date of this decision.
the Registrar is served with a notice of appeal before that time, I direct that
registration shall not occur until either the appeal
is withdrawn or
discontinued. Otherwise, the disposition of the Application should be in
accordance with the Court’s order
or direction.
Applicant sought costs in the Notice of Intention to Defend. It is usual for
costs to follow the event, and I see no reason to
depart from that principle
here. I award costs against the Opponent under
in the relevant amounts
under Schedule 8 of the Regulations.
Anne Makrigiorgos
Hearing Officer
Delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks
Unless otherwise stated, each
reference to a section is a reference to a section of the
Trade Marks Act
(Cth) and each reference to a regulation is a reference to a regulation
Trade Marks Regulations 1995
Regulations
Food Channel Network Pty Ltd
v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
, [32] (Keane CJ, Stone and
Telstra Corporation Limited
v Phone Directories Company Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot
and Edelmann JJ).
Southern Cross Refrigerating
Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 82
, [4] (Kitto J).
Section 14(1).
Re Jellinek’s
Application
[1946] 63 RPC 59 (Romer
Southern Cross
J Lyons & Co
Ltd’s Application
[1959] RPC 120
, 128 and 132 (CA UK) (‘
RTF format (637 KB)
Signed PDF/A format