Australian Workers' Union, The [2024] FWCD 1048 (4 October 2024)
[2024] FWCD 1048
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
—Alteration of other rules of organisation
Workers' Union, The
(R2024/110)
CHRIS ENRIGHT
MELBOURNE,4 OCTOBER 2024
Alteration of other rules of organisation.
On 26 July 2024
The Australian Workers'
Union (the AWU) lodged with the Fair Work Commission (the Commission) a notice
and declaration setting out
particulars of alterations to its rules. Further
information in support of the alterations was provided on 29 July 2024, 15
2024 and 6 September 2024.
The AWU seeks certification of the alterations under
section 159
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
On the information contained in the notice and declaration and the
material provided on 15 August 2024, I am satisfied the alterations
made under the rules of the organisation.
Regulation 126(1)
Fair Work (Registered Organisations)
Regulations 2009
subsection 159(1)
Act, if an alteration of the rules (other than the eligibility rules) of an
organisation is made, the organisation, within
35 days after the alteration is
made, or within any additional period the General Manager allows, must:
(a) lodge with the FWC a notice setting out the particulars of the
alteration; and
(b) if the organisation has a web site—publish on its web site a notice
that the notice mentioned in paragraph (a) has been
The alterations were transacted on 19 June 2024. The period
prescribed by
regulation 126
ended on 25 July 2026. The lodgement was made on 26
July 2024 and the notice of lodgement was published on the AWU’s website
on 29 July 2024. Therefore, both events occurred outside the prescribed 35-day
The AWU in its correspondence dated 15 August 2024 acknowledged the
delay and explained that it was occasioned by the AWU official
responsible for
lodging and publishing the notification taking personal leave due to illness.
The AWU has requested that I allow
an additional period.
I accept the AWU’s account for the delay. I note it does not
appear to have a history of lodging applications for the certification
alterations out of time. I therefore allow an additional period, until 29 July
2024. However, I remind the AWU that granting
an additional period is at my
discretion and that it is incumbent upon registered organisations to comply with
their legislative
obligations.
The particulars set out alterations to the following rules:
National Conference;
Calculation of Branch Representation and Voting Rights for National Conference
and National Executive;
Duties of Officers;
The Branches and Divisions of The Union
Annual General Meetings and Ordinary Meetings of Branches;
Accounts and Audits;
Loans, Grants and Donations; and
The particulars also delete
– New South Wales Branch
– Transitional Rule.
The declaration suggests further alterations were made to render the
language of the rules gender neutral. However, particulars of
alterations—if any—was not lodged.
Following discussions with Commission staff, the AWU requested the
withdrawal of the alteration to
and any alterations introducing gender
neutral language. Given those alterations are completely independent of all the
other alterations,
I am satisfied that the withdrawal will not affect the
meaning or effect of the remaining
alterations.
therefore agree to the withdrawal. I now turn to the remaining alterations.
The alterations to subrules 20(1A), 26(5), 55(5) and 61(4) and the
deletion of
remove redundant provisions relating to:
the time and
place for holding a National Conference during the COVID-19 pandemic;
• transitional arrangements surrounding the creation of the New South
Wales Branch in
The alteration to subrule 47(1) provides specific date information
regarding when Annual General Meetings are held.
The above alterations are minor and uncontroversial. They do not
require comment beyond expressing my opinion about the matters set
subsection 159(1)
of the Act.
The alterations to subrules 32(2)(a), 33(7)(b), 33(7)(d) and
33(7)(j) alter the composition of National Executives and Branch Executives.
increase the
number of National Officers from 8 to 9 by creating an additional honorary
National Vice President office;
number of New South Wales Branch Executive members from 24 to 20 by abolishing
one full-time Branch Senior Vice-President
office, one full-time Branch
Vice-President office and two honorary Branch Executive Committee Member
increase the
number of Queensland Branch Executive members from 11 to 12 by creating a new
full-time Branch Assistant Secretary office;
increase the
number of Victorian Branch Executive members from 25 to 26 by creating an
additional full-time Branch Assistant Secretary
An organisation has the right to mould its internal structures as it
sees fit, provided it complies with the requirements of the
legislation.
Authorities also suggest that an elected office may be abolished if the
abolition is effected in accordance with the rules, is bona
oppressive, unreasonable or unjust within the meaning of the
of the Act stipulates that rules must not impose conditions,
obligations or restrictions that, having regard to, among other things,
Parliament’s intentions and the objects of the Act, are oppressive,
unreasonable or
For the sake
of brevity, I refer to this requirement as ‘alterations to rules must not
be oppressive, unreasonable or unjust’.
I have already found that the alterations were made under the rules
of the organisation. There is nothing before me to suggest the
abolition is not
bona fide. The AWU’s National Secretary Paul Farrow supplied a statement
in support of the proposed alterations.
Among other things the statement said:
“The New South Wales Branch was created on 1 September
2016 as the product of the amalgamation of three Branches of the AWU
New South Wales... Almost eight years after the creation of the New South Wales
Branch of the AWU, the Branch is seeking
to reduce the size of its Branch
Executive from 24 to 20 positions as the Branch is now no longer three Branches
operating together
but a single Branch of the AWU; these additional offices are
no longer required.
The reduction in size of the New South Wales Branch Executive in no way
imposes oppressive, unreasonable or unjust conditions on members
of the Branch.
Each of the offices in the Branch are still open to all eligible members, and
the number of remaining offices is sufficient
to ensure that the Branch is
representative and accountable to its members, the Branch encourages members to
participate in the affairs
of the Branch, and provides for the democratic
functioning of the Branch.
Additionally, the reduction in size of the New
South Wales Branch Executive to 20 members will encourage the efficient
of the Branch.” (citations omitted)
I accept Mr Farrow’s statement. In my view, the alterations
that abolished the New South Wales Branch offices are not oppressive,
unreasonable or unjust.
Current subrule 61(3) provides that the abolition and creation of
any offices will not take effect until the next election. As a consequence:
• the current holders of the offices abolished by the proposed alterations
are entitled to remain in the office until their
term expires, they resign, are
• the newly created offices will be filled in
commence in January
The alteration to subrule 33(7)(d) also removes the District Office
locations of the Queensland Branch. This alteration is not controversial.
On 15 August 2024, Mr Farrow, gave consent under
subsection 159(2)
of the Act for me to make various amendments to the alterations for the purpose
of correcting typographical, clerical or formal errors.
Accordingly, the
following corrections have been made:
the heading which immediately precedes this subrule has been deleted;
the heading which immediately precedes this subrule has been deleted;
the heading which immediately precedes this subrule has been deleted;
heading which immediately precedes this rule has been deleted.
In my opinion, the alterations comply with and are not contrary to
the Act, the
Fair Work Act 2009
, modern awards and enterprise agreements,
are not otherwise contrary to law and were made under the rules of the
organisation. I
certify accordingly under
subsection 159(1)
of the Act.
DELEGATE OF THE GENERAL MANAGER
Preservers’ Union of Australia and Another
(1988) 79 ALR 138
The Australian
Workers Union
[1985] FCA 132
(1985) 7 FCR 457
Australian Postal and Telecommunications Union
(1977) 30 FLR 385
Australasian Meat Industry Employees’ Union
[1992] FCA 327
(1992) 36 FCR 536
provides that rules:
must not impose on applicants for membership, or members, of the
organisation, conditions, obligations or restrictions that, having
Parliament’s intention in enacting this Act (see
objects of this Act and the
Fair Work Act
, are oppressive, unreasonable or
See Rules 31
In addition to
Rule 61(3), see s.143(1)(a) of the Act and
Grove v Cameron
[1972] CthArbRp 393
(1972) 21 FLR
; Spicer CJ, Joske J, Smithers J; 10 May 1972 per Spicer CJ & Smithers J
AWU’s 6 September 2024 correspondence.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (556 KB)
Signed PDF/A format