URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/cth/AUEPIP/2018/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:26:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Reef 2020: Cumulative impact management policy [2018] AUEPIP 2 (1 January 2018)
Target audience
Principles for managing cumulative impacts
Implementation
Related legislation
Review and evaluation
Definitions
Further information
Attachment 1: Drivers of change, pressures and impacts on the Great Barrier Reef
© Commonwealth of Australia 2018
Published by the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
ISBN 978-0-6480964-6-7
Cumulative impact management policy
is licensed by the
Commonwealth of Australia for use under a Creative Commons By Attribution 4.0
International licence with the exception
of the Coat of Arms of the Commonwealth
of Australia, the logo of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, any
other material
protected by a trademark, content supplied by third parties and
any photographs. For licence conditions see:
http://creativecommons.org/licences/by/4.0
A cataloguing record for this publication is available from the National
Library of Australia
This publication should be cited as:
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority 2018,
Cumulative impact
management policy
, GBRMPA, Townsville.
Comments and questions regarding this document are welcome and should be
addressed to:
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
2–68 Flinders Street
(PO Box 1379)
Townsville QLD 4810, Australia
Phone: (07) 4750 0700
Fax: (07) 4772 6093
info@gbrmpa.gov.au
www.gbrmpa.gov.au
To provide a systematic and consistent approach to managing and reducing
cumulative impacts on the Great Barrier Reef.
Cumulative impacts are defined as the interaction of effects
between one or more impacts
and past, present and reasonably foreseeable future pressures.
Cumulative impact assessment takes into account direct,
indirect and consequential impacts and the incremental and compounding effects
of these impacts over time, including past, present and reasonably foreseeable
future pressures.
This policy provides a framework to mitigate or
reduce cumulative impacts on Great Barrier Reef values.
To reduce pressures on Great Barrier Reef values from multiple sources
through rigorous decision-making that:
• identifies past, present and reasonably foreseeable pressures;
• examines their combined effects on Great Barrier Reef values and
• designs and applies appropriate management measures to avoid and
mitigate impacts.
The target audience for this policy is the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
Authority and other Australian and Queensland government
agencies making
decisions that may affect the values of the Great Barrier Reef (Refer to
Definitions
environment, decision, Great Barrier Reef and values
Government agencies and authorities should apply this policy when revising or
preparing relevant agreements, policies, plans, strategies
and programs when
they are likely to contribute to the drivers and
on Great Barrier Reef
Cumulative impacts should be considered at a strategic level, such that where
proposed activities are consistent with management approaches
that have already
considered cumulative impacts, then project level cumulative impact assessments
would not be required.
However, activities that pose a higher risk to Great Barrier Reef values and
are generally the subject of an environmental impact
assessment or similar, will
be required to assess cumulative impacts, in accordance with this policy.
Where required, proponents should apply this policy when seeking approvals -
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975
or relevant Queensland
legislation – for actions that are likely to adversely affect attaining
the desired outcomes for Great
Barrier Reef values. These are most likely to be
proposed actions for which formal environmental impact assessment, or similar,
is required.
Local government, businesses, industry, community groups and other people are
encouraged to use this policy to better understand the
different types of
pressures and impacts affecting the Great Barrier Reef, and to provide guidance
to reduce impacts either through
taking direct action, partnering or influencing
others. Small positive actions have the potential to deliver a cumulative
impact for the Reef.
Attachments 1 and 3 will help identify potential interactions that contribute
to drivers and pressures on Great Barrier Reef values,
and target opportunities
to deliver better outcomes for the Reef.
The Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report 2014 (Outlook Report) identified the
four main pressures on the Great Barrier Reef as:
- climate change (global scale)
- coastal land-use change (Great Barrier Reef catchment scale)
- poor water quality from land-based run-off (Great Barrier Reef catchment
- some remaining impacts of fishing (Great Barrier Reef Region scale).
Impacts on the Great Barrier Reef rarely occur in isolation but often overlap
and interact with each other (Figure 1). Where impacts
accumulate over time and
space, they create cumulative impacts which lower the resilience of the
ecosystem and its ability to recover
from disturbance.
Reducing the pressures from local, Marine Park, catchment and global levels
is required to improve the condition of Great Barrier
Reef values and build
resilience. Attachment 1 lists drivers and pressures affecting the Great
Barrier Reef and their relative risk
The impact is not just on the Great Barrier Reef ecosystem, but also impacts
on the cultural values of Traditional Owners; economic
values to the tourism and
fishing industries which rely on a healthy Reef; social values for communities
along the coast for whom
the Reef is part of their daily life; together with the
broader Australian and international community who consider it to be an
irreplaceable
icon – belonging to the global community.
It is critical for reefs worldwide, including the Great Barrier Reef, that
global scale efforts to reduce climate change pressures
are effective.
International actions to limit the Earth’s temperature increase to
C above pre-industrial levels (or ideally less) are underway
through the Paris Climate Agreement. To ensure a future for the Great
Reef as a functioning reef ecosystem, these efforts need to be supported by
improving the Reef’s resilience to climate
change through reducing local
Improving management of cumulative impacts to reduce pressures, together with
delivering decisions that result in an improvement in
the condition of values,
is critical to the future health and resilience of the Great Barrier Reef.
The Reef 2050 Plan provides an overarching strategy for long-term management
of the Great Barrier Reef. It brings together actions
across government,
Traditional Owners, industry, researchers and the community. The Plan provides
an agreed outcomes-based, target-driven
framework for protecting the Great
Barrier Reef’s health and resilience while allowing for ecologically
sustainable use.
The Plan details primary principles to consider in all decision-making that
affects the Great Barrier Reef which are:
- maintaining and enhancing outstanding universal value in every action
- basing decisions on the best available science
- delivering a net benefit to the ecosystem
- adopting a partnership approach to management.
Practical approaches for addressing these principles are contained in the
Reef 2050 Policy Guideline for Decision Makers. Good Practice
Management for the Great Barrier Reef provides additional direction for
decision-makers and the broader community.
This policy is one of a number of Reef 2050 documents being developed to
provide decision-makers and the community with additional
information and
guidance about priorities and processes for implementation (Figure 2).
for managing cumulative impacts
Adopt a consistent approach to cumulative impact management terminology
and methods
Terms used in the
Great Barrier Reef Region Strategic Assessment
Outlook Report
should be adopted to assess, monitor
and report on cumulative impacts at regional and Great Barrier Reef–wide
scales. These
are outlined in this policy’s
Definitions
Attachments 1-3.
Methods used to assess cumulative impacts should build on approaches used in
Great Barrier Reef Region Strategic Assessment Report
. This report
suite of tools
to understand and assess cause-and-effect
relationships of pressures on values.
Methods should be updated as new science and information becomes available,
including standards and protocols being established as
part of the Reef 2050
Integrated Monitoring and Reporting Program.
Understand issues of scale, and cause and effect
For those decisions where Cumulative Impact Assessment is required, the
Driver Pressures State Impact Response framework (Figure 4)
should be used to
identify the broadest range of opportunities to reduce cumulative impacts.
Management interventions to reduce risks
from drivers, pressures and impacts
should be explicitly mapped to this framework.
Assessment of cumulative impacts should identify:
- the space and time scales at which drivers, pressures and impacts –
including direct, indirect and consequential impacts –
are operating
(refer to text box on the next page)
- the space and time scales in which affected values are present and
relationships or dependencies between values
- the cause and effect relationships between drivers, pressures, impacts and
risk on values
- the resulting zone of influence (Figure 3) – the area and time scale
of effect at which impacts are occurring and the scope
of response available or
required to manage these impacts.
Project-based, regional or strategic assessment of cumulative impacts may be
required to manage the drivers and activities leading
to pressures and
consequential impacts within the zone of influence (refer to Attachment 5).
Consideration also needs to be given
to any consequential impacts such as
downstream consequences of altered connectivity between land and sea.
Different types of cumulative pressures on marine ecosystems.
Cumulative effects caused by the same pressure accumulate in a range of
ways through time and space. Some examples include:
• Sequential acute events of the same pressure, such as those caused
by repeated or seasonal pressures in the same area (e.g.
flood events that have
increased volume and pollutants above natural background)
• Subsequent acute effects occur before full recovery from the
previous stress event
• Simultaneous pulses of the same pressure (e.g. nutrient and
pesticides discharged from a number of adjacent catchments)
• Chronic (long term) exposure to the same pressure (e.g. effects of
climate change, such as acidification and increased sea
temperature).
The cumulative effect of multiple pressures is even more complex. A
simultaneous or successive effect by two or three (or more) acute
lead to reduction in ecosystem health.
On the Great Barrier Reef it is not unusual for reefs to be successively
affected by Crown of Thorns Starfish (CoTS), cyclones and
bleaching from thermal
In a DPSIR framework, this means that numerous drivers and activities, such
as atmospheric changes in carbon dioxide concentrations,
fisheries and
agriculture, may interact to lead to cumulative pressure.
Some of these pressures (especially the global and chronic pressures of
ocean acidification and global warming) can be seen as slowly
ramping up over
decades, while other pressures simultaneously affect the community in an acute
or chronic fashion.
(Adapted from page 10 of Uthicke, S., Fabricius, K., De’ath, G.,
Negri, A., Warne, M., Smith, R., Noonan, S., Johansson, C.,
Gorsuch, H. and
Anthony, K. (2016).
Multiple and cumulative impacts on the GBR: assessment of
current status and development of improved approaches for management: Final
Report Project 1.6. Report to the National Environmental Science Programme
Reef and Rainforest Research Centre Limited, Cairns (144pp.)).
Assess against desired state, current condition, thresholds and
Cumulative impact assessments should determine the current condition and
trend of affected values within the zone of influence of
the plan, program or
action. This provides the reference point and context for assessing and managing
cumulative impacts. Use the
best available information including:
- The Outlook Report identifies the condition and trend for values that
contribute to the outstanding universal value of the Great
Barrier Reef and that
underpin Reef-related matters of national environmental significance (see
Attachment 3).
- The Great Barrier Reef Strategic Assessment Program Report established the
desired state of these values by linking their current
condition and trend to
international and national obligations for protecting the Great Barrier Reef.
- The Outlook Report assesses the condition and trend of the Reef’s
values every five years.
- Advice from Traditional Owners and stakeholders on important ecological,
cultural, social and economic values within the zone of
The desired outcomes for Great Barrier Reef values are outlined in Table 1.
At a minimum, it should be considered whether the management
of cumulative
impacts associated with any proposed decision:
- will facilitate or restrict delivery of the desired outcome for specified
- is consistent with ecological sustainable use principles
- accommodates for the effects of global warming of at least 1.5
above pre-industrial levels.
Project-based cumulative assessments should align with any cumulative impact
findings or directions embedded in strategic and regional
assessments and plans
that are consistent with the principles and procedures of this policy. Where an
action is likely to have a
significant impact on Great Barrier Reef values,
environmental impact assessment processes should evaluate project-specific
contributions
to the current and desired condition of impacted values to
determine their acceptability.
Relevant standards, guidelines and thresholds for affected values should be
considered. Currently there are standards for water quality,
ecosystem health
and limits of acceptable change for Ramsar wetlands.
Current condition
Desired outcome
The condition is maintained
The condition is maintained and enhanced
The condition is restored to good
The condition is restored to good
Trend in condition
Desired outcome
The trend is maintained
The trend is maintained and improved
Deteriorating
The decline is halted and reversed
: Desired outcomes for Great Barrier
Reef values
Use integrated approaches and a range of management
Management of cumulative impacts should consider how decisions about
planning, programs, development assessment and on-ground actions
Great Barrier Reef, along the coast, in coastal catchments and globally will
impact Great Barrier Reef values.
Cumulative impacts should be considered at all scales of decision-making and
applied proportionately to the nature and scale and risk
of likely impacts. For
some decisions, cumulative impacts are incorporated in developing overarching
strategies or legislative frameworks.
In most cases, cumulative impacts are best avoided or managed through
regional or system scale planning that guides local scale assessment
management.
Management should be guided by risk assessment using forecasting scenarios
(e.g. climate and global economy) that examine alternative
strategies for
intervention and planning. Transparent analysis of risks and consequences under
alternative scenarios and options
can help identify the most sustainable and
effective options for managing cumulative impacts. Those options should be
into strategic, regional and, where required, local management
mechanisms.
The process for cumulative impact assessment and management for the Great
Barrier Reef are similar to best practice environmental
impact assessment, with
a broader focus on understanding the context and underlying pressures on the
system, its values and desired
outcomes. The process should be used when:
- scoping, with analysis based on a desktop assessment
- undertaking a detailed assessment to improve information or reduce
uncertainty in decision-making.
Attachment 6 includes a suggested process to undertake cumulative impact
assessment or management and includes references to critical
resources to be
consulted for information about the Great Barrier Reef.
Implementation
Implementation of this policy will be staged, recognising the need to develop
specific guidance to better manage cumulative impacts
- government agencies, including planning and assessment officers
- different industry sectors
- natural resource management bodies
- the broader community.
This policy is to be read in conjunction with the Reef 2050 Policy Guideline
for Decision Makers which illustrates a wide range of
actions designed to manage
drivers and pressures on the Reef.
Cumulative impacts will be considered to the extent permissible under
legislation with respect to the planning, assessment and approval
operating within and adjacent to the Great Barrier Reef. Implementation will
take a risk-based approach focussing first
on addressing the pressures and
impacts that present a Very High or High level of risk (refer Attachments 1 and
Where assessment and management of cumulative impacts is consistent with this
policy and has been included in plans, governing arrangements
assessments, the assessment of cumulative impacts is not required for individual
decisions guided by and consistent with
these plans, governing arrangements or
class assessments.
The Cumulative Impact Management Policy has been developed in parallel with
the Reef 2050 Plan Net Benefit Policy and guidance for
Good Practice Management
under the overall governance framework for the Reef 2050 Plan (Figure 5).
legislation
Australian Government, including:
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975
(GBRMP Act)
Queensland Government, including:
Environmental Offsets Act 2014
Environmental Protection Act 1994
Fisheries Act 1994
Marine Parks Act 2004
Nature Conservation Act 1992
Planning Act 2016
Regional Planning Interests Act 2014
State Development and Public Works Organisation Act 1971
Sustainable Ports Development Act 2015
Vegetation Management Act 1999
and evaluation
The effectiveness of this policy will be reviewed and evaluated in line with
the assessment of risks to the Reef’s values through
the five yearly
Outlook Report. Effective management of cumulative impacts should deliver
decisions and actions that recognise and
seek to reduce cumulative impacts. In
the longer term this should translate to a decrease in pressures, or risks, to
Definitions
Actions and activities are used to describe projects and project parts under
the EPBC Act and GBRMP Act. For this policy actions
are used, assuming
activities comprise action, or a subset of an action. Also includes development
proposals and/or planning actions.
Adaptive capacity
The ability for a component of the environment to adapt to impacts to
maintain or improve its condition. Includes the environmental
component’s
ability to recover, reorganise or build capacity to learn and adapt in between
Adaptive management
A systematic process for continually improving management practices through
learning from the outcomes of previous management. It
includes a monitoring,
evaluation, reporting and improvement cycle.
Avoid-mitigate-offset hierarchy
Is used to guide assessment of actions and inform decision-making. The
highest priority is given to avoiding impacts on the environment.
measures must consider prudent and feasible alternatives to a proposed action.
Potential impacts that cannot be avoided
must be minimised. Mitigation measures
must consider direct, indirect and cumulative impacts, and account for the
likely spatial
and temporal scales of impacts across the duration of the
proposed activity. Offsets compensate for the residual adverse impacts
action on the environment.
Baseline condition
A description of existing conditions to provide a starting point (e.g.
pre-project condition of biodiversity) against which comparisons
can be made
(e.g. post-impact condition of biodiversity), allowing the change to be
quantified. Baseline conditions for the Marine
Park are measured from its World
Heritage Declaration in 1981.
Biodiversity elements
Biodiversity is the variety of life on Earth. It includes all living things
and the way they interact with each other and their environment.
Region’s biodiversity values which underpin matters of national
environmental significance include:
- Great Barrier Reef habitats
- terrestrial habitats that support the Great Barrier Reef
Community benefit
The interconnectedness of people and their environment as reflected in the
definition of ‘environment’ under the EPBC
Act and GBRMP Act and as
defined in this document.
Consequential impacts
Are a form of ‘indirect’ impact resulting from further actions
(including actions by third parties) that are made possible
or are facilitated
by implementation of the activity. For example, a port expansion may result in
an increase in shipping activity
which may bring with it a suite of
consequential impacts (e.g. anchoring impacts, displacement of uses).
Cumulative impacts
Cumulative impacts are defined as the interaction of effects between one or
more impacts and past, present, and reasonably foreseeable
future pressures.
Cumulative impact assessment
Takes into account direct, indirect and consequential impacts and the
incremental and compounding effects of these impacts over time,
including past,
present and reasonably foreseeable future pressures.
Decisions are not limited to regulatory decision-making. Decisions include
developing, revising or implementing relevant agreements,
policies, plans,
strategies and programs; implementing legislation as part of the Great Barrier
Reef planning and assessment processes;
prioritising and undertaking on-ground
An overarching cause that can drive change in the environment. It can affect
the environment indirectly by changing the way people
undertake activities that
affect the environment (indirect drivers) or by directing changing conditions in
the environment itself
(direct drivers). Examples include climate change,
economic growth and population growth.
Ecological processes and functions
Ecological processes comprise a number of functions including: microbial
processes, particle feeding, primary production, herbivory,
symbiosis, recruitment, reef building, competition and connectivity. Key
ecological processes of the Great Barrier Reef
are listed in Table A4.2. Changes
in these processes can have direct and indirect effects on other species such as
depletion of prey
or predators and the delivery of ecosystem services.
Ecosystem services are the benefits provided to humans through the
transformations
of resources (or environmental assets, including land, water,
vegetation and atmosphere) into a flow of essential goods and services
clean air, water, and food 12 (Ecosystem services definition cited in Department
of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the
Arts (2009). Ecosystem Services: Key
Concepts and Applications, Occasional Paper No 1, Department of the Environment,
Water, Heritage
and the Arts, Canberra).
Ecologically sustainable use
The principles of ecologically sustainable use are defined in section 3AA of
the GBRMP Act as:
a. decision-making processes should effectively integrate both long-term and
short-term environmental, economic, social and equitable
considerations
b. the precautionary principle
c. the principle of inter-generational equity—that the present
generation should ensure that the health, diversity and productivity
environment is maintained or enhanced for the benefit of future generations
d. the conservation of biodiversity and ecological integrity should be a
fundamental consideration in decision-making
e. improved valuation, pricing and incentive mechanisms should be
Is a deviation from the expected (positive or negative).
Environment
Includes ecosystems and their constituent parts, including people and
communities; natural and physical resources; the qualities and
characteristics
of locations, places and areas; heritage values of places; and the social,
economic and cultural aspects of the above.
(EPBC Act and GBRMP Act).
A change in situation; something happening or not happening (when it was
expected); an incident or occurrence that exposes a value
to a hazard.
The magnitude, frequency and duration of an environmental component’s
Great Barrier Reef
Refers to the Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area, Great Barrier Reef
Marine Park and Great Barrier Reef Region areas relevant
to the decision-making
A source of potential harm; a situation, action or behaviour that may
negatively impact on an environmental component, whether intentionally
unintentionally.
Heritage values
The Region’s heritage values, which underpin matters of national
environmental significance, are grouped into five broad categories:
Indigenous heritage values
: the heritage values of a place
that are of significance to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander persons in
accordance with their
practices, observances, customs, traditions, beliefs or
other heritage values
: a place’s natural and cultural
environment having aesthetic, historic, scientific or social significance, or
other significance,
for current and future generations of Australians
world heritage values
: the natural heritage and cultural
heritage of a property that is internationally recognised as being of
outstanding universal value
national heritage values
: the values of a place that are of
national significance as recognised through placement on the National Heritage
Commonwealth heritage values
: the values of a place that are
specified in its placement on the Commonwealth Heritage List.
Relates to ‘wholeness and intactness’ of the World Heritage
property and how it conveys the values it holds. Integrity
can also relate to
the size of the property (sufficient size to continue to represent the values)
and to any threats affecting the
The result or effect that happens when an environmental component is exposed
to a hazard; may be positive or negative.
Matters of national environmental significance
Those matters as defined in the
Environment Protection and Biodiversity
Conservation Act
Net benefit
A decision or action which results in a net improvement to the condition
and/or trend of a Great Barrier Reef environmental value
or process as described
in Attachment 4 – Tables A4.1 and A4.2.
Outstanding universal value
Cultural and/or natural significance which is so exceptional as to transcend
national boundaries and to be of common importance for
present and future
generations of all humanity. Outstanding universal value is distributed
throughout the entire Great Barrier Reef
World Heritage Area. The relationship
between outstanding universal value and Great Barrier Reef values is described
in Attachment
Pressure (Threats)
An activity or group of activities that cause an impact on a value.
Includes programs, plans, decisions and on-ground actions.
Reference condition
Assessment of the reference condition and trend of Great Barrier Reef values
(taking into account past and present effects) is described
in Attachment 3 and
values are benchmarked and graded every five years through the Outlook Report.
Reference scenario
What is likely to have occurred in the absence of management response. The
reference scenario is based on the current condition and
trend, taking into
account reasonably foreseeable future pressures. Grading statements for
condition are described in Attachment
3 – Table A3.1.
The ability of an environmental component to cope with change or exposure and
remain in a desirable functioning state. It includes
the ability to absorb
impacts and continue functioning, and recover, reorganise or build capacity to
learn and adapt in between events.
Defined by the Australia/New Zealand Standard for Risk Management (AS/NZS
31000:2009) as “effect of uncertainty on objectives.”
policy/guideline, risk relates to uncertainty as to whether the objectives of
the policy can be achieved i.e. achieving
desired states for Great Barrier Reef
Sensitivity
The degree to which a component of the environment is responsive to a
specific impact.
How serious a consequence would be if it occurred; the degree of degradation
that would occur to the value if that consequence occurred.
Refers to values and processes as described in Attachment 4. Foremost,
healthy and resilient ecosystems are fundamental to the protection
biodiversity and heritage values and the community benefits they support.
Vulnerability
The susceptibility of environmental components to degradation from impacts.
Vulnerability is a function of the environmental component’s
sensitivity and adaptive capacity.
Zone of influence
The area or spatial extent in which an activity or pressure has the potential
to impact a component of the environment. The ‘zone
of influence’ or
‘zone of impact’ is used to describe the area and temporal scale of
effect at which impacts (such
as from an action, project, plan or program) are
occurring and the scope of response available or required to manage impacts. The
zone of influence includes the assessment of the boundaries to biological and
life processes needed to encompass the spatial and
temporal extent of impacts
that influence the condition of environmental values, ecosystem processes and
socio-ecological systems
throughout the period during which impacts of the
decision will occur. The zone of influence can be described in three parts:
- zone of ecological influence - the area or spatial extent in which an
activity or pressure directly impacts a component of the environment
- zone of system influence - the area or spatial extent in which an activity
or pressure has an indirect or consequential impact on
a component of the
environment, recognising the boundaries to biological and life processes extend
beyond the direct impact of the
- zone of management influence – which includes the scope of response
encompassing direct and indirect impacts and other past,
present pressures and
threats affecting values and processes.
information
Director- Policy and Planning
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority
2 - 68 Flinders Street
PO Box 1379
Townsville Qld 4810
Phone + 61 7 4750 0700
Fax + 61 7 4772 6093
reefcoords@gbrmpa.gov.au
www.gbrmpa.gov.au
Document control information
Approved by:
Great Barrier Reef Ministerial Forum
Approved date:
19 June 2018
Last reviewed:
Next review:
Document custodian:
Director- Policy and Planning, Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
1: Drivers of change, pressures and impacts on the Great Barrier Reef
Drivers are overarching causes that can drive change in the environment
(State of the Environment, 2011; Strategic Assessment Report,
2014) and have
also been referred to as underlying causes of change in the environment (Outlook
Report, 2014). For the purposes
of this policy and the Reef Integrated
Monitoring and Reporting Program, it is proposed to adopt six drivers of change
for the Great
Barrier Reef system:
1. Climate change
2. Population growth
3. Economic growth
4. Technological developments
5. Societal attitudes
6. Governance systems
Pressures and impacts are mechanisms that exert a change force (either
positive or negative) on a value. Put another way, pressures
and impacts are
the change mechanisms (e.g. processes or activities) that result from drivers.
For the purposes of this policy,
pressures are defined consistent with the
Outlook Report ‘threats’ (2014) and the Strategic Assessment Report
(2014). The green boxes in Table A1.1 are pressures and
impacts of particular relevance in the Great Barrier Reef catchment. Refer
Attachment 2 for the process for assessment of risk to Great Barrier Reef
Table A1.1 – Pressures and impacts, their definitions and their
risks to values
Pressures and impacts
Definitions
REGION-WIDE
Cyclone activity
Cyclone activity.
Sea temperature increase
Increasing sea temperature.
Ocean acidification
Increasing acidity of the Region’s waters.
Rising sea level
Rising sea level.
Modifying supporting terrestrial habitats
Clearing or modifying supporting terrestrial habitats such as wetlands,
saltmarshes, mangroves and sand dunes — this also includes
trampling and
damage from recreational vehicle use.
Nutrients from catchment run-off
Nutrients entering the Region in run-off from the catchment.
Sediments from catchment run-off
Sediments entering the Region in run-off from the catchment.
Outbreak of crown-of-thorns starfish
Outbreak of crown-of-thorns starfish (i.e. when the density exceeds about
30 starfish per hectare).
Illegal fishing and poaching
Illegal fishing, collecting and poaching (foreign or domestic) including of
species of conservation concern.
Extraction – incidental catch of species of conservation
Immediate or post-release effects (such as death, injury, reduced
reproductive success) of interactions of species of conservation
concern with
fishing gear.
Increased freshwater inflow
Increased freshwater inflow from prolonged or heavy rainfall including
flood events, and from changes to catchment ecosystems; resulting
Artificial barriers to flow
Artificial barriers to riverine and estuarine flow including breakwalls,
weirs, dams, gates, ponded pastures, and weeds causing changes
to hydrology,
groundwater and ecological connectivity.
Marine debris
Manufactured material discarded, disposed of or abandoned in the marine and
coastal environment (including discarded fishing gear
and plastics).
Incompatible uses
Activities undertaken within the Region that disturb or exclude other
users, such as recreational use in areas important for cultural
activities.
Extraction – discarded catch
Immediate or post-release effects (such as death, injury, reduced
reproductive success) on discarded species as a result of interactions
fishing gear. Does not include species of conservation concern.
Extraction — top order predators
Retained take (extraction) of top order predators (e.g. sharks) through
commercial, recreational and traditional fishing and the Queensland
Control Program.
Extraction — lower order predators
Retained take (extraction) of lower order predators (e.g. coral trout and
snapper) through commercial, recreational and traditional
Extraction — lower trophic orders
Retained take (extraction) of lower trophic orders (e.g. scallops, sea
cucumbers and prawns) through commercial, recreational and
traditional
Altered ocean currents
Altered ocean currents due to climate change or anomalies related to the El
Niño-Southern Oscillation, and altered coastal
water movement at a local
LOCAL or REGIONAL
Pesticides from catchment run-off
Pesticides (including herbicides, insecticides, fungicides) entering the
Region in run-off from the catchment.
Disposal and resuspension of dredge material
Sea dumping of dredge material including smothering, loss and modification
of seabed habitats and resuspension.
Extraction — fishing in spawning aggregations
Retained take (extraction) of fish from unidentified or unprotected
spawning aggregations.
Outbreak of disease
Outbreak of disease, both naturally occurring and introduced.
Outbreak or bloom of other species
Outbreak of naturally occurring or native species, excluding
crown-of-thorns starfish.
Urban and industrial discharge
Point and diffuse-source land-based discharge of pollutants from urban and
industrial land use and mining, including polluted water,
sewage, wastewater and
stormwater.
Acid sulphate soils
Exposure and subsequent oxidation of potential acid sulphate soils.
Artificial light
Artificial lighting including from resorts, industrial infrastructure,
mainland beaches and coastlines, vessels and ships.
Damage to reef structure
Physical damage to reef benthos (reef structure) through actions such as
snorkelling, diving, anchoring and fishing, but not vessel
Damage to seafloor
Physical damage to non-reef benthos (seafloor) through actions such as
trawling and anchoring, but not vessel grounding.
Dredging of the seafloor.
Coastal reclamation
Coastal land reclamation, including for ports and groynes.
Exotic species and diseases
Introduction of exotic species and diseases from aquaculture operations,
hull fouling, ballast release, imported bait and release
of aquarium specimens
to the Region, plus the introduction of weeds and feral animals to
Extraction – herbivores
Retained take (extraction) of herbivores (e.g. some fish, molluscs,
dugongs, green turtles) through commercial and non-commercial
Grounding large vessel
Grounding of large vessels (>50m) including physical damage and the
dislodging of antifoulants.
Illegal activities — other
Illegal activities such as entering a protected or restricted area, illegal
release of industrial discharge, shipping outside of designated
Noise pollution
Noise from human activities, both below and above water.
Spill — large chemical
Chemical spill that triggers a national or regional response or is more
than 10 tonnes.
Spill — large oil
Oil spill that triggers a national or regional response or is more than 10
Vessel strike on wildlife
Death or injury to wildlife as a result of being struck by a vessel of any
Waste discharge from a vessel
Waste discharged from a vessel into the marine environment.
Wildlife disturbance
Disturbance to wildlife including from snorkelling, diving, fish feeding,
walking on islands and beaches, and the presence of boats;
not including noise
Grounding small vessel
Grounding of small vessels (<50m) including physical damage and the
dislodging of antifoulants.
Spill — small chemical and oil
Chemical or oil spill that does not trigger a national or regional response
and is less than 10 tonnes
Atmospheric pollution
Pollution of the atmosphere related to domestic, industrial and business
activities in both the Region and adjacent areas. The contribution
of gases such
as carbon dioxide to climate change is not included as this is encompassed under
threats such as sea temperature increase
and ocean acidification.
2: Risks to Great Barrier Reef values as reported in the Great Barrier Reef
Outlook Report
The Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report provides a full description of threats
and risks. The Outlook Report has a standard set of criteria
to allow the
comparison of different types of threats within the one risk assessment, based
on the likelihood and consequence of
each threat. The likelihood and consequence
of each predicted threat are ranked on five-point scales, as described
Figure A2.1 - Likelihood scale
Expected frequency of a given threat
Almost certain
Expected to occur more or less continuously throughout a year
Not expected to be continuous but expected to occur one or more times a
Not expected to occur annually but expected to occur within a 10-year
Not expected to occur in a 10-year period but expected to occur in a
100-year period
Not expected to occur within the next 100 years
Figure A2.2 - Consequence scale - based on
current management
Consequence
Broad scale
Local scale
Catastrophic
Impact is clearly affecting, or would clearly affect, the nature of the
ecosystem over a wide area. Recovery periods greater than
20 years likely
Impact is or has the potential to destroy a class or collection of heritage
places on a large scale; or is clearly affecting, or would
clearly affect, a
range of heritage values over a wide area.
Impact is, or would be, significant as a wider scale. Recovery periods of
10 to 20 years likely.
Impact is, or would be, extremely serious and possibly irreversible to a
sensitive population or community.
Condition of an affected part of the ecosystem possibly irretrievably
compromised.
Impact is, or would be, adversely affect the heritage values of a number of
places; destroy individual heritage places of great significance;
significantly affect the heritage values over a wide area.
Impact is, or would be, present at a wider scale, affecting some components
of the ecosystem. Recovery periods of five to 10 years
Impact is, or would be, serious and possibly irreversible over a small
area. Recovery periods of 10 to 20 years likely.
Impact is, or would, affect individual heritage places or values of
significance; or affect to some extent the heritage values at
Impact is, or would be, not discernible at a wider scale.
Impact would not impair the overall condition of the ecosystem, or a
sensitive population or community, over a wider level.
Impact is, or would be, significant to a sensitive population or community
at a local level. Recovery periods of five to 10 years
Impact is, or would, affect heritage places or values of local
significance, but not at a wider scale. Impact would not impair the
condition of the heritage values.
Insignificant
No impact; or if impact is, or would be, present then only to the extent
that it has no discernible effect on the overall condition
No impact; or if impact is, or would be, present then only to the extent
that it has no discernible effect on the overall condition
No impact; or if impact is, or would be, present then only to the extent
that it has no discernible effect on the heritage values;
or positive
Figure A2.3 - Risk matrix legend
Likelihood and consequence are combined to determine risk level, in
accordance with the Australian Standard for Risk Assessment (AS/NZS
31000:2009).
Almost certain
CONSEQUENCE
Catastrophic
Insignificant
Photograph: Chris Jones
Example: Risk assessment procedure for the
Marine Park permission system
Determine sensitivity and exposure
Determine whether a risk event may occur. A risk event is when an activity
exposes a value to hazard to which that value is sensitive.
An event only occurs
if two things are true:
• The value is
to that hazard; and
• The value may be
to that hazard.
sensitivity
– is the value sensitive to the hazard,
that is, likely to change in response to the hazard, creating an impact?
• Low sensitivity – Value is not known to be affected by the
• Medium sensitivity – Value is known to be slightly affected by
the hazard (sub-lethal effects)
• High sensitivity – Hazard has well-documented negative impacts
on the value (lethal effects are possible)
• Uncertain – There is a high degree of scientific uncertainty,
or no knowledge about the value’s sensitivity.
– is the value likely to be exposed to the
• Low exposure – The value is not known to occur in the zone of
impact, or has been reported as a rare, aberrant visitor.
There are no reasons
to believe that the value occurs in the zone of impact.
• Medium exposure – The value has occasionally been reported in
the zone of impact, or there is reason to believe that
the value occurs in the
zone of impact.
• High exposure – The value is commonly reported or known to
occur in the zone of impact.
• Uncertain - There is a high degree of scientific uncertainty, or no
knowledge about the value’s occurrence or range.
Use figure A2.4 to determine whether a risk event needs to be considered in
the assessment.
Figure A2.4 – Does a risk event need to be considered in the
assessment?
SENSITIVITY 
Case by case decision
Case by case decision
Analyse the risks
Analyse the likelihood and consequence of how a risk may affect a value.
These effects are called “impacts.”
A “risk rating” is calculated based on:
• the consequence of the impacts to a value (expressed in terms of
severity) if a risk event occurs and
• the likelihood of that risk event occurring (expressed in terms of
probability or frequency).
The risk rating provides a measure of the level of risk, which is then used
to decide the acceptability of that risk and to establish
management priorities
for treating the risk.
Standard descriptions for consequence and likelihood, based on a five-point
scale, allow the comparison of different types of hazards
within a single risk
assessment.
Determine the possible impacts
For each event and hazard, list the potential impacts to relevant values that
might reasonably be expected to occur.
Impacts are distinct effects on some aspect of a value. They are different
from consequences (which are considered in the next step);
a consequence is the
overall outcome on the condition or trend of the value.
Consider the full range of values that might be impacted. For example, death
of a dolphin may impact not only on the biophysical value
of dolphins, but also
on social or Indigenous heritage values associated with dolphins.
Where quantitative information is available, this should be used to more
accurately identify the potential impacts.
Determine the severity of consequences
This step moves from impacts on an aspect of a value to considering the
consequence – that is, the overall outcome on the condition
or trend of
Table A2.2 provides a standardised description of consequences for different
general categories of values. These generic descriptions
may be supplemented
• The individual
assessment guidelines
provide consequence tables unique to specific
• Expert advice may be used to develop a consequence table for a
specific value, where Value Assessment Guidelines are not yet
Consider each value that may experience consequences, and how the severity of
these consequences differ depending on the value.
Consider at what scale the consequence may occur:
• Local scale – A single bay, reef or island; generally an area
less than 100 square kilometres
• Regional scale – A Natural Resource Management region
• Widespread scale – Overall condition of the value across
multiple regions or across the entire Marine Park; generally,
affecting 50 per
cent or more of the value’s extent.
Consider the vulnerability of the value, or of sub-groups within that value.
If there are populations, groups or individuals that
are particularly vulnerable
to a certain impact, the consequence level will typically be higher. In
particular:
• impact to different life histories/processes
• the dependency of values on impacted resources
• the current condition and trend in condition of values
• relevant health thresholds
• the ability of the value to adapt to the new impact to maintain or
improve its condition, such as the rate of recovery between
disturbances, based
on current condition or rate of change and reorganising of a system to a
desirable functioning state.
3: Condition and trend of Great Barrier Reef values
Relationship between values and processes and
‘outstanding universal value’
A property is considered to be of ‘outstanding universal value’
if it meets one or more of 10 world heritage criteria
and is inscribed on the
World Heritage List. To be deemed to be of outstanding universal value ‘a
property must also meet the
conditions of integrity and/or authenticity and must
have an adequate protection and management system to ensure its
safeguarding’.
Effective future protection of the Great Barrier
Reef’s outstanding universal value, together with the seven matters of
environmental significance, relies on the integration of management
measures and a systems approach to the protection of values and
Given the scale and complexity of the Great Barrier Reef and its diversity
and interconnectedness, key values and processes are combined
comprehensive set as a basis for assessment of outstanding universal value and
the seven matters of national environmental
significance. The key values and
processes presented in the following tables are based on those identified in the
description of
each matter in
Sections 4.2
of the Great Barrier Reef
Region Strategic Assessment Report.
Great Barrier Reef Outlook report condition
and trend assessment approach (adapted from page 9 of the Great Barrier Reef
Outlook Report
A set of assessment criteria is used to analyse available evidence. For
example, the assessment of biodiversity uses two assessment
habitats to support species and populations of species or groups of species.
Within each assessment criterion there
are multiple assessment components. A
series of statements is then used to standardise the allocation of grades for
all components
examined in an assessment, as well as the overall grade for the
Grading statements (refer to Table A3.1)
The grade allocated is a ‘grade of best fit’, based on a
qualitative assessment of the available evidence for the Region.
It is not a
comparison of the Region in relation to other tropical ecosystems around the
world. The statements developed for assessing
most heritage values are based on
those used in the Australian State of the Environment Report and Strategic
Assessment draft report.
Those for the assessment of world and national heritage
values are adapted from a grading system developed by the International Union
for Conservation of Nature to assess the outstanding universal value of natural
world heritage sites. One aspect considered in grading
the condition of heritage
values is the degree to which those values have been recorded and identified.
This recognises the important
role an understanding of heritage plays in its
protection.
Trend and confidence
The approach to grading is refined by including an indication of trend and
confidence, similar to the Australian State of the Environment
Report and the
Strategic Assessment report. There are four categories for trend: improved,
stable, deteriorated and no consistent
trend. The category of ‘no
consistent trend’ is applied to a component when the available information
is too variable
to establish a trend, for example where there is strong
variation across broad areas or across species within a group. The terms
‘improved’ and ‘deteriorated’ are replaced with
‘increased’ and ‘decreased’ in assessments
of benefits,
impacts, threats and risks. Similar to the Australian State of the Environment
Report and the Strategic Assessment report,
the level of confidence in each
assessment of grade and trend is rated. The categories used are:
- adequate high quality evidence and high level of consensus
- limited evidence or limited consensus
- inferred, very limited evidence.
For components where the confidence level is ‘inferred, very limited
evidence’, the assessment is based on knowledge from
managing agencies,
Traditional Owners, topic experts and informed stakeholders (expert
elicitation).
Evidence used
The evidence used in the Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report is derived from
existing research and information sources. It is drawn
from the best available
published science based on:
- relevance to the required assessments
- duration of study
- extent of area studied
- reliability (such as consistency of results across different sources, peer
review and rigour of study).
Table A3.1 - Condition of values grading
Functional group of values
Condition grading statement
Habitat to support species
All major habitats are essentially structurally and functionally intact and
able to support all dependent species.
There is some habitat loss, degradation or alteration in some small areas,
leading to minimal degradation but no persistent, substantial
populations of dependant species.
Habitat loss, degradation or alteration has occurred in a number of areas
leading to persistent substantial effects on populations
of dependent
There is widespread habitat loss, degradation or alteration leading to
persistent, substantial effects on many populations of dependent
Populations of species and groups of species
Only a few, if any, species populations have deteriorated as a result of
human activities or declining environmental conditions.
Populations of some species (but no species groups) have deteriorated
significantly as a result of human activities or declining environmental
conditions.
Populations of many species or some species groups have deteriorated
significantly as a result of human activities or declining environmental
conditions.
Populations of a large number of species have deteriorated
significantly.
Physical, chemical and ecological processes
There are no significant changes in processes as a result of human
activities.
There are some significant changes in processes as a result of human
activities in some areas, but these are not to the extent that
significantly affecting ecosystem function.
There are substantial changes in processes as a result of human activities,
and these are significantly affecting ecosystem functions
in some areas.
There are substantial changes in processes across a wide area as a result
of human activities, and ecosystem functions are seriously
affected in much of
Outbreak of disease, introduced species and pest species
No records of diseases above expected natural levels; no introduced species
recorded; pests populations within naturally expected
Diseases occasionally above expected natural levels but recovery prompt;
any occurrences or introduced species successfully addressed;
pests sometimes
present above natural levels with limited effects on ecosystem function.
Unnaturally high levels of disease regularly recorded in some areas;
occurrences of introduced species require significant intervention;
outbreaks in some areas affecting ecosystem function more than expected under
natural conditions.
Unnaturally high levels of disease often recorded in many areas;
uncontrollable outbreaks of introduced pests; opportunistic pests
affecting ecosystem function in many areas.
Indigenous, historic, social, aesthetic, scientific, Commonwealth and
Natural heritage values
Heritage values have been systematically and comprehensively identified and
included in relevant inventories or reserves. Known heritage
values are well
maintained and retain a high degree of integrity.
Heritage values have been mostly identified and included in relevant
inventories or reserves. Known heritage values are generally
maintained and
retain much of their integrity.
Heritage values have not been systematically identified. Known heritage
values are degrading and generally lack integrity.
Heritage values have not been identified. Known heritage values are
degraded and lack integrity.
World and national heritage values
All elements necessary to maintain the outstanding universal value are
essentially intact, and their overall condition is stable or
Available evidence indicates only minor, if any, disturbance to this element of
outstanding universal value.
Some loss or alteration of the elements necessary to maintain the
outstanding universal value has occurred, but their overall condition
causing persistent or substantial effects on this element of outstanding
universal value.
Loss or alteration of the elements necessary to maintain outstanding
universal value has occurred, which is leading to a significant
reduction in
this element of the outstanding universal value.
Loss or alteration of most elements necessary to maintain the outstanding
universal value has occurred, causing a major loss of the
outstanding universal
Economic and social benefits of use
Use of the Region provides significant economic and social benefit, in ways
that sustain the fundamental value of the natural resource.
The Region is
strongly recognised, valued and enjoyed by catchment residents, the nation and
the world community.
Use of the Region provides valuable economic and social benefit. The
Region is valued by catchment residents, the nation and the
There are few and declining economic and social benefits derived from the
use of the Region. Many do not recognise the value of the
Region and do not
enjoy their visit to the Region.
Use of the Region contributes little or no economic and social benefit.
The Region holds little value for catchment residents, the
nation or the world
4: Values, attributes and processes that underpin matters of national
environmental significance relevant to the Great
Barrier Reef
Table A4.1 - Key values and attributes of matters of national
environmental significance
The following table outlines key values and attributes for the Great
Barrier Reef. These values and attributes underpin Reef-related
National Environmental Significance. For the World Heritage Area, values are
based the Statement of Outstanding Universal
World heritage properties
Listed migratory and
threatened species
Key values and attributes
Criterion i (now viii)
Criterion ii (now ix)
Criterion iii (now vii)
Criterion iv (now x)
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
National heritage places
Commonwealth marine areas
Marine turtles
Estuarine crocodiles
Sharks and rays
Wetlands of international importance
Biodiversity — Great Barrier Reef habitats
Beaches and coastlines
Mangrove forests
Seagrass meadows
Coral reefs (<30 m)
Deeper reefs (>30 m)
Lagoon floor
Continental slope
Open waters
Biodiversity — terrestrial habitats that support the Great Barrier
Saltmarshes
Freshwater wetlands
Forested floodplain
Heath and shrublands
Grass and sedgelands
Rainforests
Connecting water bodies
Biodiversity — species
Benthic microalgae
Other invertebrates
Plankton and microbes
Sharks and rays
Marine turtles
Estuarine crocodiles
Geomorphological features
Coral reefs
Islands and shorelines
Channels and canyons
River deltas
Seagrass meadows
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander heritage
Cultural practices, observances, customs and lore
Sacred sites, sites of particular significance, places important for
cultural tradition
Stories, songlines, totems and languages
Indigenous structures, technology, tools and archaeology
Historic heritage
Places of historic significance — historic shipwrecks
Places of historic significance — World War II features and sites
Places of historic significance — lightstations
Places of historic significance — other
Places of scientific significance (research stations, expedition
Places of social significance — iconic sites
Community benefits of the environment
Understanding
Appreciation
Access to Reef resources
Personal connection
Health benefits
Table A4.2 Key
environmental processes relevant to matters of national environmental
significance
For the World Heritage Area, connections are based on the Statement of
Outstanding Universal Value. For listed species, processes
that have a major
supporting role in maintaining the species are shown (for example, the role that
beaches play in the nesting of
listed marine turtles). For wetlands of
international importance, the connections shown are those discussed in the
Ramsar Convention
information sheet.
World heritage properties
Listed migratory and
threatened species
Key environmental processes
Criterion i (now viii)
Criterion ii (now ix)
Criterion iii (now vii)
Criterion iv (now x)
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
National heritage places
Commonwealth marine areas
Marine turtles
Estuarine crocodiles
Sharks and rays
Wetlands of international importance
Waves, currents and tides
Sedimentation
Sea temperature
Nutrient cycling
Ocean acidity
Freshwater inflow and salinity
Microbial processes
Particle feeding
Primary production
Competition
Connectivity
Recruitment
Reef building
Attachment 5:
Examples of decision-making considerations in implementing the cumulative impact
management policy for plans, programs
and actions
Planning and program considerations
Project considerations
Existing examples to facilitate management and assessment of cumulative
impacts on Great Barrier Reef values
Initial zone of influence - determine initial area boundary of
Is your planning area described in legislation?
Are the actions to be managed by the plan restricted to within the planning
What are the consequential actions facilitate by your action?
What is the spatial scale of your action plus consequential actions?
Zone of influence for planning:
Plans of Management under the
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act
Traditional Use of Marine Resources Agreement under the
Great Barrier Reef
Marine Park Act
in conjunction with the Reef 2050 Plan.
Determine area boundary based on an understanding of likely direct,
indirect and consequential impacts
What are the likely impacts from those actions to be managed by the
What are the likely direct, indirect and consequential impacts from your
Refer to Attachment 1 for a list of pressures and impacts relevant to the
Great Barrier Reef. The pressures and impacts of particular
relevance in the
Great Barrier Reef catchment are highlighted in green.
Chapter 6 of the Great Barrier Reef Region Strategic Assessment provides an
example for assessing the effects of past and present
impacts on key values and
attributes of matters of national environmental significance.
Identify affected values the space and time scale at which they occur, and
consider connectivity between values.
Use the Policy supporting documents to identify the drivers, pressures and
impacts and other current and reasonably foreseeable sources,
Government plans
and programs, and the values that may be affected.
Identify and engage the affected community and stakeholders regarding what
ecological, social and economic values are represented
by the affected area of
the Great Barrier Reef.
Through the plan, identify the values likely to be affected by your
Use the Policy supporting documents, and relevant plans, programs and
strategies to identify drivers, pressures and impacts from the
project, other
current and reasonably foreseeable sources, Government plans and programs, and
the values that may be affected.
The Great Barrier Reef values are listed in Attachment 3.
Note that impacts may be of a positive and/or adverse nature. The extent of
the impact on effected values should be considered having
regard to space and
time scales, and connectivity.
Refer to Local Mariner Advisory Committees, the Great Barrier Reef Marine
Park Authority, Australian Institute of Marine Science and
the CSIRO to gain
further information of potential values represented in the area of
Identify and engage the relevant Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
groups about cultural heritage that may be impacted, and can
authority for effected country.
The first three steps are an iterative process; once you
have scoped the impacts and values, the resulting spatial and temporal
distribution
of impacts and values is the zone of influence.
Determine the current condition of affected values, and their desired
Refer to the Reef 2050 Plan, the Great Barrier Reef Outlook Report and
progress reporting through the Reef Integrated Monitoring and
Identify and engage the affected community of key stakeholders regarding
what ecological, social and economic values are represented
by the affected area
of the Great Barrier Reef.
Does a relevant plan, program or strategy identify values and their
condition at a scale relevant to your decision making?
The Great Barrier Reef values are listed in Attachment 3.
Refer to Local Mariner Advisory Committees, the Great Barrier Reef Marine
Park Authority, Australian Institute of Marine Science and
the CSIRO to gain
further information of potential values represented in the area of
Identify and engage the relevant Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
groups about cultural heritage that may be impacted, and can
authority for effected country.
For assessment and evaluation, refer to the latest Outlook Report to
describe the current condition and desired outcome for the affected
value/s, at
a Reef-wide scale. Data from the Reef 2050 Integrated Monitoring and Reporting
Program and local and/or regional monitoring
arrangements, which may be
collected by the proponent or other third party, should be used to refine the
current condition of the
affected value at a smaller scale.
Detailed consideration of the available evidence informed the assessment of
the current condition and trend of the Region’s
key values and attributes
including relevant matters of national environmental significance in Chapter 7
of the Great Barrier Reef
Region Strategic Assessment. The assessment of
condition is graded relative to the best available knowledge about likely
condition. Where limited information is available, evidence of the
condition of supporting ecosystems and processes was taken into
consideration in
assessing condition and trend. The outcomes are presented separately for key
values and attributes, including more
detailed analysis of the condition and
trend of values and attributes of particular concern. Each assessment is
comprehensively referenced.
Examine the cause and effect of impact contributions
Refer to Table 2.1 of the Great Barrier Reef Region Strategic Assessment
for a list of tools to help.
Choose a method that effectively deals with complexity and uncertainty in
your given scenario.
Does a program, plan or strategy provide cause and effect methodology that
you can use?
If not, refer Table 2.1 of the Great Barrier Reef Region Strategic
Assessment to identify and understand cause and effect relationships.
assessment of impacts on the affected value/s should be measurable.
Choose a method that effectively deals with complexity and uncertainty in
your given scenario.
Examples of methods used in the Great Barrier Reef Region Strategic
Assessment:
Structured lists are used in Chapter 4 to identify key values and
attributes of national environmental significance (see Tables 4.8
and 4.9) and
again in Chapter 6 to define the scope of impacts to be considered and to
connect the identified impacts to direct drivers
and activities.
Based on a detailed analysis of each impact, matrices are used to assess
the past and current effect of each impact on key values
and attributes of
biodiversity, geomorphological features and indigenous and historic heritage
values (see Tables 6.6 to 6.9). The
resulting impacts on community benefits are
also described (see section 6.7). While matrices present a more complete
understanding
of the range of impacts and the effects of each impact acting on
an individual value, they do not allow consideration of complex
interactions and
cumulative impacts.
Conceptual diagrams and influence diagrams are used to map relationships
between different impacts, values and processes. Examples
are presented
throughout the report (see Figures 4.14 and 4.15). These types of diagrams are
also employed during the process of
building qualitative process models, the
tenth tool in the hierarchy shown in Table 2.1.
Qualitative models are used in Chapter 6 to document how key impacts affect
matters of national environmental significance associated
with coral reefs and
seagrass meadows (including dugong). These models can be used to assess the
multiple drivers and activities
that act simultaneously on complex ecological
systems. The models were developed in workshops with experts in these fields. An
of qualitative models is that they provide a relatively rapid and
flexible means to understand system dynamics, predict cumulative
impacts and
consider potential management interventions. Because they can be constructed and
analysed relatively quickly, they can
be used to compare alternative models
Bayesian networks, based on qualitative models, are employed in Chapter 11
(see Figures 11.1 and 11.2) to model possible future scenarios
for the condition
of coral reefs, seagrass meadows and dugongs, given the predicted trends in some
impacts. Bayesian networks are
statistical models that represent variables
within a system and their dependencies.
Quantitative modelling has been applied to generate a series of exposure
maps of coral reefs to key impacts and of key water quality
variables (see
Section 6.8). These models are useful where management questions require
definition of critical thresholds for limits
to acceptable change to a value or
attribute. Quantitative models can produce precise predictions for highly
specified details of
a system’s biological and ecological components,
processes and relationships; however, they typically require a large amount
Undertake a risk assessment.
Use resilience and vulnerability risk analyses as a basis for understanding
how ecosystem values are affected by multiple drivers
and pressures in space and
Compare the outcome of the assessment with the desired outcome for the
state of the value or process and relevant standards and guidelines.
For this policy, risk relates to the likelihood of the impact affecting a
Great Barrier Reef value and the consequence of the impact
on a Great Barrier
Reef value.
For the assessment of vulnerability of a value, identify the likely
exposure to potential pressures.
Prepare a risk assessment for the program, plan or strategy in accordance
with the Australian/New Zealand International Standard AS/NZS
ISO 31000:2009
Risk management principles and guidelines to provide practical direction for
managing and improving risk associated
with the program, plan or strategy. This
step should guide reliable decision-making and planning and afford greater
certainty in
decision making.
Prepare a risk assessment consistent with the Australian/New Zealand
International Standard AS/NZS ISO 31000:2009 Risk management
principles and
guidelines to provide practical direction for managing and reducing risk on
Great Barrier Reef values. This step should
guide reliable decision-making and
planning and afford greater certainty in decision making.
Talk to Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority, Australian Institute of
Marine Science and the CSIRO to gain further information
on sensitivity, or
consult the best available, peer-reviewed information.
Refer to Attachment 2 for risk assessment methodology, and Table 1 for
desired outcome for Great Barrier Reef values.
Refer to the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority’s Risk
Assessment – Permission System (Revision 1, effective from
2017) for an example in applying risk to activities within the Great Barrier
Reef Marine Park.
Use the literature review in the latest Outlook Report, or other methods
consistent with the Outlook Report, to understand the resilience
of the affected
value/s to individual and multiple impacts.
Use the existing vulnerability assessments prepared in accordance with the
Great Barrier Reef Biodiversity Conservation Strategy 2013
or the associated
assessment method where one is not available to understand the vulnerability of
the affected value/s.
The assessment of the projected condition of matters of national
environmental significance in the Great Barrier Reef Region Strategic
is informed, in part, by an understanding of ecosystem resilience. The
description of ecosystem resilience considers factors
such as: capacity to
either resist (absorb) an impact, or to recover from that impact; capacity for
recruitment; diversity; connectivity;
scale and complexity (see Chapter
To assess future risks to the Great Barrier Reef ecosystem posed by
identified impacts, the Australian Standard for Risk Assessment
31000:2009) was adopted. The assessment is based on the assessments of current
trends in drivers and activities, past and
present impacts, current state of the
values, effectiveness of management and current ecosystem resilience.
Both the likelihood and consequence of each predicted impact are ranked on
a five-point scale and an overall risk level for each threat
determined.
Where relevant, an impact is individually assessed for its likely future
effect on biodiversity, geomorphological features, Indigenous
heritage values
and historic heritage values. The flow-on implications for community benefits
are outlined. The outcomes are presented
in Chapter 10.
The projected condition of matters of national environmental significance
(see Chapter 11) is based on:
• an understanding of drivers and activities and the past and present
effects of impacts
• the evaluation of the current condition and trend of key values and
attributes of the matters of national environmental significance,
consideration of integrity
• the effectiveness of current management arrangements to protect
values and manage impacts, both on a broad scale and the demonstration
• an understanding of ecosystem resilience
• the evaluation of overall risk, identifying the most serious future
• a consideration of scenarios of the likely future projected
condition of the Region, using the qualitative models outlined
The assessment of projected condition is presented for the key values and
attributes and summarised for each relevant matter of national
environmental
significance.
Design and apply management measures based on the mitigation
Avoid impacts, or avoid increased effects from drivers, and revisit the
zone of influence and risk to values. Avoiding impacts may
significantly reduce
overall impact.
Mitigate impacts, or provide opportunities for mitigation or
restoration.
Consider opportunities to improving the condition and trend of values and
promote ecologically sustainable development.
Identify where impacts could be avoided, mitigated or managed.
Avoid impacts, or avoid increased effects from drivers, and revisit the
zone of influence and risk to values. Avoiding impacts may
significantly reduce
overall impact.
Design appropriate mitigation and management measures and apply them in a
revised risk assessment to understand if the risk from the
project and with
other sources is reduced on affected value/s.
Where possible, implement mitigation and management measures in
collaboration with other stakeholders to maximise environmental outcomes.
For planning:
Avoidance measures may include identifying no-go areas, or minimum
standards that ensure impacts are avoided.
In allowing an action to occur, planning may include a prescribed approach
to mitigation of impacts.
Planning may also include or specifically allow for opportunities to
restore or provide overall net improvement to values. Refer
to the Net Benefit
policy for guidance on how to deliver a net benefit to the Great Barrier
For projects
Apply planning or strategy minimum standards prescribed to ensure impacts
are avoided and mitigated.
Where your action may conflict with a desired outcome of a value, planning
may also include or specifically allow for opportunities
to restore or provide
overall net improvement to values. Refer to the Net Benefit policy for guidance
on how to deliver a net benefit
to the Great Barrier Reef.
Monitor, evaluate and report.
The design of the monitoring and evaluation must be relevant to tracking
condition and trend of affected values and measures implemented
to mitigate and
restore condition and trend.
The design of the monitoring and evaluation must be relevant to tracking
condition and trend of affected values and measures implemented
to mitigate and
restore condition and trend.
In some cases, existing monitoring and modelling may be available, and
should be used, although consistency with the Reef Integrated
Monitoring and
Reporting Program monitoring standards and indicators should be applied.
Where possible, design and implement a monitoring program in collaboration
with other stakeholders consistent with the Reef 2050 Integrated
Monitoring and
Reporting Program to evaluate the effectiveness of the mitigation and management
measures against legislative requirements
and report accordingly.
The decision-maker should hold and supply data for current and reasonably
foreseeable projects, and Government programs and plans
made available in the
public domain to allow stakeholders to accurately assess other sources.
Drive continuous improvement by adapting plans, programs and actions in
response to new information, emerging issues and changing
circumstances.
When evaluating implementation, consider opportunities to further avoid and
mitigate impacts on Great Barrier Reef values.
Restoration opportunities should be available and utilised if the condition
of values declines.
Measures to adapt management and restoration opportunities should be
available and utilised if the condition of values declines.
Reef 2050 Plan adaptive management processes, which include the Great
Barrier Reef Outlook Report and the Reef Integrated Monitoring
and Reporting
Program to guide policy review and adjust to approach.
Drive continuous improvement by adapting actions in response to new
information, emerging issues and changing circumstances.
The drivers, pressures and
impacts of most relevance in the Great Barrier Reef catchment are highlighted in
Attachment 1
Related Materials
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (25.8 MB)
PDF format (3.13 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter