A and B v Minister for Administrative Services and the Secretary, Department of Administrative Services [1993] PrivCmrACD 2 (22 December 1993)
Case Citation
Determination No. 2 of 1993
Between "A", First Complainant and "B", Second Complainant; and Minister for
Administrative Services, First Respondent, and the Secretary,
Department of
Administrative Services, Second Respondent
This determination relates to complaints lodged by "A" and "B" in June 1990
against the Minister for Administrative
Services and the Secretary, Department of Administrative Services, regarding an
alleged unauthorised
disclosure of personal information about the
complainants.
This determination relates to a complaint lodged by A. The complainant was at
the time of his complaint a Member of Parliament. The
second complainant B was
an adviser on his staff. A lodged his complaint with me on 1 June 1990. It arose
from an item published
in The Sydney Morning Herald which concerned A and B. The
item referred to information which was identical to that which A had given
the Minister, the first-respondent, in a letter seeking a reimbursement in
respect of an expense incurred by A in connection with
his responsibilities as a
Member. The expense related to the cost of upgrading a fare for B from Melbourne
to Canberra.
B later lodged a complaint in similar terms to A’s.
A and B contended that the material contained in the letter was "personal
information" within the meaning of the
and that for The Sydney
Morning Herald to have obtained the information there must have been a
disclosure in contravention of Information
either the Minister or the Department, to whom the letter was referred for
action. The item which
appeared on 15 May 1990 in The Sydney Morning
Herald’s "Stay in Touch" column was as follows:
"Exercising Power is Like Walking A Dog
Sometimes, there must be special pleasures being a Minister. The Administrative
Services Minister, Nick Bolkus, probably knows this.
The Member for ...,
[A] ... was involved in the recent High Court challenge to the
Government’s decision to increase the
allowances for MPs more than
threefold. In order to hear the judgement, which upheld the challenge, [A] flew
to Canberra on
day) and took a staff member, [B] In a letter to Mr
Bolkus, [A] says he "was unable to obtain an economy class seat for
because "it was essential for [B] to accompany me on the flight, I was forced to
obtain a first class seat". Might it be
for me to get my money back,
inquired [A] who had paid for the tickets on his own account? No, it
wouldn’t, said Senator
The material parts of
A’s letter to the Minister state:
"On ... 1990, it was necessary for my Assistant Private Secretary, [B]
to accompany me to Canberra to attend the High Court
in the Postal
Allowance case and deal with other matters. I was unable to obtain an economy
class seat for [B] on the same
Airlines flight TN.406 and as it was
essential for [B] to accompany me on the flight, I was forced to obtain a first
that flight. This was charged to my Australian Airlines account.
As you know, it has not been easy in recent times to get
the precise
bookings we
ask for on the airlines and, in the circumstances, I trust that this expenditure
may be approved. If not,
I should be
pleased if you would let me know and I will
pay the additional cost."
The Minister made a note at the foot of
the letter not approving the request; and referred the letter to the Department
for action.
The letter was with the Department
from ... to ... 1990. Those who had knowledge of the
existence of the letter
included the correspondence-handling
staff in the
Minister’s office, the Minister and relevant officers in the
entitlements area of the Department.
1. Investigation
My office’s investigation of this complaint had these components:
(i) the provision of information in writing by the Minister and the
Department in response to matters raised by my staff, or by the
complainants;
(ii) an inspection of administrative practices followed in the Department and
in the Minister’s office in relation to this type
of correspondence, the
inspection being undertaken by the Director, Privacy Compliance and Senior
Compliance Officer;
(iii) the supply of some information by the editor of The Sydney Morning
Herald; and
(iv) a conference held on 5 August 1991 attended by relevant staff from the
Minister’s office and the Department and conducted
by me. This conference
was later adjourned at the request of the respondents and was not reconvened on
the basis that the respondents
opted to make a joint submission in writing.
2. Applicability of Act to Complaint
At the conference held on 5 August 1991 a legal officer with the Australian
Government Solicitor, representing the Minister and the
Department submitted
that the contents of the letter that A had sent to the Minister were not in fact
protected by the
. It was contended that "personal information" as
defined under the
does not include any information relating to an
individual which is capable of being disclosed under the Freedom of
Information
In my view this proposition has no legal basis. The Act’s definition of
personal information is very broad and is as follows:
"personal information means information or an opinion (including information or
an opinion forming part of a database), whether true
or not, and whether
recorded in a material form or not, about an individual whose identity is
apparent, or can reasonably be ascertained
from the information or
In my view the
’s protection attaches
to all records of personal information held by Ministers (in their capacity as
Ministers) or agencies
governed by the Act; subject only to the exceptions
contained in the definition of "record" (see
of the Act).
These records retain the protection of the Act whether or not they may be
released in response to a Freedom of
Information Act
request. If it were
otherwise (and the Australian Government Solicitor’s
representative’s view were to be upheld) then
no records in Commonwealth
administration would be protected by the
as they are all potentially
releasable under the Freedom of
Information Act
. This is an absurd result, which
could not in my view have been contemplated by the Parliament.
itself deals with the circumstances in which the personal
information subject to the protection of the Act may be disclosed. Exception
of Information Privacy Principle 11 contemplates the possibility that personal
information protected by the Act may be disclosed
where that disclosure is
authorised by another law. But it does not follow that because the record
containing personal information
governed by the
can be disclosed
lawfully to third parties, its contents never had the protection of the
. As A pointed out at the statutory conference, had there been an FOI request
(say by The Sydney Morning Herald) for the contents
of his letter to the
Minister, A may well have been entitled to receive notice of the application and
to make any submissions he
wished to the Minister or the agency before it made a
decision whether or not to disclose. See Freedom of
Information Act
(information relating to professional affairs); or s.27A (information relating
to personal affairs).
The only possibly relevant exclusion from the definition of record concerns
"generally available publications". A letter written in
confidence by a Member
to a Minister relating to official entitlements clearly is not a "generally
available publication."
3. Observations
I am satisfied that the contents of The Sydney Morning Herald article were
derived from the letter sent by A to the Minister. As can
be seen from a
comparison of the text of the newspaper article and the text of the letter, some
of the words quoted in the article
are exact transcriptions of the contents of
the letter. It is clear, I consider, that the author of the article had obtained
to the original or a copy of the letter.
The key matter for my determination in the case is whether that access
resulted from an unlawful disclosure from the Minister’s
office or from
the Department. The Minister and all relevant staff in his office and in the
Department denied responsibility for
the disclosure. It remains possible that
there was an inadvertent disclosure from the Minister’s office or the
Department.
Alternatively A or his staff may have made the disclosure.
As to the possibility that A or his staff made the disclosure that seems to
me to be unlikely. The information appears to have been
selectively leaked to a
journalist writing a type of gossip column. It was presented in a way that would
tend to embarrass the subjects,
A and B. In these circumstances it seems to me
to be highly unlikely that A (or B) would have sought to disclose this
information.
Moreover, A was not aware of the Minister’s decision at the
time the article appeared.
It is possible that there may have been a lapse in security in the
Minister’s office or the Department. I have undertaken, as
noted, an inspection of relevant administrative practices. While this
possibility cannot be excluded absolutely, I was
satisfied that reasonable
standards of security appropriate to the nature and volume of this type of
correspondence were likely to
have been in place in April and May 1990 in the
relevant areas.
In the course of my investigation I did write formally to the editor of The
Sydney Morning Herald requesting any information that
he could give in relation
to the circumstances leading to the publication of the story. While the editor
refused to co-operate with
my inquiries, claiming that the journalists’
sources were confidential, he did give some information in relation to the
publication.
It appears that for several days before the article appeared the
journalist responsible for it had been working from Parliament House,
The advice from the editor was that the column had been prepared in
In order to obtain further information on this matter I issued a formal
notice under
requiring the journalist to attend before me to give
further information. However A, the first-complainant, later indicated to me
that he did not wish to see this course of action pursued. Consequently, I
withdrew that notice.
At the conference A advanced the view that the disclosure was more likely to
have come from the Minister’s office rather than
the Department because of
a political controversy involving the Minister and A which was alive early in
1990. That controversy related
to the objections A had made to a Government
policy which provided a substantial increase in the postage allowance available
use by Members.
A had been the plaintiff in High Court proceedings which had resulted in the
government action in that regard being declared unlawful
with the consequence
that the government was obliged to bring a bill before Parliament to reinstate
this policy. That bill had gone
before Parliament in 1990. A, and the
first-respondent, the Minister for Administrative Services were the leading
protagonists for
the Opposition and the Government respectively in relation to
the desirability of the bill.
A claimed that it would advantage the Government in securing support for the
bill from the Australian Democrats in the Senate if the
Government could show A
had sought to misuse official entitlements, given that A’s primary
objection to the bill was that the
new entitlements it gave members were
inappropriate.
Consistently in correspondence to me and as previously stated, the Minister
has denied being responsible for any improper disclosure
of the contents of the
letter; as have all his staff involved in the handling of the relevant
correspondence. Similar denials have
been furnished to me by the relevant
officers of the Department. In addition there is no evidence before me from the
journalist who
published the item.
I consider that to draw the inference which A proposes having regard to the
political context of the days surrounding this disclosure
(i.e. that the
Minister’s office was responsible for disclosure) would be unsafe, given
the denials which the Minister and
his staff have furnished to me.
In light of the security practices followed in the Department and in the
Minister’s office, I consider that it to be highly
unlikely that access
was obtained by the journalist through surreptitious or clandestine means. On
the other hand there is insufficient
evidence before me to specify whether
either one of the agencies who are respondents to this complaint was responsible
for the disclosure.
Consequently I am not in a position to make an adverse finding of fact
specific to either agency (or to both agencies).
I am reasonably satisfied that the most likely explanation is that there was
a disclosure of personal information in contravention
of Information Privacy
Principle 11 from some part of the Commonwealth administration. But I am unable
to say where the disclosure
occurred within the portfolio, nor am I able to
identify whether the disclosure was accidental or otherwise.
In light of my conclusion that the most likely explanation for the source of
the journalist’s story was an unlawful disclosure
in contravention of
Information Privacy Principle 11, I have considered whether I should find
formally under
section 52(1)(b)
that the complaint is substantiated even though
I am not in a position to identify precisely which agency was (or which agencies
were) in breach. I have received a submission from the second-respondent that to
follow this course would result in an adverse impression
nonetheless being
created, because the agency would remain seen as a possible offender when there
is no specific evidence to that
I am satisfied that the disclosure in issue in this case emanated from within
Commonwealth administration. However I am unable to
identify the source of the
disclosure. There is no conclusive evidence linking the disclosure to either the
Minister’s office
or the relevant unit of the Department.
4. Determination
Accordingly, I declare under
section 52(1)(b)(iv)
of the Act that it would be
inappropriate for any further action to be taken in this matter.
Dated 22 December 1993
KEVIN O’CONNOR
No downloadable files available