Cowell v A School [2000] HREOCA 40 (10 October 2000)
HUMAN RIGHTS & EQUAL OPPORTUNITY COMMISSION
DISABILITY DISCRIMINATION ACT 1992
No. H97/168
Mrs Cowell and Fleur Cowell
Complainants
REASONS FOR DECISION OF INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
KATHLEEN McEVOY
Date of Decision: 10 October 2000.
Hearing Venue: Adelaide.
Hearing Dates: 12 July 1999, 14 July 1999 and 6 October 1999.
Complainants represented by: Mrs Cowell for herself and on behalf of Fleur
Respondent represented by: Lindy Powell QC instructed by Mellor Olsson,
Solicitors.
INTRODUCTION
Inquiry Commissioner Sir Ronald Wilson handed down a decision dated
23 March 1998 which made determinations concerning a complaint
originally made
by Mrs Cowell on behalf of herself and her daughter (Fleur Cowell) (“the
complainants”), pursuant to
Disability Discrimination Act 1992
(Cth) (“the Act”), in August 1996. The Disability Discrimination
Commissioner had referred that complaint to the Commission
for a public inquiry
and that was conducted by Commissioner Wilson in November 1997.
Commissioner Wilson made an order at the commencement of his inquiry pursuant
to section 87(1)(c) of the Act which suppressed the
identity and names of the
complainants and the respondent. Part of the suppression order continues in
place and I shall refer to
this matter below.
The subject matter of the original complaint related to allegations of both
direct and indirect discrimination by the respondent school
School”) in relation to Fleur’s education while she was enrolled in
the School, and of allegations of harassment
on the ground of her disability
occurring towards the end of her period of enrolment with the respondent School.
Fleur suffers from
a disability within the meaning of the Act: she was diagnosed
in 1987 with Perthes’ disease. This affected her right hip and
mobility difficulties. Fleur attended the School in 1994, 1995 and 1996, and
during that period underwent surgery to correct
her hip problems as a
consequence of the disease. The complaint alleged Fleur was unable to attend
some of her classes during that
period due to their location in the school
premises: her school “House” was located upstairs, and she was
unable to manage
the stairs. Accordingly Fleur was located for much of her
schooling downstairs in the library. It was also alleged Fleur was prevented
from attending school functions and academically and socially disadvantaged by
the actions of the School. The respondent denied
the allegations of
discrimination and its view was that it had done everything it reasonably could
to accommodate Fleur’s disability.
The respondent did not contest
Fleur’s assertion that she suffered from a disability within the meaning
of the Act.
Commissioner Wilson made a number of findings in his determination of 23
March 1998. In particular he dismissed Mrs Cowell and Fleur’s
pursuant to
of the Act that Fleur had been subjected to
indirect discrimination by the School: Commissioner Wilson’s view was that
no requirement
or condition had been imposed by the respondent on the
complainant with which a person without a disability would be more able to
comply. This complaint had been made in relation to Fleur’s school House
being located in an upstairs classroom which Fleur
was not able to attend
because of her disability which made it very difficult for her to deal with
Commissioner Wilson also dismissed the complaint of harassment contrary to
of the Act, finding the complaint not substantiated.
Commissioner Wilson found the complaint of direct discrimination contrary to
of the Act to be substantiated. In making this finding,
Commissioner Wilson concluded that “the discrimination was of a relatively
minor nature, contributing to Fleur’s subsequent distress and damage only
in the proportion of 25%”. He made no finding
as to quantum of
compensation, as it had been agreed at the hearing conducted by him that this
matter would be dealt with separately.
Subsequent to the handing down of this decision both the complainants and the
respondent sought judicial review of Commissioner Wilson’s
pursuant to the
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
(“the ADJR Act”). The application for review was heard by Mansfield
J in the Federal Court of Australia on 15
May 1998 and he handed down his
decision on 11 November 1998 (
A School v Human Rights and Equal Opportunity
Commission (No 2) and anor
(1998) 55 ALD 93).
Mansfield J set aside the
decision of the Commission that the School directly discriminated against Fleur
contrary to sections 5
and 22 of the Act, and the Commission’s decision
that the School was responsible for a specified percentage of any damages
suffered by Fleur. Mansfield J referred back to this Commission for re-hearing
the question of whether the School directly discriminated
against Fleur, and
further to make a determination as to any relief appropriate for Fleur, should
such discrimination be found to
have occurred. Mansfield J also referred back
to the Commission the issue of a complaint of harassment alleged to have
contrary to section 37 of the Act in relation to one of the incidents
of harassment alleged to have occurred at the start of Term
Mansfield J was of the view one of the allegations of harassment had not been
dealt with by Commissioner Wilson in his
determination of the complaint,
although evidence had been given in relation to that particular allegation.
In all other respects Mansfield J upheld the Commission’s decision.
Accordingly, this matter was listed for a further public inquiry which was
conducted by me in Adelaide pursuant to section 79 of the
Act on 12 and 14 July
1999. Both parties then provided written submissions and a further day of
discussion of those submissions
was held on 6 October 1999. Mrs Cowell made a
number of requests and submissions relating to this matter: in particular she
submissions in relation to the suppression of the name of the complainants;
and further requested, on 8 March 2000, that I hear further
evidence by way of
examination of a diary of Fleur’s which had come to light since the
hearing and to provide to Mrs Cowell
an opportunity to further cross-examine a
teacher at the School.
In relation to the application to re-open the evidence, having considered the
written submissions made by Mrs Cowell and the respondent,
I decline to reopen
the matter. I do not consider that my decision will be assisted by the further
evidence sought to be adduced
and it would be highly irregular to admit evidence
of this nature at this stage of the proceedings.
In relation to the suppression orders, Mansfield J, in separate reasons for
decision, also published on 11 November 1998, made the
“Pursuant to section 50, [of the
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth)] I make an order forbidding until further order the publication of the
names of the applicant and of the second respondent
to these proceedings, and
the names of the teachers at the school who were involved in the matters about
which the complaint to the
Commission was concerned, and the name of the House
at the school to which the younger respondent was attached upon her enrolment
the school. I give liberty generally to the parties, and any person showing a
proper and sufficient interest in so doing, to
apply to vary or discharge that
In the course of the public hearing which I conducted in this matter, on
application by Mrs Cowell I indicated that I would vary the
Commission’s
suppression order to the extent that it would no longer apply to the identity of
Fleur. However, I indicated
to Mrs Cowell that in my view she had still to make
application to the Federal Court of Australia to have Mansfield J’s order
discharged or varied. Mrs Cowell has advised that she has made an application
to the Federal Court of Australia to vary the order
of Mansfield J insofar as it
related to the second respondent to the proceedings before him and that, by
consent, this variation
has been granted. I have been provided with a copy of
the order of Mansfield J dated 19 January 2000 to this effect. Under these
circumstances the order suppressing the publication of the names of Fleur and
Mrs Cowell no longer applies. I have made no order
in relation to the name of
the School and the teachers and to this extent the Commission’s
suppression order and that of the
Federal Court continues to apply. However, in
light of my findings I can see no reason why the entirety of the suppression
should not be lifted and I give either party leave to make application to
the Commission for this to occur. Of course, further variation
of the order of
Mansfield J of 11 November 1998 would also be necessary.
At the inquiry the subject of this determination, evidence was given by two
further witnesses: one witness was a teacher at the school,
and the other a
former student. For the present, in the light of the continuing order of the
Federal Court and in order to be consistent
with Mansfield J’s order, I
will direct that the names of both witnesses and anything tending to identify
them not be published.
This direction is made pursuant to section 87(1)(c) of
There are only two matters in issue before me at this inquiry. The issues
were identified by Mansfield J in the reference back to
the Commission in his
judgment of 11 November 1998. The issues were clearly set out in his judgment:
first, whether the School directly
discriminated against the complainants, and,
if so, was the appropriate remedy applicable in relation to the complainants.
issue is to make a determination in relation to the allegation of
harassment not determined by Commissioner Wilson.
At the inquiry Mrs Cowell argued strenuously I should consider broader issues
and in particular whether her complaint alleging indirect
discrimination should
be reconsidered. Justice Mansfield clearly upheld Commissioner Wilson’s
determination in relation to
the complaint of indirect discrimination:
Commissioner Wilson found this complaint not to be substantiated and this was
the Federal Court action.
In relation to the proceedings before me, I determined it was unnecessary to
rehear evidence already the subject of a determination.
Justice Mansfield
suggested this course of proceeding would be possible and desirable, pursuant to
section 94 or 98 of the Act.
Section 94 does not seem to precisely apply in
relation to evidence given before this Commission in a previous public inquiry
a complaint made under the Act, but I note section 98 of the Act provides the
Commission in conducting an inquiry is not bound by
the rules of evidence, and
may inform itself in such manner as it thinks fit: s.98(1)(a), and further, in
s.98(1)(b) the Commission
in conducting an inquiry “must conduct the
inquiry with as little formality and technicality, and with as much expedition,
as the requirements of this Act and a proper consideration of the matters before
the Commission permit”. In reliance on section
98 of the Act I propose to
take into account all the evidence provided at the public inquiry into Mrs
Cowell’s and Fleur’s
complaints before Commissioner Wilson. The
parties did not have any objection to this at the inquiry, although Mrs Cowell
to call further witnesses. There was some discussion at the inquiry as
to which witnesses Mrs Cowell would call, and indeed she
proposed to call some
witnesses who in the event were unavailable. However, Mrs Cowell called two
witnesses who gave evidence at
the inquiry: in the light of my direction above,
that consistent with the order of Justice Mansfield the names of witnesses
this inquiry should not be published, those witnesses will be identified
as Mr PX a student, and Mr CY a member of the teaching staff
of the School. I
shall deal with their evidence below.
Pursuant to section 85(2) of the Act I gave leave to both parties to have
legal representation before the inquiry. The complainants
were not in the event
legally represented: Mrs Cowell explained she had sought legal support from the
Legal Services Commission but
support by way of representation had not been
granted. Nevertheless, I am satisfied the continuing legal representation of
the respondent
did not present any hindrance to the presentation of her case by
Mrs Cowell, and the respondent’s legal representation was
of assistance to
the Commission in the conduct of the inquiry. This was particularly the case
given the way in which the matter
had proceeded to this further inquiry: the
matters before me were essentially legal matters referred back by the Federal
Further, I considered it would be unfair at this stage of the inquiry to
exclude legal representation to the respondent, as from
the commencement of the
proceedings before this Commission it had leave to be legally represented. I
note further there was no other
representative within the School who had the
carriage of this matter, and in my view it would not have been possible for the
to present its case at the public inquiry without legal
representation.
I note, as did Commissioner Wilson in his determination, that Mrs Cowell
conducted the representation of her complaint and the complaint
she made on
behalf of her daughter with considerable skill and capacity.
The following sections are relevant to the complainants’
Disability Discrimination
less favourable treatment
] For the purposes of this Act, a
discriminator
”) discriminates against another person
aggrieved person
”) on the ground of a disability of the
aggrieved person, if, because of the aggrieved person’s disability, the
discriminator
treats or proposes to treat the aggrieved person less favourably
than, in circumstances that are the same or are not materially different,
discriminator treats of would treat a person without the disability.
where different accommodation required
] For the purposes of
subsection (1), circumstances in which a person treats or would treat another
person with a disability are not
materially different because of the fact that
different accommodation or services may be required by the person with the
disability.”
Section 22.
Access to benefit, expulsion
] It is unlawful for an
educational authority to discriminate against a student on the ground of the
student’s disability or
a disability of any of the student’s
associates:
(a) by denying the student access, or limiting the student’s access, to
any benefit provided by the educational authority;
(b) by expelling the student; or
(c) by subjecting the student to any other detriment.”
Section 37.
Harassment in Education
37 It is unlawful for a person who is a member of the staff of an
educational institution to harass another person who:
(a) is a student at that educational institution or is seeking admission to that
educational institution as a student; and
(b) has a disability;
in relation to the disability.”
I have commented above that I propose to take into account the
relevant evidence presented at the public inquiry before Commissioner
This is the only evidence before me in relation to the complaint of harassment.
In relation to Mrs Cowell and Fleur’s
complaint of direct discrimination
further evidence was called by Mrs Cowell, but no further evidence was called by
the respondent.
The respondent referred me to specific aspects of the evidence
presented before Commissioner Wilson and I take these into account.
been a very significant amount of evidence given before Commissioner Wilson and
the respondent made very detailed submissions
concerning them. The respondent
also provided a schedule of the aspects of the evidence which it considered
relevant to its submissions
and provided these to Mrs Cowell prior to
submissions being made at the inquiry.
Complaint concerning
In her original complaint, Mrs Cowell alleged Fleur had been subjected to
harassment in the course of her enrolment at the School.
Commissioner Wilson
dealt with two allegations of harassment which were alleged to have been made on
or about 1 March 1996 when
Fleur returned to school after a long absence.
Commissioner Wilson found those complaints of harassment not to be
substantiated,
and his finding was upheld by Justice Mansfield. However,
Justice Mansfield concluded Commissioner Wilson did not deal with a third
allegation of harassment alleged to have occurred in the course of a maths class
in 1995. Justice Mansfield set out the evidence
relevant to this given by Fleur
in the following account:
“In Term 1 in 1995, the incident of alleged harassment, contrary to s37
of the DD Act occurred. AJ was transferred from one
class group to another, so
that she could be taught a particular subject downstairs. She complained in
evidence that the teacher
“...didn’t treat me well at all. He was quite rude. He asked
me things he knew I didn’t know in front of the class.
He always seemed
kind of amused if he knew I didn’t know the answer, and I said that I
didn’t know it, or I got it wrong.
Yes, he just looked sort of a bit
– yes, just amused.
At the start I didn’t really understand what was going on. I
didn’t really understand that I’d been bullied, but
then I started
to get really disappointed.”
The teacher concerned denied rudeness, and denied consciously asking Fleur
questions knowing she would be unable to answer, and that
he showed any
amusement at her inability to answer questions. He pointed out that it is
routine to ask questions to determine whether
a student knows a particular
topic, and to ascertain the foundation from which to build further learning.
The Commission did advert to this evidence briefly in the following passage
recording finding on facts:
“Unfortunately, AJ felt that it was all beyond her and it
embarrassed and upset her because she felt Mr S exposed her difficulty
subject to the rest of the class.”
Justice Mansfield’s view was that “the Commission has failed to
make a decision on this aspect of the complaint”.
I was referred to Fleur’s evidence which related to this allegation of
harassment. In examination-in-chief Fleur said she was
put into Mr S’s
maths class which was at a grade higher than the one she had previously been in.
She found the work more difficult
and she gave the evidence that Mr S
“didn’t treat me well at all” referred to above. She further
said she felt
“really nervous” and that she felt as though she would
“get picked on or asked something I didn’t know”
S’s class. In cross-examination Fleur said “the whole class”
was present when Mr S was rude to her, and
named several of the other students.
However none gave evidence. Mr S gave evidence he had taught Fleur in Year 9 in
1995, having
taught her science in the previous year. He gave evidence he had
been aware of Fleur’s difficulties and the seriousness of
the illness from
which she suffered, and that he was familiar with the difficulties which
Perthes’ disease creates for a child.
He gave evidence he had discussed
with Fleur the fact that he knew another person (also a member of the
respondent’s staff)
who had a child with Perthes’ disease.
Mr S categorically denied he had been rude to Fleur. He said he believed he
had not been rude to any of his students and believed
he had never used the
expressions to Fleur which she alleged: in particular, “you have no
idea”. He gave evidence as
I asked questions. I ask questions in a maths class as part and parcel of
teaching maths, but whether the student knows the answer
of course, you
can’t guarantee that. You ask a question to find out what in fact they
know so that you can build on what’s
known, and obviously that’s the
reason for the questioning.”
Mr S said it would be “quite pointless” to ask Fleur a question
knowing she did not know the answer, and he further denied
he had ever been or
appeared amused when she was unable to answer his questions. In
cross-examination Mr S said he did not believe
he had asked questions
specifically of Fleur, but rather had asked questions “generally across
the classroom to find out just
what the level understanding is, that you might
build upon that”. He denied he had singled Fleur out in any particular
He concluded it “was very evident” Fleur was having
problems with maths, but he continued to ask questions to the class,
he was amused at Fleur’s expense. He said he could not recall Fleur
looking “uncomfortable and embarrassed”
Evidence on direct discrimination
Most of the evidence relevant to the complaint of direct discrimination is
also contained within the transcript from the previous
inquiry conducted by Sir
Ronald Wilson. I take this into account and refer to it further below.
However, Mrs Cowell called two
witnesses and I deal with their evidence
The evidence of PX
Mr PX was aged 17 years when he gave sworn evidence at this inquiry. He told
the Commission he had commenced as a student with the
School in Year 4 in 1991.
In 1996 he had broken both legs and had both his legs in plaster casts, and he
was off school for two
weeks. The period of time he was away from school was
while exams were being conducted or just prior. He told the Commission he
been told to do revision work at home, and areas where he was advised to revise
were identified. He was not sent work as such.
He did not receive any
assignments to do but undertook revision work. He said he did not recall his
sister, who was also a student
at the School, bringing work home for him, or his
mother bringing work home.
When he returned to the School he was told he could have breaks during the
exams and could work in the library if he could not manage
the stairs. He was
not given any individual classes or support when he went back to school, and nor
was this suggested.
3.2.2 The evidence of CY.
The other witness called by Mrs Cowell was Mr CY, a teacher with the School
for more than 20 years. Mr CY gave evidence on affirmation,
and said he would
have taught “thousands” of children in his time with the School.
Mr CY said when students were away from school for any period of time after
illness, as their teacher he would always make sure he
caught up with the
student to give notes and worksheets which had been provided during the
student’s absence from school.
He said if he were requested to send work
only do so on request, and certainly would not do so if it appeared the
student was unable to do the work at home. Mr CY said it
was school policy to
always provide every assistance to students, and if a student returned to school
after a prolonged absence he
would invite the student to come to see him and
make himself available to provide assistance. He said generally parents would
this practice in any event. Mr CY said there were no formal arrangements
within the School as to what action should be taken if
a student was away for an
extended time. Sometimes in teachers’ meetings individual students and
their circumstances might
be discussed, although this more generally happened
with the teachers who were specifically involved with the student. Mr CY could
not recall Fleur being discussed at any general teachers’ meetings, but he
said her circumstances were discussed at House meetings.
Mr CY said there was a
teacher employed at the School who dealt with students with special learning
needs: this teacher provided
extra tuition and in particular supported students
in English and language. A student who had lost a considerable amount of time
from school for illness or some other reason would generally be put into a
different class when they returned to school: however,
the student would not be
provided with a special teacher, but would be put in a class generally targeted
for students having difficulties
with a particular subject. Mr CY said
individual teachers might assess a student as having special needs for whatever
reasons and
recommend that student attend the special class. Mr CY believed
there was no reason why this facility would not be available to
Fleur, or why
any issues would not be discussed with Mrs Cowell and her husband.
In cross-examination Mr CY explained further that the special needs teachers
were generally provided for students with specific learning
difficulties, rather
than those who had simply fallen behind: if a student had fallen behind, rather
than having special learning
needs, they would simply go into a lower or
different class. He believed this was Fleur’s situation: she did not have
difficulty, but her circumstances were such that she had fallen
behind in her work. Mr CY said the School’s philosophy, which
personally endorsed, was to try to extend children, not close off their options
before it was necessary to do so. He believed
it would be inappropriate where a
student did not have a special learning difficulty, but rather had just fallen
behind in their
work because of illness or circumstances, to send that student
to a special needs teacher. However he believed it was appropriate
individual assessment for each student’s needs, and he believed this was
done in Fleur’s case.
Mr CY said the responsibility for making arrangements to send work home, if
this were seen as appropriate, would generally rest with
the head of House: at
the relevant time this was Mrs M, who gave evidence at the inquiry held by
Commissioner Wilson. Mr CY described
Fleur’s long period of absence as
“most unusual”. However, if arrangements were made for work to be
sent to Fleur
and this was not returned, there was not much value in continuing
to send more work. Mr CY said under those circumstances, further
probably only be sent on a specific request, and again, the teacher could only
make a guess at what level of work might
be appropriate to send. Mr CY
considered if work was not being consistently undertaken and returned by the
absent student so it
could be consistently assessed by the teacher at the
school, there would be little educational value in sending work home
spasmodically.
Mr CY believed a student returning to school after an absence of two terms
would expect to receive special attention from the School,
and this would be
appropriate. The form of that attention might not necessarily be the provision
of notes, but was more likely to
entail extensive discussion, and the student
might simply be given some current work to see how he or she coped after the
Mr CY believed he had provided Fleur with back notes to cover the period she
was away and he had seen her working alone in the library.
3.3 The comparator to Fleur.
The evidence that was relevant to address the issue of direct
discrimination related to establishing a comparator for Fleur’s
circumstances. To establish direct discrimination, Fleur must demonstrate that
on the ground of her disability she was treated “less
favourably than, in
circumstances that are the same or are not materially different”, a person
without her disability would
have been treated. Accordingly, Fleur ought to
provide the inquiry with evidence as to how persons without her disability were
in circumstances the same or not materially different to her’s.
Mr PX’s evidence was directed to this, on the basis
that Mr PX did not
have Fleur’s disability but his circumstances were the same or not
materially different from her's, in that
he was absent from school for an
extended period. Mr CY’s evidence was directed to demonstrating to the
inquiry the School’s
general practice in relation to students without a
disability but whose circumstances were the same or not materially different
Fleur’s: that is, students without a disability but who were absent
from school for a lengthy period. There was no other evidence
presented in
relation to this particular issue.
SUBMISSIONS
Both Mrs Cowell and Ms Powell for the respondent made both written
and oral submissions to the inquiry. I shall deal with the respondent’s
submissions first.
4.1 The respondent’s submissions.
4.1.1 Complaint of harassment.
The respondent submitted I should make a finding the complaint of harassment
in relation to the alleged behaviour of Mr S is not substantiated.
respondent directed me to the evidence which I have recited above.
Submissions on direct discrimination
In relation to direct discrimination under section 5 of the Act, Ms Powell
directed my attention principally to the effect of section
5(2). She submitted
it was section 5(2) which determined the extent of the respondent’s
response to Fleur’s disability.
Her submission was that section 5(2) made
it clear the respondent was required to have a “reasonably proportionate
to the complainant’s disability, but did not require the
respondent to take “affirmative action” in relation to
disability.
Ms Powell submitted section 5(2) would not become relevant unless there were
findings that Fleur had been treated less favourably
than a person without a
disability. If that finding were not able to be made then section 5(2) was not
relevant. She submitted
however that “the effect of section 5(2) is to
prevent avoidance of liability, not to extend the liability created by section
5(1)”. She submitted that although on her suggested interpretation of
section 5(2) no affirmative action was required, the
respondent conceded even
without a positive obligation placed on it, nevertheless a reasonably
proportionate response was appropriate.
Ms Powell however submitted the School had responded to Fleur’s
disability in a reasonably proportionate way. In particular
she submitted the
primary complaint made by Mrs Cowell and Fleur was one which in its fundamental
aspect was no longer relevant as
it related to a complaint of indirect
discrimination which had been held to be not substantiated by Commissioner
Wilson: Commissioner
Wilson’s finding in this respect was upheld by the
Federal Court. This complaint was that Fleur had been subjected to
discrimination
in that she had not been provided with a downstairs teaching
environment. Her complaint was that her House had its “home room”
upstairs and the School had refused to transfer this home room downstairs.
Commissioner Wilson found from March 1994 and consistently
thereafter, the
School had offered Mrs Cowell and Fleur a change of House so that Fleur could be
taught in a downstairs room. Mrs
Cowell and Fleur consistently rejected that
offer as Fleur wished to remain in the House in which she had been originally
It was this refusal which meant Fleur was, for a number of lessons,
alone in the library, rather than in a classroom environment
Although the central and primary aspect of this complaint was, in Ms
Powell’s submission no longer relevant, she submitted nevertheless
number of Fleur’s other complaints were a direct consequence of her
refusal to accept the transfer to another House.
She submitted “there was
a causative relationship between Fleur’s refusal to change Houses and the
subsequent matters
of which she complained”. Commissioner Wilson rejected
Mrs Cowell and Fleur’s evidence that they had not been offered
a change of
House after the initial very early offer in March 1994. It was the rejection of
that evidence which led to the dismissal
of the complaint of indirect
discrimination. Ms Powell submitted, having rejected Mrs Cowell and
Fleur’s allegation that no
change of House was offered and therefore Fleur
was obliged to have all her lessons outside the classroom and in isolation,
that the circumstances of detriment now complained about are
causally linked to the complainants’ own decisions and actions,
school’s treatment of her”. Ms Powell further submitted:
“It would be untenable to argue that a disabled person could create, by
her own actions, circumstances whereby services could
only be provided by the
implementation of exceptional strategies, and then complains that the failure to
implement those strategies
amounted to less favourable treatment”.
Ms Powell submitted the onus of proof to establish the discriminatory action
lay with the complainants. She submitted the complainants
had not discharged
that onus of proof. She conceded the onus of proof was extremely difficult for
a complainant to establish: the
complainant, to discharge that onus of proof,
needed to provide evidence that students without a disability enrolled in the
had been or would have been treated differently from Fleur if their
circumstances had otherwise been the same as her’s, and
different treatment would have been or was more favourable. Ms Powell conceded
in discussion it would be extraordinarily
difficult for a complainant to
establish an appropriate comparator: this was what Mrs Cowell had sought to do
in calling the witness
PX. The relevant comparator must be a student without
disabilities, but who has for some reason had extensive absences from school,
and as a consequence fallen behind in their school work.
In her submissions concerning the allegations of direct discrimination, Ms
Powell identified the evidence given at the previous inquiry
before Commissioner
Wilson, and I set this out below. The submissions she made relating to the
allegations of direct discrimination
were that there was no evidence supporting
the allegations made by Mrs Cowell and Fleur, or that there was evidence the
made a reasonably proportionate response to Fleur’s disability,
and the circumstances alleged by Mrs Cowell and Fleur therefore
constitute direct discrimination under the Act. Ms Powell also submitted I
should adopt the submissions made before Commissioner
Wilson at the previous
inquiry, and in particular the factual analysis presented in those submissions.
Mrs Cowell did not object
to this, and I considered this to be the appropriate
approach to take, and I do adopt that analysis.
Ms Powell listed the allegations made by Mrs Cowell and Fleur which
constituted their claim in relation to direct discrimination.
The first two
allegations relate to Fleur’s circumstances whereby she spent a good deal
of time at the School working alone
downstairs in the library. This arose
because Fleur’s House “home room” was situated upstairs which
great difficulty in accessing. Ms Powell submitted these allegations
relating to this aspect of Fleur’s complaint could not
be sustained, as
Commissioner Wilson had found there was no discrimination by the respondent
against Fleur in the provision of the
downstairs teaching environment: this
finding had been endorsed by Mansfield J. Ms Powell’s submission was that
a number of
the other circumstances of discrimination alleged by Mrs Cowell and
Fleur flow directly from Fleur’s inability to have her
schooling in a
classroom with her peers.
Ms Powell submitted there was no evidence to support the complainant’s
allegation she was discriminated against, in that no
arrangements were made for
her to receive tuition outside classes when she was unable to attend in the
classroom. Ms Powell submitted
there was no evidence that tuition outside
classes was offered to non-disabled students, and indeed the evidence of Mr D
Commissioner Wilson) was that parents would often make arrangements to
engage a tutor where their child was falling behind in school
work for whatever
reason. There was no evidence of any school policy in relation to such tuition,
and Mr CY, called by Mrs Cowell
before this inquiry, did not give any indication
this was an arrangement the School would make: Mr CY gave evidence of the
arrangements
the School would make once the student returned to school.
In relation to the complaint that Fleur was subjected to discrimination in
that she was not provided with the same materials as other
students, and
practical problems in providing ongoing assistance
while Fleur was away from
school, because she did not return work which had been sent to her already. Mr
CY gave evidence on this
matter, and indicated that if work sent home was not
returned with regularity it was inappropriate for the School to continue
work, as the School would not be able to make an assessment as to what
work was appropriate. His view was that such a practice would
be educationally
disadvantageous for the student. Ms Powell submitted there was evidence given
in the previous inquiry that it was
often the case the School was not notified
when Fleur would be at school and when she would return to school, and under
those circumstances
it was very difficult for the School to prepare work for her
to do out of class, either at home or in the library. Ms Powell submitted
same considerations were relevant with respect to Fleur’s complaint that
she was discriminated against in that she was
not provided with regular contact
with members of the teaching staff, or that she was not provided with the same
materials or feedback
as other students.
In relation to Fleur’s complaint that she was not provided with a
designated person for support, Ms Powell submitted the evidence
indicated Fleur
and Mrs Cowell were aware of the existence of the school counsellor, but chose
not to consult with him, other than
once in March 1996. Commissioner Wilson
found the head of Fleur’s House, Mrs M, provided significant
“pastoral care”
to Fleur, but of course was not in a position to
provide this on a one to one basis permanently. Ms Powell submitted Mrs M and
librarian both responded appropriately when assistance was sought. Ms
Powell submitted “it would be beyond a proportionate
response” to
impose any further obligation on the School, beyond that which was requested,
when it was clear a school counsellor
was available. Further Ms Powell
submitted, there was no evidence any other student, whether disabled or not, was
provided with
such a service.
In relation to Fleur’s complaint that she was placed in a class
“for which she was unsuited”, Ms Powell submitted
there was no
evidence of an objective nature that such conduct occurred. Ms Powell submitted
the only evidence in support of this
allegation was the “subjective
assessment” by Mrs Cowell and Fleur, but the evidence of teachers who gave
evidence before
Commissioner Wilson was that Fleur was placed in classes which
provided an appropriate teaching environment, having regard to her
circumstances.
In relation to the complaint that she did not receive newsletters during her
absences from school, Ms Powell directed my attention
to Mansfield J’s
indication that the evidence was clear that the School did not send home weekly
notices unless requested by
parents. In any event, Fleur’s sister who was
a student at the School in 1995, received the newsletters herself to take
Fleur also made complaints she was not provided with adequate assignments and
other tasks during her absences, nor provided with extra
classes or tutoring.
Ms Powell submitted the School had considerable difficulty in setting
assignments and providing them to Fleur
while she was away from school, as they
were rarely returned, and it was neither sensible nor appropriate to continue to
work when it was not possible to make any assessment of how she was
keeping up. In addition, Ms Powell directed my attention to
the evidence of the
witness PX: he gave no evidence which supported Fleur’s suggestion that
other students away from school
for a period of time but without disabilities
were provided with such assistance. Fleur also complained the School did not
her academic progress with her Open Access Program in 1995: Ms Powell
indicated the evidence of Mr L was that although the School
was aware Fleur was
engaged in the Open Access Program, it was never provided with any results or
details. In relation to this matter,
Ms Powell also submitted that to suggest
the School had treated Fleur less favourably as a consequence of her disability
to obtain the results, cast a positive duty on the School which was
beyond both the obligations imposed on it by the legislation
proportionate response to Fleur’s disability. In addition, there was no
evidence provided to the inquiry that the
School sought out such results on
behalf of any other students.
In relation to Fleur’s complaint the School had not ascertained her
academic progress and determined what additional assistance
appropriate, Ms Powell submitted there was no evidence to establish that
complaint. Ms Powell directed my attention to
evidence given before
Commissioner Wilson concerning consultations about Fleur’s placement in
the School when she returned
in 1995, and the evidence of the strategy adopted
by the School in relation to Fleur’s circumstances as a result of missing
so much school. The evidence was that it was the School’s policy to make
an individual assessment of each child’s educational
needs, and there was
no evidence to suggest this did not occur in relation to Fleur.
Fleur’s final remaining complaint was the School had not maintained
directed my attention
to evidence given before Commissioner Wilson indicating there had been
communication with Fleur during her
various absences from school, including her
suspended enrolment period. When she was in hospital flowers and goodwill
messages were
sent to Fleur from the School.
Ms Powell’s overall submission in relation to the allegation of direct
discrimination was that it should be dismissed. In terms
of the application of
the legislative requirements, Ms Powell submitted there was no need for any
affirmative action or positive
action by the respondent, but rather that the
respondent respond in a reasonably proportional way to Fleur’s disability.
Powell submitted this was the only possible way in which the issue of a
relevant comparator could be established, as it was clear
it was not possible to
find a real comparator. Ms Powell then submitted all the evidence demonstrated
the School had responded in
a reasonably proportionate way to Fleur’s
disability: the classroom was reorganised to accommodate the disability;
were altered; and there were attempts to facilitate teaching
downstairs, even though Fleur had declined the invitation made on several
occasions to move to a downstairs House. Further, the School permitted the use
of inside stairs to the computer room. Ms Powell
further submitted none of the
allegations of direct discrimination as set out above were substantiated by the
evidence. Moreover,
many of Fleur’s allegations of direct discrimination
resulted from her refusal to move to a downstairs House. Under those
circumstances much of what she complained of as direct discrimination was
directly as a result of her refusal to move downstairs,
initially offered in
March 1994. Ms Powell submitted in that sense, any disadvantage suffered by
Fleur was in a causative sense
ascribable to this decision she made herself. Ms
Powell submitted Mrs Cowell and Fleur had failed to establish on the balance of
probabilities there was any discrimination such as that proscribed by the Act
established on the evidence. Most of Mrs Cowell and
Fleur’s statements of
direct discrimination were simply assertions of discrimination with little
evidence to support it. In
particular there was no relevant evidence of a
comparator: Ms Powell submitted there must be evidence upon which the relevant
can be made in relation to less favourable treatment and no evidence
of such a relevant comparator was provided. Ms Powell submitted
Cowell and Fleur had asserted that they did not believe other students were
treated in the same way as they believed Fleur
was treated, this was rejected by
the School in direct evidence, but in relation to other assertions which
required evidence of a
comparator, no such evidence was provided.
The complainants’ submissions
Mrs Cowell made both written and oral submissions at the inquiry. She also
requested I take into account submissions made earlier
at the inquiry before
Commissioner Wilson, insofar as they dealt with the issues presently before me.
I take those into account.
Mrs Cowell’s submissions essentially took the
form of a summary of the evidence and a restatement of the complaints. Mrs
Cowell did not specifically address the legal questions raised by Justice
Mansfield, but in the event these issues were widely canvassed
in the oral
discussion at the inquiry.
Mrs Cowell submitted Fleur was treated “far less favourably than other
students”, “because of the fact that she
has a disability”.
Mrs Cowell asserted she and her husband had consulted with the relevant person
at the School and had specifically
asked for work to be sent home when Fleur was
absent; that Fleur’s home room be moved downstairs so that her classes
downstairs; and for the support of a peer group and friends. Mrs
Cowell asserts she and her husband were told to find another school,
School could not be of any assistance. Mrs Cowell conceded Commissioner Wilson
did not accept this evidence, but accepted
the School’s evidence that Mrs
Cowell was not told she should find another school for Fleur.
Mrs Cowell said the School had been well aware of Fleur’s disability
and that it was a long term illness, from the time she
applied for enrolment.
She submitted the School had provided Fleur with less favourable treatment in
respect of all of the aspects
of direct discrimination alleged, including not
sending home school work when Fleur was absent from school; not notifying her of
special school events that would benefit her education; not keeping her parents
involved by provision of school notices; not contacting
Fleur when she returned
to school to provide her with back notes or discuss the work she had missed; or
assisting her in free lessons.
Mrs Cowell directed my attention to the evidence
of Mr CY who stated the School responded to requests for assistance if a student
or parents requested extra help, but indicated Fleur did not receive any extra
although the School had
special education teachers available, he was not aware of why the attention of
special education teachers
would not have been provided to Fleur. Mrs Cowell
said she had not been made aware of these teachers or the services they could
have provided, and believed they could have provided assistance to Fleur. She
submitted these teachers were available to all students
other than Fleur, and
this was on the basis of her disability.
Mrs Cowell submitted the evidence was clear that teachers were notified when
Fleur went to school and was in the library, but there
was rarely any response
to this. She submitted “teachers made the presumption that [Fleur] could
not do her exams, and did
not bother to help her when she said she wanted to sit
them. This was less favourable treatment.”. She submitted the
asserted policy to extend a child’s individual ability was
not applied in Fleur’s circumstances.
Mrs Cowell submitted I should not accept the evidence of Mr D who gave
evidence before Commissioner Wilson, or that of Mrs M in relation
to her notes
concerning her discussions with Fleur’s father.
Mrs J’s final submission was that Fleur’s “access to
benefits provided by the school was restricted on the grounds
disability”. She submitted the grounds for direct discrimination were
clearly made out.
Mrs Cowell also submitted the School had harassed Fleur as a consequence of
her disability by placing her in a class she could not
manage. In particular,
Mrs Cowell submitted the evidence of Fleur made it clear Mr S harassed her with
inappropriate questions and
responses when her work was behind due to absence as
a result of her disability, and submitted a reasonable person would have
anticipated
that Fleur would be offended and humiliated by this conduct. She
submitted I ought make a finding Fleur had been subjected to harassment
ground of her disability.
Mrs Cowell submitted there was no evidence before me to show that teachers
made any attempt to help Fleur in the way she submitted
other students were
CONSIDERATION
Harassment – section 37 of the Act
The only issue of harassment before me is the allegation that one of the
teachers, Mr S, asked Fleur questions to which she did not
know the answer and
which he could have been expected to know she would not know the answer, and
appeared amused at her confusion
and embarrassment in class when she revealed
her lack of understanding. Fleur’s evidence was that Mr S was rude and
she had been bullied by him. Mr S denied he had been rude to Fleur,
and denied he had consciously asked her questions which he knew
she would be
unable to answer. He also categorically denied showing any amusement at her
inability to answer the question. His
evidence was that it is routine to ask
questions of students in class, and explained in his evidence it was necessary
as part of the general learning and educative process.
I did not have an opportunity to observe Mr S or Fleur as they did not give
evidence at this inquiry. Nevertheless, their evidence
is clear from the
transcript and the general tenor from the submissions made before me by Mrs
Cowell and Ms Powell.
Mrs Cowell did not call any other witnesses in support of her allegation of
harassment, although the evidence suggests the circumstances
which Fleur found
difficult and of which she complained occurred before a whole class of students.
In her evidence Fleur named some
of the students, but I note no other students
were called to give evidence either before Commissioner Wilson or at this
I am not satisfied the allegation of harassment has been made out. I am
satisfied the events which occurred in this class were part
of the ordinary
process of teaching and it seems likely that Fleur’s disability and
circumstances may have led to a heightened
sensitivity about the extent to which
she had fallen behind in her work, leading to embarrassment and unhappiness. I
note documentation
tendered at the previous inquiry indicates that maths was one
of Fleur’s weaker subjects and any falling back in her studies
to affect them most.
I am satisfied the claim of harassment against Mr S is not substantiated, and
I propose to dismiss this complaint pursuant to section
Direct discrimination
There was much discussion at the inquiry as to the meaning of section 5 and
the way in which the notion of direct discrimination can
be established in
relation to disability discrimination. It is clear the onus of proof in this
matter lies with the complainant,
who must satisfy the Commission on the balance
of probabilities that the proscribed behaviour set out in section 5(1) has
Accordingly, the complainant must establish that because of
Fleur’s disability she was treated less favourably by the respondent
other persons without the disability in the same circumstances as she found
herself in (or ones that were not materially different).
Fleur therefore must
establish less favourable treatment; that the less favourable treatment was on
the ground of her disability;
and further, that other persons in a similar
situation to her’s, but without the disability, would not have been
to that less favourable treatment.
It is clear Fleur was certainly disadvantaged most significantly as a result
of her disability, and the disadvantages she faced included
educational
disadvantage. This is quite clear from any consideration of the complaint and
the evidence before Commissioner Wilson,
and his decision and that of Mansfield
J. This documentation, including the transcript before the previous inquiry,
shows graphically
the very great difficulties resulting from her disability
which Fleur and her family faced. I have very great sympathy for Fleur
difficulties and disadvantages for her and her family which resulted from her
disability. It is also clear from the documentation
and submissions before me,
which include the materials referred to above, that the School also had (and
maintains) considerable sympathy
for Fleur and her family. The evidence makes
it clear the School acted as it saw appropriate to assist her in relation to the
disadvantages
consequential upon her disability which were relevant to her
education, and it is also clear the School saw a need to bear in mind
doing, both Fleur’s and other students’ educational needs. The
issue before me in this context is whether the
School’s response which it
saw as appropriate, was sufficient in law.
The requirements of section 5(1).
Section 5(1) requires three factors to be established for direct
discrimination contrary to the Act to be made out as a result of
a complaint.
First, the aggrieved person must have received less favourable treatment;
second, this less favourable treatment must
be on the ground of the aggrieved
person’s disability; and thirdly, the less favourable treatment must be
compared with treatment
provided to others without the disability but “in
circumstances that are the same or are not materially different” from
those of the aggrieved person.
There are significant difficulties for a complainant to make out a complaint
of direct discrimination under this section. First the
complainant must
establish the less favourable treatment on a comparative basis. This is
emphasised as the core of the difficulty
established by Mansfield J in relation
to this matter before the Federal Court: section 5 requires that a comparator
be established
so a comparison can be drawn between the way a person with a
disability is treated and the way a person in similar circumstances
but without
a disability is treated. The view taken by Mansfield J is that there is no
obligation to treat a person with a disability
more favourably than the way in
which a person without a disability would be treated: the obligation is to not
treat the person with
the disability “less favourably”. Further,
any less favourable treatment must be on the ground of the disability.
Commissioner
Wilson saw as “a critical question” in relation to this
complaint, whether the respondent School was responsible to some
Fleur’s personal distress and lack of educational achievement because it
treated her less favourably than it treated
other students. Justice Mansfield
accepted this was an appropriate identification as the issue, and was satisfied
this identification
was not equivalent to imposing a positive obligation on the
School to act more favourably towards Fleur: Mansfield J commented it
contended by the complainant that any positive obligation was imposed by section
However, what obligation is placed on a respondent is raised by the
expression in section 5(1) “to treat...less favourably”:
concepts of equality and discrimination applied in Australian law (and indeed by
common sense) make it clear that people can
be treated in exactly the same way
but this can nevertheless amount to less favourable treatment for one of those
persons because
that person has a disability. In the context of constitutional
law, which includes discrimination as a constitutional concept, the
High Court,
in cases such as
Castlemaine Tooheys Ltd v South Australia
[1990] HCA 1
(1990) 169 CLR
, has considered this issue. At 478, Justices Gaudron and McHugh considered
in what circustances a law could be discriminatory within
the meaning of the
Constitution:
“A law is discriminatory if it operates by reference to a distinction
which some overriding law decrees to be irrelevant or
by reference to a
distinction which is in fact irrelevant to the object to be attained; a law is
discriminatory if, although it operates
by reference to a relevant distinction,
the different treatment thereby assigned is not appropriate and adapted to the
or differences which support the distinction. A law is also
discriminatory if, although there is a relevant difference, it proceeds
though there is no such difference or, in other words if it treats equally
things that are unequal – unless, perhaps, there
is no practical basis for
differentiation.”
Although this analysis of the concept of discrimination was there applied in
the context of constitutional law, it is relevant to
apply generally in
developing a theory of discrimination to apply to the relevant Commonwealth
legislation, which includes this Act.
Section 5(2) can provide some assistance in determining what obligation is
imposed on a supplier of (as in this case) educational
services, in
relation to
a person with a disability in establishing the appropriate level of behaviour
which will truly not amount
to less favourable
Section 5(2): The obligation placed on a
respondent.
There was considerable discussion both in the written and oral submissions as
to the appropriate interpretation of section 5(2) of
the Act. The respondent
submitted there was no positive obligation imposed on it by the Act to act to
affirmatively assist Fleur
in relation to her disability: the respondent argued
rather, it must have a proportionate response to Fleur’s disability, but
there was no obligation to positively discriminate. This matter was also
considered by Mansfield J in the Federal Court.
Does section 5(2) simply provide a description of what amounts to a material
difference, or does it set out a means of establishing
how to make circumstances
of disability such that they are not materially different from persons without a
disability? The issue
is of considerable significance:
if section 5(2) defines
the level of response required by a respondent, then it enables section
operate more effectively to describe what “material difference”
might mean. Otherwise, section 5(1) presents
a considerable difficulty to a
complainant, as in this case, in establishing a relevant comparator.
In his judgment Mansfield J comments it was not contended before him that
section 5 imposed any positive obligation on the School.
Nevertheless he
“I do not wish to be taken as accepting that the obligation not to
discriminate against a person with a disability under the
DD Act does not
involve some obligation to take positive action with respect to a disabled
person.” (at 103).
He continues, “the accommodation of that need may well require some
positive action to be taken” (at 103).
He notes there are some limitations expressed in the legislation as to the
extent of any obligation not to treat less favourably imposed
on a respondent:
in particular, references in several sections of the Act which limits the action
which might otherwise be required
to be taken if such action would impose
“unjustifiable hardship” on the person providing the goods or
services or other
relevant service. In relation to education, this is reflected
in section 22(4) of the Act: however that qualification of unjustifiable
hardship only operates in respect of a refusal to accept a person into an
educational institution where admission as a student “would
services or facilities that are not required by students who do not have a
disability and the provision of which would impose
unjustifiable hardship on the
educational authority”. The limitation of unjustifiable hardship does not
apply to the educational
institution once the person with the disability has
been admitted as a student. Mansfield J comments that the central issue thus
for a student with disabilities once admitted to a school is to be found in
section 5, not section 22, as section 22(2) does not
carry an equivalent
exempting provision. Mansfield J comments that what amounts to less favourable
treatment must be measured in
circumstances that are not “materially
different”, and section 5(2) provides that a requirement for different
accommodation
or services cannot itself provide a basis for establishing that
material difference. Justice Mansfield concludes there may therefore
positive obligation on a respondent to provide for the needs of a person with a
disability such as Fleur in some circumstances.
Justice Mansfield did not express any concluded view on this matter, although
he made it clear he was of the view there were some
obligations which were
imposed on a respondent in a case such as this, the limitations of which might
well be found in section 5(2).
The central issue in Mansfield J’s consideration of the
Commission’s previous determination was that it had not addressed
of a comparator which is required by section 5(1). Rather, Commissioner Wilson
focused on how Fleur was treated or could
or should have been treated by the
School, without considering how the School treated or would or should have
treated a comparator
student: that is, a student in similar circumstances to
Fleur but without her disability. Commissioner Wilson’s conclusion
terms of what the respondent ideally should or could have done for Fleur, rather
than in terms of whether it treated her less
favourably, compared with the way
it treated a comparator non-disabled student. Mansfield J's conclusion relevant
to this issue
is set out at 106:
“Irrespective of the consequences of s5(2) upon the proper construction
of “discrimination”, clearly a comparison
is required between two
sets of circumstances to enable a decision to be made as to whether there has
been discrimination. One is
the real set of circumstances as to how Fleur was
in fact treated. The other is the hypothetical set of circumstances as to how
student or students without that disability would have been treated, or the real
set of circumstances as to how a student or students
without that disability
have been treated in circumstances that are the same or not materially
different. Section 5(2) elucidates
what may, or may not, constitute a material
difference.”
Justice Mansfield identified the matters in which he considered the
Commission’s previous consideration had been deficient and
required to be addressed in this inquiry. He indicated it was necessary to make
very specific comparisons: “The
factual findings...were expressed in terms
of what was needed for Fleur in her particular circumstances. The comparison
non-disabled students is of course a difficult one to make. That is
especially so in the face of what the Commission described as
“unusual and
extremely difficult” circumstances. Those students not forced to be
absent from school by disability, would
not have prolonged absences or periods
of time in the library working alone. The Commission has not made any
observations as to
whether there were other students who experienced prolonged
or broken absences from school...or how they were treated.” Justice
Mansfield concluded it was necessary to consider what treatment would have been
accorded to other students without Fleur’s
disability in the same or
similar circumstances; why in the event of any such differential treatment that
differential treatment
occurred; and if there were any differential treatment
whether one reason for it was Fleur’s disability.
The issue of less favourable treatment in the context of the Act is
extensively and sensitively discussed by Commissioner Nettlefold
in his decision
Garity v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
(No H97/191, 25 January 1999).
He concluded that “the ‘principle of reasonable
accommodation’...should be regarded
as a central principle of disability
discrimination law. The proper construction of the Act shows that the principle
of reasonable
accommodation is contained in it.” Commissioner Nettlefold
considered this was recognised in section 5(2) and other sections
of the Act.
His view was that “the use of the word ‘favourably’ [in
section 5(1)] adverts to the notion of giving
aid or help. A mere mechanical
measure of the aid or help given, which ignores disparate capacities, needs, and
circumstances is
not sufficient.” Commissioner Nettlefold adopted
“as correct and applicable” the statement by Commissioner Wilson
quoted by Wilcox J in
Commonwealth v Human Rights Commission
[1993] FCA 547
at 151, and by other courts elsewhere:
“It would fatally frustrate the purposes of the Act if the matters
which it expressly identifies as constituting unacceptable
bases for different
treatment, could be seized upon as rendering the overall circumstances
materially different, with the result
that the treatment could never be
discriminatory within the meaning of the Act.”
I too adopt as correct and applicable that statement.
So how does section 5(2) operate to assist in the interpretation of section
5(1), and in particular the “less favourable”
discussions to which I have referred above indicate a general view that section
5(2) does not provide just a description
of what amounts to material
differences: rather, it assists in determining how to make circumstances of
disability not materially
different. That is, in some circumstances there may
be some positive obligation on a respondent to take steps in order to ensure
there is no material difference between the treatment accorded to a person with
a disability and the treatment accorded to a person
in similar circumstances but
without a disability. Mansfield J alludes to this in his judgment in this
matter. It is my view that
without this interpretation of section 5(2), it
would be difficult to establish direct discrimination under the Act, except in
most blatant circumstances, and a person subjected to discriminatory
treatment within the intention of the Act would most often have
section 6 and establish indirect discrimination.
It is my view the substantial effect of section 5(2) is to impose a duty on a
respondent to make a reasonably proportionate response
to the disability of the
person with which it is dealing in the provision of appropriate accommodation or
other support as may be
required as a consequence of the disability, so that in
truth the person with the disability is not subjected to less favourable
treatment than would a person without a disability in similar circumstances.
This conclusion seems consistent with the approach taken by Commissioner
Nettlefold in
and with the suggestions of Mansfield J in the
Federal Court. In the submissions before me my attention was drawn to the
of this issue by the US Court of Appeals in
Southern Community
College v Davis
[1979] USSC 119
(442 US 397
(1979)), and further discussions by Kirby P (as
he then was) in
Jamal v Secretary, Department of Health
(1988) 14 NSWLR
In both these cases, the US Court of Appeal and the Court of Appeal in New
South Wales were seeking to distinguish
between those
adjustments for disability
which are “fundamental” or “substantial” (and therefore
not required
from a respondent),
and those which are “reasonable”
and therefore required as an appropriate response to disability.
The conclusion
endorsed in
is that suggested above: that there is
no requirement of affirmative action or positive obligation on a respondent, but
some need for an appropriate response to disability. It was submitted
this should be described as a requirement of a reasonably
proportionate
response, and in my view that is an appropriate expression to use, and one
increasingly used by the courts.
My attention was also directed to the decision of the New South Wales Court
of Appeal in
Boehringer Ingelheim Pty Ltd v Reddrop
[1984] 2 NSWLR 13.
That case considered New South Wales legislation, but the structure of the
legislation before the Court of Appeal was similar to
that contained in section
5 of this Act. The Court’s view was that the legislation was concerned
with “the detriment
concept of discrimination”, rather than
“reverse discrimination” or “affirmative action
discrimination”.
The Court considered the reference to being treated less
favourably “in circumstances that are the same or are not materially
different” to “represent merely the draftsman’s necessary
drawing out of the meaning of ‘less favourably’.
I do not think
they are intended to limit the circumstances in which less favourable treatment
could operate as discrimination”.
I am of the view these considerations represent an appropriate and workable
interpretation of section 5 of the Act. Once Fleur, with
an agreed disability,
was admitted as a student with the respondent School, the School could not rely
on the defence of “unjustifiable
hardship” in section 22(4) in
relation to providing her with any particular needs as a consequence of her
disability. It was
obliged not to treat her less favourably, than in
circumstances in which it would treat a student without a disability whose
circumstances
were not materially different from Fleur’s, where the less
favourable treatment was on the ground of Fleur’s disability.
obligation did not impose a positive obligation to discriminate in Fleur’s
favour, but it does impose an obligation on
the respondent School to establish a
proportionate response to Fleur’s disability so that the issue of
discrimination against
her on the ground of her disability was truly addressed.
In my view the limits of the respondent’s obligations are to be
established
by considering what amounts to a proportionate response to
Fleur’s disability. I am quite satisfied a proper reading of section
does not establish any positive obligation on the respondent to take affirmative
action towards Fleur, but the respondent certainly
could not necessarily treat
Fleur the same as another student without a disability who was away from school
for a long period, as
that comparator would never be sufficiently precise to
take into account the consequence of Fleur’s disability. Fleur’s
disability meant not only that she was away from school for long periods and
therefore fell behind in her school work, it also meant
when she was at school
she often worked downstairs, she lost touch with her peers and she, as well as
having the other consequences
of her illness and disability such as loss of
energy and pain, had also lost confidence. A student who is away from school
periods, for example because he or she is engaged in elite sports
training, is a comparator in one sense (the absence from school),
unlikely to be a sufficiently precise comparator in relation to Fleur’s
particular circumstances consequential upon
her actual disability.
Application to Fleur’s complaints of direct
discrimination.
In none of the evidence presented before me or before Commissioner Wilson did
Mrs Cowell provide clear direct evidence of a comparator
relevant to
Fleur’s circumstances. Mr PX gave evidence: he was a student who had been
away from school for two weeks as a
consequence of both his legs being broken,
but as a comparator this was inadequate. Mr PX was away for only a short period
(relative to Fleur’s extensive absences as a consequence of her
disability), and at a time when it appeared there was no substantive
going on: it was just before the exams and he was revising. As a comparator he
did not provide a helpful counterpoint,
but in any event the evidence he gave
was not helpful to Fleur’s case. It was clear the School did not provide
him with any
particular assistance, but this of course could have been because
it was a period just prior to the exams, and as Mr PX said he was
It is clear the onus of proof is on a complainant to establish the
appropriate comparator and that the respondent has not responded
proportionately or appropriately to the disability. I am of the view this onus
of proof has not been discharged, either
by direct evidence adduced before me,
or in the previous inquiry or by inference from that evidence.
In saying this I would comment it is a difficult task to establish direct
discrimination under this Act because of the need for a
comparator: the
difficulties faced by a person with disabilities such as Fleur are such that it
is very hard to find a relevant comparator,
or to effectively address or define
the issue of reasonably proportionate response. Justice Mansfield comments on
this. People
without a disability will almost never be in circumstances
comparable to those with a disability: disability discrimination is in
sense quite different from discrimination on the ground of sex or race. The
conclusion in this matter must be that Fleur was
significantly disadvantaged in
her education (as in other things) because of her disability, but this
disadvantage resulted from
her disability. I am of the view no disadvantage
such as that proscribed by the Act was a consequence of any unlawful
discriminatory
treatment by the respondent.
I have carefully considered the matters identified by Justice Mansfield as
necessary for attention in determining Fleur’s complaint.
It is clear
Fleur was treated differently from other students: other students were not
separated from their classes or required
or expected to work alone in the
library. However, no other students had Fleur’s incapacity to work in
their upstairs home
room. I am satisfied there was no obligation on the
respondent to move the whole class downstairs, but in any event it is my view
such a response would not have been proportionate. It was accepted by
Commissioner Wilson and in the Federal Court that the respondent
had made offers
and suggestions to Fleur and her parents that she change to a House with a
downstairs home room from as early as
March 1994, early on in her enrolment in
the School. Fleur and Mrs Cowell refused that offer, preferring that Fleur
remain in the
House in which she had originally enrolled a week or two earlier.
Consequently the respondent School made other arrangements to
accommodate
Fleur’s disability. Those other arrangements included work in the library
and in some other downstairs classrooms,
separated from the rest of her class.
I accept the arrangements made by the School were appropriate, given
Fleur’s rejection
of the offer to move to a House with a downstairs home
room. It is these changed arrangements, either proposed or made by the School,
which appear to me to constitute a proportionate response to Fleur’s
disability: these changed arrangements include the offer
to change Houses,
changes in timetabling, the use of inside stairs to access the computer room
(acknowledging Fleur still had very
significant difficulties with the stairs but
further that the computers were located in a particular area requiring stair
and other matters referred to in the evidence.
There is some evidence before me as to what services were provided to other
students: it is clear under some circumstances work was
sent home to be
completed by students who were away from school for an extended period. Some
work was sent home to Fleur. This
was not however a consistent practice in
relation to Fleur. I accept the evidence before Commissioner Wilson, and
separately before
me from Mr CY, that the fact the School did not persist with
sending work home to Fleur was based on its inability to maintain an
assessment of her capacity to continue with the work as the work was not
consistently completed and returned. This assessment
by the School is linked
with other evidence before me and earlier Commissioner Wilson that the School
asserted it made individual
assessments of each child to provide each child with
support according to each individual’s educational needs. Fleur
she did not obtain the same feedback and support as other students,
was placed in classes for which she was unsuited and was not
provided with
additional assistance such as extra classes and tutoring. However, I am
satisfied both that the School did provide
Fleur with such educational
assistance and support (including placing her in an appropriate level class) as
was consistent with its
assessment of her individual needs, and in any event
that there is no evidence before me that other students received additional
assistance that was not made available to Fleur. Fleur complained she did not
have access to a designated person or persons who
could provide her with ongoing
support and assistance or with a special education teacher. The School employed
a school counsellor
and special education teachers. I am also satisfied Mrs
Cowell was aware of the position of the school counsellor and indeed contacted
him, but did not seek his assistance on an ongoing basis. I am satisfied the
special education teachers employed by the School were
not teachers who were
able to assist Fleur: Fleur’s disability is not one in the area with
which special education teachers
are able to assist. Fleur’s disability
impacted on her educational circumstances because it necessitated her taking
periods off school which put her behind in her studies, rather than
impeding her capacity in an intellectual sense to pursue them.
Further, I am
satisfied there is no evidence that the school counsellor or special education
teachers were available to non-disabled
students who had long periods off school
but who did not have specific learning difficulties. The school counsellor was
to Fleur in the same way as he was available to any other student, and
Mrs Cowell was aware of his role but declined to utilise it.
Nor am I satisfied there is any evidence to suggest the School maintained
from the level,
degree and nature of contact that was maintained with Fleur while she was away
from school. There was evidence that
messages of goodwill and flowers were sent
to Fleur when she was in hospital; and the evidence was quite clear that school
were not sent home as a matter of course to students who were absent
from school unless requested. Fleur’s parents did not
request the notices
to be sent home, but in any event they were receiving the school notices because
Fleur’s sister was also
at the School at that time and would have received
them and taken them home. There was no evidence the School had any practice of
maintaining ongoing contact with a student away from school who was conducting
other studies such as Fleur’s through the Open
Access Program. I accept
the respondent’s submission ongoing contact in an educational sense with
Fleur was extremely difficult
for the School to maintain, as there was no
development by Fleur or her parents of an ongoing line of communication by
either notifying
her presence at school or the periods of her absence; returning
assignments which had been provided to her to complete at home; or
advising her
progress under the Open Access Program. In any event, there is no evidence
before me the School conducted such practices
in relation to other students
without disabilities, or indeed that the failure of the School to maintain such
when she was absent for such lengthy periods of time could be
regarded as constituting less favourable treatment on the ground of
disability. It seems to me persistent attention from the School while Fleur was
unable to attend school because of the weakness,
pain, discomfort and
difficulties which her disability created for her, particularly when she was
substantially immobilised following
surgery, might have been entirely
inappropriate and disadvantageous to her recovery. Issues of disability and
illness are very difficult
to assess for an outsider.
I also accept the respondent’s submission that many of the matters of
which Fleur complained as examples of direct discrimination
were matters which
arose directly as a consequence of her refusal to change Houses. It is clear
many of the disadvantages which
she saw as accruing as a consequence of her
House having an upstairs home room, such as working in the library, feeling
not having the support of her peers, etc., were factors which followed
from this refusal. I am satisfied (as was Commissioner Wilson
and Mansfield J)
that the offer to change Houses was made and was rejected by Mrs Cowell and
Fleur. Many of the matters complained
of follow this decision.
The issue of the comparator student is to some extent a red herring in the
light of the view I have taken in relation to the obligation
on the School to
make a reasonably proportionate response to Fleur’s disability. However,
there is in any event, little evidence
of any differential treatment of Fleur
compared with the way a student without a disability but in similar
circumstances may have
been treated. It is clear Fleur’s circumstances
were different by virtue of the fact that she was often not at school. When
was at school she was severely inhibited in going upstairs and as a consequence
was behind in her work, and when she was at school
was isolated in the library
to some extent. However, there is no evidence as to how the comparator student
without a disability
but in similar circumstances was treated by the School.
The primary evidence that is before me, which I accept, is that the School
an individual assessment of the needs of each student, including Fleur, and
engaged in its educational relationship with each
student on that basis.
However, I have concluded above that mere lack of differentiation between the
way in which Fleur was treated, and the treatment accorded
to a non-disabled
student, might not be enough. The School’s response must be such that,
while not requiring positive discrimination
in favour of Fleur, it must behave
proportionately and appropriately to ensure Fleur was not subjected to less
favourable treatment
than the hypothetical comparator would have received. I am
satisfied on the basis of the evidence before me this was the case.
satisfied it was an appropriate and proportionate response of the school to
suggest to Fleur she change Houses so she could
have a downstairs classroom.
Had she done so many of the matters of which she complained simply would not
have occurred. She would
not have been separated from her peers in class; she
would not be working in the library; she would not have felt her work was
I am also satisfied it was a proportionate response by the School to
not send her further work to complete at home when initial
work had not been
returned. In those circumstances no assessment was able to be made by the
respondent as to the level or nature
of work which was appropriate to send.
Such a decision would have been inconsistent with the School’s own policy
and practice
in relation to its treatment of its students.
While the matters of which Fleur complains clearly are consequential upon her
disability, it does not necessarily follow that the
respondent has treated her
less favourably on the ground of her disability. It was because of her
disability she was off school
for long periods of time; it was because of her
disability she was not able to be placed in an upstairs classroom. But it was
disability which created these problems, not the School’s response to
her disability. The School’s response to her disability
was to offer her
a House with a downstairs home room, which she rejected. It further responded
to her disability by sending her
good wishes and flowers when she was ill, and
sending some work home for her to complete. It responded to its educational
relationship
with her by not persisting in sending further work home when she
did not return it and no appropriate educational assessment could
continue this practice. I am satisfied these considerations address each of
Fleur’s complaints of direct discrimination.
In relation to other aspects of Fleur’s complaints, I am satisfied
there was either no evidence to support them and they remained
mere assertions
by Fleur (for example her assertion the School did not make any assessment of
her academic progress when she returned
to school in 1995 and did not place her
in appropriate classes), and under those circumstances those complaints are not
I propose to dismiss Fleur’s complaint of direct discrimination
pursuant to section 103(1)(a) of the Act.
IDENTITY OF THE COMPLAINANT
As I propose to dismiss both aspects of this complaint before me
this question is merely academic.
The issue was specifically raised before Commissioner Wilson who considered
he need not determine the matter. It was also raised
before me. The original
complaint was made by Mrs Cowell “on behalf of” Fleur. In that
complaint Mrs Cowell indicated,
“I seek compensation for my daughter and
for my family...”. On 12 November 1997 Commissioner Wilson made a
amending the name of the complainant to “[Mrs Cowell] on behalf
of herself and [Fleur]”, and indicating Mrs Cowell should
be named an
aggrieved party pursuant, to section 69(1)(a)(ii) of the Act.
In submissions before me Mrs Cowell indicated only she sought to be joined as
a complainant with Fleur: the original complaint had
referred to her husband as
well as herself. Mrs Cowell told me all the matters which affected Fleur also
affected her: in particular,
she referred to the way in which she believed she
had suffered as a consequence of the discrimination against her daughter. She
said she believed she did not have the same rights as other parents as she had
not received school notices, and although she had
requested work to be sent home
for Fleur this had not occurred, although she believed it had occurred in
relation to other parents.
She believed she was ignored by the School.
Further, she submitted the matters which in her allegation amounted to
discrimination
against Fleur should also be regarded as discrimination against
herself. Mrs Cowell said there were also things she was required
to do because
of Fleur’s disability which she believed other parents did not have to do:
these included signing Fleur in at
school, and advising teachers of
Fleur’s presence.
The respondent opposed the joining of Mrs Cowell as a party. In particular
the respondent submitted there was no basis in either
the complaint or the
evidence which indicated how Mrs Cowell could be regarded as an aggrieved person
under the Act. The respondent
did not object to Mrs Cowell bringing the
complaint on behalf of Fleur, but directed my attention to the words of section
Act which sets out who may lodge complaints. Complaints can be lodged
by “a person aggrieved” on that person’s
own behalf, or on
behalf of another person. However, the fundamental criteria in section 69 is
that for a person to be a complainant
under the Act, that person must be
“a person aggrieved”. It was submitted this must mean a person who
is subjected directly
to the discriminatory behaviour alleged. Ms Powell
submitted the Act did not contemplate “the extension of liability to
without a disability who are affected in a detrimental way by the
effects, in turn, of discriminatory conduct on a disabled person.
would be to extend liability for breach of statutory duty in an impermissible
I note Mrs Cowell did not make a complaint that she was discriminated against
by the School on the ground of the disability of an
associate: this basis of
complaint would not be open to Mrs Cowell under section 22(2), as what is
rendered unlawful by that part
of the Act is “to discriminate against a
student on the ground of the student’s disability or a disability of any
the student’s associates”. Mrs Cowell of course was not a
student, and nor was she disabled. It might, however, have
been open to Mrs
Cowell to make a complaint under section 24 of the Act in relation to the
provision of educational services by the
School to her as a parent (and
associate) of a child with a disability.
Because I have determined to dismiss this complaint, the determination of
this issue is unnecessary for the purposes of this determination.
However, it
is my view Mrs Cowell is not properly a complainant in this matter. On the
basis of the complaint before the inquiry
Mrs Cowell was not “a person
aggrieved” in the sense referred to in the legislation. That Mrs Cowell
naturally is profoundly
affected by the consequences of her daughter’s
disability goes without saying, but this is in itself not a sufficient basis
establish unlawful behaviour under the Act. In any event I am satisfied there
is no evidence Fleur has been subjected to any
unlawful discriminatory behaviour
under the Act, and under those circumstances of course, even if Mrs Cowell were
appropriately a
complainant, that complaint too would be dismissed. Even if I
were to construe the complaint as one made under section 24 of the
Act, there is
insufficient evidence before me to suggest that Mrs Cowell herself was subject
to discrimination in the provision by
the School of its educational services to
her as a parent.
the reasons given above, pursuant to section 103(1)(a), I make the following
determinations:
(1) I dismiss the complaint alleging harassment of Fleur by an employee of the
respondent School.
(2) I dismiss the complaint made by Fleur alleging she was subjected to direct
discrimination contrary to the Act by the respondent
I certify that this and the preceding
forty pages is a true copy of the Reasons for Decision of Kathleen McEvoy,
Inquiry Commissioner.
Hearing Solictor:
Date: 10 October, 2000
RTF format (132 KB)
Signed PDF/A format