Bolkvadze & Bolkvadze (No 4) [2025] FedCFamC1F 535 (11 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Bolkvadze & Bolkvadze (No 4)
FedCFamC1F 535
File number(s):
SYC 2018 of 2022
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PARENTING –
Interim parenting orders – Application to reconsider recently made final
parenting orders –
Where the parties agree that there has been a
significant change in circumstances such that it is in the children’s best
for the final parenting orders to be reconsidered – Where each
parent proposes competing orders to address alleged risk of
harm to the children
when in the other parent’s care – Where the children are not
presently living with or spending time
with the mother pursuant to the final
orders – Where the s 65DAAA application is granted – Where orders
are made on an
interim basis for the children to live with the father and spend
day time only with the mother – Where the mother is restrained
Orders made progressing the matter to the preparation
of a Child Impact Report.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
Central Practice Direction
Family Law Case Management
, 1 May 2024
Cases cited:
Bolkvadze & Bolkvadze (No 3)
FedCFamC1F 107
Chiles & Petrenko
[2024] FedCFamC1A 112
Deiter & Deiter
[2011] FamCAFC 82
Eaby & Speelman
(2015) FLC 093-654
Fitzwater & Fitzwater
[2019] FamCAFC 251
(2019) 60 Fam LR 212
Isles & Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
(2022) FLC 94-092
Re F: Litigants in Person Guidelines
[2001] FamCA 348
(2001) FLC 93-072
[2010] FamCAFC 13
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Ms Clifford
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Boyce & Boyce
For the Respondent:
The Respondent appeared in person
SYC 2018 of 2022
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
MR BOLKVADZE
MS BOLKVADZE
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS, PENDING FURTHER ORDER, THAT:
section 65DAAA(3)
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the
Act”) and noting the consent of the parties, leave is granted to the
parties to proceed to revisit the final
parenting orders made on 24 February
3, 4, 5, 10 and 13 of the Orders made on 24 February 2025 are discharged.
children, X born 2009, Y born 2011 and Z born 2015 (“the children”)
shall live with the father.
otherwise agreed between the parties in writing, the children shall spend time
with the mother, as follows:
(a) Each Wednesday from after school or 3.00pm to 6.00pm; and
(b) In week one and every second week thereafter, each Saturday and Sunday from
2.00pm to 6.00pm (with the first weekend of care
commencing on the weekend
following the making of these orders);
(c) During all school terms and during all school holidays at the conclusion of
Terms 1, 2 and 3, in accordance with orders 4(a)
and 4(b) herein, following the
pattern of care which applied during term periods; and
(d) Such other times as the parties may agree in writing.
time that the children X and Y spend with the mother in accordance with Order 4
herein shall be subject to their views.
mother (including by her agents, save for lawyers engaged to represent her
interests) is restrained by injunction from:
(a) Contacting any medical practitioner or therapist assessing or providing
treatment to any of the children (which includes other
staff of the
clinic/practice from which those providers offer their services); and
(b) Providing any information, in writing (which includes electronic
communication), to any medical practitioner or therapist assessing
or providing
treatment to any of the children (which includes other staff of the
clinic/practice from which those providers offer
their services), unless
expressly requested by the practitioner or therapist in writing.
mother may meet with any medical practitioner or therapist assessing or
providing treatment to any of the children if requested
by the practitioner or
therapist to do so and may communicate with them/the staff of the
clinic/practice from which the providers
offer their services, to schedule an
appointment.
18 and 19 of the orders of 24 February 2025 be varied to the extent that the
father may select the clinic to provide the P
Family Therapy and, for that
purpose, the written agreement of the mother as to the selected therapy provider
shall not be required.
father is to provide to the mother, in writing (via the parenting communication
application used by the parties) every 14 days,
a summary which is to include
the following information:
(a) Particulars of any attendance of a child or children upon a medical
practitioner or therapist assessing or providing treatment
to any of the
children in the preceding 14 day period, with such to include a summary of the
outcome of that attendance and any recommendations
made by the medical
practitioner or therapist; and
(b) Particulars of any medication being taken by any of the children and, or,
any changes to the medication regime prescribed (as
applicable) in each 14 day
section 68L
of the Act, an Independent Children’s Lawyer be appointed
for the children and Legal Aid NSW is requested to provide such representation.
parties provide to Legal Aid NSW and, or, the Independent Children’s
Lawyer, if requested, all documents thus far filed
in these proceedings by that
party together with all existing orders and copies of any relevant reports.
is granted to the Independent Children’s Lawyer to issue more than 5
section 62G
of the Act, the parties and the children X, Y, and Z are directed
to attend with a Court Child Expert (practicing under their appointment
family consultant) nominated by the Court Children’s Service (the Court
Child Expert) for the purposes of the preparation
of a Child Impact Report at
the dates and times below, or as otherwise directed by the Court Child
of the event will occur by video, using Microsoft
Teams, on 27 October 2025, with:
(a) the Applicant to attend at 9.00am; and
(b) the Respondent to attend at 10.30am.
Microsoft Teams links will be provided to the parties by the Court Child
Expert prior to the event.
of the event will occur in person at the Sydney Registry on the
morning of 28 October 2025. Specific details regarding the attendance
the parties and the children on this date will be provided to the parties at
of the event.
party shall do all things necessary to ensure the children attend upon the Court
Child Expert pursuant to
Section 62G(3A)
, unless otherwise determined by the
Court Child Expert that
Section 62G(3B)
parties and the children shall continue to attend at such times, dates and
places as the Court Child Expert may advise.
later than 4.00pm on 19 August 2025 the parties must provide their contact
telephone numbers and email addresses to ...@....
to order 13 herein, the Court Child Expert shall provide a written report to the
Court and the report shall deal with the
following matters:
(a) Any agreement reached between the parties;
(b) Identification of key issues requiring resolution;
(c) Any views expressed by the children. and any matters (such as the
children’s maturity or level of understanding) that would
weight that the court should place on those views;
(d) The impact of the issues/dispute before the Court on the children;
(e) Any other matters that the Court Child Expert considers important to the
welfare or best interests of the children.
completion, the Child Impact Report shall be provided to the Court for release
to the parties, including by way of order made
in Chambers.
Court Child Expert be at liberty to inspect any material filed by the parties
and documents produced on subpoena and pursuant
is granted to the Independent Children’s Lawyer to relist the matter on 48
hours’ notice.
balance of the applications for interlocutory relief as sought by the father in
his initiating application filed 21 June 2025
and by the mother in the document
marked as Exhibit 1 are otherwise dismissed.
matter be adjourned to 1 December 2025 at 9.30am for case management hearing.
THE COURT NOTES THAT:
mother informed the Court that she would attend to the filing of the documents
upon which she relied at the hearing which, at
the time of the hearing, were not
drafted in publishable form (as was the case for the minute of orders the mother
sought be treated
as her Response being Exhibit 1 and her affidavit).
mother appears to have filed response material on 7 August 2025. Those
documents have not been reviewed for consistency with
the documents upon which
she relied at the hearing.
deciding this application, I have had regard only to the documents placed before
me and, or, accepted into evidence at the hearing.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Bolkvadze & Bolkvadze
has been approved pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
recently as 24 February 2025, Christie J made final orders which provided for
the final parenting arrangements for the parties’
three children
(“the final parenting orders”): X (aged 15), Y (aged 14), and Z
(aged 10). Her Honour’s reasons
for judgment became
Bolkvadze &
Bolkvadze (No 3)
[2025] FedCFamC1F 107
(“reasons for judgment”).
21 June 2025, the father filed an Initiating Application (alongside an affidavit
and Notice of child abuse, family violence or
risk) in which he implicitly
sought for the final parenting orders to be reconsidered. In that application,
the father sought the
discharge of a range of the final parenting orders and
that different parenting orders be made, including restraints upon the
an affidavit also filed that day, the father set out his evidence as to the
events which had occurred after the final parenting
orders had been made,
asserting a significant change of circumstances relating to the care of the
children and which he said supported
the application being heard with some
1 August 2025, I conducted a case management hearing with a view to allocating
the matter an urgent interim hearing. On that occasion,
the mother had not
succeeded in filing her response documents (it appears that she had prepared and
filed certain documents which
had been filed in a new matter, with a new file
number; there were apparently other difficulties with the mother’s
such that they were not, at that time, filed in the matter before the
that occasion, I directed the mother to file and serve any amended material with
respect to the parenting application by 2.00 pm
on 5 August 2025. The documents
which had, at that time, been prepared by the mother appeared to also seek
relief with respect to
financial and property matters. The mother was informed
on 1 August 2025 that the father’s application related to parenting
matters only and that she could not utilise
Family Law Act
(Cth) (“the Act”) as a vehicle to seek to revisit the final
property orders made. She was encouraged to obtain legal
matter came before me on 6 August 2025 for hearing of the
application
and if successful, what interim orders needed to be made relating to the care of
the children. At the commencement of
the hearing that day, the mother had not
filed her Response to Initiating Application or supporting documents, but had
a lengthy affidavit to chambers that morning. The mother had
additional difficulties that morning and was late in her arrival to
commencement of the hearing was delayed to enable the mother’s attendance.
circumstances where the mother had only served the father with that affidavit
(and without a Response to an Initiating Application)
that morning, I granted
the mother additional time to engage with Family Advocacy and Support Services
(“FASS”) at the
court and to prepare a Response setting out the
orders she sought. In the discussions which occurred with the mother that
it became clear that she also sought (or did not oppose) the final
parenting orders being revisited.
the mention of the matter that morning, I invited the mother to review her
affidavit such that she could identify for the court,
those annexures (from her
affidavit which was 95 pages, including annexures) which she wanted to tender in
support of her submissions.
I also identified to the mother that those parts of
her affidavit dealing with financial issues would not be read by me. Further
time was extended to the mother, at her request, to enable her to complete this
process. Consequently, the hearing did not commence
until approximately
without legal representation in proceedings of this nature is challenging and I
was concerned to afford the mother reasonable
opportunities to prepare for the
hearing and I explained to her on several occasions, the process and what would
Re F: Litigants in Person Guidelines
[2001] FamCA 348
(2001) FLC 93-072).
was apparent that, nonetheless, there were occasions when the mother became
overwhelmed and experienced some distress. The experience
of listening to the
submissions being made on behalf of the father resulted in some dysregulation by
the mother.
subject children have been, variously, diagnosed with a number of medical and
mental health conditions. It is clear from the
reasons for judgment that the
management of the health and therapeutic care of the children has long been a
source of conflict and
dispute between the parties.
mother is also neurodivergent. It was apparent that at times the mother was
quite overwhelmed by the challenge of addressing
matters before the court and
locating documents to which she wanted the court to have regard.
THE FINAL PARENTING ORDERS
final parenting orders provide for the children to live with the parents on a
week about basis and for the parents to have joint
responsibility for making
decisions in relation to all major long-term issues concerning the children,
save for decisions in relation
to major long-term issues regarding the
children’s health and medical needs, for which the father has sole
responsibility pursuant
to Order 9.
father is required to provide certain information to the mother relating to the
children’s medical and therapeutic care.
father was required to do all things necessary to engage Z in a specified
family-based therapy with a particular named clinic
(or other provider as
agreed) to assist Z with his diagnosis of an eating disorder. The mother was
permitted (Orders 19 to 21) to
receive information and to participate in that
therapy, as requested by the therapist. The mother was restrained (Order 15)
taking the children to attend upon a medical provider and, or, therapist
for assessment or treatment and was restrained from providing
instructions to
the children’s medical providers or therapists, unless requested by them
or with the father’s consent
in writing.
SECTION 65DAAA
seeking confirmation from the mother that I understood her orders sought (the
way in which that occurred and her orders sought
are outlined and summarised
below), I was satisfied that the parties agreed that there needed to be a
reconsideration of the final
parenting orders pursuant to s 65DAAA of the Act.
will be set out below, it is not controversial that there has been a breakdown
of adherence to the living arrangements for the
children as provided in the
final parenting orders. Since 16 May 2025, Y has been living with the
father, having sought his father’s
assistance in collecting him from
outside the mother’s home on that occasion. On 14 July 2025, the mother
directed the father
to retain X and Z in his care (at least until a particular
event in mid-August 2025). At this time, all three children remain in
father’s care and are not spending time with the mother.
additional concern, there have been certain disruptions to the provision of
medical care and therapy for Z since the final parenting
orders were made. The
father says that this is directly attributable to the impact of the
mother’s engagement with medical
specialists, leading to their refusal to
assist the family. Therapy that Z was intended to engage in, relating to a
particular disorder
(and as stipulated in the final parenting orders) is not
occurring. A particular diagnostic medical procedure for Z was also cancelled
abruptly, again, on the father’s case, because of the mother’s
communication to that specialist.
the events underpinning these recent changes are to some extent disputed between
the parties, it is clear that there has been
a complete breakdown of the
longstanding week about care arrangements between the two households (which had
been in place since shortly
after separation and was confirmed in the final
parenting orders). Z’s medical and therapeutic care is presently being
as a consequence of events which have occurred since the final
parenting orders were made.
parties are in agreement that the final parenting orders need to be
reconsidered. Section 65DAAA(3) makes clear that the court
retains the
discretion as to the reconsideration of final parenting orders, even when the
parties consent to that occurring.
the reasons for judgment, Christie J observed at [132] that:
Each party contends that his or her proposal will best meet the children’s
needs but the reality is that the children’s
needs may not be entirely met
whatever orders the Court makes. It is however, beyond question that they need
the litigation to end.
Regrettably,
the evidence before the court makes clear that further engagement and
consideration of the living and care arrangements
for these children is
necessary and in their best interests, the circumstances for which will be
addressed more fully below.
a consequence of the consent position, the hearing focussed upon what interim
orders needed to be made as to serve the children’s
best interests and
THE ISSUES BEFORE THE COURT
the father’s Initiating Application, he sought interlocutory orders, which
can be summarised as follows:
(a) He sought to discharge various final parenting orders, including the week
mother’s engagement
with medical providers and therapists;
(b) He sought that he continue to exercise sole decision making for the
long-term issues relating to the children but sought to discharge
requirement for input by the mother;
(c) He sought a spend time regime of three hours after school each Wednesday and
between 2.00 pm and 6.00 pm on Saturday and Sunday
every second weekend;
(d) He sought orders that, during school holiday time (in term holidays), the
children would spend seven days of time with the mother,
limited to 10.00 am to
6.00 pm each day (and that such should also occur, on an alternating weekly
basis, over the long summer holiday
(e) He sought orders for the two older children to spend time with the mother
subject to their views;
(f) He sought to restrain the mother from any engagement with the medical
providers and therapists upon whom the children attend,
save for at the request
of any of the providers; and
(g) He sought an order directing him to continue the P Family Therapy through a
particular provider (or another provider at his nomination,
should that provider
be unable to assist the family).
to the commencement of the hearing and after the father had an opportunity to
read the mother’s affidavit, provided that
morning, I was advised by the
father’s counsel that her client no longer proposed any orders for spend
time arrangements for
the children with the mother. It was submitted that
aspects of the mother’s evidence had led the father to conclude that the
children were at some risk in spending unsupervised time with the mother. Those
matters are addressed further below.
the commencement of the hearing, the mother prepared a document, with the
assistance of the FASS team, which I accepted as her
Response for the purposes
of the hearing and which became Exhibit 1.
mother sought orders which can be summarised as follows:
(a) The discharge of certain orders of the final parenting orders (being Orders
10, 11, 12, 13, 14(a), 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, and 21).
(b) The amendment of Order 3 (which provides for the children to live in a week
orders which provide for
the children to live with the mother from 3.00 pm Wednesday until 3.00 pm
Thursday in the following week.
This would result in an increase in the time
that the children lived with the mother by one day and one night across the
(and a reduction to the time the children were in the father’s
(c) The mother sought the necessary amendment to orders relating to school
holiday time (to reflect her proposed care pattern across
the term and long
summer holidays, unless otherwise agreed).
(d) The mother sought the discharge of orders providing the father with final
decision making with respect to medical and health
matters, and instead, sought
that such would be exercised solely by her in addition to educational
(e) Consequently, the mother sought to discharge Order 15, which restrains her
engagement upon the medical practitioners and therapists
of the children.
Similarly, the mother sought to vary Order 22 such that she was permitted to
provide the medical practitioners
and therapists with the orders.
MATERIAL RELIED UPON
father relied upon:
(a) His Initiating Application filed on 21 June 2025;
(b) His affidavit filed on 21 June 2025;
(c) His document titled “Father’s contentions as to change in
circumstances” (filed 31 July 2025 and which became
Exhibit 2); and
(d) His case outline document filed 31 July 2025.
mother relied upon:
(a) A typed document which set out her summary of the orders she sought to
change and the new orders she proposed ought to be made
in their place (and
which I took as addressing the interim orders she also sought);
(b) Her affidavit which she advised had been affirmed that morning (here I note
that I only had an unsworn copy, but I accepted her
representations as to her
affirming of that evidence); and
(c) Her case outline document filed on 1 August 2025 (Exhibit 25).
father’s counsel and the mother each identified additional documents which
were made into exhibits. While I have had regard
to each of those documents, I
will only refer to those exhibits which have proven to be of relevance or
assistance to me in making
my decision.
THE KEY EVENTS AND CHANGES SINCE THE FINAL PARENTING ORDERS
the evening of 16 May 2025, the father deposes to receiving text messages from Y
who was at that time in the mother’s care.
The father says that he had
missed the messages when they were sent by Y but he was later awakened by a
phone call from Y, in the
early hours of 17 May 2025, requesting that the father
collect him. The father collected Y that night and observed that he was
distressed.
Y, who is 14 years of age, has remained in the father’s care
since that night.
text messages to the father are Exhibit 12. Y had advised the father in his
first text message that his mother wanted the
father to collect him.
mother does not provide direct evidence about these events in her affidavit.
The mother identified that she had set out, in an
email to Y’s school, a
summary of the events that had occurred and which lead to Y being in his
father’s care. That
email is Exhibit 24. It appears that the mother had
become distressed on the evening of 16 May 2025 in response to aspects of
communication to the school goes over three pages and addresses broader and more
historical matters too. Curiously she invites
the recipient of the email to
assess and determine if Y wants to return to his father’s care that
afternoon (or return to the
mother). The mother advises the school:
(a) That Y has spoken with her at length that night about his “profound
sense of hopelessness regarding the future –
primarily due to climate
change, but also referencing economic instability, lack of secure employment and
the housing crisis”.
(b) She describes the conversation as deeply distressing and that she felt
shaken by it but notes that such conversations had become
more frequent with
(c) Later that evening, when urging Y to bed, she was met with increasing
resistance and that Y confided “that the last four
months” (since
the final parenting orders had been made) had been the most stressful of his
life and “that his sensory
sensitivities have worsened and become
unmanageable”.
(d) She had felt “overwhelmed by [Y]’s words and removed myself from
the situation, experiencing hyperventilation in
the kitchen”.
(e) She describes Y later that night sobbing uncontrollably and that he
“appeared terrified, telling me ‘you don’t
love me’ and
‘don’t touch me’. He said he needed to be with his father.
His father picked him up around
mother’s account of these events suggests that it was highly challenging
for her and that she was unable to retain her composure
in those circumstances.
I also note that she did not engage directly with the father to secure his
assistance in collecting the
child – that task was left to Y.
the mother’s communication with the father (after Y had been collected by
the father) in a parenting application, Our Family
Wizard, and which became
Exhibit 3, she suggested that Y should remain in the father’s care:
“I don’t think he
should be encouraged to come back here until we
have get [sic] to the bottom of what’s going on for him”. The
does not advise the father of her own vulnerability that night or what Y
may have experienced of her distress.
those eight messages to the father, sent between 1.08 am and 10.03 am, the
mother sets out her observations of Y’s engagement
and behaviour in her
care and urges the father to pursue further investigations about Y’s
functioning. In the first message,
the mother says: “I am deeply
concerned about his mental health and my heart breaks for him. I am devastated
at the mental
decline that I am seeing in our children”.
her message to the father sent at 6.54 am, the mother says:
[Mr Bolkvadze]. For the love of God, and the love of your children; please do
not insist to [Y] that he comes back here today. He
isn’t eating here and
it’s a child welfare crisis. If you kick him out, he has nowhere
realistically where he thinks
he can go which could cause self-harm. I have
serious concerns about this possibility... You can anticipate further decline in
school grades in June. It may be considered child abuse if you don’t
respond appropriately. [Y] has had to shape shift in
his head to justify that
you are his safe parent, despite ongoing evidence to the contrary. He needs his
cognitive distortion to
be addressed and taken seriously urgently.
was nothing in evidence to support the contention that the child was at risk of
being “kicked out” by his father.
a message to the father on 19 May 2025 (Exhibit 27), the mother declares her
requirement that Y should return to her care (in accordance
with the final
parenting orders).
communication to the father and to the school (and the mother’s evidence
more generally) suggests that the mother holds
the view that this child’s
welfare is being adversely impacted by the consequences of the final parenting
12 is a series of text messages from the mother to Y starting at 2.10 am on 17
May 2025 and concluding on Thursday 12 June
2025. I understand that Y has not
responded to any of the mother’s text messages. Many of the text messages
are expressions
of the mother’s love and pride in the child and are an
attempt by the mother to retain some connection with a child who is
choosing not to engage in communication in return.
on occasion, the mother communicates with the child about adult issues,
(a) The court proceedings;
(b) Details of limitations in the court orders;
(c) Her views of her own difficulties about the event which had occurred between
them (describing it as “triggering and somewhat
traumatic” and that
she “is a wreck with confusion and frustration” and that
“being triggered and dysregulated
is normal for humans in challenging
conditions”);
(d) She expresses her opinion about the father’s responses to her
(“your father’s physical response to me which
is not considered to
be a normal response for a divorced coparent. The orders are for 5050 which
suggests that the feeling of fear
and risk of harm that ur father felt: feels
towards me was not validated by the third parties”);
(e) She shares information about things a marriage counsellor advised the
(f) She tells the child that the father has “responded with complete
avoidance of me outside of texts (since 2022)” and
“I fear the same
pattern occurring with you”;
(g) She admits to feeling “frustrated, stressed and angry on occasion in
the last year as a response to very challenging circumstances
where I regularly
felt not credible, not believed and powerless which did trigger disproportionate
responses at times”;
(h) She shares her views and understanding about disproportionate and avoidant
responses being linked to trauma and, or, unmanaged
mental health issues;
(i) She advises him that her psychologist has said she has “some
trauma”; and
(j) She asks Y about the extent to which his own psychologist is helping him,
then observes “she doesn’t have a specialty
in trauma or
neurodivergence but rather in [mental health disorders] so if you don’t
think she is helpful; you can ask to switch”.
a later text message, the mother returns to the theme of conflict “between
stressed humans who love each other”.
content of some of the messages are of concern and may inappropriately place the
child in the centre of the ongoing dispute between
his parents and, or, cause
him to feel responsible for his mother’s wellbeing. Christie J was aware
of the “significant
emotional toll” the proceedings had taken on the
children (reasons for judgment at [130]). These more recent events are likely
to have added to that burden.
health needs require ongoing assessment and support, and particular orders were
made about this in the final parenting orders.
The father deposes to steps he
had taken to secure Z an appointment with a specialist to perform an important
diagnostic procedure.
That procedure was scheduled to occur in May 2025. The
father advised the mother of this plan in April 2025. The father says that
May 2025, he received a telephone call from Dr TT who advised him that he
would not perform the procedure on Z because of correspondence
he had received
from the mother. The father asked the mother to provide him with a copy of the
correspondence. The mother has not
done so and her communication to Dr TT is
not in evidence.
mother does not directly address these events in her affidavit. The mother
places no evidence before the court to explain her
part in these events. It is
of considerable concern that despite the terms of the final parenting orders,
the conduct of the mother
appears to have disrupted Z receiving necessary
diagnostic assessment.
father had also taken steps to engage Z (and the wider family) in the therapy
foreshadowed in the final parenting orders. The
father deposes to
communications he received from the doctor undertaking that therapy to the
effect that she will not continue, because
of the mother’s engagement with
that doctor and her practice.
child had his first session of that therapy in May 2025. The children and the
mother engaged in a session on 6 June 2025 and
that was the first time that Y
had been with his mother since the events of 16 May 2025. The father deposes to
being advised by
the older children that the mother “hassled” Y
mother to stop. The attitude of the mother as to the medication requirements of
the children was identified by Christie J (and
the experts) as being rigid given
her view that “the ‘optimal dose’ of ADHD medication would
achieve their maximum potential” (the reasons for
judgment at [126]).
UU (who provides the therapy) communicated to the parties about a future session
to occur at the mother’s home and made clear
certain boundaries with
respect to the nature of communications to her office and during the therapy
sessions. It appears that the
mother communicated with Dr UU in a fashion which
Dr UU found unhelpful. Dr UU advised the father that the mother had refused to
make a booking for a therapy session at her home.
Dr E, who is the children’s paediatrician, wrote to both parties on 10
June 2025 expressing her concerns about barriers
which she said obstructed her
ability to provide care to Z (Exhibit 6). She described the barriers as
“parental discord; variations
in history provided by each parent;
excessively lengthy email communications”. Dr E makes clear in that
letter that “email
communication is no longer acceptable”.
E provides a comprehensive update to Z’s general practitioner on 13 June
2025 (Exhibit 7), including confirming his diagnosis
of an eating disorder and
stressing the importance of Z’s school attendance. In that letter, she
makes clear that she does
not want further communications from the mother
outside of the monthly scheduled meeting.
E expresses further concerns for Z and the children more generally in a letter
to the general practitioner dated 15 June 2025 (Exhibit
8), expressing concerns
for the mother’s health and functioning. In that letter she advises the
general practitioner that
she had made a mandatory report to the NSW Department
of Communities and Justice (“DCJ”). Certain records from the DCJ
are in evidence (Exhibit 17) and corroborate the receipt of certain concerns on
a date which aligns with the reported actions of
instance of the mother’s communications with Dr E became Exhibit 9. On 16
June 2025, the mother sent to a member of staff
at Dr E’s rooms, an
extensive email to which are attached five attachments (the attachments are not
in evidence). The body
of the email is a copy of an email which, it appears,
the mother sent to the father that expresses certain views about actions he
taken, including events dating back to 2022. She suggests in that email that
others involved in the care of the children were
“concerned” about
the father’s conduct. She also makes allegations as to the father’s
conduct after the end
of the marriage (which predates the making of the final
parenting orders). It is difficult to discern the benefit to the
paediatrician in receipt of a document setting out the
mother’s views of, and criticisms of, the father’s historical
conduct. The mother also appears to suggest that the father has not provided
sufficient or accurate background information to Dr
E. The email concludes
(directed to the father):
If you acknowledge that you have caused significant harm to the children since
having parental responsibility, consider if you have
an ethical responsibility
to relinquish medical responsibility through consent in a bid to restore the
children to thriving and achieving
outcomes to the level of 2023.
same day, the mother emails the father the content of an email directed to Dr UU
and Dr E (and the father), about which she says
forward this to [Dr E] or [Dr UU] until our next appointment. For your
interest.” That email is Exhibit
10. In that email intended for the
doctors, but not at that time sent, the mother expresses certain views as to
“the progressive
deterioration of outcomes” for the children, and
“which has made me increasingly heightened and fearful for our
wellbeing”. She appears to offer explanations to Dr UU
for her conduct:
... your seeming unwillingness (a misunderstanding) to incorporate the
endocrinology report findings, in front of the children, caused
me distress
(which in turn unsettled the children).
admission as to her conduct when with the doctor, in front of the children, adds
weight to the other evidence before the court,
to the effect that the
mother’s engagement with Dr UU may have been unhelpful for the children
and apparently caused the doctor
Consistently
in the mother’s communication to the doctors, to the school, and to the
father, is criticism and, or, concern that
the “full” picture
relating to the health and functioning and prior medical assessments of the
children has not been
provided. It is clear that she does not trust the father
to discharge his obligations in managing the medical care of the children
provided under the final parenting orders) and that she continues to believe
that a child, or the children, have been misdiagnosed
and, or, are not being
properly treated and supported. That distrust appears to consistently shape the
mother’s engagement
with the father and her unwillingness to accept the
terms of the final parenting orders, with respect to decision making and
of the particular health needs of the children.
distrust of the father is also manifest in her belief, expressed in her
affidavit, that the father has manipulated and, or, forged
communications from
some of the medical providers, alleging:
(a) “...spoofing of email aliases designed to appear as if they originated
from me (a form of cybercrime intended to mislead
recipients)”;
(b) “Infiltration of my personal contacts list, which was subsequently
used to craft messages that impersonated treating professionals”;
(c) “...tactics not only undermined my ability to communicate clearly and
respectfully with treating professionals but also
created an atmosphere of
confusion and mistrust. I believe these behaviours represent a form of coercive
control – using technological
deception to manipulate the views of
treaters and position me as “delusional” or “fixated”
within the clinical
narrative”; and
(d) “...suspicious changes in logos, signatures and copy patterns –
further support my concern that some of these communications
may not have
originated from legitimate clinical sources”.
of these extraordinary allegations are at best explained by the mother as being
based upon a comparison which she states she
has undertaken of various emails
sent from different email addresses within the medical practice and her
observations about different
fonts, email addresses and how signature blocks may
appear in different instances.
for the father confirmed that her client denied any proper basis for such
allegations. That denial did not assuage the mother’s
suspicions and at
various points in the hearing, she sought to object to the tender of various
emails to and from the medical providers
on the basis that she suggested they
had been tampered with.
a letter dated 5 August 2025 to the father from Dr UU (which was part of Exhibit
15), Dr UU advised that Z was being discharged
from the disorder therapy
program because the child did not have:
... adequate support across both parents’ households” and that the
mother “did not book necessary appointments
when requested and did not
indicate willingness to continue with treatment sessions...
that letter, Dr UU repeated the cautions she had provided to the parents
regarding the need for boundaries around communication
to the practitioner and
stated that: “[Z]’s mother did not comply with requests to
communicate within these boundaries”.
doctor indicates that she is willing to resume treatment for Z in the event the
child was living with the father and if the mother
was restrained from
initiating communications with the doctor. Dr UU indicates further:
... it is important that treatment strategies are applied consistently in
households where the child resides” and that “clear
and enforced
clinical boundaries are necessary in order to maintain a safe and appropriate
therapeutic relationship.
note that the letter was prepared by Dr UU in direct response to a request made
of her by the father (those emails are also part
of Exhibit 15). While Dr UU
has expressed an opinion in the letter of 5 August, which effectively mirrors
the wording suggested
to her by the father in one of his emails of the same
date, it is clear from the communications between the father and Dr UU that
she had communicated these sentiments on 4 July 2025 in a letter to the
children’s general practitioner. I accept that Dr
UU wrote the matters
expressed in the letter of 5 August 2025 as a reflection of her concerns for the
child Z and her views about
the benefits to him of resuming his therapy.
matter of concern raised by the father in support of his application is the
extent to which the children may be absent from
school while in the care of each
parent. The mother quite properly observes that school refusal for the children
had been a matter
the subject of challenge for the parents before the final
parenting orders were made (and was considered in the reasons for judgment).
The father suggests that in the current school term, Z had been absent from
school on 17 out of 20 days that he was in the mother’s
care. Of those
absences, 13 were unexplained absences.
mother provided evidence of alleged inconsistency between the data she could
observe on the school’s site versus the data
available to her when
accessing the information from the parent portal. The mother communicated her
concerns to the school about
this potential anomaly. It remained unclear to me
however, whether the mother was saying that Z had in fact attended school on
or some occasions beyond those observed by the father based on the school
records. It was difficult to obtain a clear answer from
the mother as to her
own observations of Z’s attendances from her household (that is, when in
her care). The evidence remains
subject to some uncertainty. I do not
disregard the possibility that the school records (as viewed by parents) may be
given that the school appear to be investigating the mother’s
concerns and have not rejected the possibility of error in their
communications
to the mother. I do not have the benefit of clear evidence from the mother
THE BEST INTERESTS OF THE CHILDREN
each parent’s application, I am being asked to make orders which
substantially change the final parenting orders, less than
six months after they
parent makes allegations of some risk to the children in the care of the other
parent. The father asserts that the children
are at risk of exposure to the
mother’s dysregulated behaviour and uncertain mental health (being a risk
of psychological or
emotional harm to the children), and the risk that she will
impede their access to appropriate medical care.
mother alleges that the children will not receive appropriate medical care when
with the father (or as a consequence of the exercise
of his decision-making
power), but she supports the children still living with the father, but for less
time than previously.
parent seeks to make long term decisions relating to the children without
consultation with the other.
father indicated a change to the orders he sought on an interim basis, after
receipt of the mother’s affidavit that morning,
and made an oral
application to that effect. The father relied upon a letter dated 2 April 2025
to the family general practitioner,
from Dr VV, a psychiatrist upon whom the
mother has attended for some time (Exhibit 16). That letter had not been seen
by the father
prior to the interim hearing, and it was submitted that the
contents of that letter (coupled with other evidence before the court)
cause such concern in the court that no face-to-face time should occur between
the children and the mother, pending further
investigation (and order in due
course). As is explained below, that position was later modified by the father
to embrace contemplation
of professionally supervised time.
was submitted that the reference in that letter to the mother being assessed for
“Complex PTSD” was recently arising
and was suggestive of some
additional concern with respect to the mother’s functioning and wellbeing.
I can place limited weight
upon the contents of that letter, in circumstances
where the treater/author has not provided further information as to the basis
that reference. It is not clear what information was provided to Dr VV, or by
whom. That statement appears, at best, to be a
report of information (probably)
provided by the mother. The accuracy of that report and its basis is not known.
It is not supported
by additional, clear evidence from the mother as to her
current mental health status or steps being taken by her to receive support,
the extent needed, about those matters.
was submitted that aspects of the mother’s presentation in court (which
was at times heightened and distressed) would also
result in additional caution
in consideration of the spend time arrangements between the children and the
mother was self-represented at the final hearing. Christie J accepted that the
mother, at times, including at the hearing, “presented
as heightened or
“emotionally labile” when discussing issues related to the
children’s care” (the reasons
for judgment at [98]). That
description fairly describes the mother’s presentation in court on this
that time, Christie J noted that there was no evidence to suggest that this had
a negative impact upon the children. However,
given the more recent events,
there is some risk that aspects of the mother’s functioning and response
to certain matters relating
to the care of the children (including her views of
optimal medication regimes) may be impacting upon the children and their medical
of the experts engaged in the previous proceedings had suggested that if the
children were exposed to the mother’s “anxious
and emotionally
labile presentation then this may cause the children distress” but
Christie J also accepted that much of the
mother’s anxiety arose in the
context of the litigation (the reasons for judgment at [99]). In circumstances
where the litigation
is now resumed and given the events which have recently
occurred, I recognise that there is some risk that the mother’s management
of her health may be under strain and the children may be exposed to the
manifestation of this strain.
evidence about the mother’s engagement with Y on the evening of 16 May
2025 adds some weight to the contention that there
may have been some change or
deterioration to the mother’s mental health or functioning since the final
parenting orders were
made. In addition, her allegations that the father has
manufactured or tampered with email communication, including some which
emanated from the various medical practices, is also suggestive of a
decline in mental health functioning of the mother.
the father was initially (through the oral application made on his behalf at the
commencement of the hearing) proposing interim
orders which would sever all
in their care and in
the process of decision making. While it was proposed by
the father that such would occur in the immediate term while a further
(from a Court Child Expert) could be obtained, that proposal gives insufficient
attention and weight to the important relationship
the children have with their
mother and the benefits to them of ensuring that their relationship with her is
supported. The expert
evidence at the time of the final hearing confirmed that
the children were “equally attached to both parents” (the reasons
for judgment at [78]).
at the time of the final hearing, the evidence before the court was that the
children wanted to continue a week about care
arrangement (the reasons for
judgment at [69] and [75]) and Christie J placed significant weight upon those
views (the reasons for
judgment at [78]). Given the age of the children, the
extent to which their views and preferences about their living arrangements
have changed is important (along with factors which may have influenced any such
change) and would be given substantial weight
in proceedings about their care.
Ultimately, those matters (and the extent of any change to their views) will
require further investigation.
proceedings are by nature abridged and this matter came before the court with
some urgency. Clearly, greater clarity about
some of the matters summarised
above may be gained if additional evidence is obtained in the future conduct of
the matter. There
are inherent fact-finding limitations in interim proceedings.
That does not mean however that simply because material facts have
been put in
issue, the contested evidence must or should be ignored, particularly in
circumstances where that material may have significant
bearing on what orders
ought to promote the children’s best interests (
Deiter & Deiter
[2011] FamCAFC 82).
considering what parenting orders I am to make; I am to have regard to the best
interests of the children as the paramount consideration
(s 60CA of the Act).
Section 60CC of the Act sets out the matters to which the court is to have
regard in determining what is in
the best interests of the children.
non-hierarchical factors provide me with a framework to consider the unique
circumstances of this parenting matter, while placing
the best interests of the
children at the forefront of my decision-making. In determining the issues
before the court, I have had
regard to each consideration prescribed by s 60CC
of the Act.
circumstances where the care arrangements provided for in the final parenting
orders have broken down (certainly for the two older
children) and where other
aspects of their care as provided for in those orders have been obstructed, I am
persuaded that it is necessary
to discharge certain of those orders and replace
them with other orders.
children are not presently spending time with the mother. There is some
evidence that this change reflects the views of the older
two children
(certainly of Y who returned to the father’s care in circumstances of some
distress in May 2025). However, Z
is 10 years old and there is no evidence to
suggest he does not wish to spend time with his mother (and given his age, such
would be relevant but unlikely to be determinative). I am not persuaded
that there should be no time enjoyed between the children
and the mother pending
further investigation or order. I am particularly conscious that as recently as
24 February 2025, Christie
J recognised the many benefits to the children of
their continuing relationship with the mother and ordered the continuation of
week about live with arrangements.
am mindful of the care to be taken in undertaking a risk assessment,
particularly in the context of an urgent interim hearing.
While findings in
disputed interim proceedings “should be couched with great
circumspection” (
Eaby & Speelman
(2015) FLC 093-654), that does
not mean that disputed facts are to be disregarded for reliance only upon agreed
facts. The majority
of the Full Court (Boland and Thackray JJ) observed
[2010] FamCAFC 13
... Apart from relying upon the uncontroversial or agreed facts, a judge will
sometimes have little alternative than to weigh the
probabilities of competing
claims and the likely impact on children in the event that a controversial
assertion is acted upon or
rejected. It is not always feasible when dealing with
the immediate welfare of children simply to ignore an assertion because its
accuracy has been put in issue.
Isles & Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
(2022) FLC 94-092
”), the Full Court cited with approval the observations of
Austin J in
& Fitzwater
[2019] FamCAFC 251
(2019) 60 Fam LR 212
explains as follows:
assessment of risk is a predictive exercise and while it is, naturally enough,
liable to be influenced by factual findings about
past events, the contemplation
of risk entails the foresight of
harm. It is an oddity to expect
that the mere
possibility
of future harm can or should be proven as a
probability
, as has been implied before (
Potter and Potter
[2007] FamCA 350
, [129]). Risks of harm must be heeded even if they are
improbable eventualities.
the usual course of undertaking the risk assessment, the court is to identify
the contended risk event, assess the likelihood of
it occurring, and then
consider the magnitude of harm which might follow if the risk event does occur.
In that context, the consideration
becomes whether, in light of those matters,
the risk of harm is acceptable or not (Tree J in
Chiles & Petrenko
[2024] FedCFamC1A 112
Isles & Nelissen
father submits that the mother presents
to the children but his
primary solution to that risk assessment was to entirely suspend time. If the
children spending unsupervised
time with the mother created risk for them (that
her affect and mental health or general functioning might be a risk of emotional
or psychological harm), which the father argued was unacceptable, then,
consideration of risk mitigation ought to then be undertaken
(noting the very
clear benefits to the children of their relationship with the mother, as found
by Christie J in the reasons for
judgment). In that context, the father
accepted that implementation of professional supervision would act to mitigate
(and this became, in effect, his secondary position). The father
submitted that if supervised time was to occur, the mother should
bear the costs
of such and that she had resources available to her as consequence of final
property orders made in February 2025.
There was no evidence before the court
as to the availability of professional supervision services including as to wait
is a balancing exercise. I am reluctant to make an order which may create
barriers to the mother continuing to spend time with
the children, with the
consequence that the time does not occur.
an interim hearing, when the hearing is by necessity an abridged process and
where findings of fact as to disputed matters are
not readily available, I am to
have regard to matters which are not controversial and, or, evidence from
independent sources (including
in this instance, the medical providers).
Significant in this exercise are the findings made in February 2025 by Christie
J, particularly
as to the benefits to the children of their relationship with
both parents. Challenging aspects of the mother’s functioning
by the court at that time and were considered.
light of the matters that I have explored above, I decline to make the orders
sought by the mother. The evidence does not support
the children living with
the mother for more time than that of the father, nor does it support the mother
holding sole decision-making
responsibility for the children. I am persuaded
that the recent events addressed previously in this judgment, also support the
conclusion that the current arrangement (of a week about living arrangement)
should be suspended, to enable further evidence to be
particularly from a Court Child Expert. Recent events have already had an
adverse impact on the children (including
distressing engagement with the
mother, for Y, and a disruption to the medical care to be provided to Z).
am also not persuaded that the best interests of the children will be met by
making the orders sought by the father (in his oral
application) to suspend all
time between the children and the mother, nor (his alternative position) to
impose supervision of the
mother’s care of the children.
the court is required to consider what arrangements would promote the safety of
the children from being subjected to, or exposed
to, family violence, abuse,
neglect or other harm (s 60CC(2)(a)) – which includes risk of
psychological and emotional harm
– the absolute protection derived from an
order for no time creates other risks, including the risk of loss of the many
of the children’s relationship with the mother. Similarly, I am
not persuaded that supervision of the mother’s time
with the children is
an appropriate response to the identified risk, especially when that application
was made at the last minute
and where the court has no evidence about the
logistics of that outcome. The consequence of that may be in fact that the
do no spend time with the mother.
accept however, that the evidence does suggest that there may have been some
deterioration in the mother’s health and functioning
and I do have some
concerns, currently, as to her capacity to provide for the developmental,
psychological and emotional needs of
the children (s 60CC(2)(c)). At this
preliminary stage, until further evidence about this is obtained, it is in the
best interests
of the children to proceed with some caution.
will make orders as previously proposed by the father in his application, for
the children to have specific day time periods of
care with the mother (as set
out in his Initiating Application at paragraph 5 of the interlocutory orders he
sought). I will make
orders that recognise that the older children will spend
time with the mother, subject to their views, giving due recognition to
outcome will give the children the opportunity to maintain weekly connection
with the mother (and the benefits they derive from
such, consistent with s
60CC(2)(e) and as found by Christie J), without the mother being responsible for
their extended care including
school attendance (the evidence about which is
presently disputed but which, if established, adds to the vulnerability of the
in the mother’s care). It also will enable the father to take
necessary steps to restore engagement with the medical providers.
ordering daytime care only, the father’s role in making decisions about
the medical care of the children will be protected
and the children will receive
the benefit of consistent application of medication – the father will
attend to decisions about
particular medication and prescribed dosage, for the
children, as applicable, before they spend time with the mother.
frequency of the time proposed will ensure that the children are spending time
with the mother each week with the benefits to
them of such – this will
provide a secure and beneficial foundation for future care arrangements, which
may include the restoration
of a shared care arrangement or the mother providing
substantial care of the children.
identify however that there may be additional risks for the children in having
overnight time with the mother at this time –
the events relating to Y and
the mother’s response to that and her failure to frankly advise the father
of her own vulnerabilities
at that time, weigh against the prospect of
continuing overnight care at this time. Some of the mother’s more recent
may be suggestive of a deterioration in her mental health functioning
and until those matters are explored further (and the mother
has an opportunity
to place evidence before the court about this) a cautious and protective
approach to the spend time arrangements
for the children is appropriate. I am
also mindful that the older children may elect not to spend time with the
mother, and this
may create a situation where only Z, at 10 years of age, is
spending time with the mother without the benefit of the support and
reassurance
of his older siblings. Again, caution is warranted in that circumstance.
will order the re-appointment of the Independent Children’s Lawyer.
Noting the age of the children, this will aid in ensuring
that the views of the
children are obtained and placed before the court appropriately.
father’s counsel submitted that the cost of re-engaging a single expert,
on a private basis, was not supported by the father.
I have regard to the Cost
Notice filed on behalf of the father and recognise the extraordinary expenditure
which has occurred in
these proceedings to date. I take into account that the
father is meeting all of the costs of the children’s care with only
child support being paid.
father proposed that a Court Child Expert be appointed and that a Child Impact
Report be obtained. I accept, with some reluctance,
that this is a necessary
additional step, including to assist in obtaining evidence as to the views of
the children and to make recommendations
as to any further inquiries to be made.
My reluctance is founded on the extent to which these children have already been
with experts (medical and otherwise) and the risk that in this further
process, the children are made even more acutely aware of
the ongoing litigation
and conflict between their parents.
is also the possibility that with the re-appointment of the Independent
Children’s Lawyer, and after obtaining a Child
Impact Report, further
discussions and dispute resolution between the parties may occur. That outcome
would be consistent with the
overarching purpose and the Central Practice
Direction. Dispute resolution was not explored prior to the commencement of
of litigation, given the urgency as identified by the father.
am also persuaded that it is necessary to change the orders about the management
of the children’s health. I accept the father’s
evidence about the
disruption of Z’s therapy, the cancellation of the planned diagnostic
procedure, and the risk of disturbance
of other ongoing therapeutic
relationships intended to benefit the children. Absent further orders, I am
concerned that the father’s
capacity to meet the developmental,
psychological and emotional needs of the children (s 60CC(2)(d)) will be
compromised. I will
discharge certain of the orders dealing with the medical
care of the children. The evidence presently before the court satisfies
without further intervention, the mother will continue her pursuit of outcomes
for the children which are consistent with
her views and that such will disrupt
the optimal care of the children. The mother’s conduct since the making
of the final
parenting orders is suggestive that she cannot presently support
taking a secondary role to the father in these matters.
am persuaded the mother ought to be restrained from contacting and, or,
communicating with the medical and therapeutic providers
for the children. I
will order that she may have contact with them, only to the extent such is
directed or invited by the provider.
The recent events make clear that the
restraint is necessary as the mother’s conduct has already caused
disruption and there
is a real risk that the children’s care will continue
to be disrupted absent a restraint upon the mother. The evidence provides
sufficient foundation to predict the risk to these children if the mother
continues to engage as she has – doctors have already
cancelled procedures
and refused to continue to assist the family, as a direct consequence of their
experiences of the mother’s
engagement.
father argued against an order which would require him to provide the mother
with information about the children’s medical
and therapeutic care. It
was submitted that such might result in further dispute and conflict between the
parties as the mother
may respond in ways that were unproductive. In
circumstances where Christie J found that “both parents are equal to the
of providing for the children’s needs and their emotional
wellbeing” (the reasons for judgment at [103]) and that both
“involved, diligent and curious about the children’s medical
treatment” (the reasons for judgment at [117]),
it is important that the
mother remains connected to the care of the children, in a real manner, while
these matters are the subject
of further investigation. On that basis, I will
order the father to provide the mother with written updates, on a fortnightly
This is particularly important and in the best interests of
the children where I
am also restraining the mother from directly communicating with the
children’s medical providers and therapists.
The order I will make, will
not require the father to engage in further communication with the mother after
he has provided the
fortnightly update – the extent to which he elects to
do so will be a matter for him.
have made certain observations about aspects of the mother’s engagement,
and her health and functioning. In the adjourned
period, the mother will have
an opportunity to consider these observations and to obtain particular evidence
choose to do so.
the father sought in his application to discharge Order 7 of the final parenting
orders (relating to the children’s education),
his counsel indicated that
such an order was not pressed. I propose to only discharge those of the final
parenting orders which are
necessary to ensure the children are able to access
medical and therapeutic care, and that the father is able to make decisions
such, absent objection or challenge by the mother.
decline to discharge Order 8 to the extent that there are other long-term
decisions to be made by the parties, pending any further
hearing of the matter.
There is no evidence before me currently which makes clear why the mother should
not join with the father
in making those decisions. Order 9 of the final
parenting orders remains appropriate at this time and does not need to be varied
or discharged.
discharge Order 10 in circumstances where the consultation process is no longer
workable or constructive to the best interests of
the children. While the
father sought the discharge of Order 11, I am not persuaded that such needs to
occur – the mother
has a continuing interest in understanding arrangements
for the care of the children and the evidence does not persuade me that she
should not have this information. Order 12 remains appropriate, for similar
will discharge Order 13 as the medical and therapeutic processes for these
children have been disrupted as a result of aspects of
the mother’s
engagement. Instead, I will make an order restraining the mother from
providers and, or, therapists
unless they invite her to do so.
the father sought the discharge of Order 14, I will not do so. Those mutual
restraints remain appropriate and are protective
of the best interests of the
18 and 19 relate to the provision of particular therapy for Z. That process was
commenced by the father, with a different clinic,
as a result of a lack of
availability of the named clinic. I will vary Orders 18 and 19 to make clear
that the therapy will be conducted
by the named clinic or such other clinic as
the father selects, given he is the parent who will continue to manage this
process (that
is, it will not be necessary for the father to secure the
mother’s written agreement to a particular clinic). It is still
appropriate that the clinic has the contact details for the mother such that
they may elect to engage with her in the future.
decline to make orders about the care of the children in the long summer holiday
period in circumstances where the parties and the
court may have the benefit of
the Child Impact Report by that time, allowing the parties an opportunity to
reach agreement about
appropriate holiday arrangements in that context (or, to
the extent required, for such to be ordered by the court). The orders the
father seeks about that holiday period are quite restrictive and there may be
additional and persuasive evidence available in the
future which may weigh
against the extent of the restrictions as currently proposed by the father.
The court will be in a better
position to balance the competing
considerations as to the best interests of the children with the benefit of that
additional evidence
and the submissions of the Independent Children’s
matter will require future management. I will adjourn the matter for case
management hearing following the release of the Child
Impact Report.
I certify that the
preceding one hundred and fourteen (114) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of
the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 11 August 2025
RTF format (664 KB)
Signed PDF/A format