AIX20 v Director General of Security & Ors [2025] HCASJ 26 (27 August 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
AIX20 PLAINTIFF
DIRECTOR GENERAL OF SECURITY &
ORS DEFENDANTS
[2025] HCASJ 26
Date of Judgment: 27 August
M43 of 2025
application for a constitutional or other writ filed on 28 May 2025 be
plaintiff is to pay the first and second defendants' costs of and incidental to
the application.
Representation
E M Nekvapil SC and E A Brumby with J R G
Blaker for the plaintiff (instructed by Victoria Legal Aid)
P D Herzfeld
SC with C M R Ernst for the first and second defendants (instructed by
Australian Government Solicitor)
Submitting appearance for the third
Introduction
plaintiff was detained
in immigration detention for 973 days, from 19
December 2019 until 18 August 2022, after his temporary protection visa was
as a consequence of an adverse security assessment purportedly made
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act 1979
") on the basis that the plaintiff was directly or indirectly a
risk to security. The plaintiff is now pursuing proceedings against
and second defendants, in the Federal Court of Australia ("the main
proceedings"), seeking relief including damages for
negligence in the exercise
of statutory powers and for false imprisonment. In those proceedings, orders
were made for standard discovery
of documents by the parties. The first
defendant, the Director-General of Security, resisted production of certain
discoverable documents
("the confidential documents"), on the ground they were
protected by public interest immunity ("PII").
application for a constitutional or other writ filed 28 May 2025, the plaintiff
now invokes this Court's original jurisdiction
conferred by
Constitution
. The plaintiff seeks a writ of certiorari directed to the third
defendant, the Federal Court of Australia, to quash the decision
of a Full Court
(Murphy, Bromwich and Shariff
which refused the
plaintiff leave to appeal from orders of a single judge of the Federal Court
(Dowling J),
upholding the
first defendant's PII claims and dismissing the plaintiff's application for
production of the confidential documents
under a "restricted counsel
procedure".
The plaintiff
also seeks a writ of mandamus directed to the Federal Court requiring a
differently constituted Full Court to hear
and determine his application for
leave to appeal from the primary judge's orders.
plaintiff invokes this Court's original jurisdiction because, by the combined
operation of
ss 25(2)(a)
(4B)(a) of the
Federal Court of Australia Act
(Cth) ("the FCA Act"), an appeal must not be brought to the High Court
from a judgment of the Federal Court in the exercise of its
Federal Court, remittal would be inappropriate.
plaintiff identified three grounds in support of his application for relief in
this Court, which may be summarised as follows:
(1) the Full Court exceeded its
of the proposed appeal
and, in so doing, made errors of law that appear on the
face of the record; (2) the Full Court erred in failing to find a prima facie
case for the grant of leave because of the significant impact of the primary
judge's decision upon the scope and outcome of the main
proceeding; and (3) the
Full Court erred in failing to give adequate reasons for upholding the PII
claims. The application is supported
by an affidavit of the plaintiff's
solicitor, Walid Babakarkhil, affirmed on 28 May 2025 and a reply filed on 16
first and second defendants opposed the application, arguing that the
application does not fairly reflect the Full Court's reasoning
inconsistent with how the case was run by the plaintiff before the courts
In addition to their response filed on 10 July 2025, those
defendants rely upon an affidavit of Anthony Giugni, an AGS lawyer, affirmed
4 July 2025. The third defendant filed a submitting appearance.
plaintiff informed the Court that he wished to be "heard orally only if and to
the extent that the Court considers that oral
argument might assist the Court in
considering the issues and deciding the application".
The first and
second defendants were content for the matter to be determined on the papers.
Having considered the material filed by
the parties, I do not consider that oral
argument would assist the Court. For the following reasons, the application must
be dismissed.
I have also concluded that it is appropriate to publish these
reasons other than in open
plaintiff is from Iraq and arrived in Australia in October 2012. After a period
spent in immigration detention, the plaintiff
was granted a bridging visa on 13
December 2012. From then he lived in the Australian community on bridging visas
and, from 16 August
2017, on a temporary protection visa.
21 October 2019, the first defendant purported to make an adverse security
assessment concerning the plaintiff ("the first ASA")
on the basis that the
plaintiff was directly or indirectly a risk to security within the meaning of
. The first defendant recommended that the Minister for Home
Affairs cancel the plaintiff's temporary protection visa, which duly
occurred on
5 December 2019 pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
(Cth). The cancellation of that visa led to the plaintiff's detention,
purportedly under
Migration Act
immigration detention for 973 days.
15 July 2020 the first defendant furnished a second adverse security assessment
in respect of the plaintiff ("the second ASA"),
in materially similar terms to
the first ASA. On 15 March 2021, the Independent Reviewer of Adverse Security
Assessments concluded
that the plaintiff was not directly or indirectly a risk
to security; and the second ASA was "not a proportionate response to the
material relied upon by the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation"
("ASIO") and was "not an appropriate outcome" ("the Independent
defendant initially decided not to take any action in response to the
Independent Review.
on 5 August 2022, he made a "non-prejudicial security assessment", which led to
the Minister for Home Affairs revoking the
visa cancellation decision and
granting the plaintiff a bridging visa, and releasing him from detention on 18
August 2022. Since
that time, the plaintiff has been living in the Australian
plaintiff commenced the main proceedings on 15 August 2022, seeking: (1)
declarations that the first and second ASAs and the
decision not to take action
in response to the Independent Review were invalid; (2) damages, including
aggravated damages, for breach
of a duty to take reasonable care in the exercise
of the first defendant's powers and functions under the
as well as for
false imprisonment; and (3) an apology from the first defendant. The first and
second defendants unsuccessfully sought
summary dismissal of the main
proceedings,
consequent application for leave to appeal was
As Mortimer CJ
put it in dismissing the latter
application:
is at stake [in the main proceedings] is scrutiny of exercises of public power
that resulted in the [plaintiff] being deprived
of his liberty for two and a
half years, in circumstances where ultimately the asserted justification for
that deprivation of liberty
was not maintained."
The primary judge's decision to uphold the PII claims
first defendant provided discovery to the plaintiff by serving a list of
documents and an affidavit, accompanied by a bundle
of documents. The
Director-General withheld from production the confidential documents, comprising
1,614 pages. The claims for PII
were supported by two affidavits of the Deputy
Director-General of Security, Michael Keith Noyes. One of those affidavits was
"open" affidavit filed in the main proceedings, the other was a "confidential
affidavit" which was provided only to the Court on
a "read and return
consent orders made on 6 June 2024, the primary judge noted the plaintiff's
intention to contest the PII claims in their entirety
on the basis that the
restricted counsel procedure, as defined in the notation to the consent orders,
"would have the result that
there is no countervailing public interest against
the disclosure and use of the [c]onfidential [i]nformation" in the main
proceedings.
In the affidavit in support of the plaintiff's application to this
Court, the restricted counsel procedure is summarised as
"[I]n addition to the plaintiff’s existing legal
team, security-cleared counsel, Dr James Renwick SC and Ms Sarah Zeleznikow,
would be briefed by the plaintiff on an undertaking to represent the interests
of the plaintiff in those parts of his case requiring
the use of material over
which the Director-General has claimed [PII]. The undertaking would prohibit Dr
Renwick SC and Ms Zeleznikow
from disclosing that material to any person other
than in closed court and subject to suppression or confidentiality orders made
pursuant to [the FCA Act] or other relevant legislation."
a hearing before the primary judge on 2 August 2024, the claims were contested
on the foreshadowed basis. There was no dispute
between the parties about the
principles to be applied in determining the
primary judge's reasons record that he examined each of the confidential
In assessing
their evidentiary value, the primary judge noted that his assessment was
"necessarily broad" since the opposition to
the PII claims was not made by
reference to particular documents, and that the restricted counsel procedure had
the potential to
undermine the value of the documents where there were limits on
the use to which the documents may be
The primary judge
noted the plaintiff's concession that he was able to maintain the main
proceedings without disclosure of the confidential
documents, and that
the documents were "not essential" to the continuance of the main
proceedings.
Leghaei v Director-General of
primary judge reasoned that the first defendant's affidavit evidence ought to be
given "very considerable weight" because courts
are "ill-equipped ... to
evaluate pieces of evidence obtained by
The primary judge
accepted the first defendant's evidence that the confidential documents would
reveal or would tend to reveal ASIO’s
intelligence holdings and sources of
information; ASIO’s investigative and operational methodology; the
identity of ASIO employees;
and ASIO administrative and system
identifiers.
also accepted the first defendant's evidence
is fundamental to the effective operation of ASIO that the following matters be
kept in the strictest possible secrecy: the
specific details of ASIO’s
areas of interests; the identity of the subjects of security interest; the
degree of ASIO’s
ability to obtain intelligence in relation to those
subjects; ASIO’s sources (including human sources); ASIO’s
investigative
techniques; ASIO’s technical capabilities and work methods;
and ASIO’s successes and the information derived from its
successes."
accepted that evidence, his Honour concluded that the restricted counsel
procedure would not be an adequate safeguard against
the risk of inadvertent
disclosure.
The primary
judge also concluded that, regardless of whether the Federal Court has the power
to order the procedure (an issue which
was raised by the first and second
defendants but was unnecessary to decide), he should not exercise the Court's
discretion to implement
it because the procedure would be attended by practical
difficulties and deviated from a bespoke legislative scheme enacted for the
Full Court's decision to refuse leave to appeal
plaintiff sought leave to appeal the primary judge's orders. The Full Court
correctly identified that leave to appeal should
only be granted if the
plaintiff established that: (1) the decision giving rise to the orders is
attended by sufficient doubt to
warrant it being considered by a Full Court;
(2) substantial injustice would result if leave were
The Full Court
inspected the confidential documents in advance of its hearing, with the consent
of the parties.
Honours noted that the plaintiff addressed two proposed grounds of appeal and
considered that neither raised a sufficient doubt
The Full Court
also recorded, and treated as a third proposed ground of appeal, the plaintiff's
"overarching contention" that the
primary judge had reached the wrong conclusion
in upholding the PII
The Full Court's
treatment of the overarching contention is the subject of the application to
this Court.
setting out their reasons for rejecting the overarching contention, the Full
Court said:
"Not only are we not
satisfied that the primary judge’s decision is attended by sufficient
doubt to warrant our consideration,
having ourselves examined the [c]onfidential
[d]ocuments and considered the Noyes confidential affidavit (provided to us
under strict
security arrangements on a read and return basis), as well as the
Noyes open affidavit, we concur in the view that the PII claims
Full Court identified three elements to the overarching
contention.
Firstly, "the
primary judge erroneously focussed upon the public interest in national security
that could be harmed by the disclosure
of the [c]onfidential [d]ocuments in a
general sense and not by reference to the specific marginal risk of disclosure
arising from
the implementation of the [r]estricted [c]ounsel [p]rocedure".
Secondly, the risk of disclosure was marginal because security-cleared
had already examined the confidential documents and they had also been reviewed
by the primary judge and the Full Court.
Thirdly, the primary judge failed to
engage in the balancing exercise by reference to the correct risk calculus,
being the minimal
additional risk of disclosure from the implementation of the
restricted counsel procedure. Thus, as summarised, the argument focussed
attention on the "correct risk calculus" as opposed to the more general question
of whether the primary judge had engaged in the
required balancing
The plaintiff
did not submit that the Full Court had misstated the elements of the overarching
contention.
to the plaintiff's argument, the Full Court considered that the primary judge's
reasons disclosed that he had addressed
the marginal risk of disclosure and
concluded that "the marginal risk of disclosure was outweighed by the gravity of
the impairment
to the public interest in national security notwithstanding the
countervailing interests in the administration of justice having
regard to the
criticality of the [c]onfidential [d]ocuments to the [plaintiff]'s case against
the [first and second
defendants]".
Full Court continued by saying that, having examined both the confidential
documents and both of Mr Noyes' affidavits, "we do
not consider that the primary
judge's conclusion is attended by sufficient doubt and, in fact, we agree with
the conclusion that
Their reasons
were: (1) the risk to the impairment of national security is not limited to the
risk of inadvertent disclosure arising
from disclosure to security-cleared
counsel; (2) the risk also involves an assessment as to the practicalities
involved in the handling
and examination of such material as part of proceedings
before the Full Court, even where orders are made for such proceedings to
in closed court and be subject to suppression orders; (3) the risk is not merely
the prospect of the information being intercepted
or falling into the hands of
"bad actors"; (4) the risk must also be assessed against the prospect that the
fact of such disclosure
may place Australia’s security interests in
jeopardy in respect of the sources of intelligence information both presently
into the future; and (5) "[t]he gravity or consequences of those risks
materialising may, depending on the particular facts and context,
outweigh the
rival public interest in the administration of
the question of injustice if leave to appeal were not granted, their Honours
applicant submitted that refusing to grant leave to appeal would lead to an
extraordinary outcome which would leave the applicant
without access to
documents that are critical to his case and in seeking to hold the
Director-General to account for an alleged infringement
of his civil liberties.
The primary judge was conscious of this fact, as are we. The outcome here is
fact dependent. The upholding
of any claim for PII necessarily weighs in favour
of one aspect of public interest over another. In the present case, it is our
of the facts that the balance weighed in favour of upholding the PII
claim and the primary judge’s decision in this regard
was not attended by
sufficient doubt to warrant the grant of leave to appeal. As we have separately
considered and upheld the claim
for PII, nor is there any relevant injustice in
refusing leave to appeal as the outcome could not have been different."
submission that the confidential documents were critical to the plaintiff's
case, apparently accepted by the Full Court, was
not supported by a finding of
the primary judge. To the contrary, it conflicted with the basis on which the
primary judge had proceeded,
namely that the confidential documents were "not
essential" to the continuance of the proceeding.
the Full Court noted that the question of the Federal Court's power to implement
procedures such as the restricted counsel
procedure, raised by notice of
contention, did not arise if leave to appeal was refused. Therefore, like the
primary judge, the Full
Court did not decide whether the Federal Court would
have power to make orders for the restricted counsel
plaintiff's application for a constitutional or other writ
Introductory observations
The plaintiff submits that the Full Court's summary of the facts is "incomplete
and erroneous in certain respects" and its statement
as to the "thrust" of the
main proceedings misstates the nature and basis of the plaintiff's case as
involving a failure to take
reasonable care in making the first ASA and the
second ASA when in truth it was an argument that three decisions of the first
were made on material that "is and was
as a matter of fact
reliable, credible or probative" (original emphasis). Those complaints are
overstated and are not material to the plaintiff's
contention of jurisdictional
error. The Full Court was plainly aware of the challenge to the validity of the
three decisions, and
of the claim for declaratory relief. In that context, the
Full Court's description of the "thrust" of the main proceeding was not
inapposite.
three grounds advanced by the plaintiff in this Court fail for the reasons set
one states (citations omitted):
"[A]s a step in reasoning for
refusing leave to appeal, the Full Court 'separately considered and upheld' the
Director-General’s
'claim to PII' ... In purporting so to decide, the Full
Court exceeded its jurisdiction under s 24(1A) of the [FCA Act], which was
only to decide the question of leave upon forming an opinion of the merits of
the proposed appeal (and not separately to uphold any
claim). Because the Full
Court refused leave on the premise of that ultra vires decision-making, the Full
Court’s decision
to refuse leave was itself beyond jurisdiction. These
also were errors of law on the face of the record, amenable to correction by
certiorari."
24(1A) of the FCA Act provides that an appeal shall not be brought from an
interlocutory judgment of a single Judge exercising
the original jurisdiction of
the Federal Court unless the Court or a Judge gives leave to appeal (see also s
24(1)(a)). The Full
Court exercised its appellate jurisdiction by refusing leave
make orders determining any appeal.
Court observed:
"[A]ny statement of the matters which would justify
granting leave to appeal must be subject to one important qualification which
applies to all cases. It is this. The court will examine each case and, unless
the circumstances are exceptional, it will not grant
leave if it forms a clear
opinion adverse to the success of the proposed appeal."
statement of principle has never been
matter of an application by the Chief Commissioner of Police (Vic)
observing that an arguable case of error was a necessary, although not a
sufficient condition for the grant of leave, a majority
of this Court
the Court of Appeal concluded, there was 'no basis for the making of the orders
to suppress indefinitely the matters encompassed
by the orders', it was open to
that court to conclude that the application for leave to appeal should fail. A
conclusion that an
order from which leave to appeal is sought is plainly right
does not constitute some impermissible foray into issues that would arise
on a grant of leave and the hearing of an appeal. It is no more than an emphatic
rejection of one aspect of the argument that
must be made in support of a grant
of leave." (citations omitted)
was within the Full Court's jurisdiction to have regard to the merits of the
proposed ground of appeal in such manner as it considered
appropriate in the
circumstances.
Court's reasons show that their Honours formed "a clear view adverse to the
success of the proposed
make a binding decision on the question
of whether the confidential documents
are protected by PII, and they did not purport to do so by their
plaintiff makes an additional complaint concerning the Full Court's finding that
there was no relevant injustice in refusing
leave to appeal "as the outcome
could not have been
different".
That finding
suggests that the Full Court went further than necessary to decide the relevant
question about injustice which is concerned
with the effect of refusing leave
"supposing the decision to have been
Even so, in the
absence of doubt as to the correctness of the primary judge's decision, the
immaterial.
the contention that there is error on the face of the record is misconceived.
The relevant error is said to be the failure
to make orders reflecting a grant
of leave and dismissal of the plaintiff's appeal. There is no basis for
concluding that there was
any such failure where the Full Court refused to grant
leave to appeal.
The plaintiff's second ground is:
"[T]he Full Court did not satisfy
the following condition on its jurisdiction to decide the question of leave.
Namely, that it decide
that question on the basis that there was a prima facie
case for the grant of leave because the interlocutory decision sought to
appealed has a significant impact upon the scope and outcome of the
proceedings."
plaintiff relies upon the well-established principle that an interlocutory order
having the practical effect of finally determining
the rights of the parties,
though interlocutory in form, gives rise to a prima facie case for granting
leave to appeal.
that principle does not apply in this case. Before the primary judge, the
plaintiff did not argue that, if the PII claims
were upheld, he would be
required to discontinue the main
proceedings.
contrary, the plaintiff accepted that he was able to maintain his proceeding
without disclosure of the
application to this Court, the plaintiff now contends that the primary judge's
decision "in practical effect may dispose of
the plaintiff's claim of
negligence".
plaintiff's broader contention, that the "significant impact" of an
interlocutory order upon the scope and outcome of the proceedings
prima facie case for the grant of leave to appeal is not supported by authority
and must, in any event, yield to a finding
that the proposed appeal lacks
prospects. It was the plaintiff's lack of prospects that was decisive in the
Full Court's refusal
to grant leave to appeal.
Ground three
The plaintiff's final ground is that, in upholding the PII claims, the Full
Court committed jurisdictional error by failing to give
adequate reasons.
plaintiff does not contest the adequacy of the Full Court's reasons concerning
the first two proposed grounds of appeal, nor
the Full Court's reasons for
rejecting the plaintiff's contention that the primary judge erred in his
identification of the "correct
risk calculus". The contention is that the Full
Court failed to evaluate the PII claims "distributively", in other words their
did not evidence engagement in the balancing exercise at the appropriate
level for each individual document or class of documents.
requirement to give adequate reasons in this case must be understood in the
context that the Full Court was deciding an application
for leave to appeal. It
was sufficient for the Full Court to give reasons that explained adequately why
the decision of the primary
judge was not attended by sufficient doubt to
warrant a grant of leave, notwithstanding the Court's implicit acceptance that
would result, supposing the decision to have been wrong, because the
relevant documents were critical to the plaintiff's case.
The Full Court should not have gone further, by stating that there was no
relevant injustice in refusing leave to appeal because
their Honours had
"separately considered and upheld the claim" for
The Court did not
give reasons to explain that statement. However, because the Full Court did not
uphold the claim except by refusing
leave to appeal, the failure to give reasons
did not involve jurisdictional error.
Disposition
plaintiff's application for a constitutional or other writ filed on 28 May 2025
is dismissed with
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38.
AIX20 v Director-General of
Security (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1130.
A procedure described by the Full
Court at [1] as "bear[ing] some resemblance to that proposed by the defendants
Al Rawi v Security Service
[2011] UKSC 34
[2012] 1 AC 531".
High Court Rules 2004
(Cth), r 25.09.2.
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2023] FCA 1344
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2023] FCA 1344
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2023] FCA 1344
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2023] FCA 1344.
Director-General of Security v
[2024] FCA 88.
Director-General of Security
[2024] FCA 88
AIX20 v Director-General of
Security (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1130
AIX20 v Director-General of
Security (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1130
AIX20 v Director-General of
Security (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1130
AIX20 v Director-General of
Security (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1130
AIX20 v Director-General of
Security (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1130
[2007] FCAFC 37
(2007) 241 ALR 141.
AIX20 v Director-General of
Security (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1130
, [35]. See also
(1984)154 CLR 404 at
AIX20 v Director-General of
Security (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1130
AIX20 v Director-General of
Security (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1130
AIX20 v Director-General of
Security (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1130
AIX20 v Director-General of
Security (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1130
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
Décor Corporation Pty Ltd
v Dart Industries Inc
(1991) 33 FCR 397
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
, [30], [37].
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
Thomas Borthwick & Sons
(Pacific Holdings) Ltd v Trade Practices Commission
(1988) 18 FCR 424 at
431, cited in
[2020] HCA 38
(2020) 94 ALJR 1014
[1936] HCA 67
(1936) 56 CLR 221
Contender 1 Ltd v LEP
International Pty Ltd
[1988] HCA 60
(1988) 63 ALJR 26
[1988] HCA 60
McGraw-Hill Financial, Inc v Mitsub Pty Ltd
(2017) 347 ALR 18
[2005] HCA 18
(2005) 79 ALJR 881
[2005] HCA 18
214 ALR 422
at 428-429.
Tu'uta Katoa v Minister
for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2022] HCA 28
(2022) 276 CLR 579
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
Ex parte Bucknell
[1936] HCA 67
(1936) 56 CLR
North Ganalanja
Aboriginal Corporation v Queensland
(1996)185 CLR 595 at 642-643.
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
Décor Corporation Pty
Ltd v Dart Industries Inc
(1991) 33 FCR 397
Melbourne City Investments
Pty Ltd v Treasury Wine Estates Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 98
(2017) 252 FCR 1
Ex parte Bucknell
[1936] HCA 67
(1936) 56 CLR 221
AIX20 v Director-General
of Security (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1130
AIX20 v Director-General of
Security (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1130
AIX20 v Director-General of
[2025] FCAFC 38
RTF format (347 KB)
Signed PDF/A format