Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association [2024] FWCD 1064 (12 December 2024)
[2024] FWCD 1064
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
—Alteration of other rules of organisation
Distributive and Allied Employees Association
(R2024/167)
CHRIS ENRIGHT
MELBOURNE, 12 DECEMBER 2024
Alteration of other rules of organisation.
On 4 November 2024 the Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees
Association (SDAEA) lodged with the Fair Work Commission (the Commission)
notice and declaration setting out particulars of alterations to its rules.
Further information in support of the alterations was
provided on 15 and 22
November 2024.
The SDAEA seeks certification of the alterations under
section 159
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
On the information contained in the notice, declaration and
additional information supplied, I am satisfied the alterations have been
under the rules of the organisation.
The particulars set out alterations to
– Membership and
– Branches.
The alterations have been made to clarify the rules in relation to
membership of branches. The changes streamline the process for
determining
membership within certain branches by removing the discretion afforded to the
National Council and National Executive.
As a result, all members based in the
Australian Capital Territory will join the New South Wales Branch, and all
members in the Northern
Territory will become members of the South Australian
Branch (renamed as the ‘South Australian and Northern Territory
These alterations complement amendments by the SDAEA South Australian
Branch which are currently before the Commission for
consideration.
alterations will change the branch name from ‘South Australian
Branch’ to ‘South Australian and Northern
Territory Branch’
within the separate branch rules.
also remove the provisions outlining certain
duties of the National Secretary-Treasurer to bring proceedings on behalf of the
organisation
with respect to matters pertaining to employment or disputes
arising under any industrial instruments in the Territories. These duties
in effect, already overseen at the branch level of the organisation within both
the New South Wales and South Australian and
Northern Territory Branches, which
encompass members located in the Australian Capital Territory and Northern
In my opinion, the alterations comply with and are not contrary to
the Act, the
Fair Work Act 2009
, modern awards and enterprise agreements,
are not otherwise contrary to law and were made under the rules of the
organisation. I
certify accordingly under
subsection 159(1)
of the Act.
DELEGATE OF THE GENERAL MANAGER
See for instance
of SDAEA New South Wales Branch rules, and Rules 16.5.6 and
18.2.2 of the SDAEA South Australian and Northern Territory Branch rules.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (496 KB)
Signed PDF/A format