Dindima Wines Pty Ltd v Nick Bulleid [2008] ATMOGI 2 (2 July 2008)
AUSTRALIAN WINE AND BRANDY CORPORATION ACT 1980
Objection to
determination of geographical indication
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE
REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS, WITH REASONS
Re: Objection
by Dindima Wines Pty Ltd to determination of the
– applied for by Nick
Terry Williams
REPRESENTATION:
Objector: Written submissions only
Applicant: Written
submissions only
2008 ATMO GI 2
AWBC Act, s 40RB. No trade mark rights,
determination to proceed.
Australian Wine and Brandy Corporation Act 1980
(the AWBC Act)
established the Geographical Indications Committee (GIC), giving it the power to
determine, and consequently protect
under the AWBC Act, Geographical Indications
(GIs) for wines. As part of that process, the Registrar of Trade Marks has
involvement, to which I will shortly come.
Bulleid, on behalf of a group of others, has followed the necessary process for
making an application for the GI ORANGE FOOTHILLS.
The GIC has publicly
advertised this application, for the purposes of section 40RB of the AWBC Act.
Dindima Wines Pty Ltd (Dindima)
and Cargo Road Wines Pty Ltd have both,
separately, filed notices objecting to the determination, as also provided for
Cargo Road Wines Pty Ltd, however, failed to file or serve a copy of
any evidence supporting its objection. Per reg 42 of the AWBC
Regulations the
GIC has already been informed that the objection by Cargo Road Wines Pty Ltd is
not made out. I turn, in this decision,
to the objection by Dindima.
and the applicant have both filed and served evidence to support their
positions. Both sides have had the opportunity to
be heard but are content to
have the matter decided on the written record. I was assigned to do this, under
delegation from the
Registrar of Trade Marks.
ground of objection was nominated in the notice of objection. However, there
was no reason to infer that the objection was not
based on one of the allowable
grounds under s 40RB of the AWBC Act. Dindima has since confirmed that the
ground on which it relies
is “Section 40RB(4)b”. This, however, is
part of s 40 RB(4), and functions as part of that whole, which
Trade mark not registered
(4) If a person claims to have trade mark rights in
a trade mark that
is not registered
, the person may
object to the determination of a proposed GI on one of the following
(i) the trade mark consists of or contains a word or expression; and
(ii) the proposed GI is
likely to cause confusion with that word or
expression; and
(iii) the person has trade mark rights in that word or expression; and
(iv) the rights were acquired through use in good faith.
objects to the determination of ORANGE FOOTHILLS because it is both visually
close to, and indeed contains, an existing GI,
ORANGE. Dindima has succinctly
summarised its position. I have reproduced this in full as Attachment B with my
own observations
in brackets. I have full sympathy for Dindima’s strong
objection on that basis but, to come to the point, it does not fit
scope of this part of the legislation, and for good
Objection considered
AWBC Act contains an objection process that allows for objections based on
prior-existing trade mark rights. The objection process
under that provision is
intended for the recognition and protection of trade mark rights. It does not
go beyond this and is not
a process for the administration of consumer
protection in general by the avoidance of confusion between GIs, or for the
of business interests that involve things other than trade mark
rights. The adoption of GIs is otherwise a matter for the careful
deliberation
of the GIC under sections 40S to
, but the Registrar of Trade
Marks plays no part in that process. Her role is separate, and extends only to
the determination of
objections such as the present (section 40RB to 40RE, with
the Federal Court having jurisdiction on appeal, section 40RF).
onus is on Dindima to establish a ground of objection. Unless it can do so, it
would not be the responsibility of the applicant
to justify the determination of
the GI for the purposes of sections 40 RB to RF.
Dindima has the right to use Orange on its labels as a descriptor in relation to
wines that meet the requirement for the
use of the GI in question. Dindima, or
a predecessor in its business, has done so since 1996. The NSW government and
others have
collectively funded the BRAND ORANGE marketing campaign to
“raise the profile of Orange wine among the wine-buying public”.
Thus, as Dindima notes, any other maker of wines that originate in the area
defined by the GI would have the same right.
is at issue, here and now, depends firstly on the existence of trade mark rights
accruing to Dindima in respect of the word Orange.
Dindima’s ground can
succeed only if it can establish that, in terms of sub-para (iii) above,
“the person has trade
mark rights in that word or expression.”
Dindima is, unfortunately, mistaken about the scope of the rights that it has
in respect of its usage of the word Orange.
evidence sets out prior conflicts between the existence of the GI ORANGE and the
use (by others) of trade marks incorporating
the word ORANGE. That sheds no
light at all on the existence of any trade mark right Dindima may have in
ORANGE. In any case, the
view advocated by Dindima has been overtaken by
history. It is simply not the case that the existence of ORANGE as a GI would
necessarily
preclude the use of trade marks which contain that word but are used
on wines not originating from the GI. I refer, here, to the
decision of Hearing
Officer Thompson in relation to the trade mark FEET FIRST, found not to be in
conflict with FIRST, a protected
Appn by Ross & Veronica
[2005] ATMO 69.
things, however, are not particularly relevant to the present objection.
Dindima can have acquired trade mark rights in ORANGE
only if ORANGE has become
a trade mark. Section 4A of the AWBC Act sets out definitions for terms as
diverse as “wine grapes”
and “industry”. It imports the
relevant definition of “trade mark” from the
Trade Marks Act
of the latter reads, my emphasis:
trade mark?
A trade mark is a sign used, or intended to be used
distinguish
goods or services dealt with or provided in the course of
trade by a person
from goods or services so dealt with or provided by any
other person
Note: For sign see
heart of Dindima’s case would require that it had used the word Orange to
distinguish its goods from other wines, including
those that originate in the
Orange GI. This has not been the case. Dindima uses Orange on its labels for
precisely the same purpose
as its predecessor, see attachment A. However, this
is also the same way the term would be used on any other wine originating within
the ORANGE GI. The use of “Orange” in that way cannot distinguish
Dindima’s wines from those of others entitled
to use ORANGE as a GI. By
definition, therefore, that use is not trade mark use. Accordingly, and almost
paradoxically, while Dindima
may have used “Orange” on its labels,
and may continue to do so, it has no trade mark rights in that term because it
is not a trade mark.
objection has therefore not been established. I intend, after the end of the
appeal period, to inform the Presiding
Member of the GIC accordingly. Further
consideration of this GI would then remain the responsibility of the GIC under
section 40SA
and following.
E. Williams
Hearing Officer
Attachment A
Attachment B –Summary of Dindima’s objection.
The reasons for
the decision to choose the name Orange Foothills have not been satisfactorily
justified. In fact the proposers contradict
their own criteria for choosing a
name. It fails all their tests or "ideals".
[The AWBC Act does
not require such an explanation. Whatever the selection criteria applied by the
applicant, it is the end result
that counts. The suitability of the present GI
for use is a matter for the GIC, save as regards to the existence of trade mark
accruing to Dindima.]
The marketing
considerations offered, with the exception of the issue of "conflict with a
current GI name", have no relevance to the
AWBC Act as it
[See above]
It has not been
established that the words "Orange Foothills" have been in the public domain
since 19th November 2002.
Here Dindima refers to dissatisfaction
with the process of disclosing, to what it sees as adversely affected parties,
the intention
to create a GI of ORANGE FOOTHILLS.
The examples of
current GI's presented do not provide precedents for the same name to be used
for GI's within a Zone, as is alleged.
This again is a matter
between the GIC and the applicant.
acknowledged that there would be opposition to the use of the word "Orange" from
those in the Orange GI.
The applicants
are attempting to infringe the rights already in existence of growers and
winemakers in the Orange GI and to trade
on their existing reputation.
There is a lack
of understanding that the GI name used for a wine is defined strictly by the
AWBC Act not by local marketing practices.
It would not be
"mutually beneficial" for the two Regions to share the name Orange. It would
confuse and undermine the public perception
of the Orange GI's uniqueness.
The AWBC Act and
the Australia-EU Agreement are premised on each GI as defined and registered
being distinctly different from any
other GI. Having similar names undermines
that premise.
[These issues are not a concern of the present
process, for reasons that I have already set out in my decision.]
Dindima has applied to register
the trade mark ORANGE FOOTHILLS. The application lapsed after the examiner of
trade marks reiterated
the conclusion that:
“The definition of FOOTHILLS is hilly land on the lower slope of
mountains. Thus ORANGE FOOTHILLS would naturally refer to
this type of feature
near ORANGE which is a wine growing and agricultural region. Thus your trade
mark lacks the capacity to distinguish
because it is one that other traders
should be able to use in connection with goods similar to yours”.
my purposes here, there is no evidence that Dindima has ever used ORANGE
FOOTHILLS as a trade mark.
Thus, for instance, section 40T(3)(b) allows the GIC to determine a different
name for the GI. The determination is subject to public
consultation under s
40V. Likewise, s 40Y allows review, in the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, of
the determination the GIC.
RTF format (2.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format