Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice & Salo [2025] FedCFamC1F 567 (19 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Secretary, Department of Communities and
Justice & Salo
[2025] FedCFamC1F 567
File number:
SYC 2260 of 2025
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– INTERNATIONAL CHILD
ABDUCTION – Where the parents and children were habitually resident in the
United Kingdom –
Where the mother retained the children in Australia
following a Christmas holiday – Where jurisdictional requirements under
Family Law (Child Abduction Convention) Regulations 1986
were satisfied – Where the mother opposed return on the
basis of grave risk of harm and intolerable situation – Where
she alleged
coercive control, family violence, financial abuse and risks arising from the
father’s health – Where the
mother is electing not to return to the
United Kingdom – Where the grave risk exception is not established
made for the return of the children to the United Kingdom.
Legislation:
Family Law (Child Abduction Convention)
Regulations 1986
Cases cited:
DP v. Commonwealth Central Authority; JLM v.
Director–General, NSW Department of Community Services
(2001) 206 CLR
Re F: Litigants in Person Guidelines
[2001] FamCA 348
(2001) FLC 93-072
Wolford & Attorney–General’s Department
FamCAFC 197
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Ms Milivojevic
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Ms McMullen
Self-represented Respondent:
SYC 2260 of 2025
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF COMMUNITIES &
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
DATE OF ORDER:
UPON THE UNDERTAKING GIVEN TO THIS COURT BY THE FATHER MR C
that he will not instigate or support any criminal prosecution against the
in relation to child abduction
THE COURT ORDERS
to compliance with Order 2 of these orders, the children,
(“the children”) be returned to
the United Kingdom pursuant to the
Family Law (Child Abduction Convention)
Regulations 1986
return of the children to the United Kingdom is conditional upon the requesting
parent, Mr C of City B (“the father”),
England doing all acts and
things necessary to effect the following and the following being
(a) purchasing three flight tickets on the same flight, for the children and for
himself, from Sydney Airport, Sydney NSW to the
United Kingdom, with such flight
to depart on or before 26 August 2025, or other date as agreed by the applicant
(noting the England
school term commences in the week of 1 September 2025);
(b) providing the applicant with a copy of the flight tickets booked in
compliance with Order 2(a).
upon becoming aware of the date of the flight details in Order 2(a) the father
inform the respondent mother (“the
mother”) of the date, time and
location at which the children are to be presented, for handover into the care
of the father.
mother ensure the children and the children’s clothes, medication and
other belongings, are presented on the time and date,
and at the location as
advised by the applicant in accordance with Order 3.
father or his nominee authorised in writing is permitted to collect the
children’s passports from the applicant at the Suburb
D Community Service
Centre, at E Street, Suburb D immediately upon receipt of a sealed copy of this
Order. The father is at liberty
to hold the children’s passports in his
possession and use them to facilitate the children’s travel to the United
the children’s departure from Australia for return to the United Kingdom,
the mother be restrained and an injunction
issued restraining her
(a) causing or permitting or suffering the children or either of them to be
removed from the Commonwealth of Australia and in this
regard all officers of
the Australian Federal Police be directed to enforce, if required, the
provisions of such Order;
(b) cancelling any passport held by the children or applying for any further or
other passport or passports for the children;
(c) causing or permitting or suffering the children or either of them to reside
anywhere other than her present residential address
or any other residence at
which the applicant has agreed that the said children may reside.
mother be and is hereby restrained from being at or within 5 kilometres of
Sydney Airport, from the date on which handover of
the children occurs until the
date on which she receives written confirmation that the children have departed
Australia in accordance
with Order 11.
6 of these orders remain in force until the letter (“the letter”)
from the applicant is received by the Australian
Federal Police advising of the
travel arrangements made for the children’s return to the United
so far as Order 3 of the orders made on 28 March 2025 relates to the children
that Order be discharged upon receipt of the letter
from the applicant
IS REQUESTED
that the Australian Federal Police remove the name of the
Airport Watch List upon presentation for boarding the nominated flight to the
United Kingdom on the date nominated for the
said travel nominated in the letter
from the applicant.
so far as Orders 3 and 4 of the orders made 28 March 2025 relate to the mother
they be discharged 24 hours after receipt of the
letter from the applicant
referred to in Order 8,
AND IT IS REQUESTED
the Australian Federal Police
forthwith thereafter remove the name of the mother,
, from the Airport Watch List
applicant is to advise the Registrar of the Federal Circuit and Family Court of
Australia, the mother and the Independent Children’s
Lawyer, in writing,
that the children have departed Australia, within 24 hours of the departure
having occurred.
sealed copy of these orders be provided forthwith to the Marshal of the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of Australia, the Commissioner
of the Federal Police
and the police forces and services of the states and territories of the
Commonwealth of Australia and the Secretary
of the Commonwealth Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Marshal of the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia and the
Commissioner and all federal agents of the Australian Federal
officers of the police forces and services of the states and territories of the
Commonwealth of Australia are requested
and empowered to take all necessary
steps to give effect to these orders.
Independent Children’s Lawyer is to explain these orders to the children,
and, for that purpose, the mother is to facilitate
the children meeting with the
Independent Children’s Lawyer at a time and date as directed by the
Independent Children’s
appointment of the Independent Children's Lawyer is discharged upon compliance
with Order 14.
is reserved to the parties to apply urgently in relation to the implementation
of these Orders.
applications are otherwise dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the Order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
application is brought by the Secretary, Department of Communities and Justice
(“the applicant”) on 26 March 2025
seeking the return of the
children X, born 2013 and Y born 2014 to United Kingdom pursuant to the
provisions of the
Family Law (Child Abduction Convention) Regulations 1986
(Cth) (“the Regulations”).
respondent is the mother of the children.
requesting parent is the father. He lives in the United Kingdom.
children were both born in Sydney and moved with their parents to the United
Kingdom in around early 2018. The parents separated
around 2018 according to the
father and 2019 according to the mother. The parents engaged in parenting
proceedings in the United
Kingdom and orders were made by consent in November
2020 and varied by consent in July 2022. Both sets of orders provided for the
children live in a shared-care arrangement with each of their parents on a
week–about basis.
Additionally,
and also by consent both sets of orders provided for the father to retain the
children’s passports, and to provide
them to the mother for the purposes
of travelling abroad. It is common ground that after the Covid pandemic, there
were occasions
the mother travelled with the children around Europe for the
purposes of holidays.
is common ground that the mother travelled with the children to Australia by
agreement, leaving the United Kingdom on 22 December
2024, for a holiday. The
agreement was that the mother would return with the children on 6 January 2025.
However, the mother reneged
on that agreement and has retained the children in
Australia since that time.
application for return was filed on 26 March 2025.
mother appeared on her own behalf, having determined not to engage legal
representation despite having had the opportunity to
do so. In accordance with
Re F: Litigants in Person Guidelines
[2001] FamCA 348
(2001) FLC 93-072
the mother was
given a detailed explanation as to how the proceedings would be conducted and
provided with the opportunity to challenge
the father’s evidence by way of
cross examination.
DOCUMENTS RELIED UPON BY THE PARTIES
applicant relied upon the following documents:
(a) Form 2 Application filed 26 March 2025;
(b) affidavit of Miriam Milivojevic filed 11 August 2025
(c) outline of case document filed 11 August 2025.
mother relied upon the following documents:
(a) Form 2A Cross Application filed 5 June 2025;
(b) affidavit of the mother filed 14 April 2025;
(c) affidavit of Ms F filed 22 March 2025;
(d) statement of the mother dated 26 March 2025; and
(e) statement of the mother dated 27 July 2025.
Independent Children's Lawyer relied on the
Regulation 26
report dated 18 June
of the exhibits to the affidavits was admitted into evidence. In addition, a
(a) WhatsApp messages between Ms Salo and Mr C dated 16 July, 8 August and 10
August 2025;
(b) an email from Mr J (AFP) 13 August 2025;
(c) a letter from G Clinic dated 4 March 2019;
(d) a letter from Ms H (a social worker) dated 25 June 2020;
(e) an undated email from Mr C to the maternal grandmother;
(f) Ms Salo’s healthcare records ranging from 2017 to 2020; and
(g) a letter from K Clinic dated 20 January 2022.
matter proceeded by way of an online hearing. There were some minor technical
difficulties from time to time with the mother’s
audio connection, but
these were able to be overcome, and I am satisfied I was able to hear the
mother’s submissions and her
father was cross examined, as was the mother. No other witness was required to
give evidence.
is no dispute as to the jurisdictional facts or as to the date of retention. It
is agreed as follows:
(a) the children were habitually resident in the United Kingdom as at 22
December 2024;
(b) the parents agreed that the mother could travel with the children to
Australia, the basis that the children would be returned
to the United Kingdom
on 6 January 2025 where they would resume school;
(c) the mother and children left the United Kingdom on 22 December 2024 and
arrived in Australia on 24 December 2024;
(d) the mother did not return the children as agreed. She now proposes that the
children remain living with her in Australia on a
permanent basis;
(e) the father had rights of custody regarding the children which he was
exercising immediately prior to the children’s retention
in Australia and
the retention was in breach of those rights of custody;
(f) the application was made within 1 year of the children’s retention in
Australia; and
(g) the children are under 16 years of age.
am satisfied the jurisdictional facts have been established and the children
wrongfully retained in Australia from 6 January 2025.
REGULATORY EXCEPTIONS TO RETURN
establishment of the jurisdictional pre-requisites to a return Order, there are
limited circumstances or exceptions to return
which may be relevant in response
to an application to return the children to their country of habitual residence.
Those regulatory
exceptions must be read in the context of the fundamental
obligation to return the child.
is the mother’s case that pursuant to r 16(3)(b) of the Regulations there
is a grave risk that the return of the children
would expose them to physical or
psychological harm or otherwise place them in an intolerable situation. She said
the grave risk
to the children arose in the context of her having been the
victim of family violence, comprising physical, emotional and financial
and coercive control, perpetrated by the father during the relationship. She
said the financial abuse and controlling behaviours
continued post separation
and were ongoing.
mother said having endured family violence in the United Kingdom at the hands of
the father, she is unable to contemplate a return
to the United Kingdom –
which she said would adversely impact her health and wellbeing. The mother was
clear that she will
not accompany the children in the event their return is
ordered. It is her case that the children’s separation from her in
event of an Order for return would cause the children psychological harm or
otherwise place them in an intolerable situation.
addition, the mother asserted the father suffers from poor health and consumes
alcohol to excess which she said undermined his
ability to care for the
children. She said accordingly, if the children were returned to the United
Kingdom, in the absence of the
mother, this would expose them to a grave risk of
harm or otherwise be intolerable.
mother conceded she did not raise any other exception to return.
Relevant legal principles
leading authority in Australia pertaining to this regulatory exception is
v. Commonwealth Central Authority; JLM v. Director–General, NSW Department
of Community Services
(2001) 206 CLR 401.
In that case their Honours
Gaudron, Gummow and Hayne JJ observed [39]
(a) the onus of proof lies on the party opposing return;
(b) that party must demonstrate there is a grave risk of the children being
exposed to certain types of harm or otherwise placed
in an intolerable
(c) this requires some prediction, based on the evidence of what might occur
upon the children’s return;
(d) the inquiry will inevitably involve some consideration of the
children’s best interests;
(e) the party claiming the exception does not have to establish there is
certainty that the children will be exposed to harm. However,
the Court must be
persuaded that there is a risk of such exposure to harm which warrants the
qualitative description “grave”;
(f) the Court will generally require clear and compelling evidence to be so
persuaded. Indeed, “[t]he bare assertion, by the
person opposing return,
of fears for the child may well not be sufficient to persuade the Court that
there is a real risk of exposure
(g) the words in the exception are to be given their ordinary meaning and there
is no requirement to read the regulation “broadly”
“narrowly”; and
(h) the harm must be more than the disruption, uncertainty and anxiety likely to
be experienced by children who have been wrongfully
removed and then required to
is, accordingly, for the mother to persuade me that the predicted risk of the
children being exposed to physical or psychological
harm, or placed in an
intolerable situation in the event of their return to the United Kingdom is not
only very real, but “grave”.
As observed in
Attorney–General’s Department
[2014] FamCAFC 197
and [62], whilst the word “grave” characterises the level of risk
rather than the seriousness of the harm, “there
is in ordinary language a
link between the two”.
Evidence as to grave risk
The mother’s allegations of family violence and
coercive control
were significant deficiencies in the quality of the mother’s evidence
regarding family violence and coercive control.
In particular, there was little
detail and a lack of specificity in the mother’s material regarding the
allegations –
with her affidavit and supporting statements containing bald
assertions and conclusions, with almost no dates or specific details
alleged abuse.
father denied all allegations of violence and abuse.
mother relied on a letter from G Clinic dated 4 March 2019. The mother attended
that service for counselling sessions in around
early 2019. In that letter it
was reported that the mother had:
...continued to show remarkable emotional resilience at what you describe as a
stressful and difficult divorce. You have given me
an outline of the situation
you are in, and described to me how you are feeling bullied, coerced and
manipulated by your husband.
You deeply fear he will attempt to take your two
children from you and that you'll be homeless or forced back to Australia.
appears to be some disconnect between the description given in 2019 by the
mother of being bullied, coerced and manipulated
with the statement the mother
now makes that she “suffered the most horrific abuse”. It is also
difficult to reconcile
the concern the mother is said to have expressed in March
2019 that she may be “forced back to Australia” with her assertion
now that she was held in the United Kingdom for seven years against her will.
mother also tendered medical records. There were some references in those
records to the mother having referred to the father
taking the children’s
passports, to him having been “abusive” and there having been a
“history of violence”.
Again, none of the allegations of violence
and abuse are specific. They are also based on the mother’s self-report.
is clear that the period around separation was difficult and stressful. The
mother’s medical records refer to the mother
being tearful, worried the
father will have her sent back to Australia without the children, and to the
father having the children’s
passports. However, this adds little to the
mother’s assertion that if the children are returned to the United Kingdom
there is a grave risk that they will be exposed to harm.
mother’s assertion that the father poses a risk to the children moving
forward, as a result of his violence and abuse of
her, needs to be seen in the
context of the proceedings in the United Kingdom, and the orders made there, by
consent, regarding the
ongoing shared-care of the children.
following the parents’ separation, the parenting arrangement in place from
January 2019 was for a shared-care arrangement
broken up across a two-week
cycle. The parents were then engaged in two sets of proceedings regarding
the care arrangements for the children in the United Kingdom.
Each party made claims in those proceedings that the other had subjected
violence and abuse.
first of those proceedings commenced in 2020. There was a period the father
prevented the children’s time with their mother
at the outset of the
Covid-19 pandemic. The father also raised concerns at that time as to the mother
having mental health issues.
The mother asserted the withholding of the children
and the father’s complaints as to her mental health were acts of violence.
Notwithstanding,
orders were made, by consent in November 2020 at the Family Court in City B
implementing a week about arrangement.
Importantly, at the time those consent
orders were made the Court had the benefit of a Scott schedule. In that document
is it recorded
that the mother asserted the father physically assaulted her in
mid-2017, strangling her. That was denied by the father. The allegations
financial abuse were also denied by the father, as were the allegations of
emotional abuse and coercive control. The father made
counter allegations of
family violence perpetrated by the mother against him.
Court also had the benefit of a section 7 report from CAFCASS completed on 28
October 2020. In that detailed report the writer
sets out the history and issues
in dispute, and the allegations and counter allegations each parent made about
the other and the
investigations undertaken in response. The children were
interviewed and observed with their parents. Neither child raised any safety
concerns. They were described as having loving relationships with their parents,
and happy in their care. The writer determined that
“there is no evidence
that either child is at significant risk whilst being cared for by either
relation to the allegations by each parent of physical and other abuse, the
writer stated “[t]here is no evidence of this”.
Both parents were
assessed as having exposed the children to their arguments as the marriage came
to an end, and the father was criticised
for having prevented the children
seeing their mother for a short period at the outbreak of the pandemic. The
writer recommended
that the parents continue to have the shared-care of the
children as she did not find that there were risks to the children in the
of either parent. She concluded:
...the only harm the children are experiencing is due to their parents’
acrimonious relationship. I am therefore recommending
that both parents are
offered early help support around parental conflict, healthy relationships and
supporting children with anxiety.
This will ensure that the children are not
continued to be exposed to the acrimonious relationship or continue to be drawn
into private
law proceedings.
recitals to the 6 November 2020 consent orders record that the parents had
agreed to the father holding the children’s passports,
with him to make
then available to the mother to travel abroad with the children upon the
provision to him of details of the proposed
trip. The recitals also refer to the
mother having the ability to travel to Australia with the children.
Additionally,
the recitals refer to both of the parents having raised allegations of family
violence, and that no findings had been
made and “both parties therefore
agreeing to move past these issues and accepting they cannot raise issues that
pre-date this
order as a means to justify any change in the future to these
arrangements”. Notwithstanding the contents of the Scott schedule,
Court further confirmed “there are no safeguarding concerns” in
relation to either parent. The final recital states
that the mother confirms
“she has no intention to permanently remove the children” from the
United Kingdom and that it
would be a breach of the law should she do so.
orders then provided for the parents to have the care of the children on a week
on/week off basis. There were additional orders
for special occasions, and for
travel, including that the mother can travel with the children to Australia upon
providing the father
with 12 months’ notice in advance and details of the
flights four weeks in advance.
was further dispute regarding the implementation of the orders and the matter
returned to the Family Court at City B in 2022.
The parents attended that Court
in mid-2022 – each appearing in person. Further orders were made that day,
again by consent,
finalising the matter.
recitals to the July 2022 orders included a statement that it would be a
criminal offence to take a child out of the United Kingdom
without the consent
of both parents or an Order of the court. The consent orders again provided for
the children to live with the
parents on a week about arrangements, and for the
passports to remain in the father’s care. The mother was to provide the
with at least one month’s notice of any intention to take the
children out of the jurisdiction. Orders were made for the Christmas
do not accept the mother’s characterisation of the father’s
retention of the children’s passports as being evidence
of efforts to
control her or that he ‘used the children as pawns’ as she asserts.
The mother was able to access the passports
to travel. That the father held the
passports in circumstances where there were some concerns the mother might
attempt to relocate
the children is neither unusual nor untoward.
do I accept the mother’s assertion that the implementation of a
shared-care arrangement was evidence of the father’s
desire to “use
and control” the mother. The orders were made by consent. They were
supported by the social worker. There
is no suggestion that the arrangements
were not working well, or that the children were other than settled and content
arrangement.
relation to the mother’s assertion that the father subjected her to
financial abuse the allegations regarding the period
of the parties’
relationship were largely unparticularised. The mother’s allegations as to
post separation behaviour
she said amounted to financial abuse
(a) that the father did not refund her costs for the children’s extra
curricular activities;
(b) the father made her reimburse him for lost clothing items he had
(c) the father had made an application for child maintenance through the
relevant authorities in the United Kingdom seeking a contribution
(d) the father sought a property settlement in the Family Law Courts in the
United Kingdom.
also note that in the mother’s two statements tendered as exhibits M5 and
M6, the mother criticises the father for the week
he sought those arrangements to negatively financially impact the mother.
do not accept that the complaints outlined by the mother can be characterised as
financial abuse. Nor do I accept that the implementation
of a shared-care regime
is evidence of financial abuse by the father.
the hearing before me, the mother now asserts she did not pursue the family
violence allegations in the United Kingdom Courts as
she did not want to prolong
legal processes there. It is difficult to reconcile that evidence with her
agreement to final orders
in 2020 and in 2022 to a shared-care regime, and with
her proposal even at this juncture that a shared-care regime continue to be
arrangements for the children if they remain in Australia.
the mother’s evidence was that:
(a) since the father has been in Australia, arriving on about mid-2025, by
consent the children have spent time with him travelling
in a campervan during
the school holidays for almost three weeks;
(b) the parents have now reinstated the week about shared are arrangement;
(c) if the father was to remain in Australia, the mother would propose the
children continue to live with the parents on a week–about
mother also sought to travel to the United Kingdom herself on about 4 July 2025.
That was to see a terminally ill close family
friend. Regrettably she was unable
to travel due to orders of this Court prohibiting same. It is notable, however,
that she was prepared
to leave the children in their father’s care whilst
she would be out of the country.
is, the mother’s own admissions and actions make it plain she does not
regard the children as being at risk in the care
of their father and that she
regards the shared-care arrangement as being in the children’s best
Ms F’s evidence
not required for cross examination, I put no significant weight on the affidavit
of Ms F, the mother’s sister. It is
apparent that much of her evidence is
a recitation of complaints made to her by the mother rather than matters she has
herself observed.
The only relevant matters that she observed herself is in
relation to the period prior to the family moving to the United Kingdom.
is, more than seven years ago. Ms F said she heard the father “yelling and
fighting” with the mother, and that on
“one occasion I heard him
physically attacking her”. There are no particulars given. Ms F also
referred to the father’s
alcohol consumption, to which I will shortly
The father’s health and alcohol consumption
mother’s evidence is that she and children have recently observed the
father shaking, and that he has also vomited on occasion.
In addition, the
mother said the father consumes alcohol to excess.
father acknowledged he experiences adrenal fatigue, which can result in his
speech being slurred and he can experience some shaking.
He said the symptoms
are exacerbated by stressful situations and that he otherwise manages the
condition with ensuring he gets adequate
sleep and maintains a healthy
lifestyle. He said he is appropriately engaged with medical practitioners in the
United Kingdom for
the management of these issues. The father acknowledged he
vomited when he had the children with him recently on holidays. He said
contracted a “stomach bug” which he caught off one of the children
who had similarly been unwell.
is apparent the father’s adrenal issues are chronic. The mother referred
in her cross examination to the father experiencing
symptoms of adrenal fatigue
in 2017, and that one of the reasons the family relocated to the United Kingdom
was so the father could
recover. Despite the condition being long standing the
mother does not specifically depose to any incident or event where the
ability to parent the children was compromised as a result save
to say he was shaking and vomited on a recent contact visit.
shared-care arrangement for the children has, by agreement, been in place for in
excess of five years. That the mother continues
to support this arrangement
strongly suggests the mother is not concerned that the father’s condition
impairs his parenting
to the father’s alcohol consumption being problematic, this was not
deposed to by the mother and only raised in her oral
evidence. The
father’s alcohol consumption does not appear to have been raised by the
mother as a concern in the medical records
she tendered which spanned from June
2017 to November 2020. Nor is there any reference to the mother having concerns
in this regard
in the letter from the social workers who were engaged with the
mother in the United Kingdom.
only reference in the mother’s material to the father drinking is in the
affidavit of Ms F in which it was asserted the
father “would often have
drinking binges that would leave him bedridden and unable to function for the
next day or two”.
This related to a period prior to April 2018.
father denied drinking to excess.
mother has consented to – and continues to propose – a shared-care
regime, which would suggest she also does not regard
the father’s alcohol
consumption as problematic. Indeed, the mother’s proposal for a continued
shared-care arrangement
– if the father remains in Australia –
undermines her assertion that she is “extremely concerned about the
implications
of him being able to care for the children”.
Regulation 26 report
have the benefit of a Regulation 26 report prepared by a Court child expert.
Interestingly neither child understood that their mother
wanted to remain with
them in Australia indefinitely and suggested their mother wanted to stay
“a bit longer” or “for
a few more months”.
children raised no concerns in that report regarding their safety in the care of
either parent. They both expressed content as
to the week about arrangements
whilst in the United Kingdom. They spoke positively about both parents.
was clear that neither child objected to being returned to the United Kingdom,
although they felt it was ‘more fair’
to their mother if they could
stay longer in Australia. Y’s complaints regarding the United Kingdom were
minor, relating to
the weather and some complaints regarding his teachers and a
dispute with a peer. Neither child expressed a view that they wanted
living in Australia permanently despite the mother’s assertion that she
wants to remain here now because “that’s
what the children
want” and she wants “to support them”.
appears Y has been exposed to some aspects of the adult dispute –
referring to the father having taken the children’s
passports “and
made us stay”. He also expressed concern that the father would not let the
children return to Australia
again – which was not the father’s
evidence before me – and that his mother might get arrested if she
to the United Kingdom. He was worried the mother would “spend the
rest of her life in jail”.
children reported missing their father.
to the impact on the children in the event they were separated from their mother
both boys reported they would miss their mother.
X said he would be sad if his
mother did not return to the United Kingdom. He said that not being able to see
his mother would make
him feel “just as sad as not seeing Dad”. Y
said if he had to return to the United Kingdom without his mother “I
be fine if Mum had to stay here, as long as she does not have to go to
mother, in her closing, asserted that the children were “scared” of
their father. This was not contained in her affidavit
or either statement. Nor
was it reflected in the children’s statements to the report writer.
CONCLUSION AS TO GRAVE RISK AND INTOLERABLE SITUATION
evidence upon which the mother relies falls well short of being clear and
compelling. Taking the mother’s assertions even
at their highest,
individually or as a whole does not enable me to make a finding that the level
of the predicted risk to the children
if they are returned to the United Kingdom
could be categorised as grave, nor that the situation upon the return of the
would be intolerable.
of the mother’s allegations were vague and unparticularised. Her concerns
substantially pre-date the mother’s agreement
in the United Kingdom to a
shared-care arrangement first reflected in a court Order made in 2020. The
alleged concerns are inconsistent
with the mother’s agreement to the
reimplementation and continuation of the shared-care arrangement provided the
family remain
in Australia. There was no evidence adduced by the mother that
suggested the shared-care arrangement had been problematic for the
their wellbeing or safety – save for saying that the father had recently
been shaking and vomiting on an occasion
he had the children in his care. The
father’s evidence provided a plausible explanation for this.
mother’s assertion that the father strangled her in mid-2017 is a serious
allegation. It was brought to the attention of
child protection and the courts
in the United Kingdom and investigated by child protection. The social worker
engaged in 2020 determined
there were no risk issues for the children and
supported a shared-care arrangement. The court made orders for equal time by
There is no other allegation that the children have been subject to or
exposed to any family violence at least since the parties’
separation in
or around 2019.
relation to the allegations of financial abuse, I am not satisfied that the
matters relied upon by the mother can be properly characterised
as financial
abuse. The matters raised by the mother in the Scott schedule are all plausibly
explained by the father’s response.
At any rate, the mother’s
concerns in this regard do not assist her in establishing a grave risk of harm
to the children, nor
to establish a return would place the children in an
intolerable situation.
mother’s assertion that the father kept her and the children in the United
Kingdom against their will cannot be made out
on the evidence before me. The
father’s retention of the children’s passports was an arrangement
made by consent despite
the mother’s refusal to acknowledge that under
cross examination. The mother did admit that whilst in the United Kingdom, the
father had provided her with the children’s passports when requested,
enabling her and the children to take several holidays
abroad, as well as
travelling to Australia in late 2024. The mother did not adduce any evidence
that she had made other requests
to the father to holiday in Australia or
elsewhere which the father rejected.
accept the father prevented the children from seeing the mother at the start of
the Covid-19 pandemic. I also accept he expressed
concern regarding the
mother’s mental health to the relevant authorities in the United Kingdom.
In circumstances where the
mother’s medical records tendered by her refer
to the mother experiencing low mood and suicidal thoughts in late 2019 the
reports may have been reasonable. This is not clear or compelling
evidence of abuse or coercive control.
have significant scepticism regarding the mother’s assertion that she
“fled” the United Kingdom at the first opportunity
“after 7 years of being held against my will”. Such an assertion
appears to be inconsistent with the mother’s
evidence. I note:
(a) the mother acknowledged that when she left Australia with the children on 22
December 2024 this was for a holiday, only, and
she intended to return;
(b) by around 20 January 2025 the mother’s proposal was that she and the
children would remain in Australia for 6 months and
she would then return with
(c) during cross examination the mother acknowledged she initially intended to
return on 6 January 2025 and then changed her mind
to want to stay for 6 months.
She said she has changed her mind again – seeking to stay permanently
– because that is
what the children want and she is supporting their
matters do not support a finding that the mother left the United Kingdom n 22
December 2024 with the intention of “fleeing”
from an abusive
situation. It appears the mother has re-characterised the purpose and intention
of her trip to Australia over time.
the mother’s evidence was inaccurate when she said the trip to Australia
was the first opportunity the mother had
to leave the United Kingdom. As already
observed, the mother and children travelled on occasions throughout Europe post
the parties’
separation.
if the mother’s historical allegations of abuse and coercive control were
made out, the evidence falls well short of establishing
that there is any real
risk physically or psychologically to the children if they are returned to the
United Kingdom. The children
have been living in a shared-care arrangement since
care at any time. They made no complaints about their
father’s care to the authorities in the United Kingdom. Nor did they
any complaints to the Court child expert who prepared the report in these
proceedings. The mother’s assertion in her closing
address that the
children are fearful of their father has no basis. I repeat that the mother
herself is content to reimplement the
shared-care arrangement.
any rate, there is a presumption that member states whose accession to the
convention has been accepted by Australia will be capable
of adequately protect
children upon their return. To that end, I note there was nothing adduced by the
mother that suggested that
the authorities in the United Kingdom would not be
properly equipped to make suitable arrangements for the children in the event
a return order.
report writer opined that the children would likely feel considerable sadness
and a sense of loss if the mother refuses to return
to the United Kingdom.
However, the evidence cannot support a finding that the children’s
distress at being separated from
their mother would expose them to a grave risk
of psychological harm or otherwise place them in an intolerable situation. To
the exception, the mother must persuade me of more than this expected
disruption, anxiety or upset. She has not.
mother conceded she had no knowledge of there being any legal or practical
impediments to her returning to the United Kingdom.
She agreed she had made no
enquiries to the relevant authorities in that regard. Rather, her refusal to
return was at her own election.
Whilst she said her well-being would be impacted
if she was to return – and made reference to suffering from post-traumatic
stress disorder – she adduced no evidence from any medical or allied
health professionals to corroborate her assertions in
this regard. I note the
mother also sought to travel to the United Kingdom in July 2025 for a brief
visit in sad circumstances, notwithstanding
she now says she cannot contemplate
a return. She also conceded under cross examination that she may travel to see
the children during
the summer holidays in the United Kingdom. The
father’s evidence was that he would facilitate the children’s time
their mother.
Accordingly,
this regulatory exception must fail. There is no need to consider the
circumstances in which my discretion to return
is enlivened.
ORDER TO RETURN
is common ground that in the event a return Order is made, that should be
implemented as soon as practicable. X is due to commence
high school in the
United Kingdom on 3 September.
is of some concern that despite having been ordered on 28 March 2025 to deliver
the children’s British passports to the Court,
the mother has not done so.
She said she had been “busy”, that it had “slipped her
mind” and that it was
too far for her to travel to the Court to deliver
them. She said it would take her about an hour and a half to travel to the
mother’s excuses are not acceptable.
Order was made on 14 August 2025 pursuant to which the mother was to deliver the
children’s passports to the applicant by
12 noon on 15 August 2025.
am making an Order restraining the mother from endeavouring to secure passports
for the children pending their return to the United
Kingdom. This is in
circumstances where the mother has recently sought the father’s agreement
to the children having Country
L passports. For obvious reasons no further steps
should be taken in that regard until the children are back in the United
The parents can then decide whether this is an avenue they wish to
am also making an Order restraining the mother from attending at or near the
airport on the day of the children’s departure.
She will need to say her
goodbyes to the children when she hands them over to their father. I am
concerned that if the mother attended
at the airport this could cause the
children significant discomfort and distress as they prepare to board the
applicant advised the father was prepared to give an undertaking in these
proceedings that he would not pursue criminal prosecution
in the United Kingdom
regarding the children’s wrongful retention in Australia by the mother. I
accept there are issues with
the enforceability of that undertaking. However, in
the context of this case – and particularly in light of the concerns
by Y – I am content to make my orders subject to the father
having given that undertaking.
otherwise make orders largely in accordance with the minute proposed by the
applicant and supported by the Independent Children's
Lawyer. The mother
proposed no other orders in the event of a return Order being made.
I certify that the preceding eighty-seven (87)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 18 August 2025
RTF format (517 KB)
Signed PDF/A format