Brunet & Hautum (No 2) [2025] FedCFamC1F 575 (25 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Brunet & Hautum (No 2)
FedCFamC1F 575
File number(s):
NCC 3944 of 2022
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– COSTS – Where the
applicant seeks costs on an indemnity basis as a result of the respondent filing
a Notice of Discontinuance
shortly before the final hearing – Where
indemnity costs sought – Where there are no circumstances that justify a
from the usual rule that each party bears their own costs.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules
Cases cited:
Bant and Clayton (Costs)
[2016] FamCAFC
Colgate Palmolive Company & Anor v Cusson Pty Ltd
(1993) 46 FCR
Munday v Bowman
(1997) FLC 92-784
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Ms Volk of Helen Volk Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms Willoughby
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Gillard Family Lawyers
NCC 3944 of 2022
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
First Respondent
Second Respondent
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Application in a proceeding filed 28 February 2025 and sealed on 5 May 2025 be
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUSTICE CARTER
INTRODUCTION
application before the Court is that brought by the applicant mother (“the
mother’) seeking that the respondent paternal
grandmother (“the
respondent”) pay the mother’s costs. The application was made on 28
February 2025 seeking:
That the [respondent] pay the ... mother's costs as agreed or assessed of and
incidental to her Application in a Proceeding to join
these proceedings and the
Response filed 22 March 2024, discontinued by Notice of Discontinuance filed 4
February 2025.
the costs hearing – and as set out in the mother’s written
submissions filed on 12 June 2025 (one day late and just
4 days before the costs
hearing) – she sought indemnity costs. The mother’s costs agreement
was only provided to the
respondent at that time.
respondent had sought to be joined in the substantive parenting proceedings
between the parents by way of an Application in a
Proceeding filed 13 February
2024. In terms of the orders then sought, it was the respondent’s
position that she would seek
time with the child in the event the Court
determined that no time should be ordered between the child and the father.
Order for the joinder of the respondent was made by consent on 15 March 2024.
The respondent then participated in the preparation
of the family report –
a process which was already underway. The orders made on 15 March 2024 required
that the respondent
meet the additional costs of the report writer incurred as a
result of further documents having to be read and additional interviews
family report was completed and dated 3 June 2024.
respondent filed a Notice of Discontinuance on 4 February 2025. This was just 27
days before the final hearing of the parenting
dispute, and after the mother and
father had filed their trial material.
Applicable legislation
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”) has recently been
amended, including renumbering the sections dealing with costs. The provision
each party bears their own costs unless there are circumstances that
justify departing from that rule remains, as does the list of
considerations to
which the court must have regard.
Relevantly,
the transitional provisions provide that the amended Act applies to proceedings
instituted before and not finally determined
before the commencement date (being
10 June 2025) other than proceedings in respect of which a final hearing
commenced before that
costs application by the mother was brought by way of an Application in a
Proceeding. The substantive proceedings to which that
application was attached
were proceedings in which the final hearing commenced (and concluded) prior 10
June 2025. Accordingly, I
am satisfied the Act as it was prior to the 10 June
2025 applies. However, even if I am wrong, this would not change my
determination
as to the outcome of this application as the matters to which the
court is to have regard when considering what costs order, if any,
remain almost
identical. Only the numbering – but not the substance – of the costs
provisions have altered.
Was the application was brought in time?
to r 12.13 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law)
(“the Rules”), applications for costs are to be filed
within 28 days of the conclusion of the proceedings.
Notice of Discontinuance was filed on 4 February 2025. That finalised the
proceedings between the mother and the respondent. However,
the parenting
proceedings (being the substantive proceedings on foot at the time the mother
filed her application in those proceedings
seeking costs against the respondent)
did not conclude until 2 May 2025 when I delivered judgment. I do not agree with
the respondent’s
submissions that the mother’s application was out
of time on the basis that she had 28 days from the filing of the Notice of
Discontinuance and the application was only sealed on 5 May 2025.
am satisfied the application was filed within time as the 28 days commenced from
the delivery of my final judgment on 2 May 2025.
The Court portal shows the
application was filed on 28 February 2025, although due to an administrative
oversight, my chambers did
not seal the application until 5 May 2025.
application for costs had not been served on the respondent until it was sealed
on 5 May 2025. It was, however, available on the
court portal from 28 February
2025. It was submitted that it was “procedurally unfair” that the
respondent had given
evidence at the final hearing (as a witness on behalf of
her son) when she did not know there was a costs application on foot against
her. It was also asserted this had “the potential to be prejudicial”
against the respondent and that her evidence could
have been affected had she
known the application had been brought. There was no articulation of how the
respondent could have been
prejudiced or disadvantaged and accordingly, those
assertions are not made out.
THE EVIDENCE
mother relied on her:
(a) Application in a Proceeding filed 28 February 2025; and
(b) affidavit filed 28 February 2025;
(c) Financial Statement filed 11 June 2025; and
(d) written submissions filed 12 June 2025.
summary, it is the mother’s case that the respondent’s joinder to
the proceedings was not a genuine application to
spend time with the child in
her own right. Rather, the application was driven by an ulterior motive being to
secure the child’s
time with his father through the respondent. The mother
was also critical of the respondent’s conduct as a litigant.
was submitted on behalf of the mother that the bulk of the costs incurred after
6 February 2024 and until the respondent discontinued
her application were
regarding answering the respondent’s case, particularly in circumstances
where the father was in jail
from late 2023 to late 2024. However, no attempt
had been made by the mother’s representative to identify with any
specificity
the likely quantum of costs that were attributable only to the
dispute with the respondent and those incurred in responding to the
father’s application. In those circumstances it was proposed that the
costs would have to be formally assessed.
respondent relied on the following documents:
(a) Response to an Application in a Proceeding filed on 9 June 2025;
(b) affidavit filed 9 June 2025; and
(c) Financial Statement filed 9 June 2025.
respondent denied that she acted improperly or had an ulterior motive when
bringing her application to spend time with the child.
She said she had acted
appropriately as a litigant and that there was no basis for a costs order to be
parties tendered a number of documents in the course of submissions.
THE LAW IN RELATION TO COSTS
general rule in relation to costs is that each party will bear their own costs.
That is set out in s 117(1) of the Act. However,
that rule is subject to the
provisions of s 117(2). That subsection provides that a court may make such
order for costs as it considers
just if “...the court is of opinion that
there are circumstances that justify it in doing so...”
Subsections
117(2A)(a)-(g) of the Act set out the matters the Court must consider in
determining whether to exercise its discretion
and make an order as to costs. No
one factor must be present, and no particular factor is to be given more or less
weight than any
Indemnity costs
mother’s application for indemnity costs was, as set out, made effectively
at the door of the Court.
authorities make it clear that an Order for costs on an indemnity basis ought
not be made lightly and is generally considered
a great departure from the usual
course; see
Colgate Palmolive Company & Anor v Cusson Pty Ltd
46 FCR 225 (“
”) per Sheppard J at 233. Indeed, such an
order will be made only where there are exceptional circumstances; see
and Clayton (Costs)
[2016] FamCAFC 35
his Honour provided some examples of circumstances that might
justify the awarding of indemnity costs. Drawing from that decision,
Holden CJ in
Munday v Bowman
(1997) FLC 92-784
, at 84,660 succinctly set
out the following as examples where indemnity costs might be
appropriate:
(a) Where it appears that an action has been commenced or continued in
circumstances where a party properly advised should have
known that he had no
chance of success. In such cases the action must be presumed to have been
commenced or continued for some ulterior
motive or because of some wilful
disregard of the known facts...
(b) Making allegations of fraud, knowing them to be false, and the making of
irrelevant allegations of fraud...
(c) Evidence of particular misconduct causing loss of time to the court and to
other parties...
(d) The making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue
prolongation of a case by groundless contentions...
(e) An imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise.
(Citations omitted)
indicated, the mother asserted the respondent brought her application for time
with the ulterior purpose of securing time for the
father and child. She said
this was by a number of matters, including the respondent’s opposition to
the mother relocating,
by her proposal that time occur near the
respondent’s home and by her abandonment of her application when the
mother proposed
the respondent be injuncted from allowing the child to see the
father. Additionally, it was submitted the application was unmeritorious,
that the respondent wilfully disregarded the safety issues facing the mother and
Financial circumstances of each of the parties to the
proceedings
respondent is in paid employment. She owns a property, subject to a mortgage.
There was some discrepancy between the respondent’s
Financial Statement
and her taxation return. It is the mother’s assertion the respondent may
receive an income of as high as
$90,000 per year. That is disputed by the
respondent who says she receives around $65,000 with some fringe benefits. Given
she is nearing the end of her working life.
mother is also in paid employment, working part time. According to her Financial
Statement she earns about $73,000 per annum.
In addition, she receives rental
income from a property owned by her of about $27,000 per annum. That property is
encumbered by a
mortgage. She is currently living with her parents who meet some
expenses on her behalf. She says this is not a viable, long term
solution. The
mother will be required at some point to relocate so she can continue and
complete her vocational training. She has
the sole care and bears almost all
financial responsibility for a young child. She receives almost no financial
support from the
father towards the child’s costs. It is her evidence that
she owes substantial funds to her parents for her legal fees.
Legal assistance by way of legal aid
is not a relevant consideration.
Conduct of the parties to the proceedings
case law makes it clear that conduct of the parties to the proceedings includes
factors such as uncooperative behaviour, prolonging
of litigation, filing
unreasonable or unmeritorious applications, non-disclosure or some other conduct
that leads to an increase
in costs by the other party.
is the mother’s assertion that she acted at all times in accordance with
the Court orders and processes. Conversely, she
asserts that the
respondent’s conduct as a litigant fell short. In particular, the mother
was critical that the respondent
took no steps to communicate with the mother
solicitors for the respondent wrote to the mother seeking time and promptly
made an application to join the proceedings just 7 days
later. The mother said
accordingly no genuine steps were taken by the respondent to resolve the dispute
prior to her issuing the
application to join.
already noted, it is also asserted by the mother that the respondent was not
genuinely seeking time with the child. Rather, it
was argued that the
application was brought to enable the respondent to facilitate time between the
child and the father.
acts of which the mother was critical of the respondent as to her conduct in the
proceedings included:
the respondent
refused to agree to the mother being able to relocate the child’s
respondent’s proposals envisaged the mother undertaking the whole of the
travel responsibilities between the mother’s
respondent;
respondent’s proposals for time did not include any injunction on exposing
the child to the father for many months after
she filed her application to join;
when the mother
made an offer of time that included a restraint on the child having any contact
with his father, there was no response
from the respondent to that proposal and
the application subsequently abandoned.
was asserted these matters provided support to the argument that the
respondent’s application was made for the ulterior motive
of fostering a
relationship between the child and the father.
respondent asserted she gave proper notice of her intention to commence
proceedings, and that there was some urgency which exempted
her from undertaking
the usual pre-action procedures. She said her application sought a continued
relationship with the child, and
to ensure he remained connected to his extended
paternal family and cultural heritage. She co-operated with the report writing
and paid additional costs to the expert arising from her joinder
application. She filed her material in accordance with Court directions.
balance, I am not satisfied that the respondent’s application for time was
. Nor am I satisfied that she wilfully disregarded facts,
that her application for time was unmeritorious or that her conduct as a
litigant could otherwise be criticised to the extent that a costs order could be
note that at the time of writing his report, the family report writer
contemplated the child spending time with the respondent,
to maintain “a
thread of connection” with the paternal family. In light of the
recommendations made at that time, the
application of the respondent in which
she sought to maintain a relationship with the child could not be described as
without merit.
I note further the letter dated 21 June 2024 to the mother in
which the respondent indicated she would accept the recommendations
family report writer and proposed orders reflecting those recommendations to an
further subsequent offer made by the respondent dated 15 August 2024 included a
proposed order restraining the respondent from
permitting the child having any
the respondent was
disregarding the potential safety risks if the child was to
be brought into contact with his father.
mother’s response to that offer was under cover letter dated 22 September
2024 which proposed a far more restricted regime
of time. This was not accepted
by the respondent.
parties participated in dispute resolution. The respondent participated in that
process as it occurred prior to her filing her
Notice of Discontinuance. That
dispute resolution event would have occurred between the mother and father at
any rate, even had the
respondent discontinued her application prior to same.
application to discontinue was made after the filing of the mother’s trial
material. However, the respondent’s affidavit
formed part of the evidence
before me. She was cross examined as a witness for the father. Accordingly, the
mother’s trial
material had to deal with the evidence of the respondent
even though she was no longer a party to the proceedings.
accept the trial may have been scheduled for fewer than five days had it been
known the respondent would not be a party at the final
hearing. However, I am
not certain that it could have been anticipated that the trial would have been
significantly shorter and the
matter may have remained listed for five days even
in the absence of a third party. There was potentially a lot to traverse. The
respondent did not have other witnesses and as she was called as a witness by
the father the number of witnesses was unchanged despite
her discontinuance. It
was plain that counsel for the father sensibly confined his cross examination of
the mother, which truncated
much of the evidence.
all the circumstances I do not find the respondent’s conduct in
instituting, perusing, and then discontinuing the proceedings
as providing a
justification for an Order for costs to be made.
Whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a
party to the proceedings to comply with previous orders of the Court
consideration is not relevant.
Whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly
unsuccessful
circumstances where a party has discontinued an application, and there has been
no hearing on the merits this consideration is
not relevant. This was observed
by the Full Court in
where their Honour’s
noted that this subsection “is designed for cases where an application is
heard and determined and...is
wholly unsuccessful”.
Whether the other party to the proceedings has made an offer in
writing to the other party to settle the proceedings
observed each party made proposals to the other, which were tendered in evidence
before me. None of the offers were accepted by
the parties, and none were
adopted by the Court. The offers made prior to trial were to an extent aligned
with the recommendations
made by the family report writer in his detailed
report. However, at trial the family report writer ultimately recommended more
protection of the mother’s wellbeing and supported orders for no
all the circumstances it could not be said it was imprudent of either the mother
or the respondent to have rejected the proposals
made by the other. They were
not inappropriate in the context of the case at the time the offers were made.
DETERMINATION
all the circumstances, I am not satisfied that there is any basis for a costs
Order to be made, either on an indemnity or other
basis. There are no
exceptional circumstances as would be required in order to make an Order for
indemnity costs, and no circumstances
that otherwise justify departing from the
usual rule that each party will bear their own costs. The application is
therefore dismissed.
I certify that the preceding forty-seven (47)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
RTF format (407 KB)
Signed PDF/A format