Mansoor v Coles Supermarkets T/A Coles Northland [2012] FWAFB 9415 (13 November 2012)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
—Appeal of decision
Minhaj Mansoor
Coles Supermarkets T/A Coles Northland
(C2012/4062)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT HAMILTON
COMMISSIONER LEE
COMMISSIONER GREGORY
MELBOURNE,13 NOVEMBER 2012
Appeal against Senior Deputy President Kaufman at Melbourne on 9 May 2012 in matter number C2012/3516 - costs application by Respondent.
Introduction
On 24 October 2012 we dismissed an appeal lodged by Mr.Minhaj Mansoor. We also refused permission to appeal
. Coles Supermarket sought an order of costs against Mr.Mansoor under
Fair Work Act
(‘the Act’). When Coles sought an order of costs Mr.Mansoor did not address the issue in his written submission. We provided
Mr.Mansoor with an additional opportunity to put a submission on the issue. He put a submission, and Coles put a reply submission.
Submissions
Mr.Mansoor submitted that he had fundamentally misconceived the nature of the proceedings on which he embarked. He submitted that
he felt aggrieved by the decisions taken by Coles Supermarkets in transferring his employment, but that he misunderstood the nature
of the proceedings embarked upon, and the possible ramifications for all concerned. He now understands that all proceedings in respect
to his grievance about transfer have been dealt with by Fair Work Australia and are now at an end. He requested that no order for
costs be made. He apologised to Fair Work Australia for any inconvenience caused.
Coles Supermarkets submitted that there are grounds for an order for costs to be made against Mr.Mansoor on the basis that it should
have been reasonably apparent to him that the appeal had ‘no reasonable prospect of success’
(s.611(2)(b)).
Coles noted the repeated attempts by Fair Work Australia and Coles to obtain from Mr.Mansoor an identification of the ‘decision’
he was purporting to appeal. Coles relied on the summary of the legal tests in
Clothier v. Ngaanyatjarra Media
which made an order for costs in ‘analagous circumstances’.
The Legislation and Authorities
Brian Clothier v Ngaanyatjarra Media
a Full Bench of this tribunal said:
[11] The Respondent in its submissions sought an order for costs against the Applicant. It was submitted that the order should be
made on the basis that it should have been reasonably apparent to the Applicant that the appeal had “no reasonable prospect
of success”
(s.611(2)(b)).
Section 611
provides that generally a person must bear their own costs in relation to a matter before FWA. However FWA is given power to make
an order for costs against a person if it is satisfied that the person made an application vexatiously or without reasonable cause
or the application had no reasonable prospects of success.
Section 611
is in the following terms:
(1) A person must bear the person’s own costs in relation to a matter before FWA.
(2) However, FWA may order a person (the
first person
) to bear some or all of
the costs of another person in relation to an application to FWA if:
(a) FWA is satisfied that the first person made the application, or the first person responded to the application, vexatiously or
without reasonable cause; or
(b) FWA is satisfied that it should have been reasonably apparent to the first person that the first person’s application, or
the first person’s response to the application, had no reasonable prospect of success.
Note: FWA can also order costs under
sections 376
(3) A person to whom an order for costs applies must not contravene a term of the order.
Note: This subsection is a civil remedy provision (see
Section 402
deals with the making of applications for costs orders in matters arising under
of the Act. The section provides as follows:
“402 Applications for costs orders
An application for an order for costs under
section 611
in relation to a matter arising under this Part, or for costs under
section 401
, must be made within 14 days after:
(a) FWA determines the matter; or
(b) the matter is discontinued.”
Baker v Salva Resources Pty Ltd
, a Full Bench of FWA summarised the approach to be taken in relation to
subsection 611(2)(b)
of the Act as follows:
“[10] The concepts within
s.611(2)(b)
‘should have been reasonably apparent’ and ‘had no reasonable prospect of success’ have been well traversed:
‘should have been reasonably apparent’ must be objectively determined. It imports an objective test, directed to a belief
formed on an objective basis, rather than a subjective test; and
a conclusion that an application ‘had no reasonable prospect of success’ should only be reached with extreme caution
in circumstances where the application is manifestly untenable or groundless or so lacking in merit or substance as to be not reasonably
[16] On the question of what constitutes “without reasonable cause”, Justice Wilcox in
Kanan v Australian Postal and Telecommunications Union
“It seems to me that one way of testing whether a proceeding is instituted ‘without reasonable cause’ is to ask
whether, upon the facts apparent to the applicant at the time of instituting the proceeding, there was no substantial prospect of
success. If success depends upon the resolution in the applicant’s favour of one or more arguable points of law, it is inappropriate
to stigmatise the proceeding as being ‘without reasonable cause’. But where it appears that, on the applicant’s
own version of the facts, it is clear that the proceeding must fail, it may properly be said that the proceeding lacks a reasonable
[17] This test of what constitutes “without reasonable cause” has been adopted by FWA in several cases.
[18] The Respondent submitted that the resolution of the proceedings appealed is not a “decision” of FWA and is not subject
to appeal. It further submitted that this had been explained to the Applicant at the telephone hearing on the stay. Accordingly it
was submitted that it should have been reasonably apparent to the Applicant that the appeal had no reasonable prospects of success.
[19] We have considered the submissions of the parties in relation to the application for costs. In the circumstances of the present
matter, we consider that it would be appropriate to make an order pursuant to
that the Applicant bear some of the costs of the Respondent in relation to the appeal.
[20] The matter appealed against clearly did not concern an appealable decision of FWA. This should have been apparent to the Applicant
from a reading of the legislation and/or upon making appropriate inquiries. Although the Applicant might have been proceeding on
the basis of some misguided notion of what might be possible outcomes of the appeal, we are satisfied that the requirements in
for the making of an order for costs are met. Further it was made clear to the Applicant in the stay proceedings before Justice Boulton,
and in the decision refusing the stay, that there were a number of fundamental problems in the appeal and that on the basis of what
had been put by the parties and filed in the appeal the appeal had no reasonable prospects of success. Despite this, the applicant
continued to pursue the application to appeal.
[21] For these reasons, we are satisfied that the Applicant made the application to appeal “without reasonable cause”
and that he pursued the appeal in circumstances where it should have been reasonably apparent to him that it had no reasonable prospect
of success.
[22] Accordingly we consider that the grounds have been made out for the making of an order for payment of part of the costs of the
Respondent in the appeal. Any application made pursuant to
of the Act will be dealt with by Justice Boulton having regard to this decision. The order to be made and amount of costs awarded
will be determined by Justice Boulton after providing an opportunity for the parties to make further submissions on this issue.’
[Footnotes omitted]
The decision in
relates to circumstances which are to some degree of a similar nature to those before us. In this case there was also no appellable
decision, and the appeal was therefore dismissed. However, each matter has to be dealt with in accordance with the particular circumstances.
In relation to the circumstances before us, we said in our earlier decision that:
‘[19] Mr.Mansoor has been provided with at least four opportunities to advise the tribunal and Coles of the decision he purports
to appeal. The form which he used to lodge his appeal requested him to identify the decision he was appealing. Mr.Mansoor did not
identify the decision. Fair Work Australia wrote to Mr.Mansoor on 13 June 2012 advising him that he had not provided a description
of the decision that he wished to appeal, and that his appeal document did not appear to conform with the requirements of the rules.
Mr.Mansoor did not reply to the letter by describing the decision he wished to appeal. Coles Supermarkets provided a written submission
which clearly stated that no decision had been issued, and that therefore there could be no appeal against a decision. Mr.Mansoor
did not respond to that submission in his written submission of 3 October. Coles Supermarket repeated the point in its submission
of 10 October. Mr.Mansoor again did not address the issue in his final written submission of 12 October.
[20] Mr.Mansoor has not identified any decision made by Kaufman SDP in the matter. Coles submitted without contradiction that the
result of the conference before Kaufman SDP was that a settlement was reached, and that Kaufman SDP was not requested to arbitrate
the matter and make a decision. There is no record of a decision on file. Kaufman SDP’s Chambers advised Mr.Mansoor that the
matter was settled in conciliation
. Mr.Mansoor did not contradict them.
[21] We conclude that no decision was made by Kaufman SDP in relation to the application made by Mr.Mansoor in matter C2012/3516,
whether under the dispute settlement clause of the agreement or under another provision of the agreement, or under the Act. There
is therefore no decision which may be the subject of an appeal under the dispute settlement procedure or
of the Act.
[22] We must therefore dismiss the appeal. Nor is there a basis on which permission to appeal may be granted. We refuse permission
to appeal. It is not necessary for us to deal with the application for an extension of time in which to appeal.’
We have considered the submissions put to us. In the circumstances of the present matter we consider that it would be appropriate
to make an order pursuant to
that Mr.Mansoor bear some of the costs of Coles Supermarket in relation to the appeal.
Kaufman SDP made no decision which could be the subject of an appeal. This should have been apparent to Mr.Mansoor from a reading
of the legislation and/or upon making appropriate inquiries. Mr.Mansoor chose to persist with his appeal despite repeated attempts
by Fair Work Australia and Coles to raise with him the difficulties with his application, or to point out that his application was
misconceived and could not succeed.
We are satisfied that the requirements in
for the making of an order for costs are met. We are satisfied that Mr.Mansoor made the application to appeal “without reasonable
cause” and that he pursued the appeal in circumstances where it should have been reasonably apparent to him that it had no
reasonable prospect of success.
Accordingly we consider that the grounds have been made out for the making of an order for payment of part of the costs of Coles
Supermarket in the appeal.
However, we do not think that Mr.Mansoor should bear all of the costs of the matter. He was given an opportunity to put a submission
on 3 October 2012, having regard to the submissions already put by Coles Supermarket. He should at that stage have realised that
his application had no reasonable prospect of success. Coles had explained the nature of the matter and the fundamental difficulty
that his application had. In writing his submission he should have had regard to that explanation and acted accordingly. However,
he chose instead to pursue the appeal notwithstanding that explanation. He should bear the costs incurred by Coles from that time,
which consist of a further written submission and the costs of further written submissions relating to this matter.
This application will be dealt with by Deputy President Hamilton having regard to this decision. The order to be made and amount
of costs awarded will be determined by Deputy President Hamilton after providing an opportunity for the parties to make further submissions
on this issue.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Final written submissions:
[2012] FWAFB 8081
[2012] FWAFB 6323
, Boulton SDP, Hamilton DP, Steel C
[2012] FWAFB 6323
, Boulton SDP, Hamilton DP, Steel C
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR531008>
No downloadable files available