Shao v Crown Global Capital Pty Ltd (in prov liq) ACN 604 292 140 & Anor [2025] HCATrans 59 (2 September 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 059
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Sydney No S46 of 2025
B e t w e e n
CROWN GLOBAL CAPITAL PTY LTD (IN PROV LIQ)
ACN 604 292 140
First Respondent
CROWN GROUP HOLDINGS PTY LTD (IN PROV LIQ)
Second Respondent
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
BRISBANE ON TUESDAY, 2 SEPTEMBER 2025, AT 10.00 AM
High Court of Australia
MR J. HOROWITZ
please the Court, I appear with my learned friend
MR M.A. HAZAN
for the appellant. (instructed by Yau
& Wang Lawyers)
MR S.A. LAWRANCE, SC
May it please your Honours, I appear with my learned friends
MS C.M.R. ERNST
MS S.T. BRADBURY
for the respondents. (instructed by
Mangioni Biggs + Co)
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Lawrance. Mr Horowitz.
MR HOROWITZ:
you, your Honour. Your Honours have my outline of oral submissions.
I propose to deal with the notice of contention in
reply, if that is suitable.
GAGELER CJ:
Yes, that is fine. Thank you.
MR HOROWITZ:
Just an administrative matter to get out of
the way in the first instance, the respondents are in provisional liquidation.
I could just ask the Court to turn to the appellant’s book of further
materials at page 26.
GAGELER CJ:
Say that page again,
MR HOROWITZ:
MR HOROWITZ:
There is an order that was made
in the Court of Appeal granting leave to the appellant:
pursuant to s471B of the Corporations Act –
to proceed in
this appeal. I note that the respondents, as far as I am aware, remain in
provisional liquidation.
GAGELER CJ:
MR HOROWITZ:
This case involves what was termed a note
facility agreement, and that might be an appropriate place to start. That
page 4 of the appellant’s book of further materials. If I
can just take the Court briefly to some of the relevant terms.
itself at the beginning, under:
Note Facility Agreement
We confirm that Qian Peng and Yakun Shao –
are both there defined as the lender:
has agreed to make available this facility on the following terms and
conditions.
The borrower is Crown Global Capital, the first
respondent. The guarantor is Crown Group Holdings, the second
respondent. The limit
of the facility is $1 million, in number 3. Turning
over the page to clause 7:
The Borrower must issue Notes to the Lender upon settlement of each cash
advance made available under this facility . . . The Borrower
must provide to the Lender a certificate substantially in the form of
Annexure B –
And if we turn to annexure B, which is
on page 11, we will see there the note certificate that was issued in this
case. It is addressed
to Mr Peng and Ms Shao. It certifies that they
hold a million notes. The drawdown amount is $1 million; interest rate, 12 per
payable quarterly. The expiry date was originally 26 February, but
that was modified by hand to 5 March. Then, if we turn the page
page 12, it states there in clause 3 that:
The Borrower may at any time by issuing a Redemption Notice to the Lender
redeem any Notes, and on the Expiry Date must redeem all
Notes, which have not
previously been redeemed . . . and repay the Face Value and all
interest accrued but unpaid on the Note to
the date of payment.
That clause gives rise to an obligation in debt, we say. Clause 4
provided the means by which payment was to be made, and stated
All money payable by the Borrower to the Lender under the Notes must be paid
by cheque drawn by the Borrower and either delivered
personally to the Lender on
the due date for payment or deposited into the Lender’s bank account as
notified by the Lender
to the Borrower from time to time.
Justice Ball at first instance determined that this allowed for
electronic transfers, and the lender, as we know, is defined as both
Mr Peng and Ms Shao.
GAGELER CJ:
This is the
critical provision in your submission, I take it?
MR HOROWITZ:
This is the critical ‑ ‑ ‑
The critical provision in clause 4.
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes. Yes, that is right.
The primary judge did not
find a breach of clause 4.
MR HOROWITZ:
Was that subject to the appeal to the
New South Wales Court of Appeal?
MR HOROWITZ:
That was only dealt with somewhat peripherally. The question was whether
Ms Shao had lost her right to claim damages by reason
of having sued
Mr Peng before suing Crown.
And it is implicitly
for breach of clause 4.
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes. Well, indeed,
expressly. That was the pleaded – it was pleaded that she was
entitled to damages because of a breach
of clause 4.
MR HOROWITZ:
And it was maintained on the
appeal, in the same way that it is maintained here, that it was breach of
clause 4 that led to the
right to damages.
breach of clause 3?
MR HOROWITZ:
MR HOROWITZ:
No, we accept that there is no
breach of clause 3 by itself. The obligation in debt has been discharged.
What there is is a breach
of clause 4. We say whereas clause 3 sounds
in an action in debt, the breach of clause 4 sounds in an action in
Well, a breach of clause 3 could sound
in action for damages, as well, if the money was not paid.
Consequential damages – yes, that is true. Sorry,
that is correct. There is a debt obligation in clause 3. There are also
other obligations in clause 3(a), such as the obligation to issue a
redemption notice if there is going to be early repayment, and
there is an
obligation to pay on the expiry date. So, yes, breach of those aspects of the
clauses would sound in damages.
And one of them is
joint and several and the other is several.
MR HOROWITZ:
That is your case.
MR HOROWITZ:
Clause 4 is several – that is right – and
clause 3 is joint, and I will take the Court to the authorities in support
of that in due course.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Horowitz, to the
extent that there is a difference between you and your opponent as to the
construction of clause 4, could you
identify that difference and state the
construction for which you contend.
MR HOROWITZ:
As I understand
it, my opponents contend that there cannot be a discharge of the debt under
clause 3, or any other provision, unless
clause 4 is complied with.
So, they say clause 4 is a condition precedent for the discharge of the
debt, and so that if clause 4
is not complied with, there has been no
discharge of the debt at all and, consequently, the appellant’s only cause
is in debt, not in damages.
fundamental than that, is it not? That is why I put to you that it is joint and
several. They say there is one obligation,
not two obligations. That is, that
the debt and the form of the repayment of the debt are inextricably linked, that
you cannot separate
them out – that is the respondent’s case,
as I understand it – and that therefore you must elect in order to
how you are going to seek to recover. Your case is: no, there are
two obligations, not one; one is in debt and one is for contract.
Yes. I accept that way of putting it, your Honour. Thank
you. So, one of the arguments that is made by my friends is that
– the appellant seeks to rely upon an implied term, that the
debt cannot be repaid in any way other than in accordance with
Our response to that is, looking at the words of clause 4, it expressly
All money payable . . . must be paid –
in this manner. That is, both of the lenders must nominate the account.
We say there is no need to imply a clause, because where
the act that is
complained of is the breach of an express term, one does not need to imply any
further term which would have the
effect of preventing that act. We cite
Lewison on contracts in our submissions for that proposition. Now, if I could
actually, I will not take your Honours there yet, but the
Court of Appeal held that clause 4:
required Crown . . . to pay out the debt only when both joint
creditors, Ms Shao and Mr Peng, had nominated an account into which
the monies could be paid.
During the term of the loan – it was a 12‑month
loan – Shao and Peng separated, and Peng misappropriated other moneys
that belonged to Ms Shao, which had nothing to do with this facility
agreement. In August of 2015, Ms Shao informed Crown of her
from Peng, of her intention to divorce him, and of his misappropriation of the
That was the subject of much of the dispute below on the
question of whether or not Mr Peng had authority – either actual
apparent authority – to give directions to Crown, and
Justice Ball found that after Ms Shao had informed Crown about her
from Peng, and her intention to divorce him, there was no apparent
authority after that date.
So, that happened in August of 2015.
Notwithstanding that notification to Crown, on 17 February, Crown emailed
Mr Peng alone to
notify him that the facility agreement was due to expire
on 26 February, and this is at the respondent’s book of further
page 4. At the bottom of the page, we have the email from
Ms Edwards, who was an employee of Crown, writing to Mr Peng, telling
him that the:
Loan Notes Facility . . . will expire on 26
As it happened, that was incorrect, because the date had been changed on
the document to 5 March. Then, referring to clause 4, which
the method of payment, and asking whether payment should be by cheque or
transfer, and if by transfer:
please provide the account details so that we can proceed
accordingly.
Mr Peng responded as we see at the top of the page
Thanks for the reminder.
It would be good to receive the repayment via transfer –
into the following account. That was an account in his name. Notably,
it was a different account to the account where Crown had
been paying the
quarterly interest payments. Those payments had been made into a joint account
of Ms Shao and Mr Peng. So, Crown
was aware that Mr Peng was
changing the account that the payment was to be received.
receiving that response from Mr Peng, Crown went and paid the
$1 million in principal and some $18,000‑odd in interests
accrued but had not yet been paid. The Court of Appeal found that this email
from Ms Edwards to Mr Peng constituted a valid
redemption notice under
clause 3(a), and that was able to be accepted by Mr Peng.
On 3 March ‑ ‑ ‑
And you do not challenge that.
MR HOROWITZ:
we do not challenge that.
On 3 March ‑ ‑ ‑
That is because clause 3, “lender” – you accept
now, I take it – is to be read severally. Clause 3 of the
facility agreement.
MR HOROWITZ:
Well, the Court of Appeal
held that, in the context of a redemption notice and the requirement to issue a
redemption notice, either
Mr Peng or Ms Shao were able to accept it
themselves. That is a consequence of clause 3 being a joint obligation, I
believe, because,
where there is a joint obligation, either one of the joint
obliges can accept it, differently to a several obligation where obviously
have to accept it.
My recollection, though, was that
the trial judge read “lender” in clause 3 as being either
Ms Shao or Mr Peng.
MR HOROWITZ:
For the purposes
of accepting a redemption notice, yes, that is correct.
MR HOROWITZ:
Not for the purposes of discharging the debt,
MR HOROWITZ:
moneys were paid back on 25 February 2016. On 3 March, some two days
before the facility agreement was due to expire, Shao
telephoned Crown to
discuss the imminent expiry of the facility agreement, only to be told that the
moneys had already been repaid
to Mr Peng. Shao commenced proceedings that
same day against Mr Peng and obtained freezing orders against him but
discovered in
the course of those proceedings that the moneys had already been
dissipated by Mr Peng transferring the moneys to his parents in
In the 2016 proceedings, at the time that Ms Shao rushed up
to court to get an injunction, there were a number of defendants named,
including the respondents. It was decided, however, not to proceed against the
respondents – or any of the other defendants
– other than
Mr Peng. Expedition was granted and Ms Shao proceeded to obtain
judgment against Mr Peng for the full amount,
relevantly, of the
$1 million and the $18,000 in interest, and she ultimately bankrupted
So, if I could take your Honours then to one of the critical
paragraphs in the Court of Appeal’s judgment, which is in the
core appeal book at page 59.
GAGELER CJ:
What paragraph is
MR HOROWITZ:
Paragraph 38.
GAGELER CJ:
MR HOROWITZ:
Court of Appeal said:
In light of –
the previous factual findings:
the question remained whether Ms Shao was entitled to sue Crown for her
debt given her earlier suit against Mr Peng.
That, I should point out, is incorrect. Ms Shao never sued Crown
for debt. It is common ground between the parties that the claim
made against
Crown below was a claim for damages:
The primary judge found that when Ms Shao learned that Mr Peng had
applied the proceeds of the Note Facility to his own use, she had
(1) suing Crown for recovery of the proceeds on the ground that its payment
to Mr Peng did not validly discharge the debt . . . or
(2) accepting that the payment to Mr Peng validly discharged the debt
owed by Crown . . . and suing Mr Peng.
those moneys. What we say this omits is a third option, which is the option to
accept that the debt was discharged by
the payment out, but it was not
discharged in conformity with the contract. In particular, clause 4. That
enabled Ms Shao to sue
for the damages that arose from the defective
performance of the discharge of the debt. We say this is an application of
contractual principle and we rely upon a number of cases for that
proposition.
The first that I will take your Honours to is
MacKenzie v Albany Finance
, which is in the joint book of
authorities behind tab 23, which is page 512. Just very briefly, that
case involved the appellants,
the MacKenzies, having made interest‑bearing
deposits with Albany Finance. Those deposits rolled over after the
maturity date,
and the term of the deposit was that interest would keep accruing
and the moneys were repayable on demand.
What occurred was that Albany
made several repayments after the maturity date but without any demand having
been made for those payments.
The question was whether the appellants were
entitled to interest as a result of the payment having been made without demand.
is, it was not made in conformity with the contract. The relevant
paragraph I will take your Honours to is paragraph 106, which
the bottom of page 556 of the joint bundle, where
his Honour Justice Heenan says:
Consequently, for repayments to be made by the respondent to the appellant
under this loan, they should have been made upon a demand
for repayment of the
entire deposit, in which case the whole of the principal and accrued interest
would have become due and payable
. . . Repayment of any or all
of the deposit by the respondent, without demand being made or without interest
being paid, would not
be a payment made in conformity with the terms of the
deposit. Unless accepted at the time such repayment was offered, or
subsequently
ratified, such a repayment would be in breach of the terms of the
contract of deposit and could expose the respondent to a claim
for damages,
for example:
the appellants were only able to reinvest the principal for the remainder of
the term or terms at lower interest rates.
Importantly here, his Honour
Such a premature or part payment of principal could be made and accepted, but
would still entitle the appellant to bring a claim for
damages for loss of
interest if reinvestment on comparable terms was not possible. Alternatively,
if a premature repayment or partial
repayment had been offered, the appellants
would have been entitled to refuse to accept payment and to insist on the
investment continuing
In my submission, that is an equivalent choice to the one that
Ms Shao had in this case.
So, the principle you
are just relying on is that acceptance of performance does not waive a claim for
damages for breach in the manner
of the performance.
MR HOROWITZ:
That is exactly correct, your Honour.
is a principle that is a little bit older than 2004.
MR HOROWITZ:
No – yes, that is true, but it is a principle that has been
elucidated since
Hungerfords v Walker
in relation to money claims and the
ability to accept repayment of the debt and then seek consequential damages for
the defective
repayment, and so it is in
So, put it in these terms, there are many old cases dealing with goods,
where goods can be accepted but you can still breach –
action for breach in relation to the nature of those goods. So, is it any
different from those cases?
MR HOROWITZ:
No, we say it is not,
and we say that is made clear in
Hungerfords v Walker
and cases which
follow on from
Hungerfords v Walker
one case that expressly refers to
Hungerfords v Walker
that we rely upon
Hardie v Shadbolt
, which is in the joint book of authorities at
page 437, which is behind tab 19.
That was a case in which a
plaintiff was able to accept repayment of a debt in breach of contract and sue
for damages. So, what
happened in this case is that debts were repaid late as
opposed to early, like in the
case. If your Honours see,
at paragraph 7 to 11, there are the dates that the payments were due and
the dates that they were actually
GAGELER CJ:
to go into that much detail?
MR HOROWITZ:
No. I will go
straight to page 456, which sets out, at paragraph 57, the fact
the respondents claimed in the alternative damages for breach of the
Agreement, quantified as the amount due on the termination
. . . plus loss of opportunity to use the moneys
comprising the principal outstanding . . . to their commercial
advantage –
and reliance was placed on
Hungerfords v Walker
as authority for
the ability to claim that. Now, although
Hungerfords v Walker
with a time stipulation in a contract enabled
the lender to claim consequential
damages resulting from their loss of the use of the money between the time that
the money was due
for payment and the time that it was repaid. The respondents
do not take issue with those principles.
What they say, however, is that
those principles do not enable a plaintiff to obtain the quantum of the debt as
damages or, effectively,
a similar almost identical quantum of the debt as
damages. Our response to that is that it depends on what consequential loss is
suffered as a result of the debtor’s breach of contract.
Hardie v Shadbolt
, the loss that was compensated for was a temporary loss
of the use of the moneys. What has happened in this case is that Crown’s
defective performance in repaying the debt resulted in a permanent loss of the
use of the $1 million by Ms Shao, rather than just
the temporary
That is the consequential damage that she suffered when Crown
breached clause 4. The purpose of clause 4, as was found by the
below, was to protect both Mr Peng and Ms Shao. One of the
things that it was to protect them from was that one or the other would
moneys for themselves.
Why on your case was the
consequential loss the whole of the amount of the money? Why was it not
MR HOROWITZ:
Because we established that Ms Shao was
the beneficial owner of the entirety of the money, so she had contributed the
of the funds. That was pleaded – it was originally denied
or not admitted, but at the haring at first instance the respondents
that she was the beneficial owner of the entirety of the
Does that mean that Mr Peng had an
obligation to her – although he was jointly entitled to the debt, he
had an obligation to
her to contribute 100 per cent of any recovery that he
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes, that is correct,
your Honour.
Was there a finding to that
MR HOROWITZ:
There was a finding that the moneys were
beneficially owned by Ms Shao, and I believe the finding was that the
moneys that ‑
That is the moneys that were contributed to the loan, not the debt
MR HOROWITZ:
But the finding, I believe, was that
Ms Shao and Mr Peng were trustees who held the interest in the debt on
trust for Ms Shao alone.
MR HOROWITZ:
I will try and obtain a reference to that in
the judgment. So, what we say is that, by paying the million dollars to
Crown enabled him to misappropriate it, which he did.
Accordingly, Ms Shao is not suing Crown now to recover the million dollars
as a debt, she is suing to recover the million dollars in consequential damages
that she suffered as a result of their breach of
clause 4. It is also
entirely possible that the quantum that is sought in a case such as this could
far exceed the amount of the
If, for example, instead of
clause 4 in this contract, Ms Shao had asked to have inserted a clause
that Crown agreed with which required
Crown to pay the loan proceeds into a
solicitor’s trust account and it was recorded that that was because
Ms Shao had entered
into a contract to purchase a property and the
completion date was 12 months hence and the money was required to complete
the purchase
of the property – time being of the essence –
if Crown then paid the moneys directly to Ms Shao, she could accept that
the debt was discharged but still sue Crown for the consequential loss that she
suffered as a result of them not complying with the
obligation to pay it to the
solicitor’s account if the contract fell over as a result and she lost the
deposit and she lost
any profits on the property.
I give that example to
illustrate that, while
Hungerfords v Walker
MacKenzie v Albany Finance
deal with breaches as to
time stipulations in a contract, there is no difference in principle between a
breach as to a time stipulation
and a breach as to a place stipulation where the
moneys have to be paid.
GAGELER CJ:
So the primary authority
that you rely on is
Hungerfords v Walker
MR HOROWITZ:
GAGELER CJ:
And the cases that you go on to refer to in
paragraph 4, you say, are illustrations of that principle working out in a
similar circumstance
to the present?
MR HOROWITZ:
I am sorry,
paragraph 4 of?
GAGELER CJ:
Paragraph 4 of your
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes, those cases – well, two of
them precede
Hungerfords v Walker
, but essentially, yes. One can apply
the same reasoning to explain the results in those cases.
makes the submission that what Ms Shao is claiming in this case is to be
entitled to have both repayment of the debt and
damages to compensate her for
not receiving the moneys comprising repayment of the debt, but the whole point
is that Ms Shao did
not receive the debt. She accepts that it was
discharged but defectively. So, there is no injustice involved in
suing Crown for damages.
Crown accepts that
Ms Shao could have sued it in debt and it would have been liable to pay out
an additional million dollars on top
of the million dollars that it paid to
Mr Peng, but Crown says that because Ms Shao attempted to recover the
money from Mr Peng first,
Ms Shao is now shut out from obtaining any
relief against Crown. If that were correct, it would leave Ms Shao bearing
the entirety
of the loss in circumstances where she was the only innocent party
in this transaction.
Now, if I can turn, please, to those three cases
that I refer to in paragraph 4 of the outline, the first one being
, which is behind tab 13, at page 365.
involved two partners who opened a joint account with a bank. The cheques that
were drawn on the account were required to be signed
by both partners. One of
the partners forged Ardern’s signature on 13 of the cheques and the bank
paid the money out and then
Ardern sued the bank for breach of
The question in that case was whether Mr Ardern could sue
the bank in relation to its wrongful repayment of a debt where that debt
owed jointly to both Ardern and his partner, Mr Brookes, but where
Mr Brookes was disentitled from suing the bank by reason of
his fraudulent
conduct. Justice Martin held that there were in fact two separate
obligations: an obligation in debt owed jointly
and an obligation not to honour
cheques unless signed by both, and that obligation was owed
Is the key to that distinction that the
requirement that there be both signatures on the cheques is
protective – it is a protective
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes, precisely, your Honour.
You would say it is
the same here ‑ ‑ ‑
Exactly the same.
‑ ‑ ‑ this is a
protective.
MR HOROWITZ:
Indeed, that
is why it is not jointly, it is several; it is protective against each
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes. Indeed, there was an express finding
to that effect ‑ ‑ ‑
Page 574 of
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes, but I was
going to say, your Honour, there is an express finding in the judgment of
the Court of Appeal, if I could just interpolate,
at paragraph 60, which is
on page 65 of the core appeal book. Her Honour Justice Adamson
writes, at the bottom of page 65:
the reference to “Lender” in
cl 4 . . . must mean both of them
That is not saying that the clause is a joint clause, her Honour
there is saying the definition of “Lender” is to be interpreted
Shao and Peng, and her Honour says:
to fulfil the purpose of protecting each of the lenders as well as Crown. It
protects each of the lenders from the other nominating
an account to which the
other lender has sole access –
And I think Justice Martin at page 573 of
the Victorian Law Report, about halfway down the page:
This condition, as to both partners signing, was obviously inserted for the
benefit of each partner, to prevent any dishonest drawings
MR HOROWITZ:
MR HOROWITZ:
while ‑ ‑ ‑
can I just – I know I came back to this earlier. Reduced to its
simplest terms – I do not mean this pejoratively
have a contract, you say it has an express term, that term has an undertaking or
an obligation or a condition that the
manner of the payment is to be done by
account nominated by two people in a protective sense described both by the
primary judge
in the Court of Appeal here and by the Supreme Court of Victoria
at 573 and again at 574, and that was
MR HOROWITZ:
you are entitled to damages for breach, notwithstanding the fact that the
separate debt obligation was discharged.
MR HOROWITZ:
respect, yes, that is our case.
And presumably you
would say that the damages would be reduced for the amount that you have
recovered in the bankruptcy.
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes, of course, and we
have taken that into account.
And that was
MR HOROWITZ:
It was, yes. Had we recovered a larger
amount, it would have been reduced further. Indeed, had we recovered the entire
then there would have been no need to sue Crown at all, potentially.
Relevantly, I might just mention in response to my friends’
argument that
involved the implication of a term, one can see, from about
point 4 on the page of 573, his Honour says:
the agreement in this case was that the bank would open a joint account in
the names of both partners and that no cheque would be
honoured unless signed by
both of them.
So, we say that was an express term, not an implied
Why does it matter whether it was an express or
an implied term in
or in this case?
MR HOROWITZ:
Well, my friends say that there was no reason to imply a term for business
efficacy or for any other of the reasons and that we
have not met all of the
tests set out in
BP Refinery
only rely on clause 4.
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes, we only rely on
clause 4, and we say that, to the extent that there is a necessary
implication that one cannot pay out other
than in accordance with clause 4,
that is just an implication that flows from the natural words of clause 4.
It is still an express
term; it is not an implied term. It is a matter of
construction.
At the bottom of page 370 of the bundle, or 574
in the Victorian Law Report, there is a reference there to Justice Martin
to permit Mr Ardern to elect whether he will have judgment for
damages or a declaration that the bank had wrongfully debited the
account. So,
that is to say that Mr Ardern had to make an election between rejecting the
bank’s purported repayment of the
debt, in which case the account would
have been credited, or accepting that the debt had been discharged, albeit
defectively, and
claiming damages arising from the defective discharge. In this
case, because they were partnership funds, the judge held that Mr
was entitled to half the amount in the account.
Importantly, we say it
would have made no difference if Mr Ardern sued Mr Brookes before he
sued the bank, other than Justice Martin
would not have been able to give
him an election in the form that his Honour did at the bottom of
page 574 because, by suing Mr Brookes,
he would have accepted that the
debt was discharged, because that was the basis of his suit against
Mr Brookes in trying to recover
the moneys from Mr Brookes, and so he
would have only had the opportunity to claim damages.
In the same way,
we say in this case, Ms Shao could have sued Crown – without
suing Mr Peng first, she could have sued Crown
and claimed damages. She
would not have had to claim debt against Crown if she sued them first, just as
Mr Ardern had an
might have been met by a defence of failure to mitigate.
Yes, it may have been, and we say that one of the things that
she did by suing Peng was attempt to mitigate, and it is on that
Ms Shao claims the costs of the suit against
Was the primary judge taken to this
line of authority?
MR HOROWITZ:
No. However, the Court of
Appeal was.
has been followed fairly extensively in Australia,
are set out in my written submissions, but I will not detain the Court by
taking your Honours to any of those.
The next case that we rely
upon in this regard is
, which is to be found behind tab 17,
at page 413. In
, the bank paid out funds that were held in a
joint account on the instructions of Mr Catlin alone, despite being
required to act
only on instructions signed by both Mr and Mrs Catlin.
, the court held that Mrs Catlin was entitled to
damages for the bank’s breach of its obligation not to honour instructions
that had not been signed by both account holders. So, at page 417 of the
bundle at G, which is page 763 in the report, it stated
Mr. and Mrs. Catlin instructed the defendants in writing that all orders
for payment or transfer from the account were to be signed
So, we say again that that is an express clause, an express
obligation. Then, at page 422 of the bundle, at page 768 in the
his Honour Justice Bingham sets out at D:
The factual position can therefore be put very shortly. The plaintiff and
her husband deposited funds in a joint deposit account
with the defendants on
terms of an express mandate that no payment out of the account should be made
save on the joint signatures
of both account holders. In breach of that
mandate, and without the knowledge or authority of the plaintiff, the defendants
negligently
transferred all the funds out of the
That reference to “negligently” is not a
reference to a cause of action in negligence but negligently in terms of the
performance of the contract. His Honour says at the bottom at that
One might suppose that there could be no answer to her claim.
defendants in that case raised
Brewer v Westminster
his Honour says that:
I should be sorry to conclude that they are right. The plaintiff has
suffered serious loss through no fault of her own. A rule that
denies her any
remedy in such circumstances is not one that could be viewed with
complacency.
I might interpolate that the same proposition applies in
this case. Then turning over to page 425, at line C:
The defendants agreed to honour instructions signed by both account holders.
This no doubt imported a negative duty not to honour
instructions not signed by
both account holders. This duty also could, in theory, have been owed jointly,
but it must (to make sense)
have been owed to the account holders severally,
because the only purpose of requiring two signatures was to obviate the
possibility
of independent action by one account holder to the detriment of the
We say clause 4 has the same effect here. Now, my friends
seem to suggest that the words:
This no doubt imported a negative duty not to honour instructions not signed
by both account holders.
again is an implied term in the contract, but
again, we say that that is not an implied term; it is an implication that arises
the words. And ‑ ‑ ‑
It has to be a term, I think, on any view, because it is, as I
understand it from your submission, accepted that without acceptance
Ms Shao, the debt would not have been
discharged.
MR HOROWITZ:
So, there has to be either a negative implication in clause 4 or an express
stipulation as part of clause 4 that required the payment
to be made as
notified by both of them.
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes, we say it is
express, and it is just a matter of construction and there is no need to imply
it. The next case that we rely
, which is behind tab 18,
page 427 of the bundle. That case involved a debtor, Aon, who owed moneys
to two joint creditors: FNS
Those moneys were to be paid into
a designated bank account agreed by both FNS and DAR – we say, a
relevantly identical obligation
to that in this case – and in breach
of that term, Aon paid the moneys owing on the instructions of only one of the
joint creditors,
FNS, and DAR sued and was held entitled to damages, subject to
assessment. So, relevantly on page 428 of the bundle, at paragraph
of the judgment, the relevant term is set out at the very bottom of the page:
Payments to FNS Consultant/DAR –
that is, the two
joint creditors:
will be made in accordance with the above pro rata basis, immediately upon
receipt . . . and into a designated Bank Account to be
Then, if we turn to paragraph 18, Lord Justice Mance
In circumstances –
that I do not need to go into:
Aon has, it appears, paid monies on account of the 60 per cent
brokerage due to DAR/FNS to Mr Sfeir alone –
who is FNS. Then, in paragraph 19:
DAR’s case is that it was not open to Aon to make such payments to Mr
Sfeir alone without any prior notice to and without any
consent . . . The judge accepted that case.
if we turn to the top of page 434, his Honour says at top of that
The relevant clause was clearly aimed at regulating the way in which payment
should be made, not just its timing. The phrase “a
designated bank
account to be agreed” was on the face of it to ensure that there could be
no doubt about where and to what
place the joint venturers’ share was to
go. They were to agree and to designate a bank account for the purposes of
payments. On the face of it such a provision was important for
everyone concerned; for Aon, who would know that it had to meet the
to FNS/DAR, and also to FNS and DAR, who would know as between themselves that
the commission which they had obviously
agreed to split between
themselves . . . would be safely received in the designated
and agreed bank account for the protection of
each of them.
So, all of these cases have the same theme, that a clause such as
clause 4 is specifically to protect joint creditors, and there can
breach of clause 4 which sounds in damages. Then, in paragraph 30,
Lord Justice Mance says that the clause was:
for the benefit of each and every one of the three
parties . . . it is the necessary corollary of it that Aon
owed a duty to DAR and
to FNS, individually or severally, not to make payments
Finally, looking at paragraph 35, his Honour says:
Assuming that the monies paid to Mr Sfeir were due in terms of the agreement
as all or part of the brokerage . . . then DAR has in
my judgment
a valid claim for damages, even though no designated account was ever opened.
It was a breach –
of the agreement:
in such circumstances –
to pay and, but for the breach . . . one can readily surmise
that Mr Sfeir and Mr Said would have come to some
agreement . . . about
a joint bank account or jointly agreed
method of payment –
In that circumstance, there was a payment out by claiming damages or
electing to claim damages. DAR accepted that there was no more
claim for debt
under the contract. Instead, it was a claim in damages for breach of that
clause requiring a joint bank account to
be nominated.
Now, underlying
the respondents’ submissions, there seems to be an assumption that a
debtor either repays a debt in conformity
with a contract or the debtor has not
performed the contract at all. They seem to deny the possibility that a debtor
may defectively
perform a contract. We say that that possibility is expressly
contemplated by cases such as
Hungerfords v Walker
MacKenzie v Albany Finance
but also it can be inferred inferentially
from the result that, in
plaintiffs were entitled to damages.
A similar argument to the argument
that has been put by the respondents was made in
Albright & Wilson UK Ltd
, and that case is to be found at tab 12 of the joint bundle,
page 349. Just briefly, that case involved a delivery of a chemical
wrong location, which led to an explosion at a factory.
It was argued
that because the contract required the chemical to be delivered to another
location, and no delivery had been made
to that other location, then the only
damages that could be claimed for breach of contract was for failure to deliver
the chemical
at all. That is, the chemical had not been delivered to A; instead
it was delivered to B.
So, you could get damages for failure to deliver
to A but no damages for delivery to B, which resulted in the explosion at the
That argument was rejected by the Court of Appeal. This
decision was partly reversed in the House of Lords, but not on this
GAGELER CJ:
So, is there a proposition of law you are
trying to extract?
MR HOROWITZ:
GAGELER CJ:
Perhaps you could take us to that.
MR HOROWITZ:
At paragraph [21], on page 357. At the bottom of the page,
demonstrates that the concept of purported performance that the judge was
asked to pass on extends to cases where there is objectively
an attempt to
perform a contract, but that attempt goes wrong.
Then, if we turn to page 362, at the top of page 362, it was
argued by counsel for Berk – who had delivered to the wrong
A breach of s 14 was to be determined as to what happened at the place
of delivery. That was required to be at the fluids plant.
No delivery was made
there: the goods were sent to the phosphates plant. So the time for
performance by Berk had not yet arisen,
and the only fault on Berk’s part
was not to deliver at all. As a result, the damages would be somewhat less
GAGELER CJ:
So, stated at a level of principle that can be
applied to the present case, what is it that you say this case
illustrates?
MR HOROWITZ:
paragraph [37], I think.
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes. If I could
just ask your Honours to read paragraph [37].
As I understand it, you are just making a point that existed long before
1893 and the
Sale of Goods Act
. It is just that
acceptance of a performance does not waive a breach in terms of the manner or
the circumstances of the performance.
MR HOROWITZ:
Accepting defective goods does not mean you
cannot sue for the defect. That is the only point, is it
MR HOROWITZ:
It is, but the respondents say that there
was no performance of the contract – that when they paid Peng, that
was a payment
which was entirely outside of any relevant to the facility
agreement between them and the lender.
We say that that is a
commercially absurd proposition, because when Crown paid Mr Peng, they sent
him an email telling him they were
going to pay him; they asked him where to pay
it; they paid in accordance with the direction; when Ms Shao rang them,
we have paid it already to Mr Peng. Then, in the proceedings
below, they defended the case on the
basis that they had paid it properly in
accordance with the contract because Mr Peng had authority from
Ms Shao – whether actual
or apparent – to direct them
where to pay the payment.
So, we say, that the proposition in
applies. They purported to perform, it was a defective
performance, and that performance was accepted so far as it discharged the
but it gave rise to a claim in damages.
the errors that you are pointing to in the Court of Appeal’s
judgment is the last sentence of paragraph 65, where
Justice Adamson
found that Crown:
did not thereby obtain good discharge of the debt.
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes, that is correct –
subject to this. At the time they made the payment, they did not obtain a good
discharge of the debt,
because Ms Shao had the election whether to accept
that the debt was discharged or not. Having accepted that it is discharged, she
was then entitled to claim damages.
My final point is on the question of
ratification. Our principal proposition is that there is no ratification
involved by Ms Shao
having sued Mr Peng. Approbation and reprobation
fundamentally involves a choice between two inconsistent rights, and for all of
the reasons that I have given, there was no inconsistency here, because she was
able to accept the discharge of the debt and then
sue for damages, so the
question of ratification simply does not arise. Unless your Honours have
any further questions, those are
my submissions.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Lawrance.
MR LAWRANCE:
Your Honours, I will start, if I may, by answering the question that
your Honour the Chief Justice asked to my learned friend at
outset, that is, what is the construction that we give to clause 4 of the
note terms and conditions. If I can take your Honours
to those, which are
in the appellant’s book of further
material ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Lawrance, could you speak up a little?
MR LAWRANCE:
Yes, I am sorry, your Honour, I will speak up. If your Honours
have the appellant’s book of further material, the relevant
clause 4 on page 12. In our submission, clause 4 sets out the
mode of payment that must be followed to get a good discharge
of a payment
obligation under the notes. That is the construction that the learned trial
judge gave to that clause at paragraph
40 of his Honour’s
reasons, and we say in essence that his Honour was correct to give the
clause that construction.
While your Honours have the agreement
before you, may I jump ahead and give your Honours two points concerning
the construction of
this agreement. The first is that, if your Honours see
in clause 4 the expression:
All money payable by the Borrower to the Lender under the
there is no separate fund here, there is no identifiable fund. The
relationship between borrower and lender is purely one of debtor
and creditor.
So, when clause 4 speaks of “money payable”, it is not speaking
of an identified or identifiable fund
of money or money’s worth that must
be paid. In the literal sense, there is no such thing as “money payable
by the Borrower
to the Lender”.
What the note terms and conditions
impose are payment obligations. That is, obligations on the borrower to make a
payment by delivering
money or otherwise discharging the obligation by
money’s worth, so that when one comes to construe clause 4, and in
the reference to:
All money payable by the Borrower to the Lender –
absence of any identifiable money that is the money to be paid is a reason why,
in our submission, that clause should be understood
as dealing with the way in
which a payment obligation must be performed under the agreement. The second
point ‑ ‑ ‑
that is common ground, is it not? What seems to be in dispute is whether or
not, in addition to it being a precondition to
discharge, it also creates a duty
as to the manner in which the payment must occur.
MR LAWRANCE:
Yes, with respect, a duty and a duty that is owed severally rather than
jointly. And if I am right in the first point that I have
your Honours as to there being, in the literal sense, no money payable
under this agreement, so that when one reads:
All money payable by the Borrower to the Lender under the Notes
one understands those words as setting out how the
borrower needs to go about performing or satisfying a payment obligation, then
that is a different meaning.
That is giving those words a different
meaning to the words that our learned friends would seek to give them if one
were to treat
them as, essentially, the
term, if I can use the
So, you reject the findings that it had a
protective purpose?
MR LAWRANCE:
No, with respect, absolutely
not. It has a protective purpose, and the protective purpose is adequately
served by the fact that if
the payment is made, if the payment obligation is
purported to be satisfied in a way that does not comply with clause 4, then
debt just will not be discharged.
So, the innocent account holder is
protected, because the debt is simply not discharged. They are protected in
that way. They do
not need to be protected by a separate and several negative
stipulation of the type proposed in
, which picks up the suggestion
of Sir Arthur Goodhart in the note that is in volume 4 of the
book of authorities.
Justice Bingham would be
MR LAWRANCE:
With respect, yes.
Again, unnecessary to –
is also a mandate case. We do
say that ‑ ‑ ‑
is a lot of cases that have relied upon that type of negative stipulation in an
express term of this nature.
MR LAWRANCE:
Yes, and in this
country it is in particular
Vella v Permanent
, but taking it as a matter of first principles, if the bank sends
the customer a bank statement that incorrectly debits the account
$1 million, in my submission, it is not a term of the bank
and customer contact that that gives rise to the right to sue the bank
for $1 million as damages. It is simply a wrongful debit in the
running ledger between banker and customer that can be corrected.
does not mean that the bank, by making the wrongful debit, has inadvertently
extended further credit to the customer which the
customer can enforce via a
claim for money damages, so that – I will come to it in a little
while, but in our submission,
was wrong and has been the departure
point for the line of cases that begins with
, which all proceed on
the false premise that the innocent account holder in that example cannot
enforce the debt for its true amount.
Now, if that is right and the debt
is the debt, and the innocent account holder can enforce the debt for the true
amount, then the
innocent account holder is perfectly adequately protected by
the fact that the debt is not discharged, and there is no need to construe
apply – it does not, in my submission, matter which it
is – the terms as including the Goodhart several promise not
in the wrong way.
Indeed, there is a slight circularity implicit in the
Goodhart implied term because, ex hypothesis, if the payment in this case
not accord with the mode required by clause 4 of the note terms and
conditions, there has not been loss suffered by the innocent
account holder,
because the debt just has not been discharged. The account holder is in no
different position to the position they
were in before the purported payment.
That was the first point I wished to give your Honours on the note facility
The second is shorter, and it is this. Your Honours
have seen that the contract is, in fact a note facility agreement, so it is
agreement under which the borrower agrees to issue and the lender agrees to
subscribe for notes. Once issued, those notes are
promissory notes, they would
be promissory notes for the purpose of the
Bills of Exchange Act
mattered. The point is that they are inherently transferable and, indeed, the
transferability of the notes is recognised
in clause 7(b) at page 7 of
the appellant’s books of further material.
I am sorry, I have
given your Honours the wrong page. It is page 5, where
clause 7(b) recognises the transferability of the notes.
The only point I
say your Honours get from that is that when your Honours are
construing clauses 3 and 4 in the note terms and conditions.
need to be read taking into account the transferability of the notes, which
means that the lender could be a person to whom
the notes were
transferred.
It could be a single person, it could be three people to
whom the notes were jointly transferred. The only point is that although,
this particular certificate, the lender is constituted by two persons, when one
comes to construe the note terms and conditions,
one needs to take into account
the fact that the lender might be a single person or might be multiple
But if you accept the protective purpose,
which you do not challenge, as I understand it, does not that argument work
against you?
MR LAWRANCE:
In my submission, no. I
accept ‑ ‑ ‑
Why is that?
MR LAWRANCE:
Because the protective purpose is
achieved by providing for the debt still to be there and enforced by the
innocent account holder
if it is not discharged in the way provided for by the
contract. So, in the case of
, for example, when I come to it, it
will be my submission that there being no valid right to debit the account,
because the debt
simply has not been discharged.
There was no right in
the bank having paid on that cheque which was not a cheque that was properly
within the bank’s mandate
to pay on as agent for the customer –
there was just then no right to debit the account in the bank, so that the
innocent account
holder – in that case, Mr Ardern –
is protected by virtue of the fact that the account balance in that case has not
If that argument is right, it would
work for goods as well as for money, would it not? If you had a clause
for – if this were
not payment of money, if it were the provision of
goods, and the requirement, the precondition, your terms were that the goods
delivered to a particular place for the protection of the purchaser, your
argument would be: well, if the goods are delivered to
the wrong place, the
purchaser has got perfectly adequate protection of rejecting the goods, no claim
for breach of contract. There
is no ability to accept the goods and sue for
breach of contract.
MR LAWRANCE:
Well, it is different in this
sense, in my submission. In the case of the payment, it is either a payment
that does or does not
discharge the debt obligation. So that in the case of
, for example, the account balance had a balance prior to the
plaintiff making an election and, in my submission, it was a balance
not reduced by the £626, it is binary in a case
same with goods. The goods either do discharge the obligation of performance or
not. If you say, well, delivery to Rotterdam
rather than to Antwerp is a
precondition, the obligation is either not discharged or it is
discharged.
MR LAWRANCE:
Well, goods might be different in this
sense, in that one could substantially perform the contract for delivery of
goods and still
breach. However, in the case of the payment of money, it is
either paid in accordance with the requirements – in this case,
clause 4 – or it is not. So, it is binary in that
Your Honours, can I come back, then, to the start of the first
point in our outline that we provided this morning and deal with
which your Honours will find at page 406 of the bundle. This was the
case in which his Honour Justice McNair held that the rule
Brandon v Scott
prevented the innocent account holder from obtaining
a declaration as to the true balance of the account in the sense that it held
that the innocent account holder could not obtain a declaration that the debit
was wrongful.
The point I wished to draw attention to is that, if
your Honours have page 412 of the bundle, which is 656 of the report,
your Honours
will see at point G to H on the page that
Justice McNair accepted, in our submission, correctly, that the bank had
not obtained a
good discharge of the debt, which would have the
result – when combined with his Honour’s earlier
acceptance that
Brandon v Scott
prevented the account holders from
obtaining a declaration that the debit could not be maintained – that
the debt owed by the
bank would become, in a sense, a form of imperfect
obligation, in the sense that the debt remains because it has not been
discharged,
but neither account holder would be able to enforce it, which tends,
in our submission, to suggest the problem in the earlier treatment
Brandon v Scott
Your Honours have seen from the
written submissions that different solutions to
were posited by
Sir Arthur Goodhart and Dr Glanville Williams. I will not
take your Honours to them, but I will just point out that
in the Goodhart
solution, if I can put it that way, which is the genesis for the term that
Justice Martin found as the term of the
contract in
author accepts that Justice McNair was correct to conclude that
Brandon v Scott
prevented the plaintiff from obtaining the
declaration sought.
What we say is the correct answer to the
unsatisfactory result in
is that proposed by Dr Williams in
his note. I will take your Honours to it, if I may, it is page 768 of
the bundle. The relevant
note starts at the foot of the page. On 769
there are two paragraphs dealing with bailment – the last two paragraphs
page. Then, at page 770, there is what we say is the correct
answer to the
difficulty, beginning with the passage:
The position is a bit more difficult where instead of a bailment there is a
Then, at point 5 on the page:
It is submitted with respect that the error in this reasoning is in
asserting that A –
being the wrongful account holder in
had been paid.
And then, slightly further on:
The payment was something quite outside of and irrelevant to the contractual
obligation. The proper solution was to allow A and B
to join in an action
against the bank, and to allow the bank to counterclaim against A for
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Lawrance, is that a convenient time for us
to take a morning adjournment?
MR LAWRANCE:
your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
11.16 AM SHORT ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Lawrance.
MR LAWRANCE:
Does your Honour wish me
to – would your Honour be inconvenienced if I waited for my
GAGELER CJ:
No. It might be a good
MR HOROWITZ:
I apologise to the Court.
Your Honours, may I come to
, which is at
page 365 of the joint book of authorities. Although it is at the end of
the reasons, can I deal with the permission
given to the plaintiff to elect
between a declaration and damages. So, that is at the foot of page 574 of
the report. That is an
election between damages of £331:
or a declaration such as is sought –
and that is a declaration for – that would be a declaration
that the debit of twice that amount, £662‑odd, was wrongful
not be maintained. So, the first point is that there is an acceptance in
Brandon v Scott
– which was the
cause of the unsatisfactory result in
prevent the declaration that is being offered to the plaintiff here. So, the
rationale or the motivation for the
Goodhart solution is gone, because there is
an acceptance that the plaintiff can have the declaration that was denied in
If one were to ask, at the time these reasons were
delivered, what is the account balance, I think your Honours already have
my submission,
but that is a question that would be capable of being answered,
and the answer would be that it was a balance that had not been reduced
£662 that had been paid on the cheques signed by only one account holder.
Now, if that is the case, and one pauses at
that point and asks what is the
plaintiff’s loss, even assuming there had been a breach of the Goodhart
several promise, there
would, in our submission, be no loss because the full
account balance is there and able to be recovered by the account holders from
The reasons, in our submission, are opaque as to why the
plaintiff, by making an election, is able to reduce the true account balance.
It may be that the correct analysis is that because the paying bank is the agent
of its customer, the election is really the ratification
by the plaintiff Ardern
of the bank’s act as agent, without authority, in paying on the cheques.
That would be one way of
explaining why the plaintiff would have a right to
elect so as to reduce the account balance. But absent ratification of that
in our submission, there would be no loss and no
I mean, strictly, even if there were a
ratification, there ought to be still a claim on the premise that there is a
duty, because
there is still a breach of contract, it is just that it would
not – it is claim where you would recover nominal
MR LAWRANCE:
With respect, I accept that. It may be
that one could have a situation in which there was some other consequential loss
been suffered as a result of the breach of the Goodhart several
promise, if it be a term of the contract. So, my position would
accurately stated by saying that the plaintiff’s loss would not include
the £331 because there has been no diminution
in the balance of the
It was in any event, in our submission, an error for
Justice Martin to find that the contract contained the Goodhart negative
If your Honours have page 367 of the bundle, which
is 571 of the report, the relevant utterances are set out in the second
of the reasons, the first sentence:
Each of them stated that all cheques to be drawn on such an account were to
be signed by both of them, and the manager said he was
agreeable to
Those statements were concerned with the issue of what authority
the bank as agent required in order to pay a cheque drawn on the
account, and
their meaning should be assessed in that context.
If I were to give
your Honours this example: if a teller had cashed a cheque signed by only
Mr Brookes and the bank manager had
realised the mistake and said, well, we
obviously cannot debit the account for the amount of that cheque, you will just
have to wear
that loss, then it is unlikely that these parties intended, in my
submission, that in that situation the innocent account holder
should have a
claim against the bank for breach of contract.
It just would
not – it not necessary to protect either account holder, and provided
it is accepted, as it was in
, that the innocent account
holder – and, indeed, it must follow that the wrongful account holder
as well – could have
the debit reversed, there is no need to read the
term as importing the several negative promises.
Treating the express
words as giving rise to separate, several negative promises in favour of each of
the account holders gives rise
to further difficulties, in our submission. If,
for example, there had been three account holders rather than two and the bank
paid on the signature of one, then if each of the innocent account holders
was in the position of the plaintiff in
, that would give rise to
the prospect of inconsistent elections because, ex hypothesis, the
Goodhart promises are several promises, so, one would have two innocent account
holders, each with a claim for breach of the promise
owed to him or her
individually, and that would give rise, as we say, to the prospect of
inconsistent elections.
The same difficulty would arise even with only
two account holders in circumstances where the cheque was signed by a rogue
party and not signed by either account holder, because in that situation,
each of the account holders would be an innocent account
holder and each would
have the right to elect between damages or debiting the account and, again, that
would give rise to the prospect
of inconsistent elections. There is, in our
submission, a further difficulty that arises, which one sees from considering
the position
of the bank and its claim against Mr Brookes.
least, prior to the election, the bank had a claim against Mr Brookes to
recover the £622 paid to him as moneys had and
received. So, if the bank
has paid under a mistake – the mistake being that it thought it was
authorised to pay on the cheques
– it has paid out £622 to
Mr Brookes, it could recover those moneys from him as moneys had and
It is difficult to understand how that claim, at least for the
amount of £622, could be maintained if Mr Ardern makes an
to take £331 as damages but at the cost of the debit being
continued. To allow the bank to recover the £622 from Mr Brookes
would overcompensate the bank in that case, but if the claim is extinguished
because, if it be the case, there has been ratification
by Ardern of the
payment, then Mr Brookes has received a windfall of £331.
for those reasons, we submit that
was wrongly decided insofar as
the agreement was held to contain the several promises and Mr Ardern was
held to have a right to damages.
Alternatively, if
is good law,
it should not, in our submission, be expanded beyond the mandate cases, and that
is the context in which
has been followed in Australia,
principally in
Vella v Permanent Mortgages Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWSC 505
13 BPR 25,343.
Can I deal then with
DAR International
, which is at page 427 of the joint book of
authorities. The submission I wish to put to your Honours in respect of
this case is
that it is explicable as a case dealing with an obligation to pay
from an identified fund. So, unlike the contract before your Honours
there is no identifiable money that is money payable, if your Honours have,
at 428 of the bundle, the contract that was considered
Court of Appeal in
One sees, starting at about
point 6 on page 428, that one is dealing with an identified pool of
money, namely, the earnings generated
by AON in respect of the
Saudi Arabian Airlines account. And it is those moneys, which are
defined in the agreement to be “revenue”,
that are required to be
dealt with in a particular way, and that particular way includes that
60 per cent of them are to be paid
into the nominated
It is not identified in the sense that one
could go to a specific account, though, is it?
MR LAWRANCE:
With respect, no, it is not,
not an identified fund in the sense of, I can go to an account and say that
amount of money sitting in that account or,
more importantly, the right to call
for a repayment of that amount. It is not that kind of identified
MR LAWRANCE:
Well, no, it is, in my submission.
There are earnings being received from Saudi Arabian Airlines, and it is not
identified to the
counterparties in the sense that the counterparties to this
contract will not see what account those moneys are going into. But
moneys that are an identifiable fund and there is a promise to pay from that
identifiable fund, and if it were necessary,
in this case of
would be a case in which the promise to pay from an identified fund even gave
rise to a charge in favour of the parties entitled
to be paid those
So, the submission we make is that this is a case where one can
see an identified fund being dealt with, and so it is sensible to
moneys being paid not in accordance with the direction, because one can see that
they have been paid somewhere else.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Lawrance, could we go back a step. If you say
wrongly decided, you also say that
was wrongly decided, I take
MR LAWRANCE:
Yes, your Honour, and also
, being the case that followed it in Australia.
was a case where the Court of Appeal Justice who gave the
leading judgment saw himself as applying the principle in
MR LAWRANCE:
Yes. But the reason I
address ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
Whether or not the case can be explained on some other basis is really
neither here nor there, is it?
MR LAWRANCE:
I only advance
the submission for this reason: our primary submission is that
was wrong, but I also put to your Honours the submission that if it is good
law, it should be confined to the mandate cases, and
is not a mandate
GAGELER CJ:
MR LAWRANCE:
is why I addressed
GAGELER CJ:
MR LAWRANCE:
Could I then turn to ratification, and
could I identify a principle of law that we say is an important one in the
context of this
case. Could I start with
Peruvian Guano
, which is at
page 605 of the joint book of authorities. The principle that we seek to
have your Honours take from it appears at
pages 616 to 617 of the
bundle, which is pages 499 to 500 of the report, in particular, at
bundle 616 at point 5 on the page, there
is the statement:
The effect of this resolution is plain. It is an attempt to affirm in part
and disaffirm in part. A principal must act consistently;
he cannot, as was
stated by Lord
, blow hot and cold –
following page, 617 of the bundle, that is given some more context in this
particular case. If your Honours have, four
lines down, the
Now the resolution here is ambiguous –
That is a reference to the resolution that appears at about point 3
on the page at bundle 616, which was relied on as part of the
ratification of the compromise agreement:
the resolution here is ambiguous, but the act of the Republic in retaining
the £260,000 is plain and unambiguous.
That being the settlement
sum, but then a few lines further down, there is the sentence that begins on the
right‑hand side of
The Republic, then, with full knowledge of the facts, deliberately insist on
retaining the money paid as the consideration for the
Slightly further down, at about point 5 on the page:
Here the £260,000 would not have been paid had it not been for the
agreement –
the expressive and emphatic language of the agreement itself, it was paid
“as the price of perpetual peace”—between
the Republic and the
Defendants.
So that one cannot divorce the reason for the payment in this
case from the acceptance
of this is in controversy. I mean, it is common ground, as I understand it,
between the parties that the performance had not
been provided in terms of the
condition precedent in paragraph 4, and that that was accepted, ratified.
The only issue in dispute
is whether there is a separate obligation, or duty,
that condition 4 required, which would not have been ratified or accepted
of the manner in which the performance was provided.
Well, the submission we put is that the ratification extends to
the nomination of the account. So, the appellant has ratified
the nomination of
the account because the money would not have been paid, and obviously would not
have been paid into that account
but for the nomination of the account by
Mr Peng, who purported to nominate the account on behalf of both himself
and the appellant.
The point we make is that she has ratified the
nomination of the account, she cannot now sue for breach of the term on the
that the money was not paid into an account that was
So, there is two separate arguments that
you are wrapping up ‑ ‑ ‑
‑ ‑ ‑ and the first argument is that
there is no duty to notify – sorry, no duty to comply with the
4 requirements as a separate obligation, and the second one is that,
even if there is such a duty, that performance of that duty
had been waived, or
the breach of that duty had been waived by accepting that the debt had been
MR LAWRANCE:
I think the way I would put the second point
is that the appellant has ratified her agent’s act of nominating the
Ratification operating retrospectively, if she has ratified that
nomination, then there is just no breach and she cannot sue for
breach of that
term, even if that term be a term of the contract, which as your Honour
observes, our first point is it is not.
How does she
ratify it? Is it just by a pleading?
MR LAWRANCE:
No, she does
ratify it by the pleading, but then she – the appellant goes on to
pursue Mr Peng to judgment, being a judgment
to which she is only entitled
if the nomination was a valid nomination, and then she bankrupts
Then she proves, in his bankruptcy for $17,000, that
is attributable in large part to her proof in his bankruptcy for the million
dollars, being a million dollars or so, to which she is only beneficially
entitled if the moneys in Mr Peng’s hand are the
moneys paid by
Crown, and they are only those moneys if he validly nominated pursuant
to – if he gave a valid nomination.
So, the nomination was
clearly not valid at the time, but she ratified it. To answer
your Honour’s question directly, the
first point in time at which she
ratifies is when she asserts in the claim against Mr Peng that the moneys
in his hands, which he
received from Crown pursuant to a payment made pursuant
to the very direction in question, were beneficially hers.
I will take
your Honour, if I may, to the appellant’s book of further material,
just to be precise about it. It is page 20
of the book of further
material, and your Honour sees this is the pleading in the statement of
claim, the 2016 proceedings against
Mr Peng. Paragraph 39, the pleading of
the direction to pay into his account. Paragraph 40:
not authorised by Shao to make the Direction.
Paragraph 41:
pursuant to the Direction, Crown paid the sum of $1,018,7410 into the ANZ
bank account –
Then paragraph 42. If it is not ratified before now, it is ratified
at paragraph 42:
The sum of $1,018,740 paid by Crown to Peng was beneficially owned by
That, in our submission, is ratification. The ratification, in our
submission, extends to Peng’s unauthorised act at the time
as agent for
her, and also himself, in giving the nomination in paragraph 39. Sorry, it
is a very long‑winded answer to your
At the risk of labouring it, the reason we submit that the
principle stated by Justice Chitty in
Peruvian Guano
assistance is because of the proposition at page 617 of the bundle, that if one
is considering what is the transaction that
the agent has effected which has
been ratified – which is an exercise in characterisation, because one
needs to characterise
what is in and what is without the
transaction – one could not in this case divorce from the payment and
the agent’s
act of acceptance of a payment.
One cannot divorce the
reason why the payment is made. There is a very sensible reason for that, in
our submission, and it is stated
by the authors of
in their commentary on article 17(4). If the principal could
affirm in part and disaffirm in part, the principal would be in a position
bring into effect a very different kind of transaction, a different transaction
to the one the third party had in contemplation.
, the transaction that the third party had in contemplation was payment
of £260,000 as a settlement sum. In this case, the transaction
had in contemplate was payment pursuant to a direction given by both
There is a second case that states the principle similarly. I
am sorry that it is not in the bundle of authorities, but we have
provided which
have hopefully reached your Honours. It is the decision of
Justice Jacobs in
Australian Blue Metal Limited v Hughes
(1961) 79 WN (NSW) 498.
The relevant passage is at page 515 of the
report. At page 515, in the left‑hand column, at the foot of the
page, there is
a paragraph that begins:
It is true that the receipt of the money even with knowledge –
I will not read it all out, but in that paragraph at the top of the next
page, his Honour says:
The principle of ratification, as I see it, is that a purported principal
cannot both approbate and reprobate the actions of his purported
Therefore, if the principal accepts benefits which flow from the allegedly
unauthorized act of the agent and knows that the
benefit so flows he must,
except in very special circumstances, be taken to have ratified the
agent’s act.
We rely on that statement of
principle ‑ ‑ ‑
And you say the act here cannot be separated. It either succeeds or fails,
does it not, on that point?
MR LAWRANCE:
Yes, the act cannot be
separated from – the act of the agent in accepting and retaining the
payment from Crown cannot be separated
from the agent’s act of nominating
the account into which that is to be paid. It is
are wrong about that, then that is the end of it?
MR LAWRANCE:
If I am wrong about that, then I have lost on ratification. If I am wrong
would, in my
submission, consider whether the tender of the payment by Crown, which is a
non‑conforming tender, has nevertheless
been accepted by the agent and
that acceptance of the payment has been ratified, leading to the same result
that there is a non‑conforming
tender that has been accepted and that
acceptance is ratified – if I am wrong on both those points, then I
have lost on ratification
and that leaves only the construction question as to
whether the Goodhart several promise is a term of the contract.
Mr Lawrance, can I just
check, what do you say are the benefits that Ms Shao has accepted in this
MR LAWRANCE:
She has accepted the benefit of being a
beneficiary of a trust fund in the hands of Mr Peng to the tune of
$1,000,000, because unless
that payment to Mr Peng were the Crown moneys,
then she is not entitled. She has no beneficial entitlement to those moneys in
Peng’s hands and they would be his moneys, with Crown having a
right – an in personam right, at least – to recover
from Mr Peng.
The statement of principle I have taken
your Honours to in the decision of Justice Jacobs in
Blue Metal Limited
has been twice approved in Australia. Can I just give
your Honours the references. The first is the Full Court of the Supreme
of Western Australia in
Brockway v Pando
[2000] WASCA 192
22 WAR 405.
The relevant passage is paragraph 120 on
page 434 of the report. Secondly, by the New South Wales Court of Appeal
Leybourne v Permanent Custodians Ltd
[2010] NSWCA 78
, at paragraph 133.
Those are the
principles of law that we wished to draw attention to. On the facts of this
case, the payment was made to Mr Peng’s
on 25 February 2016. At the time it was made, it was not made into an
account that had been notified by the lender. So,
as at 25 February,
immediately after making that payment, there has been no valid discharge of the
debt owed by the first respondent
to the appellant, Mr Peng. It is
accepted that something that the appellant did after 25 February 2015
caused that payment –
which, at the time it was made, had not
discharged the debt – to change into a payment that did discharge the
debt. In our
submission, that something was ratification.
So, that it
is expressed many times in our learned friends’ written submissions as an
acceptance of something by the appellant
– an acceptance by the
appellant that the debt had been discharged – but to label it or
frame the analysis in terms of
acceptance, in our submission, only obscures it.
What one is dealing with here is ratification. There is no separation doctrine
of acceptance, and in that context, your Honours have our submission that
the ratification of the agent’s transaction extends
to the whole of the
transaction, not just part of it.
Your Honours, that is what I wish
to put on ratification. May I address abuse of process. It was not
considered – it was
not dealt with by either the
Court of Appeal or the learned trial judge. The facts we rely on are
these: the conversation between
the appellant and the employee of Crown that is
set out in paragraph 33 of the trial judge’s reasons, at core appeal
16, and, in particular, the absence of complaint about the
repayment having been made to Mr Peng; the commencement of proceedings
naming the respondents as defendants; the discontinuance of those proceedings
prior to service in circumstances where the appellant
was actively contemplating
a claim against the respondents and the respondents, if liable, had an obvious
cross‑claim again
Mr Peng; the conduct in continuing not to commence
against the respondents or intimate a claim against the respondents for a period
of almost six years, during which time the appellant pursued Mr Peng
to judgment and bankrupted him, incurring costs along the way
well in excess of
the dividends she recovered and then, on the eve of the limitation period in
circumstances where Mr Peng has been
bankrupted, bringing against the
respondents a claim that the appellant had been contemplating since
This issue in the notice of contention only
arises if you have lost on all of your primary arguments.
If you have lost on all of your
primary arguments, then it would mean that the appellant had a claim for breach
of contract against
the respondent?
MR LAWRANCE:
Would not that then also require that the
appellant have mitigated its loss for the appellant to claim damages in the full
If so, why would not a step in mitigation be required to be proceeding
to satisfaction against Mr Peng?
MR LAWRANCE:
answer I can give to that, your Honour, is that this is a case where the
respondents would be the ones primarily liable
to the appellant. By proceeding
in the way in which the appellants proceeded and deferring commencing against
Crown – or intimating
a claim against Crown – the
appellant put the respondents in a position where, by the time the claim was
brought against them,
when it could have been brought at the outset,
Mr Peng has been pursued to bankruptcy.
Possibly, that is an
inarticulate way of saying or submitting that the appellant on this notice of
contention point needed to include
Crown in the initial proceedings, and it may
well be that she also had to in those proceedings proceed against Mr Peng
Mr Peng, but the proposition that the appellant ought also to
have proceeded against Crown is not inconsistent with that.
So, I should
make it clear that it is not a case where the respondents have been vexed twice.
It does not have that characteristic.
The Court in
Tomlinson v Ramsey
accepted the proceedings could be stated as
an abuse of process if they were unjustifiably oppressive or brought the
administration
of justice into disrepute, and the submission we make is that the
claim against the respondents ought to have been raised in the
2016 proceedings
against Mr Peng.
As regards the submission that the decision to
omit the respondents from the 2016 proceedings was justified by a desire to
more expeditiously against Mr Peng, even if that were initially
accepted, by the time that Mr Peng failed to account for the money
appellant in accordance with Justice Sackar’s October 2016 judgment,
it was clear that that reason had gone.
So, for those reasons, we submit
it was unjustifiably oppressive to the respondents and brought the
administration of justice into
disrepute to invoke the processes of the Court in
2022 to bring the present claim against the respondents.
Just so I am clear, you said properly that your client has not been vexed
twice – or your clients have not been vexed twice.
Does that mean
that the second‑last sentence of your outline of oral
argument – that the belated complaint falls away,
MR LAWRANCE:
No, not in this sense – it does
not fall away in this sense. We have been put in a position of having to defend
the proceedings
a long time after they ought to have been brought, in our
submission, and in circumstances where Mr Peng has been bankrupted, but
do not say that the belated is prejudicial in any sense other than
MR LAWRANCE:
please your Honours, those are our submissions.
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Lawrance. Mr Horowitz.
MR HOROWITZ:
Thank you, your Honour. My friend’s principal argument is that there
is a binary effect – the debt is either discharged
or it is not
discharged – and he concedes that
have to be found to be wrong, if that is right. He distinguishes
I understand it, on the basis that the funds are effectively trust funds, but
when one looks at that agreement in
, in my submission, there is no
trust imposed on those funds, so they are general funds. They can be intermixed
funds. There are no trust obligations. In my submission, that
is not a distinguishing feature.
would have to be wrong,
MacKenzie v Albany Finance
would have to be wrong, because
there, there was a payment that was made out early and it was accepted and there
were still damages
that were recoverable. It was not a question of it is either
discharged or it is not and that is the end of the investigation.
looks at whether it is discharged in conformity with the contract, or
My friend says that a joint creditor is adequately protected if the
joint creditor can sue in debt and therefore should not be entitled
to damages,
but this is equivalent to saying that where a plaintiff can get specific
performance, then they are not entitled to damages
because they can get specific
performance, therefore you do not need to read a breach of contract as entitling
them to damages.
Contract law has long recognised that there are primary
obligations, and if the primary obligations are not fulfilled, then the
has an election. They can either seek to have them fulfilled through,
in this instance, debt – or, in other instances, specific
performance – or they can seek the secondary obligation, which is a
right in damages in lieu of seeking the first obligation.
So, in my submission,
the fact that there is an answer that you can possibly sue in debt does not
itself deprive the appellant of
the ability to claim damages.
said that the declaration in
that the debt had not been discharged
should have been available on the Williams solution to this issue rather than
the Goodhart
solution, but the Goodhart solution was that the protective clause
requiring two signatures was a several clause, not a joint clause.
That was the
whole basis of the Goodhart solution. Williams’ solution was to say,
well, this is just not a payment under
the contract at all, it is entirely
outside of the contract.
In my submission, the Williams article does not
get around the problem that was raised in
, which was that if one
of the joint creditors is disabled by his own fraud from suing, then neither of
the joint creditors can recover.
That was the basis in the
Goodhart – Williams suggests that Justice McNair in
decided the case on the basis that one of the joint creditors had
already been paid and that that was inconsistent with saying that
the debt had
not been discharged, but that is not the case. In
it was decided
not that the creditor had been paid but the creditor was disabled from being
sued. That principle is – with
respect, Justice McNair was
right so far as that principle is concerned.
If I can just hand up one
case, which is a decision of the New South Wales Court of Appeal. I will
not read it out, but I will just
refer your Honours to paragraph 16 of
this decision of
MMI General Insurance Ltd v Baktoo
paragraph 16, there is a reference to cases dealing with fraudulent claims
and the principle that a:
party to a fraud, he who profits by it, shall not be allowed to create an
obligation in another by his own misconduct, and make that
misconduct the
foundation of an action at law.’
Over the page, on 613, there is a reference to
submission, the Williams article does not get around that difficulty, it is
necessary to have a several obligation enforceable
by the innocent account
holder in order to get around that problem.
My friend raised the
prospect of inconsistent elections as a reason not to follow the reasoning in
, and to say that if there are three account holders one might want
a declaration that the account was invalidly debited and another
damages. At the end of the day, however, declaratory relief is discretionary,
and the court in determining whether to
award damages or whether to make a
declaration would take into account that fact. So, there would be no harm done
to the bank as
a result of two different plaintiffs wanting different
Then, before turning to the notice of contention, my friend
raised the issue of ratification. We say, in response to the submissions
he made, that ratification is only to the minimum extent that is necessary in
the circumstances of the case. Ratification is
a legal fiction, and we rely
Harrisons & Crosfield
for that proposition.
instance, there were two separate acts by Mr Peng. He sent an email
notifying and nominating an account to Crown and then
they subsequently paid the
moneys which he accepted into his bank account. We say there are two separate
acts. If ratification
is at all relevant, which we say it is not for reasons I
expressed in chief, but if it were relevant, we say that Ms Shao can ratify
the acceptance without ratifying the nomination.
My friend says, well,
they are inextricably interlinked and you cannot untangle them, but it would
have been possible for Crown to
make a payment to Mr Peng, because they had
his account on file from another transaction. They were property developers,
was evidence that both Peng and Shao were involved in other
transactions.
If they had his bank account on file and they paid the
money into his bank account without him making any nomination, then there
have been no ratification possible by Ms Shao of a notification given by
Peng, because he would not have given one. So, it
is possible conceptually to
just ratify the acceptance without ratifying the notification.
I note that in the pleading of Ms Shao’s case against
Mr Peng, it is specifically pleaded at paragraph 40 that:
Peng was not authorised by Shao to make the
MR HOROWITZ:
I am sorry, your Honour, I did
not hear ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
if you look at page 20 of the appellant’s book of further material,
in the pleading of Ms Shao’s case against
Mr Peng, there is a
specific pleading that he was not authorised by her to make the direction. So,
at least as the case seems to
have been pleaded, a lack of authority was part of
the case she was asserting, not the existence of
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes. That is correct,
your Honour, with respect.
Paragraph 42 is
just an assertion of beneficial ownership. Do you say that it is necessary to
imply into that a ratification of
acceptance of the funds, as opposed to merely
the receipt of the funds?
MR HOROWITZ:
It is necessary to
imply an acceptance that the debt was discharged in order to get there, and my
friend says, well, there is no
difference between ratification and acceptance.
With respect, there is, because the acceptance – the ability of a
joint creditor
to accept defective performance in the discharge of a
debt – arises in this case under clause 4, because it is a
several clause.
So, Ms Shao has the ability, as a joint creditor to whom
that several obligation is owed, to say: yes, I accept the defective
performance,
or no, I do not. It does not come to a question of ratification.
Just before moving to the notice of contention, if I can answer
Justice Edelman’s question from before the morning tea break,
was about whether there were any findings about Shao’s beneficial
ownership. There are, and they are on paragraph 18
page 13 of the core appeal book is from the primary judgment, and
paragraph 18 on that page sets out the trust that
I mentioned earlier.
It was trust of a promise.
I am sorry?
It was a trust of a
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes. Then, at paragraph –
actually, the first paragraph of that judgment also says that:
the sum of $1,000,000 . . . in fact belonged to
What do I do about page 56 of the
core appeal book? Is the declaration that is made by Justice Sackar to the
same effect?
MR HOROWITZ:
Yes, it is.
That is paragraph 30 where the declaration is set out.
Yes, that was effectively the declaration of a constructive
Black v Freedman
‑type constructive trust based on
stolen funds that belonged to Ms Shao.
Finally, if I might address
briefly the notice of contention, we say principally that Ms Shao’s
remedies against Peng on the
one hand and Crown on the other were cumulative.
They were not alternative and inconsistent. So, on the principle set out in
Baxter v Obacelo Pty Ltd
, Ms Shao was free to sue Peng and
Crown successively. There was no abuse of process in this case because, firstly
and principally,
Crown was not vexed at all in the 2016 proceedings, never
having even been served.
Secondly, to the extent that Ms Shao
needed a good reason not to proceed against Crown, she had a couple of good
reasons. One, she
wanted to obtain expedition. As I mentioned in my
submissions in chief, Ms Shao had had other moneys stolen from her by
in 2015, and there are findings in the judgment about that which
are referred to in my submissions, and she had managed to get most
moneys repaid shortly after suing Mr Peng. So, it was legitimate for her
to attempt to do that this time without incurring
the expenses of proceeding
against Crown.
Secondly, she had obtained a freezing order against
Mr Peng and she had had to give an undertaking as to damages and it is
practice in the New South Wales Supreme Court for matters where there is
a freezing order to be expedited because of the burden that
that imposes on the
party who is injuncted, and also that the expedition will reduce the exposure to
damages of the plaintiff under
the undertaking as to damages. So, for those
reasons, it was a perfectly legitimate forensic choice that Ms Shao made to
and recover the money from Mr Peng without involving
This case is far removed from
, where there
were claims that were made that were essentially the same as claims that had
previously been brought in another court;
an array arose out of the same factual
circumstances, making substantially the same allegations. In this case, there
this case could not be described as the staged conduct of
what is factually one dispute. Ms Shao’s case against Peng was a
relatively straightforward one. He had stolen her money, and she sought a
constructive trust and she ultimately obtained that without
the case being
defended at the final hearing by Mr Peng.
I should mention that
Mr Peng actually filed a cross‑claim in that case seeking relief
Family Law Act
and if Crown had been involved, then they would
have been forced to sit through potentially lengthy proceedings. If
Mr Peng had
ultimately pressed his cross‑claim and run it, they would
have been forced to sit through
Family Law Act
proceedings, rather
than just dealing with a case solely on their own liability, as this one
Finally, Ms Shao’s case against Crown was more complex
than her case against Mr Peng because the case against Crown involved
question of whether or not Mr Peng had actual or ostensible authority, and
that was the basis upon which most of the time in
the case was spent
So, in the circumstances, we say that this case is nothing close
to the circumstances of
and this Court would not
find that there has been any abuse of process by Ms Shao waiting to see
what she recovered from Mr Peng
before determining to embark on proceedings
against Crown. May it please the Court.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Horowitz. The Court will consider its decision in this matter and will
adjourn until 10.00 am tomorrow.
AT 12.28 PM
THE MATTER WAS ADJOURNED
RTF format (1.44 MB)
Signed PDF/A format