Miss Raiden O'Hehir v Goyal Estate Pty Ltd, Mr Nabil Chakelli [2025] FWC 3391 (13 November 2025)
[2025] FWC 3391
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application to deal with contraventions involving dismissal
Miss Raiden O'Hehir
Goyal Estate Pty Ltd, Mr Nabil
(C2025/6877)
COMMISSIONER CLARKE
MELBOURNE, 13 NOVEMBER 2025
Application to deal with contraventions involving dismissal - whether
employee dismissed – jurisdictional objection dismissed.
Raiden O’Hehir (Applicant) has filed with the Commission an Application
section 365
Fair Work Act 2009
(Act), seeking that the
Commission deal with a general protections dismissal dispute. The Applicant has
named two respondents to her
application, Goyal Estate Pty Ltd (First
Respondent) and Mr Nabil Chekelli (Second Respondent). The First Respondent
disputes that
the Applicant is entitled to bring a proceeding under
section 365
on the basis that the Applicant was not “dismissed” as defined in
section 386
of the Act. The Commission must satisfy itself that the Applicant
has been dismissed, before exercising its powers to deal with the
This decision deals with
the parties’ respective contentions as to whether the Applicant was
matter proceeded to a hearing on 27 October 2025. The Applicant attended with
her mother, Ms Whitton, as a support person. The
First Respondent was
represented by its Director and Manager, Ms Samiksha Goyal. The First Respondent
is a franchisee of the Cheesecake
Shop, where the Applicant last worked on 3
July 2025. It is that employment that is the subject of the current proceeding.
Respondent, an employee of the Cheesecake Shop attended with Mr
Libbis who was also an employee of that organisation. The position
Cheesecake Shop and the Second Respondent were that they need not have any
involvement in resolving the issue of whether or
not the Applicant had been
. Whilst the Second
Respondent was informed that I would be permitted to make findings about his
conduct on the available evidence
even if he chose to not participate in the
, he (along with Mr Libbis)
elected to take no part in the hearing and excused themselves before the opening
of evidence.
When a person has been dismissed
noted above, the First Respondent’s objection was put on the basis that it
did not consider that the Applicant had been dismissed
within the meaning of
section 386
of the Act.
Section 386(1)
relevantly provides as
386 Meaning
(1) A person has
(a) the person’s employment with his or her employer has been
terminated on the employer’s initiative; or
(b) the person has resigned from his or her employment, but was forced
to do so because of conduct, or a course of conduct, engaged
in by his or her
party contended that there was a resignation of any sort, and in those
circumstances the requirements of paragraph (b) of
subsection (1) of
section 386
need not be discussed. Nor was there any suggestion that the exceptions set out
in subsection (2) or qualified in subsection (3)
had any application to the
facts in this matter. The sole issue for determination is therefore whether
there has been a termination
of the Applicant’s employment at the
initiative of her employer, as referred to in paragraph (a) of subsection
has been a great deal of consideration, in this Commission and elsewhere, of
what circumstances will amount to a termination
of employment at the
employer’s initiative. Before delving into the detail of that, it is
of employment in the sense that Deputy Boyce
did in the matter
Lattouf v. ABC
as follows:
“ In my view, in its most simple terms, the bringing of an employment
relationship to an end concerns the ending of an employee’s
‘service’, such that (for whatever reason) it is, or becomes, no
longer necessary for the employee to perform any work
for the employer. A
determination by an employer to cease an employee’s service will end the
employment relationship, although
it may not bring the employment contract to an
end until the employee makes an election for that to occur. A wrongful failure
allow an employee to continue in the employer’s service is equally a
breach of contract, giving rise to a ‘wrongful’
dismissal at common
law. As Higgins J stated in
Lucy v Commonwealth
The contract [of employment] is not a mere promise to pay money, but to pay
wages for service; and the breach of contract consists
in not allowing the
employee to continue in the service so as to get the wages. This is the view
which I accepted in
Williamson v Commonwealth
[1907] HCA 60
“ (citations omitted)
was conclusively established in
NSW Trains v.
that a dismissal for the
purposes of
section 386(1)(a)
may be given effect to either by the termination
of the employment relationship or the contract of employment. In either case
the termination must be “on the employer’s initiative”
to qualify as a dismissal under that paragraph. The unfair
employment “at the initiative of the
employer” as one of the
essential elements. This is rooted in the historical constitutional
underpinnings of Commonwealth laws
providing for remedies in respect of unfair
dismissal, yet the expression has remained a centrepiece of the scheme
notwithstanding
the shift to reliance on the corporations power and referral of
State powers in recent decades.
breadth of matters that might qualify as a termination on the employer’
initiative is wide, and even before the Act and
its predecessors expressly
conferred rights of action on employees who were “forced to resign”
(as paragraph (b) of subsection
section 386
does presently), it was found
that a termination might be regarded as “on the employer’s
initiative” even where
the final act that brought the employment to an end
was an act of the employee. In considering whether employment “has been
terminated on the employer’s initiative”, a Full Bench of the
Australian Industrial Relations Commission in
O’Meara v. Stanley
held that there must
“...some action on the part of the employer which is either intended to
bring the employment to an end or has the probable result
of bringing the
employment relationship to an end. It is not simply a question of whether
“the act of the employer [resulted]
directly or consequentially in the
termination of the employment.” Decisions which adopt the shorter
formulation of the reasons
for decision should be treated with some
similar vein are the following principles referred to in the decision Full Court
of the Industrial Relations Court of Australia
Mohazab v. Dick Smith
Electronics
An important
feature of a termination at the initiative of the employer is that the act of
the employer results directly or consequentially
in the termination of the
employment and the employment relationship is not voluntarily left by the
employee. That is, had the employer
not taken the action it did, the employee
would have remained in the employment relationship.
A termination of
employment at the initiative of the employer may be treated as a termination in
which the action of the employer
is the principal contributing factor which
leads to the termination of the employment relationship.
A termination
may involve more than one action, but it is necessary to ask what was the
critical action, or what were the critical
actions, that constituted a
termination of employment.
looking upon the conduct that is claimed to give effect to a termination, an
objective analysis is required. That is, whether
a reasonable person with
knowledge and background of the dealings between the parties would regard the
conduct of the employer as
terminating the
employment.
can be difficulty in identifying if, or when, there has been a termination of
employment at the initiative of the employer when
the employment concerned is
casual employment. Casual employment is generally characterised by successive,
separate contracts of
engagement underwritten by a subsisting employment
relationship that survives the lack of continuity in the engagements
themselves.
However, the mere
possibility that some future work might be offered in circumstances where none
is scheduled may not be sufficient
to indicate that the employment relationship
remains intact
, much depends on
the particular circumstances. I adopt the helpful observations of Commissioner
Hampton (as he then was) in
Bland v. MPower
“I would accept that there may be circumstances where an irregularly
hired casual employee my remain on the books of the employer
for future work and
not be dismissed, despite the absence of actual work for a short period.
However, this requires an assessment
of the actual nature of the employment and
whether an action has been taken by the employer to conclude that
employment.”
The cases advanced
advance of the hearing, the Applicant provided a witness statement from herself
(with several attachments)
witness statement from Ms Whitton (her
and written submissions.
The First Respondent did not prepare any witness Statements, however the Form
F8A response and submissions
provided were prepared personally by Ms Goyal and
provided an account of facts such that it was appropriate that they be marked as
her evidence.
An image taken
from a CCTV camera within the workplace was also provided with the
submissions.
I have had regard
to all that material. Whist I did ask questions of the witnesses, none were
cross-examined by a party. No material
was tendered on behalf of the Second
Respondent at the hearing.
Respondent’s contention that the Applicant was not dismissed leans heavily
on the fact that Applicant has not been “terminated
from the roster
and the fact the
employee was a casual employee. It is not in contest that the Applicant and the
Respondent have not communicated
events of 9 July 2025, that the Applicant has not worked since 3 July 2025, nor
the Applicant had worked a regular pattern of shifts prior to that time on
Saturdays and Thursdays (and sometimes Tuesdays) which
had reduced in the month
prior to Thursdays only
July 2025, it had become apparent to the Applicant that she had been removed
from the roster altogether.
Respondent used a system called “Tanda” for rostering
The Applicant
explained that she could be informed of rostering arrangements one to two weeks
in advance by logging in remotely to
the Tanda system, or receiving an e-mail
generated by it. She is no longer able to remotely log in to that system and
view the store
was able to do so for a period after 9 July. The Applicant became aware of her
removal from a work related WhatsApp chat
group by way of a notification from
that system, also on 9 July 2025. The Respondent submitted that the Applicant
was not removed
from “the rostering profile” on
. The technical difference
or significance of being unable to access the system as an employee versus not
removing the employee from
the employer’s “rostering profile”
were not explored in the evidence. In any event, the Applicant stated that she
has been into the store since she last worked there and seen another employee
(who she understands to be a new employee) working
the shifts that she otherwise
would have.
reduction of shifts, and the reasons for this, appear to be a catalyst for the
events of 9 July 2025, as captured by a series
of text messages between the
Applicant and Ms Goyal, which were provided as annexures to Applicant’s
witness Statement.
reproducing them in full, they reveal the following relevant
The Applicant,
and her mother, were evidently displeased by concerns expressed by Ms Goyal
the end of the day. The messages disclose
a desire by the Applicant to have a discussion with Ms Goyal about those matters
the Applicant described as “allegations”) so that she could
respond to them, or if Ms Goyal did not intend to discuss
the allegations, the
Applicant’s position was that the shifts should be restored.
Ms Goyal in
response offered to provide documents relating to end of day cash receipts, but
said she was “not putting any allegations”
but rather “these
are more behaviour issues” and advised the Applicant that “..you
have been hired as a casual
employee always and I have all rights to remove
shifts and amend rosters”.
In the course of
these messages, Ms Goyal requested to have a discussion with the
Applicant’s mother, which evidently occurred.
This request came after Ms
Goyal had sent pointed messages to the Applicant that included the
“Moreover please don’t try and threaten me
that you screenshots these messages as I have facts with me which I would be
happy to provide if I need ‘formally’. For now, it would be better
that the keys are returned and we don’t work
with each other as it clearly
isn’t working with your ongoing behavioural issues”
“For now it would be better that they keys are returned and we
don’t work with each other as it clearly isn’t working
for both of
After repeating
a request to have a discussion with the Applicant’s mother, Ms Goyal wrote
“Please return the keys for
now till the time we sort your shifts back
again if both of us agree”
Goyal’s evidence of the phone call between her and Ms Whitton was that she
was requested by Ms Whitton in a threatening manner
to reinstate the
Applicant’s shifts until the end of the school year “or otherwise
she would have taken me to different
mediums and complained about
. Ms Goyal’s oral
evidence was that after that “really
conversation with
the Applicant’s mother, she felt she could no longer trust the
Her evidence was that
prior to the conversation with Ms Whitton, she had a willingness to “work
but that after
that discussion her position changed. Thereafter, the Applicant was removed from
a WhatsApp chat group that had been
used as a platform of communication between
the employer and its employees.
The Applicant has not been offered work by the Respondent since. Ms
Whitton’s evidence of the conversation was that she asked
Ms Goyal if the
Applicant was being dismissed and was told by Ms Goyal that she wasn’t, so
she asked “if there was no
reason to dismiss her then why not reinstate
her shifts?”
. Ms Whitton
said that Ms Goyal raised the issue concerning end of day til receipts and Ms
Whitton suggested that Ms Goyal have a
formal meeting about that. When Ms Goyal
rejected the suggestion of the formal meeting, Ms Whitton told her that her
refusal suggested
that there wasn’t in truth a problem with the end of day
til cash receipts and if that was so, she should reinstate the
Ms Whitton agrees that
she sought from Ms Goyal that shifts continue until November, when the Applicant
was due to finish school,
in part because it was “only a couple of
months” that the Respondent would need to tolerate the Applicant’s
behavioural
Consideration
is evident from the discussion of the relevant principles at paragraphs
above, neither the fact an employee
is a casual employee or the fact the employee remains in some sense registered
on the employer’s
systems necessarily means that the employee has not been
this case, there is clear evidence of an active decision making process on the
part of the director and manager of the business
no longer roster
the Applicant for any shifts, notwithstanding that the Applicant had developed a
reasonably regular pattern of shifts;
applicant from an electronic “chat group” used for communicating
between the employer and employees; and
require the
Applicant to return her keys to the workplace.
These decisions
were communicated to the employee on 9 July 2025 and made in context where the
director and manager admitted in her
oral evidence that she no longer trusted
the Applicant and expressed to the Applicant at the time of making the decisions
simply is not working right between us”. The decisions and
the communications of those decisions should also be viewed against
Goyal’s Statements in the Form
that whilst she did not
view the decisions as amounting to a “dismissal”, they did amount to
a “cessation of employment”,
a decision to “stop offering
shifts” and “no longer roster” the Applicant, that were in Ms
view, decisions that were justified in the circumstances.
is no room to rationally argue that a reasonable person in the Applicant’s
position, with knowledge of the relevant context,
would not consider that their
employment had been terminated upon being given notice of the above decisions.
Whilst it is true that
some of messages sent by Ms Goyal to the Applicant on 9
July are consistent with the
possibility
of future work at a later stage,
for example “Please return the keys
till the time we
sort your shifts
if both of us agree”,
likewise clear that the highest this could be put was that
something changed, the service of the Applicant was no longer required. That
is, the employment relationship that had existed to that
point had been
terminated. The termination of that employment relationship was unquestionably
brought about by actions of Ms Goyal
that were intended to bring the employment
to an end and unquestionably would have led to that eventuality.
consequence of this conclusion is that the First Respondent’s
notice of listing will be sent to the parties for a conference in relation to
section 365
COMMISSIONER
Appearances
Ms L. Whitton,
for the Applicant.
Ms S. Goyal
, for the Respondent.
Hearing details:
27 October.
Coles Supply Chain v.
[2020] FCAFC 152.
[1995] IRCA 645.
Fatallah v. Gallawah;
Lemana v. Gallawah
Knott v. MGH
Employment and Training
(upheld on appeal) and the authorities there cited.
Shears v. Playford City
Soccer and Community Club Inc
Bland v. MPower Projects
Exhibit A2.
Exhibit A1.
Exhibit R1 and R3
respectively.
Exhibit R2.
Exhibit R1, Hearing Book
Hearing Book pages 69-70, PN
Ibid, PN 142, 266, 272-283.
Exhibit R3, PN 155,
Exhibit R1 at Hearing Book p
40, PN 76-77.
Exhibit A2, PN 294-296.
Hearing Book pages
PN 174-178.
PN 179-190, 291-293.
PN 242-246.
PN 247-249.
Exhibit R1.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government
RTF format (546 KB)
Signed PDF/A format