Madison v Optus Pty Ltd [1998] IRCA 35 (16 October 1998)
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT - alleged unlawful termination of employment -
SUMMARY DISMISSAL - VALID REASON - valid reason for termination
of employment
established by employer - CONDUCT AND PERFORMANCE - OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND - No
opportunity given to respond to allegation
of failure to obey lawful direction
or to make representations about future conduct - REINSTATEMENT -a principal
remedy reinstatement
- applicant unable to work with a number of supervisors -
radio control operators expressed reservations about working with him
applicant still bears sense of injustice which will make reinstatement
impracticable---impractical to reinstate the applicant
DAMAGES -COMPENSATION
-damages assessed taking into account unlawful termination - ALLEGED DRUG USE
at use of cable television service
Workplace Relations Act
(Cth) 1996 (formerly known as
Relations Act 1988
) ss 170DB,
DE(1), 170DF(1), 170DC, Schedule 11
Evidence Act (Cth)
1995 s 38(1) (a), s 38(1)(b) s 128(6
Occupational Health & Safety Act
1983 (NSW) ss.15, 19
McLean v Tedman & Anor
[1984] HCA 60
(1984) 56 ALR 359
Garside v Hazelton
(1997) (McIlwaine JR, unreported decision number
(1997) (McIlwaine JR, unreported decision number 119/97)
McGeehan v Hazelton Air Services Pty Ltd
(1997) (McIlwaine JR,
unreported decision number 118/97)
Selvachandran v Peteron Plastics Pty Ltd
(1996) 62 IR 371
Raymond Drury v BHP Refractories Pty Ltd
(unreported IRCA decision
number 276/95 dated 16 June)
Johns v Gunns
(1995) 60 IR 258
Heidt v Chrysler Australia Ltd
(1976) 26 FLR 257
Perrin v Des Taylor Pty Ltd
(1994) 58 IR 254
Liddell v Lembke t/a Cheryls Unisex Salon
(1994) 56 IR 447
Nicholson v Heaven & Earth Galleries Pty Ltd
(1994) 1 IRCR 199
Sophie Caroline Lethern v Beresfield Pty Limited t/a Titan Ford
(1995) (McIlwaine JR, unreported decision number 542/95)
Burazin v The Blacktown City Guardian Pty Ltd
(unreported IRCA full
court decision, decision number 606/96, dated 13 December 1996)
Qantas Airways Limited v Christie
(1988) HCA 18.
madison V optus pTY ltd
MCILWAINE JR
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
ADMINISTRATION PTY LTD
OCTOBER 1998
THE COURT DECLARES THAT:
1. The Respondent has contravened Section 170 DC of the Act.
2. The Respondent has contravened section 170 DF(1) of the Act on the grounds
of the Applicant filing a complaint against his employer
involving alleged
violation of laws.
3. In all the circumstances of the case it is impractical to reinstate the
Applicant in any position with the Respondent.
4. It is appropriate to award compensation to the Applicant in the sum of
fourteen thousand eight hundred and eighty one dollars
THE COURT ORDERS:
5. The Respondent pay to the Applicant within twenty-one days the amount of
fourteen thousand eight hundred and eighty-one dollars
6. Any sum paid within twenty one days to the Australian Taxation Office, which
the Respondent is obliged to pay on behalf of the
Applicant or which can
lawfully be made on his account, in respect of the sums ordered in paragraph 5
shall be pro tanto satisfaction
of the obligations of the Respondent under
7. The District Registrar is authorised to have engrossed my written Reasons
for Decision and upon completion is directed to publish
them and deliver them
to the parties by ordinary post.
THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SOUTH WALES DISTRICT REGISTRY
ADMINISTRATION PTY LTD
OCTOBER 1998
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
APPLICATION
This is an application by Martin Madison claiming unlawful termination of his
employment under Division 3 Part VIA of the
Industrial Relations Act
(Cth), ("the Act"), now known as the
Workplace Relations Act
(Cth), against his former employer, Optus Adminstration Pty Limited
(hereinafter referred to as "Optus").
The applicant was 25 years of age, at the time of his dismissal and in his
claim records the work performed for his employer as
customer service
". The applicant started work with the respondent on 26 June
1995 and the last day he worked was 10 January 1996. He received a written
notice of termination on 12 January 1996 as follows:
"11 January 1996 ref:mmterm.fw
Martin Madison
7/14 Pennant Way
CASTLE HILL NSW 2154
Dear Martin
Following our discussions of 10 January 1996, I confirm that your employment
with Optus Administration Pty Ltd has been terminated,
effective from today,
and you will receive one month's pay in lieu of notice as well as any your
statutory entitlements.
The main reason for the termination, as discussed, is your failure to obey
lawful directions.
Yours sincerely
OPTUS ADMINISTRATION PTY LTD
Fiona Wardlaw
Human Resources Manager, NSW"
The remedy sought by the applicant in his application is reinstatement and
compensation. The application was signed by the Assistant
Secretary of his
then Union on his behalf on 23 January 1996 and was received by the Australian
Industrial Commission on 24 January
1996. Commissioner Oldmeadow of the
Australian Industrial Relations Commission issued a Certificate dated 12
February 1996 in Sydney
in the following terms:
"In accordance with subsection 170ED(1) of the
Relations Act 1988
, the Commission hereby certifies:
(i) that it has been unable to settle this matter by conciliation, within a
reasonable period; and
(ii) that the parties in this matter, having been invited to elect to have
the matter dealt with by consent arbitration, have not
There was no objection to the certificate made by either party. In addition,
no issue was raised during the hearing as to the timing
of the lodgment of the
application. I therefore find the matter is properly before the Court. By
letter dated 19 February 1996
the Communications Electrical & Plumbing
Union notified the Registry of the Court that it was no longer representing Mr
Optus is a major media communications and entertainment company operating in
New South Wales and elsewhere in Australia. The job
of the applicant was to
install the cable television supplied by the respondent and its associated
companies, test the installation
and to assist the customer where possible with
their new service. It is not in dispute that the applicant commenced his
26 June 1995 and was terminated from his employment at the initiative
of his employer on 10 January 1996.
The applicant, during the performance of his duties, had two separate and
distinct lines of supervision. Workforce Management (WFM)
described as a nerve
centre of the operation, allocated work to the technicians by a job allocation
system recorded on Work Order
forms and through the radio and other
communications system. Secondly, he had a line supervisor or Team Leader who
provided "on
the job" supervision and would be available to attend on site if
required. Supervision of the applicant frequently overlapped, probably
the poor rostering system.
INTERLOCUTORY ISSUES
This matter was originally listed as a one day matter to commence on 3 May
1996. The Registry of the Court received a faxed document
dated 2 May 1996.
"I Martin Madison hereby gives notice that court file no. NI
Madison v Optus Administration
is to be withdrawn, Notice of
Termination Yours Truly Martin Madison."
On 3 May 1996, Mr Madison, with his mother accompanying him, appeared before
the Court and asked to withdraw the letter and proceed
with his application.
At the commencement of the hearing Counsel for the respondent, Mr Dixon,
suggested that the hearing might take
three days. The hearing proceeded by Mr
Madison giving his evidence in response to general questions from the Court.
It was made
clear to Counsel for the respondent that he may, at any time,
interrupt the process and raise an objection.
At the conclusion of the first day of hearing the mother of the applicant, who
had been allowed to assist him at the bar table,
sought time for him to obtain
legal advice. The applicant also disclosed that he wished to rely on evidence
from current employees
of Optus &, although he wished to withhold their
identity as they were concerned about giving evidence against their employer,
he named employees including Elias Mohammed, Phil Hodge, Peter Nicholl, Tony
Russo and Mark Willoughby.
At a telephone directions hearing on 21 May 1996, Mr Madison appeared
unrepresented in Court along with Mr Dixon, Counsel for the
Respondent, who was
then based in Western Australia. The applicant confirmed that he would remain
unrepresented in future hearings.
On 3 June 1996 the District Registrar conducted a hearing at which the
applicant indicated his difficulties serving subpoenas on
the Workcover
Organisation because of the costs which that organisation was seeking. At a
directions hearing on Tuesday 11 June
1996 there was no appearance by the
applicant. On 13 June 1996 the applicant was late as a result of his car being
stolen. As a result
of these difficulties every effort was made to ensure that
Mr Madison did not become confused about what he was being told to do
preparation for the continued hearing. On one occasion, a morning Directions
hearing was adjourned to allow the applicant to inspect
documents at the office
of the Solicitor for the respondent and to report on his progress to the Court
at the end of the day. It
is not necessary to review each of the occasions
except to say that the applicant often, if he did not agree with a particular
would not complete it without again raising it with the court. It
can be readily seen how a supervisor in an on the job situation
would become
frustrated and annoyed with such a refusal in the workplace. The applicant was
unable to distinguish between what should
be accepted and what should be
contested. Moreover, the applicant was unable to properly cross-examine
witnesses properly and the
presentation of his case suffered accordingly.
EVIDENCE OF THE APPLICANT
Martin Anthony Madison is an Australian citizen who is married, although
separated, with one child who was born in February 1996.
He attended school at
Parramatta except for one year, which was spent at a nearby high school when it
was suggested that a transfer
to another school might improve his health, as he
suffered from asthma. The applicant left school in Year 11 at the age of 17.
commenced employment with K-Mart in Merrylands in the auto department where
he remained for approximately a year and a half.
He applied for and was accepted for a traineeship with Telecom Australia. At
Telecom he was a customer service technician involved
in the insulation team
which covered fitouts of multi-storey buildings, including commercial and
domestic residencies. He also installed
the commander telephone systems as
well as adjusting and moving around PABX extensions. Also, he had some
experience with computer
cabling as a result of office fitouts he had worked on
in the city. For example at a Macquarie Street building in Parramatta he
required to do labouring work which involved crawling through ceilings under
floors dropping lines into cavities and knocking
out fire retardant material in
order to upgrade a cable. He worked for Telecom for four and a half years. In
May 1993 he accepted
a redundancy from Telecom along with other technicians and
was paid out all his superannuation and leave. At 23 years of age he
redundancy money to cease living at home. Thereafter he worked casually in
numerous jobs, including one for an air conditioning
company and another at the
Regent Hotel in Sydney. During some of those periods he received unemployment
or Social Security benefits.
For a time the applicant worked as a courier driver using a V8 Panel Van for
the purpose. The applicant with a touch of humour
suggested that although he
did not make much money his manager was impressed with his speedy deliveries.
He helped his father who
had his own business removing and installing
televisions, videos and washing machines. During this time, the applicant
a course on nutrition in order to deal with his asthma and for
general health reasons.
The applicant answered an advertisement placed by Optus for customer service
technicians and attended at North Sydney where Ms Jennifer
Morley and Ms Kim
Doust interviewed him. Optus first employed the applicant on 26 June 1995 as a
Technician in Training. In this
position he was taught the new systems being
developed by Optus. Since his termination from Optus on 10 January 1996, he
other employment. At the time of hearing he was on Social Security
Benefit of $318 dollars per fortnight and a family allowance
which was paid to
The applicant completed a six to eight week training course with Optus at
premises in Seven Hills. In the course he was taught
how to install and
service Pay TV equipment. This course covered both theory and practical
instructions and he was successful in
passing the examinations. The applicant
said that part of the training involved him and his fellow team members
attending meetings
at which members of the group voiced their concerns and
opinions about safety matters. The applicant maintained that when it came
safety issues he was very forthright.
The applicant was quite proud that he was asked to do the first installation
for Optus together with a colleague, Warren Cox.
The purpose of the
installation was at once to assess their business readiness, assess the average
time taken and what sort of complications
could be involved. Further, it was
intended to obtain customer feedback so that the company would have some
foundation to work on
so far as future installations were concerned. Initially
there was a difference between the estimations of time taken to do an
installation
for a cable TV on the basis that the applicant said that his
suggestion was 1-5 hours and the company was between one and two hours.
The initial allegation made by the applicant was that on or about the 14
August 1995 he became aware that people were talking about him. In
particular, he suggested his then supervisor Mr Joe Sierra was
making fun of
him. Mr Sierra was the applicant's team leader from 28
August 1995
September 1995. Although the applicant says that he did not
think much of Mr Sierra he did on occasion use him as a person to ask
and acted as a Liaison Officer to speak between management and himself.
The applicant gave evidence about a difficulty he had with one particular
installation because the technician who was to assist
him to do the job was
interfering with his planning of the work with the customer and he asked for
him to be removed from the site.
However instead of him being removed the
applicant was asked to do another job and that person remained there.
The applicant also gave evidence that he was having difficulty contacting
people through his radio when he tried to call workforce
management. He gave
another instance as when he was on the premises of another customer installing
"RF" Converters and when he returned
to his van he found there was a message on
his screen saying he was to contact the base. When he contacted the base "Joe"
him why he had not answered the radio.
Shortly after that incident the applicant noticed that another team leader, Mr
Warren Leadbetter, started to call him on the two
way radio requesting advice
as to where he was and what he was doing. The applicant was concerned by this
development and discussed
it with his own team leader who he told him he knew
nothing about the enquires being made by Mr Leadbetter. He recited another
"And then what happened I was in the depot one day and I was
photocopying some documents and I heard someone in the background call
you come over here" and I turned around to have a look to see if it was me that
he was addressing and as there was no name
requested. I looked at the person
and there was nothing else said and I continued on with what I was doing.
Approximately 10 minutes
later the person personally came to me and said "I
called you over here Martin before didn't you hear me" and I said, "Look in the
manner in which he was doing it was hey you come over here" and when I did turn
around he was patting his leg as well so I---
He was doing what?---Patting his leg as well.
Patting?---Like that.
What like a ---?---Like calling a dog over that is the way I.
And who was this person?---Warren Leadbetter was his name.
Yes?---And I naturally didn't respond to that and as I said I was not aware
that he was formally addressing me until he came the second
During the course of making this statement there was a patting noise which
occurred as a result of the applicant patting or hitting
his hand on the side
of his leg. He continued with his evidence to the effect that he then had a
verbal clash with Mr Leadbetter
"Yes I was walking out through the roller doors and I had spoken
to some other people from another group and I would also like to
show something
as to what happened. I had the work keys it has got a ring part like this
through it and I had it through my fingers.
The witness is holding up a bunch of keys on one of those what are they
called things that you latch onto your belt? - A latch device
or something like
that I don't know what they actually call them.
Yes go on? - So I had the ring part through my finger as you would wear a
ring and that it how I proceeded to carry them like so.
I walked from the
warehouse to my vehicle after talking to some other work colleagues and someone
grabbed my arm from behind and
ripped the keys out of my hands and I turned
around to see who it was and what the hell was going on and noticed that it was
and his words were after that event was a swear word, do I say it or do
I spell it or?
You tell me exactly what happened? - Okay he said, "You're fucking out of
here" gesturing with his finger pointing up in the air while
he was walking
away quite rapidly. I had not been approached by him about anything to do with
this matter or that led up to it beforehand."
The applicant said that he followed Mr Leadbetter to confront him and ask for
his keys back, Mr Leadbetter refused to give the keys
back and Mr Madison
admitted saying to him:
"If you ever touch me like that again, I will flatten
Mr Madison followed him to the van where he says he had personal items, which
he wanted to protect. After being confronted by Mr
Leadbetter and refused
access to his van the applicant admitted saying:
"Let's go behind the shed and discuss this
He recalled Mr Leadbetter saying words to the effect of:
"You Telecom blokes are all the same."
As the atmosphere was one of increasing hostility the applicant decided to
retreat and said he walked around and walked back to
his vehicle. He then
decided to walk towards the management area and as he was walking he heard Mr
Leadbetter call out: "
Here's your stuff."
While waiting to see Ms
Morley in the office Mr Leadbetter returned his things and dumped them on the
floor with the bag spilling
open. The applicant says that he pointed out that
he had some fragile things in the bag. After the incident with Mr Leadbetter
his finger became red and tender.
He then went to see Ms Jennifer Morley but was kept waiting for three hours
finally leaving at 6.00 pm. The next day he reported
to Mr Sierra and asked
for his jobs to be reallocated so he could again attempt to see Ms Morley.
Later that day it was agreed that
he and Ms Morley would meet again and
document his complaint. During this meeting he said he would not continue
working with this
man. Ms Morley promised to report back to him within 24
When they met on 21
September 1995 he was offered an opportunity of
having a witness present. His father came as a witness as well as Mr Phil
After it had been determined that his father could stay at the meeting,
although he was not a member of the company the applicant
was handed a letter
that had as its subject heading:
Performance Issues - First Written Warning - Memorandum to Martin Madison
from Jenny Morley,"
dated 21 September 1995 (See Exhibit 1).
Although the applicant was expecting a response to his report of an assault by
a supervisor there was only a minor reference in
the letter:
"The incident that occurred on 18 September 1995 between
yourself and Warren Leadbetter should clearly not have happened and all parties
involved will be severely disciplined".
What arose out of the complaint was a reference to a series of performance
related issues which had no immediate connection with the
assault. The source
seeming to be his Team Leader, Mr Sierra and less formal warnings about his
lateness. The applicant suggested
that he had explained that the late arrivals
had occurred over a six-week period and they had been discussed with him by
both supervisor
and manager. He believed this would have been the end of the
matter unless there was a continued practice of it.
He was then allowed to leave the room so he could have a discussion with his
two witnesses. He was asked to sign a document, but
after signing it the
applicant decided that he did not wish to endorse it and wrote "voided" over
it. Even though both men were
warned about their conduct it became obvious
that afterwards the applicant carried with him a severe sense of injustice at
happened and the apparent light treatment afforded to Mr. Leadbetter.
The next major incident in so far as the deterioration of the relationship
between the applicant and his employer occurred on 22
November 1995 when at
trial there was some discussion
as to whether the documents received from the
Workcover organisation were to be allowed into evidence. The report was
clearly relevant.
The basis of allowing the report into evidence was that the
respondent would be allowed to call or to lead evidence as to what was
the Workcover organisation and how Workcover responded. The effect of the
documents produced by Workcover was to record
a complaint filed by the
applicant on 22 November 1995 about the instructions he had to continue with a
job which he felt was unsafe
because of a number of factors including wet
weather. The report showed that there was some criticism of the company by the
inspectors, however they determined not to take any further action.
On 29 November 1995 the applicant was issued with a second written warning
which was followed by a third written warning on 13 December
1995. The third
written warning related to an incident when the applicant avoided being
accompanied to see the company medical officer.
The final straw in the unhappy
saga occurred on 4 January 1996 when the applicant did not arrive at an
installation until 4.30 pm
and the customer cancelled the order. Thereafter he
was on sick leave or not rostered for duty until 10 January 1996. On his
he was suspended from duty until 2.00pm when a meeting was held which
resulted in his termination.
I am satisfied that the applicant had at least three factors which affected his
performance during this period. His health was
not good as a result of his
asthma and stress in the workplace. This was compounded by his matrimonial
difficulties. More importantly
he needs a single line of communication which
should be constantly reinforced. He is not able to sort and assess alternative
of action. He was offered counselling by the respondent but this offer
came too late to be of much assistance. A better result
would have been
achieved if the respondent had followed up the approach and been more
persistent in having him accept and participate
in the counselling program
EVIDENCE OF FORMER EMPLOYEE OF RESPONDENT
The applicant was supported in his evidence on safety issues by Mr David Mark
Jenkins a former employee of the respondent. Mr Jenkins
was with Optus for a
period of six months. He testified that he was concerned by some safety issues
such as whether the ladders were
safe to be operated by one man and the short
cuts taken to complete road crossings. He confirmed that the radios did not
some areas and suggested there was difficulty with the radio operation
generally. He reinforced the concern about working on a one
man out basis. He
suggested that there had been an increase in accidents involving ladders.
EVIDENCE OF EMPLOYEE OF RESPONDENT
Mr Russo gave evidence in support of the applicant. He had moved into the
office at Lane Cove and was no longer working on the
installations. He
confirmed that the applicant often raised safety matters and supported the
applicant's evidence about the radio
difficulties. His evidence about the
assault by Mr Leadbetter confirms that he was the aggressor or instigator of
the incident.
The applicant simply responded to the unjustified physical
attack on him. He testified as to the "good samaritan " nature of the
applicant when he insisted on taking him to a doctor over a rash on his body.
Such actions together with his visits to the veterinary
surgeons with animals
injured in the course of the operations of the respondent would not and did not
impress his supervisors no
matter how justified they were from a humane point
EVIDENCE OF EMPLOYEE OF RESPONDENT
Mr Daniel Brugman gave evidence in support of the applicant. Mr Brugman
explained that he had been given written warnings, which
he felt were
unjustified. He also said he had been told by Mr Sierra in the early days that
there was not a lot to do and they should
just make yourself as useful as
Mr Brugman introduced the allegation that Mr Sierra had given marijuana to Mr
Fullarton at the party to celebrate to launch of the
Optus service saying:
"What had occurred was Jeff Fullerton had had a few drinks and
Joe Sierra gave him some marijuana and he became violently ill, and
and I had to take him home in the bus and we had to take care of
Mr Sierra subsequently denied this allegation. It is not necessary for me
to make any finding on this issue except to say that Mr
Fullarton was very
unwell after the party. I accept the description given by Mr Hodge of his
appearance.
Mr Fullarton himself was an unreliable witness on this issue. It is sufficient
to suggest to the respondent that from an occupational
health and safety view
it needs to do more to define and warn all its employees about the abuse of
alcohol or use of drugs in the
workplace. (See
McLean v Tedman &
[1984] HCA 60
(1984) 56 ALR 359
The abuse of alcohol and recommendations for dealing with the problem in the
workplace or related social events is discussed in
Garside v Hazelton
Air Services Pty Ltd
(1997 McIlwaine JR, unreported decision number
McGeehan v Hazelton Air Services Pty Ltd
(1997) (McIlwaine
JR, unreported decision number 118/97).
Finally Mr Brugman gave evidence that on at least two decisions he had been
sent to check on the applicant and found him working.
REQUEST FOR MEDIATION
The court had been adjourned to commence on Tuesday 28 January 1997 being the
day following the long weekend. When the court resumed
Mr Madison had one
witness left to call, Mr Hodge. However Mr Madison had taken no action to have
Mr Hodge present at the court.
His explanation was that he presumed that the
court would arrange or order Mr Hodge to be there.
At that stage the respondent suggested that they had made attempts to convey an
offer to Mr Madison but was not sure that it had
been successfully conveyed and
asked for the assistance of a Registrar to act as a mediator. As Mr Madison
was not represented this
proposal was agreed and the matter was referred to a
mediator. Mediation was not successful and the case resumed at 2 pm in the
afternoon with Mr Hodge being then available as a result of the cooperation of
his employer.
EVIDENCE OF EMPLOYEE OF RESPONDENT
Mr Phillip Hodge of Terrigal, Maintenance Technician with the respondent, gave
impressive evidence in support of the applicant and
of training with him at
Optus Vision. He testified the applicant was pleasant to work with and
regarded him as a very professional
employee who at the same time often raised
safety issues. Some of the issues raised by him including: "Working in
pairs". His
observations of his work habit were that he was "over friendly".
There were a lot of people within the organisation who didn't like
attitude. He confirmed the evidence of the applicant that the radios were not
working properly.
EVIDENCE OF FINAL SUPERVISOR OF APPLICANT
Mr Brian Collins was the final supervisor of the applicant. He gave an
extensive list of experience as a supervisor and given time
communication between the two of them there may have been some hope that he
would have been able to overcome the problem.
However, his appointment
occurred too late in the day when there were too many issues surrounding the
applicant to enable him to
be treated fairly.
On the question of radio communication, Mr Collins was inclined to exaggerate
the position in relation to the number of times that
the radio had actually
been checked. By this stage the applicant had gained a reputation for being a
persistent stirrer. Mr Collins
maintained in his evidence that, although
questions of safety were important, if management decided that the issue had
even if it meant that no action was to be taken, then so far as the
applicant was concerned, he should accept that position. The
applicant, of
course, is not the type of person so to do. If he thinks he's right he would
continue to persist with this issue.
Unfortunately his persistence instead of
being placed in writing, for example, which would have made life more difficult
managers, had lead him to constantly refer to the issues in his daily
activities. These safety issues were also raised by interjecting
at meetings,
which was also not well received. The company in this case was able to produce
enormous amounts of written records
as to conversations or difficulties it's
managers and supervisors had with the applicant. However, not one piece of
paper was able
to be produced in which it referred to the applicant's
complaints about safety issues and the way in which they had been addressed
considered by senior management. I am satisfied that many of the issues he was
raising were both important and justified.
OTHER EMPLOYEES OF OPTUS
Mr Collins was supported by the testimony of other Team Leaders - Mr Edmund Le
Pre, Mr Hendrik Jan Ruysch, Mr Warren Leadbetter,
and Mr King, the Field
Service Manager. Mr Sierra in his evidence was more supportive of the
abilities of the applicant than might
be expected.
Mr Williams and Mr Clark, relatively new employees, gave evidence about issues
of safety which had been raised with them by Mr Madison.
They had reported
their concerns to management.
Mr Fullarton denied that he was given marijuana by anyone. However,
irrespective of the cause, he was "violently ill" on the night
of the Optus
Launch party. Mr Fullarton was not frank with the Court.
Ms Christine Anne Mortlock, a Team Leader, from the Workforce Management gave
evidence explaining the operation of that section
and the difficulties she
encountered with the applicant. In this evidence she was supported by Mr
Mr Moffat of King Communications gave evidence as to the way in which the radio
in the van used by the applicant was fixed. His
evidence was inconclusive on
this issue when compared to the many examples given by other employees on the
job. He was not able
to conclusively say the radio was fixed as alleged by the
Team Leaders.
Ms Rundle, Ms Doust & Ms Wardlaw gave evidence from the Human Resources
point of view.
ORAL SUBMISSIONS
Mr Madison and Mr Dixon made oral submissions to the Court on 10 February 1997.
The submission by Mr Madison contained a glimmer
of hope that he had learnt
from his experience.
CREDIT OF MAIN WITNESSES
By his conduct, Mr Madison has a capacity to infuriate people not least of all
the court. Mr Madison was often late for Court and
sometimes appeared to be
either distracted or have a relaxed attitude towards his compliance with
directions. He impressed as a
pleasant young man with a large amount of
naivety. I did not find him to be an untruthful witness.
WAS THERE A VALID REASON FOR TERMINATION
It was clear the respondent had terminated the employment of the applicant on
its initiative. Under the provisions of the Act,
the respondent carries the
burden of showing that at termination it had a valid reason or reasons for
bringing the employment to
an end summarily. In his decision in
Selvachandran v Peteron Plastics Pty Ltd
(1996) 62 IR 371
, Northrop J
describes the meaning of this phrase in the following way:
"Section 170DE(1) refers to "
a valid reason, or valid
", but the Act does not give a meaning to those phrases or the
adjective "
". A reference to dictionaries shows that the word
"valid" has a number of different meanings depending on the context in which it
is used. In the Shorter Oxford Dictionary, the relevant meaning given is:
2. Of an argument, assertion, objection, etc; well founded and
applicable, sound, defensible: Effective, having some force, pertinency,
" In the Macquarie Dictionary the relevant meaning is "
just, or well founded; a valid reason.
In its context in s170DE(1), the adjective "
" should be given
the meaning of sound, defensible or well founded. A reason which is
capricious, fanciful, spiteful or prejudiced
could never be a valid reason for
the purposes of s170DE(1). At the same time the reason must be valid in the
context of the employee's
capacity or conduct or based upon the operational
requirements of the employer's business. Further, in considering whether a
is valid, it must be remembered that the requirement applies in the
practical sphere of the relationship between an employer and
an employee where
each has rights and privileges and duties and obligations conferred and imposed
on them. The provisions must "
be applied in a practical, commonsense way
to ensure that
" the employer and employee are each treated fairly, see what
was said by Wilcox CJ in
Gibson v Bostik Pty Ltd
(1995) 60 IR 1
considering the construction and application of s170DC."
In considering whether there was a valid reason for termination connected with
the employee's capacity or conduct of the applicant
I have taken into account
the fact that the applicant often made the wrong choice in trying to appease
his many supervisors. In
these actions he was not wilful and he did not intend
to disobey a legitimate order.
It should not be forgotten that the applicant was told by Miss Morley that he
was to have a fresh start. In effect this did not
In considering the question I have had regard to the observations of Wilcox CJ
Raymond Drury v BHP Refractories Pty Ltd
(unreported IRCA decision
number 276/95, dated 16 June 1995):
"Having said all this, the fact remains that Mr Drury's
behaviour was unacceptable. I agree with Mr Raymond that it did not constitute
"serious misconduct", warranting instant dismissal. But it was behaviour that
went beyond even the "give and take" atmosphere of
a modern Australian
workplace. It was disruptive behaviour that called into question the authority
of the person who was in charge
of the project. If continued after a clear
warning, it was conduct that constituted a valid reason, connected with the
operational
requirements of the project, for Mr Drury's termination: see s
170DE(1) of the Act."
In this matter, the applicant was persistent in his complaints and in his
failure to understand that until he redeemed himself in
the eyes of management
he would be "over" supervised when compared to other technicians. Although his
behaviour was not intended
to be disruptive it had a similar effect to that of
Mr Drury, except without the same amount of aggression. Although the issue is
not free from doubt, and leaving aside the impact of his complaint to
Workcover, I am satisfied that Optus has on the balance of
probabilities
established that it had a valid reason for terminating the applicant connected
with the operational requirements of
the position. In coming to this decision
I have particularly taken into account the evidence of Ms Mortlock from
Workforce management
as to the difficulties that centre was encountering as a
result of some of the actions of the applicant. Moreover, her evidence
crucial assistance in determining that it is impractical to reinstate the
WAS THERE AN UNLAWFUL TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT
It is clear that on 22 November 1995 the applicant had effectively filed a
complaint about safety issues with Workcover NSW. I
accept that this was a
genuine cry for help by the applicant and not by way of a vexatious or
unreasonable complaint.
The respondent, through its Team Leaders and Field Service Manager, was
extremely concerned by this development. Particularly given
new recruits,
motivated by their discussions with the applicant, were also raising views
of themselves as pioneers in the
field and did not need to be singled out for special attention while they were
challenging long
accepted and possibly outdated, safety practices in the
It follows from this that the prohibition contained in s170DF (1) (e) was
contravened by the respondent, there being a causal nexus
between the
termination of the applicant's employment and his filing of a complaint. I am
satisfied that the leadership team improperly
took into account difficulties
which would be faced if the applicant filed further complaints should there be
other clashes between
the applicant and his supervisors in the field over
safety issues.
There was a simple solution to the problem: an arrangement enabling the
applicant to communicate with the Workplace Health and Safety
Officer on the
understanding that any complaint raised would be dealt with by the Workplace
Health and Safety committee (which the
respondent was required to establish
under New South Wales law). Here, representatives of his peers would review
safety issues and
be able to give him some reassurance (See s 15, 19 of the
Occupational Health and Safety Act 1983 (NSW)).
Johns v Gunns Ltd
(1995) 60 IR 258
, Northrop J examined the scope of
the operation of section 170DF(1)(f) and concluded:
"The respondent has to establish a negative, namely that the
reasons for dismissal did not include the reason that Mr Johns was temporarily
absent from work because of injury. A mere denial may not be sufficient. All
the facts and circumstances of the case have to be
considered."
On this issue Northrop J also cites with approval a passage appearing at page
Heidt v Chrysler Australia Ltd
(1976) 26 FLR 257
observes, has equal application where s170DF (1)(a) of the Act applies:
"The provisions of s.5 (4) of the Act cast an onus of disproving
facts, namely, that the reason for the defendant's action was not
actuated by
the reason alleged in the charge. It has been held that a defendant need not
prove the reason why he dismissed an employee:
Atkins v Kirstall-Repco Pty
(1957) 3 FLR 439.
The mere proof of a reason for dismissal, other than
the reason alleged in the charge, does not necessarily negate the reason
in the charge. A mere denial of the reason alleged in the charge may
not be sufficient to satisfy the onus cast upon the defendant.
All the facts
and circumstances leading up to the dismissal must be considered, including any
reason expressed at the time of the
dismissal, as well as any denial of the
reason alleged in the charge."
For similar reasons, I do not accept the denials of the representatives of the
respondent that his complaint to Workcover was not
a factor in the decision
which was taken to terminate his employment. The respondent has failed to put
in place methods, which would
ensure that his complaint was not used against
him. Accordingly, this decision contravened s170DF (1)(e) of
the ground of his filing a complaint with Workcover NSW
SECTION 170DC: EMPLOYEE OPPORTUNITY TO RESPOND
Procedurally there were opportunities given to the applicant to be assisted by
another person when defending himself. (See Schedule
11 of the Act - Paragraph
9 of Recommendation No. 166) It appears to me that the procedural aspects of
the various interviews conducted
by the respondent were satisfactory. Given the
history, it would have been more prudent to insist on him having a person
to assist him. I am satisfied that Ms Wardlaw made no effort to confirm
whether his radio was working properly. This is a key deficit
in allowing the
applicant the opportunity of defending himself.
Perrin v Des Taylor Pty Limited
(1994) 58 IR 254
at 256-7, Moore J
said the following about the purpose of section 170DC:
"Its purpose is at least twofold. It is to give the employee
the opportunity to demonstrate that the allegations have no foundation
or they should not be viewed as reflecting on the employee's capacity. In the
present case, the applicant may have been
able to show that the complaints
explanation for their slow
delivery that did not relate to any want of effort
on his behalf.
A second purpose of s170DC is that an employee with whom an allegation has
been raised may be able to persuade the employer that,
while the allegation is
of substance, there are factors that should persuade the employer not to
terminate the employment. They
may be extenuating personal circumstances or
they may involve undertakings about future conduct."
There is no evidence that there was an opportunity given to the Applicant to
respond in line with the second purpose of the legislation
as outlined by Moore
J. I am satisfied that there is a contravention of section 170DC. Despite the
fact that there was an interview
between the applicant, Ms Wardlaw and others
the evidence is clear that the applicant was in effect told that he was to be
terminated.
The company has breached section 170DC of the Act, in that it
should have given the applicant the opportunity of making representations
on a number of factors including those which I have set out earlier in these
reasons. In addition he may have wished to give
undertakings about future
" to "Optus". After considering the report of Ms Wardlaw and any
representations the applicant wished to make, the company would
then have been
in a position to dismiss him without contravening the section.
In those circumstances I propose to make a finding against the respondent that
there was a contravention of Section 170DC.
REINSTATEMENT IMPRACTICABLE
I am satisfied that I have only a limited discretion not to reinstate the
applicant where it has been found that there is a contravention
of the act and
the applicant is entitled to a remedy. (See decision of
Liddell v Lemke t/a
Cheryls Unisex Salon
(Full Court decision by Wilcox CJ, Keely & Gray JJ
dated 15 December
1994, IR 56
page 447). The termination of employment
occurred on 10 January 1996 and the application was received by the Australian
Relations Commission on 24 January 1996 which is after the date of
commencement of Schedule 2 (9) of the
Industrial Relations and Other
Legislation Amendment Act 1995
(Cth) No. 168 of 1995. I am obliged by
Section 170EE (1) of the act to take into account all the circumstances of the
In view of the findings, which I have made earlier in these reasons,
reinstatement would normally be required. I have taken into
account the
evidence on behalf of the respondent about their attempts to discipline the
applicant. It has to be acknowledged that
attempts, although not always
genuine, have been made to give a fresh start under the supervision of
different Team leaders. Mr Brian
Collins was on the right track in his attempts
to resolve the situation with the applicant. Although this was aborted by the
intervention
of a more senior manager ordering him to have his radio checked.
The applicant remains committed to the ideals of the company even
if not to its
line managers. I accept that if reinstated he would, contrary to the other
claims made in evidence continue to promote
the interests of his employer
against its competitors including Telecom. I have very reluctantly come to the
conclusion that it
is impracticable to reinstate the applicant. He still bears
a sense of injustice, which may not have been overcome by these proceedings.
The applicant in his final submission gave the first positive sign that would
support his claim that reinstatement is not impractical.
I am satisfied that a
number of other members of staff below a supervisory level would not welcome
his reinstatement. Although
it is a large organisation, which may be capable
of giving him a fresh start elsewhere, this of itself, is not a sufficient
justification.
The applicant still bears a sense of injustice with a strong
desire for further vindication. I cannot be sure that he would modify
previous practice. In the circumstances of this case I am of the view that the
discretion should be exercised against the applicant.
Therefore I find that it
is impractical to reinstate the applicant.
COMPENSATION
Ordinarily an order for the payment of remuneration lost by the employee
commences from the date of termination. However, in this
case it should take
into account the four weeks payment in lieu of notice. In view of this
payment, there can be no breech of section
170 DB (2). The balance of three
weeks needs to be taken into account in any award of compensation.
Nicholson v Heaven & Earth Galleries Pty Ltd
(1994) 1 IRCR 199
Wilcox CJ, suggested it may be appropriate to make an assessment of the period
of time in which the applicant might continue in
his employment, before his
termination was able to be properly completed. In that case Wilcox CJ found
that the particular applicant
was not suited to the type of work he had done.
This is not the case here. This applicant had demonstrated, even with all his
that he could successfully complete installations. His personalty was
such that he could develop a good rapport with the customers
Sophie Caroline Lethern v Beresfield Pty Ltd trading as Titan Ford
(unreported IRCA decision dated 3 October 1995 No.542/95
McIlwaine JR), a situation arose where there was some dispute as to the
of the sales to be completed each month. In that case I stated:
"It is essential for sales managers to put clearly to the sales persons
under their control the results which they want the representatives
and that failure to achieve those results will mean dismissal. Preferably, but
not essentially, this should be done in
writing. I am not satisfied on the
evidence before me that either was properly done in this case."
There was a failure on the part of management at any level to clearly state
that he must complete at least two installations per
day. This was never
stated to him. He could have been given a mobile phone, or pager to assist him
to improve his communication
with his Team Leader.
Although I am satisfied that the applicant did suffer distress of the nature
outlined in
Burazin v The Blacktown City Guardian Pty Ltd
(1995 case,
unreported IRCA Full Court decision, decision number 606/96, dated 13 December
1996). I do not think it is necessary
to make any assessment in this case.
NON ECONOMIC LOSS CAUSED BY UNLAWFUL TERMINATION ON GROUNDS OF FILING A
In order for there to be a connection between a breach of duty and for damages
to follow, it is necessary to show that the breach
relied upon was a cause of
the loss suffered. The test as to whether the act or admission was a cause of
damage is one of common
sense. My assessment of the key witnesses in this case
leads me to conclude that a proper working relationship cannot be
re-established.
Nevertheless, I acknowledge that the finding which I have made
on the allegation of an unlawful termination on the ground of filing
complaint may in some cases require a declaration reinstating the applicant.
However, I have taken into account the observations
of Kirby J at p 70 in
Qantas Airways Limited v Christie
(1988) HCA 18
, 19 March 1988:
"But if reinstatement were not ordered, questions of
compensation and damages would remain. By such means a court could vindicate
the provisions of the Act in circumstances which took into account the
mitigating factors, including some of those upon which Qantas
There is extensive discussion of the assessment of non-economic loss in sexual
harassment cases such as:
1. Bennett & Anor v Everitt & Anor
(1988) EOC 92-244
2. Tammy Jackson v Riste Ilievskil (Innes, Com., Human Rights and Equal
Opportunity commission, 10 February 1997, unreported decision
number H96/85
3. Lorelle Dippert v Cliff Luxford and Vrachnas Betabake Pty Ltd
4. Hall, Oliver and Reid v Sheiban
[1989] FCA 72
(1989) 85 ALR 503
Based on an examination of these cases it is reasonable to conclude that a
range exists from $6000 to $9000 for such damages. I
am satisfied, having
reviewed the above cases, that an assessment of $6000 for the damage suffered
through the failure of the respondent
to protect the applicant from injury
caused by the unlawful termination of his employment with Optus.
I am satisfied that the applicant has made genuine attempts to seek other
employment. These approaches have been, for whatever
reason unsuccessful. He
has been unemployed for in excess of six months. In these circumstances the
maximum amount allowed by the
legislation is applicable. The respondent is to
have the benefit of the monies paid to the applicant by way of Notice.
CALCULATION OF AWARD OF COMPENSATION
There being these findings and the contravention of the Act it follows that it
is necessary to assess the amount of compensation
which should be ordered.
According to his Termination Advice, his taxable salary was $33,637.50. This
should be rounded up to $33
650. The amount of compensation considered to be
appropriate is a total of twenty-three weeks which equates to fourteen
eight hundred and eighty dollars ($14,881.00). It can be seen from
the findings that there was not a termination of the employment
applicant by the respondent which has contravened s 170DB (2). The amount of
one weeks wages applicable under this section
has been taken into account in
this award.
Council for the respondent, Mr Dixon and Ms Thackery, his instructing Solicitor
conducted themselves very properly in this case.
It is always difficult to
appear against an unrepresented party and the applicant was no exception. At
all times they vigorously
pursued the case for the respondent whilst taking
into account the difficulties faced by the applicant which was of assistance to
I repeat my earlier observations about the need for Optus to review its policy
on alcohol and drug usage. This is a most important
issue given that its
employees are working in the electrical industry and the lives of the fellow
employees may be in danger by a
failure to take a strong stand on this
There will be judgment and order accordingly.
certify that this and the preceding twenty (20) pages are a true copy of the
Reasons for Judgment herein of Judicial Registrar McIlwaine
Dated: 16 October 1998
Unrepresented
for the Respondent:
for the Respondent:
Ellison Solicitors
of Hearing:
21.5.96, 3.6.96, 13.6.96, 19.6.96, 3.7.96, 29.7.96, 30.7.96, 31.7.96, 1.8.96,
3.2.97, and 10.2.97
of Judgment:
October 1998
No downloadable files available