The Australian Workers' Union [2025] FWCA 3802 (12 November 2025)
[2025] FWCA 3802
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Enterprise agreement
The Australian Workers’
(AG2025/3469)
BESTBAR (VIC) PTY LTD ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT 2025-2028
Manufacturing and associated industries
DEPUTY PRESIDENT FAROUQUE
MELBOURNE, 12 NOVEMBER 2025
Application for variation of the Bestbar (Vic) Pty Ltd Enterprise
Agreement 2025-2028
The Australian Workers’ Union (
) has applied under
Fair Work Act 2009
) for a variation
Bestbar (Vic) Pty Ltd Enterprise Agreement 2025-2028
At a Mention before me on 23 October 2025, the representative of
Bestbar (Vic) Pty Ltd
”) confirmed it
consented to the application.
Section 218A allows the Commission to vary an enterprise agreement to
correct an obvious error, defect or irregularity.
The AWU application (the
Application
) set out the grounds of
the application and attached a number of supporting documents. At the Mention,
the parties confirmed the
information in the Application.
Before exercising a power to vary under s.218A, the Commission must
first be satisfied of the existence of an obvious error, defect
or irregularity
(whether in substance or form). Upon the finding of such an error, defect or
irregularity, the Commission may vary
the enterprise agreement. The power to
vary should only be exercised to the extent necessary to remove the error,
defect or irregularity.
The Application seeks to vary the Agreement by deleting the final dot
point of cl 21c(ii). The text to be deleted is marked up below:
21c (ii) Personal leave to care for an immediate family or
household member
A full-time
or regular part time employee is entitled to use their personal leave to care
for members of their immediate family or
household who are sick or injured and
require care and support or who require care due to an unexpected emergency.
entitlement is subject to the employee providing care and support of the person
Employees are
entitled to access an additional five (5) days paid Carer’s Leave for each
calendar year. This entitlement is
not cumulative.
additional Carer’s Leave is available to part-time employees on a pro-rata
five (5) additional days of personal leave may be used where the employee is ill
or injured, or for the purposes of Carer’s
Leave in accordance with this
The AWU Application indicates that during recent bargaining in
respect of the Agreement, the AWU made a claim for an additional five
paid Carer’s Leave for each calendar year with a pro rata entitlement for
a part time employee. This claim was accepted
by Bestbar and encompassed in the
third and fourth dot points to clause 21c(ii). However, during the drafting
process, the last
dot point was included in clause 21c(ii) by error.
Furthermore, the detailed explanatory material provided to employees
in conformity with s 180(5) and prior to the employee vote to
approve the
Agreement, explained that there was no change to personal leave save that
employees would receive an additional entitlement
to carer’s leave
encompassed in the third and fourth dot points. Consequently, the variation is
consistent with the explanation
provided to employees regarding the terms of the
Agreement prior to their vote to approve it.
Based on the above matters and the information set out in the
Application and the documents which accompanied it, I am satisfied
that there is
an obvious error in the Agreement being the inclusion of the last dot point in
clause 21c(ii). I am satisfied that
it is appropriate to vary the Agreement by
deleting the last dot point in clause 21c(ii)
The variation is approved and the consolidated version of the
Agreement, as varied, is
to this decision.
In accordance with s.218A(3) of the Act, the variation operates from
7 November 2025.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (1.13 MB)
Signed PDF/A format