Transport Workers Union of Australia v Hansch [1998] IRCA 29 (7 September 1998)
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
INDUSTRIAL LAW
– whether primary judge afforded procedural
fairness in determining matter based on a finding neither sought nor argued by
either party – no obligation for primary judge to seek further contentions
or do more than afford party a reasonable opportunity
to present case –
Union rules – whether adequate compliance – need for sufficient
information to union members
regarding purpose of special general meeting
resolutions void and of no effect
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Campbell v Higgins
(1957) 3 FLR 317
referred to.
Higgins v Nicol and Ors
(1971) 18 FLR 343
Campbell v Crawford
(1985) 12 FCR 317
, followed.
(1991) 37 IR 94
, followed.
Cook v Crawford
[1981] FCA 16
(1981) 52 FLR 1
referred to.
Autodesk Inc v Dyason (No 2)
[1993] HCA 6
(1993) 176 CLR 300
Re Coldham; Ex parte Municipal Officers Association of Australia
[1989] HCA 13
(1989) 84 ALR 208
Re Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance,
Ex parte Hoyts Corporation Pty Ltd
[1994] HCA 66
(1994) 119 ALR 206
TRANSPORT WORKERS UNION OF AUSTRALIA & ORS V
BARRY HANSCH
TI 12 of 1998
MARSHALL, NORTH &
MADGWICK JJ
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
TASMANIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
TI 12 OF 1998
TRANSPORT WORKERS UNION OF AUSTRALIA
KENNETH JOHN BACON
SILAS FRANK MANLEY
RAYMOND GEORGE AUSTIN
JOHN MALLETT
SAMUEL MCCRAE BARKER
RON HODGETTS
SEVENTH APPELLANT
BARRY HANSCH
MARSHALL, NORTH & MADGWICK JJ
WHERE MADE:
THE COURT ORDERS
1. The appeal be dismissed.
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
TASMANIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
TI 12 OF 1998
TRANSPORT WORKERS UNION OF
FIRST APPELLANT
KENNETH JOHN
SECOND APPELLANT
SILAS FRANK
THIRD APPELLANT
RAYMOND GEORGE
FOURTH APPELLANT
JOHN MALLETT
SAMUEL MCCRAE BARKER
RON HODGETTS
SEVENTH APPELLANT
BARRY HANSCH
MARSHALL, NORTH & MADGWICK JJ
MELBOURNE (HEARD IN HOBART)
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
THE COURT: This appeal was heard in Hobart on 7 August 1998. On that day, after
hearing the submissions of counsel for the appellants,
the Court dismissed the
appeal and indicated that the reasons for judgment would be delivered as soon as
was reasonably practicable.
Those reasons follow.
The appeal is brought from the judgment of Ryan J given on 25 May 1998. The
appellants are the Transport Workers Union of Australia
Union”) and the members, at the relevant time, of the Committee of
Management of the Tasmanian Branch of the Union
(“the Branch”). The
respondent, Barry Hansch, was at all material times an elected organiser
employed by the Union and
attached to the Branch. His Honour ordered, under
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(Cth), that the
appellants, other than the Union, perform and observe the rules of the Union by
treating as null and void and of no
effect the resolutions carried at a
purported special general meeting of the Branch at Launceston on 21 August
which purported to find Mr Hansch guilty of gross misbehaviour and
to declare his office vacant. The central issue in the appeal is
whether the
notice of the meeting was validly given to the members of the Branch and to Mr
Mr Hansch was elected unopposed as an organiser attached to the Branch on 8
March 1995. In late July 1996 Mr Hansch received a letter
Secretary of the Branch, Mr Bacon, the second respondent, which advised
Mr Hansch that the Branch Committee of Management
had charged him with the
offence of gross misbehaviour under the rules of the Union. He was further
advised that he would be suspended
with pay from all duties from 5.00 pm, 26
July 1996. No time or place of the meeting to consider the charge was referred
letter from Mr Bacon.
On 19 August 1996 a notice calling a special general meeting of members of the
Branch was published in each of the three daily regional
newspapers circulating
in Tasmania. The notice was in the following form:
TRANSPORT WORKERS
UNION OF AUSTRALIA
TASMANIAN BRANCH
SPECIAL GENERAL
MEETING FOR ALL
MEMBERS OF THE
TASMANIAN BRANCH
A Special General Meeting will be held at St
Ailbies Hall, 46 Margaret Street, Launceston
on Wednesday, August 21, 1996 commencing
at 8.30pm. Financial members only will be
required to vote and make decisions –
Please make sure you have
your O.K. card with you
Financial membership checks
will be carried upon entry
Buses will leave from Domain
Athletic Centre, Hobart at 6 pm
Showground, Burnie at 6pm
Returning to these desti-
nations at approximately
There was also evidence before his Honour that the Secretary of the
Branch sent a letter to each member of the Branch concerning the
meeting. There
was no evidence, however, of the date upon which the letter was sent.
special general meeting of the Branch was held on 21 August 1996. The meeting
resolved, by forty votes to five votes, to find
Mr Hansch guilty as
charged. It also resolved by a substantial margin that Mr Hansch’s
office be declared vacant.
THE ADVERTISEMENT AS NOTICE
Before Ryan J, it was accepted by counsel for the appellants that
the only notice to members was by way of the newspaper advertisements.
accepted by counsel that, even if the rules permitted notice by the letter, no
such notice could be relied upon in this case
because there was no evidence of
the date of receipt of the letter. Ryan J held that the special general meeting
had not been convened
in accordance with the rules of the Union. Subrule 51(d)
provided that:
“A special general meeting of Members enrolled in a Branch must be
called by advertisement in a daily newspaper circulating
in the area of the
Branch; ...”
His Honour held that the notice was
deficient because it failed
“to indicate, at least in some general way,
what the topic or matter”
was to be dealt with at the meeting. He
stated that:
“Failure to provide adequate information in the notice will result in
the meeting not being properly convened and consequently
all decisions taken
will be void and of no effect.”
His Honour referred
to relevant authorities including
Campbell v Higgins
(1957) 3 FLR 317
Higgins v Nicol and Ors
(1971) 18 FLR 343
and concluded:
“In the present case the notice placed in three regional daily
newspapers gave no indication whatever of the business to be
discussed at the
special meeting. Consequently, persons reading the notice would have been unable
to make any judgment about whether
the meeting was of concern to them or whether
they should attend at all.”
We agree with his
Honour’s conclusion that the advertisements did not provide notice in
accordance with the rules, and we agree
with his Honour’s reasons, set out
above, for so concluding.
THE LETTER AS NOTICE
In order to avoid the
consequences of the conclusion that the advertisements did not constitute notice
of the special general meeting,
the appellants contended on the appeal that:
(a) the rules permitted notice by means other than the advertisements
referred to in subrule 51(d);
(b) such notice had been given by the letter to members referred to earlier
in these reasons, and
(c) the notice had been given in sufficient time before the
In order to make good proposition (c), the appellants applied
for leave to adduce evidence on the appeal of the date of receipt of
by the members.
Leave to adduce additional evidence would be granted
only if the additional evidence would advance the case of the appellants. We
assume the correctness of proposition (a), without deciding that the rules
permit notice, otherwise than by way of advertisement,
and we assume the
correctness of proposition (c) without deciding the issue. Consequently, it is
convenient to consider whether the
terms of the letter, if received by the
members within a reasonable time before the meeting, would have constituted
sufficient notice.
The letter was in the following terms:
TO: FINANCIAL MEMBERS AS ADDRESSED
Dear Member,
Re: Special General Meeting – Barry Hansch
My apologies for contacting you again on this matter. I also would prefer
this problem did not exist, however, if we are to provide
a service to members
and a strong Union representation by officials, discipline within our ranks must
be maintained as with any employer-employee
relationship.
Brief History
In the first instance the Branch Committee of Management formed the view that
B. Hansch had abandoned his employment because he walked
away from his duties
and ignored the directions given to him by his employer, the Branch Committee of
Management, regarding attending
to his duties.
The Branch Committee of Management position was supported by a decision of
the Industrial Relations Court in which the Judge was not
prepared to find that
B. Hansch had been ready, willing and able to perform his duties with the Union.
However, because he was an
elected official and the Union did not take steps to
dismiss him from that elected position the Court held on the 19
April 1996 that he continued to be employed by the Union.
B. Hansch did not return to work on the 19 April 1996 despite the Court
decision, therefore the Branch Committee of Management charged
him with, amongst
other things, gross neglect of duty and misconduct. The Branch Committee of
Management then cancelled his membership.
B. Hansch appealed to the Federal Council of the Union over his loss of
membership and the Federal Council members voted to overturn
Committee of Management decision to cancel his membership.
I am told by both the Federal Secretary and Federal President that the reason
they overturned the Branch Committee of Management decision
was that it would be
hard for B Hansch to obtain another job if he was not a T.W.U. member (they did
not address the charges made
against B Hansch).
Both the Federal Council, I believe, and the Court decision on the 19 April
1996 make it quite clear that the only way to deal with
an elected officer of
the Union who does not follow instructions and who blatantly ignores the
directions of the Branch Committee
of Management, his employer, is to suspend
the officer with pay and to have the financial members of the Union deal with
by way of a special general meeting to decide the future of that
PLEASE ATTEND AND HAVE YOUR DEMOCRATIC SAY IN THE MATTER
MEETING VENUE: ST AILBIES HALL, 46 MARGARET STREET,
TIME: 8.30 P.M.
DATE: 21 AUGUST 1996
BUSES WILL LEAVE FROM DOMAIN ATHLETIC CENTRE, HOBART AT 6 P.M. AND BURNIE
SHOW GROUND AT 6 P.M. THE RETURN TRIP WILL LEAVE LAUNCESTON
AT APPROXIMATELY
PLEASE NOTIFY US IF YOU INTEND TO COME TO THE MEETING ON HOBART 0418 135 626
OR LAUNCESTON (003) 340 992 TO ENABLE US TO ARRANGE SEATS
Yours faithfully
BRANCH SECRETARY
In our view the letter
did not give an accurate indication of the business to be transacted at the
special general meeting. A member
of the Union receiving the letter would be
fairly entitled to assume that the meeting had been called merely to consider
what penalty
to impose on Mr Hansch, given the summary of events indicating
that the Federal Council of the Union and the primary judge, in a
judgment to the one under appeal, had determined that Mr Hansch
does not follow instructions
ignores the directions of the Branch Committee of
The members were not told what charge had been
laid against Mr Hansch. Nor were they informed about the details of the
charge. They
were not advised that they would be asked to vote to consider
whether Mr Hansch was guilty of an offence under the rules of the Union.
They were simply informed that they would “
decide the future of that
”, meaning Mr Hansch.
A member is entitled to fair
notice of the nature of the decisions he or she will be able, or required, to
make at the meeting in
Campbell v Crawford
(1985) 12 FCR 317
Durham v Ide
(1991) 37 IR 94
at 99-100. Such information, amongst
other things, is necessary for the member to determine
own interest”
Cook v Crawford
[1981] FCA 16
(1981) 52 FLR 1
36 per Evatt J) whether to devote the necessary time and inconvenience in
attending the meeting. In the case of disciplinary
proceedings, this may be of
some special importance. Each member has their own right to such notice, and
the person in jeopardy
has a right to have other members given such
Here, a member in receipt of the letter would not have realised
the true nature of the task for members: namely, to determine, without
pre-judgment, whether any of particular charges against Mr Hansch was made
out and, if so, whether any, and if so what, disciplinary
response might be
appropriate. Further, even though a task of the second of those kinds was
indicated as that of the meeting, the
highly partisan terms of the letter
suggested that the degree of discretion reasonably available to any sensible
member was very
minor. Such a member, particularly one from, say, Hobart or
Burnie, might very well have thought from the terms of the letter, that
matter was a simple, open-and-shut case, and one not warranting the
inconvenience of turning out to Launceston merely to help
an inevitable result
ensue. Thus, not only the nature of their task, but the potential degree to
which their discretion might be
engaged, was not fairly represented to the
As the terms of the letter would not have given members the
necessary notice of the matter to be dealt with by the special general
the additional evidence purporting to establish the date of receipt of the
notice would not advance the case of the appellants.
Consequently, we refuse the
application for leave to adduce such evidence. In light of this conclusion, we
also refuse the application
to adduce further evidence on appeal concerning
receipt of notice by Mr Hansch. The appellants cannot succeed in view of the
that the notice given to the members was not given in accordance with
DENIAL OF PROCEDURAL FAIRNESS
commencement of the hearing of the appeal, counsel for the appellants sought
leave to amend the notice of appeal by adding
a further ground as follows:
“That the judgement of Ryan J given on the 25th May 1998 be set
aside and that this Honourable Court either remit the proceedings
for further
hearing and determination or grant a new trial on the ground that the Appellants
were not afforded procedural fairness
in the trial before Ryan J in that
His Honour determined the matter on the basis of findings which were neither
sought nor argued
by the Respondent.”
As previously
explained, Ryan J held that the special general meeting was void because the
advertisements were the only notice given
and they did not comply with the
requirements of subrule 51(d), in that they did not specify the nature of
the business of the meeting.
Ryan J also held that the advertisements did not
give Mr Hansch or the members notice within a reasonable time of the meeting.
proposed amendment to the grounds of appeal asserts that counsel for Mr
Hansch did not seek a finding or argue that the meeting was
void on these
It is true that counsel for Mr Hansch did not seek these
findings at the trial or argue that the advertisements did not comply with
requirements of subrule 51(d). His case was that the appellants had denied him
natural justice by not providing particulars of
the charge against him either
before or at the meeting. However, in the course of the appellants’
submissions before Ryan J,
the following exchange occurred:
“HIS HONOUR: Well, what do you say about the requirements of the rules
as to the period of notice? My understanding is that
there is no period
MR READ: No.
HIS HONOUR: So presumably the implication is that it has to be a reasonable
MR READ: Yes, I am content with that. I will go that far. Now, then the
question arises, was it reasonable? And that could be judged
from the fact that
there has been no complaint from Mr Hansch that he was in any way
prejudiced in his defence by the lack of time.
And secondly, of those two
persons who telephoned him that he gives specific evidence about in the more
general evidence, was not
– the complaint was not, “Well, look, we
haven’t had enough notice”. It was, “We can’t make it
Wednesday nights. It ought to be in Hobart, or it ought to perhaps be at the
So the complaints that were made, the prejudice that was alleged, and the
lack of procedural fairness was not, “We haven’t
time” and I submit that if there was to be a finding of any procedural
– any lack of procedural fairness that
at least would need to be based on
some evidence that there was some consequence from short notice.
HIS HONOUR: Well, it is not so much a question of fairness, it is a question
of compliance with the rules – if you accept that
it is an implied term of
the rules that notice should be given was in effect, 48 hours notice,
appropriate or reasonable.
MR READ: Yes, well, it is probably, in effect, more like 60 hours, your
Honour, but if we are going to be splitting hairs as to that,
it depends when
you pick up your newspaper and indeed whether you open it at the right page, but
the only additional evidence about
that before I specifically answer your Honour
the letter to members that goes out. Unfortunately, it is not dated and
indeed Mr Bacon’s affidavit does not give it any date
and it just
simply says:
‘Annexed, marked DD, is a copy of a letter I sent to all members with
respect to the meeting of 21 August ’96.’
That letter has some importance in terms of the way in which the members at
the meeting may have informed themselves because they
would be entitled to take
into account those matters which do fall within that letter, but there is no
indication within it that
– as to when that letter was sent. Now, your
Honour is therefore left with the advertisements on 19 August, the
advertisements
on 20 August which in my submission are reasonable notice in the
absence of any complaint in relation to it.
Now, I understand your Honour’s point, well, the rules need to be
complied with and absent complaint, they still need to be
complied but one
method of judging what a reasonable period might be within this union is to
gauge whether there has been any complaint
HIS HONOUR: Well, the other question, I suppose, is that the rules speak of
notice of a special general meeting.
provides for special general
meetings to be called at any time by the branch president or branch secretary
and then there is the
requirement that it must be called by advertisement in the
daily newspaper circulating in the area of the branch. The question is
an advertisement which simply gives notice of a special general meeting complies
with the rule if, as these advertisements
seem to do, it fails to indicate the
business of the meeting?
MR READ: Well, I submit there is no requirement in the rule to advise in the
paper of the business of the meeting. It is the fact
of the meeting which must
be notified in the newspapers pursuant to
and in .....
HIS HONOUR: It is designated “a special meeting”?
MR READ: Yes, and it is designated in the newspaper “a special
HIS HONOUR: Oh, yes, but it is designated in the rules as “a special
meeting” in contra distinction with an ordinary general
meeting. I can
understand if this were a notice of an ordinary general meeting, there would be
no requirement to indicate the business,
and one would go to
to indicate
what was to happen, sorry, 53(2), I think, but the view could be taken that a
special meeting is a meeting convened to
deal with some special topic and that
in order to be effective the notice has to indicate at least in some general way
what the topic
MR READ: It is only the last part of what falls from your Honour that I take
issue with. Certainly, the fact that it is special does
require something
special and that is a notice in the newspaper of the fact of the meeting. You
see, in my submission, an ordinary
general meeting does not require notice in
the newspaper. Because it is special it gets that special requirement. Now, had
contemplated basically a need to outline the business of the meeting
the rules would in addition, or within (d), have set out “and
state the business of the meeting” but all that is required, I submit is
the fact of the meeting to be advertised.”
the construction of subrule 51(d) and the period of notice were in issue.
Counsel for the appellants responded to the arguments
outlined by his Honour,
and did not seek to reopen his case or seek any adjournment on the ground that
he was unprepared to answer
the points. The appellants contended that Ryan J
should have invited the appellants to call further evidence or to put further
The applicable approach was referred to by Brennan J in
Autodesk Inc v Dyason (No 2)
[1993] HCA 6
(1993) 176 CLR 300
“A court should not pronounce a judgment against a person on a ground
which that person has not had an opportunity to argue.
However, a sufficient
opportunity to argue a ground is given when the ground is logically involved in
a proposition that has been
raised in the course of argument before the court or
is to be considered by the court as an unconceded step in determining the
of a conclusion for which one of the parties contends. Of course, the
precise ground which a court or judge assigns for a decision
will frequently be
formulated in terms different from the terms of a submission by counsel but,
provided the ground has arisen in
one of the ways mentioned, the court or judge
may properly proceed to judgment without requiring the case to be relisted for
argument and without inviting supplementary submissions to be
Re Coldham; Ex parte Municipal Officers Association of
[1989] HCA 13
(1989) 84 ALR 208
at 220, Gaudron J said:
“As was pointed out by Deane J in
Sullivan v Department of
(1978) 20 ALR 323
at 343, procedural fairness requires only that a
party be given “a reasonable
opportunity
to present his case”
and not that the tribunal ensure “that a party takes the best advantage of
the opportunity to which
he is entitled.” And it is always relevant to
inquire whether the party or his legal representative should reasonably have
apprehended that the issue was or might become a live issue: see
Re Building
Workers’ Industrial Union; Ex parte Gallagher
[1988] HCA 4
(1988) 62 ALJR 81
(emphasis added)
Re Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance, Ex parte
Hoyts Corporation Pty Ltd
[1994] HCA 66
(1994) 119 ALR 206
at 213, the High Court
“Outside a criminal trial, there is no requirement that a judge or
member of a tribunal do more than afford a party a reasonable
opportunity to
present his or her case. In particular, there is no requirement to point to
arguments or evidence that may assist
in making the
The appellants had an opportunity to call
further evidence as to the time of receipt of the letter. They chose not to do
was no procedural unfairness in these circumstances. Similarly, the
appellants addressed argument on the construction of subrule
51(d). They did not
seek any further opportunity. There was no denial of procedural fairness by the
trial judge not inviting further
submissions. As the ground sought to be added
to the notice of appeal is bound to fail, we refuse the appellants leave to
notice of appeal.
For the foregoing reasons, the appeal was
dismissed and orders made to that effect.
I certify that this and the preceding ten (10) pages are a true copy of the
Reasons for Judgment herein of the Full Court
Dated: 7 September 1998
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr K E Read
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Jennings Elliott
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Date of Hearing:
Date of Order:
Date of Publication of Reasons:
RTF format (76.5 KB)
Signed PDF/A format