Toltz v Riemer [2025] FCA 1385 (14 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Toltz v Riemer
[2025] FCA 1385
File number:
NSD 950 of 2025
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
dismissal – where the second respondent seeks summary dismissal of the
proceeding in so far as it alleges liability
against it –where the second
respondent contends an “ordinary” or “reasonable” member
of the relevant
group would not understand the impugned acts to carry the
imputations that are alleged to contravene s 18C of the
Racial Discrimination
(RDA) – whether such a contention can be accepted without an
opportunity for evidence to be adduced at a final hearing
PRACTICE AND
– strike out – where both the first and second
respondent seek parts of the amended statement of claim to be struck out,
alleging, amongst other things, that those parts: (a) plead facts that are not
relevant to any fact that could be in issue, (b) fail
to disclose a reasonable
cause of action in inviting the Court to treat the impugned acts cumulatively
when assessing whether there
has been a contravention of
Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) and (c) would require evidence of a global
nature to be made out where such an approach is not necessary for the applicants
to make good their case
– where s 46PSA appears to
limit the Court’s discretion to make costs orders – where the
applicants have tendered
extensive documentary material which was found unlikely
to be probative of anything
Legislation:
Australian Human Rights Commission Act
Criminal Code Act 1995
Evidence Act 1995
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) rr 16.21, 26.01
Cases cited:
British American Tobacco Ltd v Western
[2003] HCA 47
Cassuto v Kostakidis
[2025] FCA 1226
Clarke v Nationwide News Pty Ltd trading as the Sunday Times
201 FCR 389
CSR Ltd v Eddy
[2005] HCA 64
Eatock v Bolt
[2011] FCA 1103
197 FCR 261
Faruqi v Hanson
[2024] FCA 1264
General Steel Industries
Inc v Commissioner for
Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
Hallett v Andrews
(1898) 42 Sol Jo 68
Jefferson Ford Pty Limited v Ford Motor Company of Australia
[2008] FCAFC 60
167 FCR 372
Jones v Scully
[2002] FCA 1080
120 FCR 243
Kaplan v State of Victoria (No 8)
[2023] FCA 1092
Lombard Australia Ltd v Mulley
(1976) 9 ACTR 23
Macabenta v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[1998] FCA 1643
(1998) 90 FCR 202
McGlade v Lightfoot
[2002] FCA 1457
124 FCR 106
Prior v South West Aboriginal Land and Sea Council Aboriginal
Corporation
[2020] FCA 808
Prior v Wood
[2017] FCA 193
Spencer v Commonwealth
[2010] HCA 28
241 CLR 118
Webster v Lampard
[1993] HCA 57
(1993) 177 CLR 598
Wertheim v Haddad
[2025] FCA 720
; 311 FCR 263
Wotton v State of Queensland (No 5)
[2016] FCA 1457
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Administrative and Constitutional Law and Human Rights
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
Date of hearing:
13-14 October 2025
Counsel for the Applicants:
Solicitor for the Applicants:
Rotstein Commercial Lawyers
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Marque Lawyers
Counsel for the Second Respondent:
R Dick SC with B Byrnes
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
Ashurst Australia
NSD 950 of 2025
JOSEPH TOLTZ
SUZANNE RUTLAND
Second Applicant
(and another named in the Schedule)
Third Applicant
NICK RIEMER
THE UNIVERISTY OF SYDNEY
Second Respondent
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
following parts of the amended statement of claim (
) be struck
(a) “descent” in [8(a)];
(b) “nationality” in [8(b)];
(c) “predominantly Jewish people and/or Israeli” in [10];
(d) “and were known as” in [21];
(e) [23], [24] and [25];
(h) the images subjoined to [35];
(i) the words “when considered individually and/or cumulatively and/or
collectively” in [86]; and
applicants have leave to file a further amended statement of claim:
(a) substituting “national origin” for “nationality” in
(b) reformulating the first sentence of [10];
(c) reformulating [34]; and
(d) making any other amendments made necessary by the striking out of the
paragraphs or parts of paragraphs referred to in order
parties’ representatives confer and provide to the Chambers of Justice
Kennett, by 5.00 pm on 28 November 2025:
(a) agreed or competing short minutes of order providing for:
(i) provision by the applicants of particulars to ASOC [28]; and
(ii) timetabling of further steps in the proceeding up to the close of pleadings
(including filing of any further amended statement
of claim as referred to in
order 2); and
(b) notification of whether they are content for these timetabling orders to be
made in chambers.
interlocutory application filed by the first respondent on 5 August 2025 be
otherwise dismissed.
interlocutory application filed by the second respondent on 28 August 2025 be
otherwise dismissed.
of both interlocutory applications be reserved.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
first respondent (
) is a Senior Lecturer in the Discipline of
English and Writing at the University of Sydney (
the University
until October 2024, President of the University of Sydney Branch of the National
Tertiary Education Union (
). He is now the Vice-President
(academic) of that Branch of the Union.
the febrile atmosphere that followed the attack by Hamas operatives on Israel on
7 October 2023, Dr Riemer made public statements
that the applicants found
offensive. Broadly, these statements were strongly critical of actions or
positions which Dr Riemer attributed
to “Zionists”. The applicants
were at relevant times students and members of the academic staff at the
University, and
one (Mr Eisner) was also an elected officer in the Australasian
Union of Jewish Students . They plead that they are “Jewish
or Israeli citizens (or eligible to be Israeli citizens) and identify as
“Zionists”.
applicants seek declaratory and injunctive relief and public apologies in
relation to several of Dr Riemer’s statements
Human Rights Commission Act 1986
the AHRC Act
), on the footing
that the statements contravened
Racial Discrimination Act
). As to some of those statements, relief is also
sought against the University on the footing that it is vicariously liable for
Riemer’s unlawful conduct under
of the RDA.
applicants filed their originating application and statement of claim on 13 June
2025. They filed an amended statement of claim
) on 30 July
proceeding has, so far, been case managed concurrently with
Toltz v Keane
(NSD951/2025) (
Toltz v Keane
, which involves allegations of
contraventions of
by another staff member of the University. The
applicants in the present proceeding are also applicants in
reasons concern the following two interlocutory applications filed by the
respondents:
(a) an application by Dr Riemer, filed on 5 August 2025, to strike out
particular parts of the ASOC pursuant to r 16.21 of the
Federal Court Rules
(b) an application by the University, filed on 28 August 2025, to:
(i) strike out some specific parts of the ASOC pursuant to r 16.21; and
(ii) dismiss summarily the aspects of the applicants’ claim that relate to
the University pursuant to
Federal Court of Australia Act
the FCA Act
and r 26.01 of the Rules.
is some overlap between the parts of the ASOC sought to be struck out by the two
applications, and the University expressly
supported aspects of Dr
Riemer’s application. In these reasons I will deal with the issues
relating to summary dismissal first,
followed by the strike-out
applications.
Section 18C
18C of the RDA provides as follows.
(1) It is unlawful for a person to do an act, otherwise than in private, if:
(a) the act is reasonably likely, in all the circumstances, to offend, insult,
humiliate or intimidate another person or a group
of people; and
(b) the act is done because of the race, colour or national or ethnic origin of
the other person or of some or all of the people
in the group.
Note: Subsection (1) makes
certain acts unlawful.
Section 46P
Australian Human Rights
Commission Act 1986
allows people to make complaints to the Australian Human
Rights Commission about unlawful acts. However, an unlawful act is not
necessarily
a criminal offence.
says that this Act does not make
it an offence to do an act that is unlawful because of this Part, unless
Part IV expressly says
that the act is an
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), an act is taken not to be done in
private if it:
(a) causes words, sounds, images or writing to be communicated to the public;
(b) is done in a public place; or
(c) is done in the sight or hearing of people who are in a public place.
(3) In this section:
public place
includes any place to which the public have access as
of right or by invitation, whether express or implied and whether or not a
charge is made for admission to the place.
The pleaded case
Introductory matters
[7] is as follows.
Each Applicant is a
Jewish person
or a person who is, or is eligible to
be, an Israeli citizen (
Israeli person
) and identifies as Zionist.
(Emphasis in original.)
is some ambiguity here, but I apprehend that the closing words of the paragraph
(“and identifies as Zionist”) are
intended as an addition to both of
the alternatives set out earlier (a “Jewish person” or an
“Israeli person”)
and therefore apply to all of the applicants.
ASOC then alleges the following in relation to “Zionists” (at
Zionists are predominantly Jewish people and/or Israeli people who believe in
Israel being a nation state and the national home of
and for the Jewish people.
A substantial proportion of Jewish and/or Israeli people identify themselves as
ASOC then pleads the following matters of background:
(a) the first (1987-1993) and second (2000-2005) intifadas, which (very briefly)
were uprisings by Palestinians against Israeli occupation
in which significant
numbers of Israelis (and much larger numbers of Palestinians) were killed (at
[21]-[25]);
(b) the aims of Hamas (said to include “obliterating” Israel and
“killing the Jews”) and its listing as a
terrorist organisation
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) (at [26]-[29]); and
(c) the events of 7 October 2023, when Hamas members “illegally invaded
the State of Israel” and committed many atrocities
(including killings,
rapes and the taking of more than 250 hostages) (at [30]-[32]).
Dr Riemer’s statements
respondents’ submissions on the interlocutory application focus on a
relatively small subset of the statements that are
the subject of complaint.
However, to give an indication of the scope of the proceeding, and in the light
of submissions of the applicants
which assert the relevance of the whole
collection, I will attempt to summarise the entirety of this part of the
The “global intifada” post and meeting
1 November 2023 Dr Riemer made a post on his “X” account (
“global intifada” post
) which is reproduced at ASOC [33] as
the photograph at the bottom of the post was clicked on, it became visible as a
larger picture which appears to show a poster advertising
a meeting. Text at the
top of the poster says “a student meeting hosted by Solidarity”. It
is alleged by what purports
to be “particulars” to ASOC [34] that
“Solidarity is a pro-Palestinian student group that closely follows and
Dr Riemer”.
“global intifada” post showed part of (and apparently annexed the
whole of) a letter from Dr Riemer to the Vice-Chancellor
of the University
protesting against a decision by the latter to prohibit a proposed student
meeting (which, one infers, is the “case
for a global intifada”
meeting advertised by the poster mentioned above). Although it was directed to
the issues of a particular
moment, the post (according to ASOC [36]) has
remained visible on Dr Riemer’s X page.
is alleged (ASOC [37]-[39]) that the meeting took place on 1 November 2023
(despite the Vice-Chancellor apparently having prohibited
it) and Dr Riemer
participated in it by:
(a) participating in a chant including:
...Israel out of Gaza, Israel out of Palestine, long live the intifada! Free,
free the West Bank, Israel out of Gaza, Israel out
of Palestine long live the
(b) giving a speech, during which he said:
...we have a right to organise around supporting Palestinians. It’s not
just a slogan. Their resistance is justified because
of the occupation, at all
times, violent or not.
[40] pleads that this conduct of Dr Riemer conveyed “imputations”,
as follows.
The Riemer Global Intifada X Post and Dr Riemer’s participation in the
chant and the quoted section of his speech conveyed
the following imputations:
violent uprising against Jewish people and Israeli people in Israel in support
of a Palestinian state in the first and second
intifadas should extend to a
violent global uprising against Jews and Israelis in Australia and other parts
of the world in support
of the Palestinian resistance.
the events of 7 October were to be celebrated and endorsed.
Hamas’ Intifada and its related violence against Israelis and Jews,
including on 7 October, is justified until Israel,
Israelis and Jews are removed
from Palestine.
The 8 October post
8 October 2023 Dr Riemer put a post on his X page (
the 8 October post
which is reproduced in ASOC [41] as follows.
to ASOC [42], the 8 October post remains visible on Dr Riemer’s X
[43] alleges as follows.
Dr Riemer’s 8 October Post conveyed the following imputations:
cause, and what it did, on 7 October 2023 against Jewish people and Israeli
people in pursuit of that cause should not
be considered to be unjust;
should express solidarity with, and support of, Hamas’ objectives and
activities against Jewish people and Israeli people;
should express their solidarity with, and support of, Hamas’ cause and its
actiities [sic] on 7 October 2023 in support
of that cause.
The 7 October post
7 October 2023 Dr Riemer reposted a tweet (
the 7 October post
reproduced in ASOC [44] as follows.
[46] characterises the tweet which Dr Riemer reposted as proceeding “on
the basis that the Jewish people and/or Israeli
people who had been murdered,
maimed, kidnapped, raped or sexually abused were Zionists by virtue of being
Jewish and/or Israeli”.
[47] is as follows.
The 7 October repost had the following imputation:
is no basis or reason for anyone to be upset or shocked by the murder, maiming,
kidnapping, rape and sexual abuse by Hamas of
Jewish people and Israeli people
on 7 October 2023.
The Overland article
is “an established Australian literary and cultural magazine published
quarterly in print as well as online” (ASOC [49]).
article by Dr Riemer (described as someone who “works in the English and
linguistics departments at the University of Sydney”
“president of the Sydney University branch” of the Union) was
published in Overland on 15 October 2023 and remains
accessible on
website (ASOC [48], [50]) (
). ASOC [51] sets out the following extracts from the Overland
“That is just one reason why solidarity with Palestinians is essential for
anyone who wants to retain their own fundamental
freedoms. Palestine solidarity
is not just internationalim or anticolonialism or antiracism or even
humanitarianism; it is not just
an expression of compassion, or altruism, or
basic decency: it is a necessity for the defence of democratic prerogatives
authoritarianism and neo-fascism in Western nations. In cheering on the
antidemocratic suppression of protest Zionists sometimes
thought of as
‘liberal’ have let their masks slip. Their support for Israeli
apartheid and permanent war against Palestinians
can only mean opposition to
democracy in their own countries” [p3/13]
The official representatives of democracy, with honourable rare exceptions, have
failed democracy again.
Condemning a person means abandoning the effort to understand them. After a
condemnation, all that is left is absolute rejection
and banishment: renouncing
the devil and all his works. Condemning is what a judge does when they sentence
a prisoner to death. Once
someone is condemned, there’s no point in
talking about why they might have done what they have done: the final verdict is
delivered; no more remains to be said. This is exactly why Zionists demand that
we condemn Hamas: to block any move towards understanding
it and what might
motivate its resistance to Israeli colonisation – to erase the
understanding of
Palestinians fight back.” [P-4/13]
square-bracketed text in this quotation appears in ASOC [51] and apparently
comprises page references, indicating that these are
extracts from a 13-page
[52] and [53] are as follows.
The first extract set out above has the following imputation:
to the false image that Jewish people and Israeli people have cultivated, Jewish
people and Israeli people have now been
exposed as racist supporters of
apartheid and of a permanent war against Palestinians as well as being people
who surreptitiously
oppose democracy in their own countries.
The third extract set out above has the following imputation:
people and Israeli people demand condemnation of Hamas only so as to erase any
understanding of why there is Palestinian resistance
to Israel’s
occupation of the Palestinian territories.
The “owned by Zionists” post
28 October 2023, Dr Riemer reposted a post on his X account (
by Zionists” post
which is reproduced in ASOC [54] as
[56] is as follows.
The Saturday Paper “Owned by Zionists” Repost had the following
imputations:
people misuse their ownership of the media to conceal from the public the
genocide that Jewish people and Israeli people are
engaging in Gaza;
silence of Jewish people and Israeli people about that genocide will fail
because history will remember and record it.
[57] alleges that, by making these “imputations”, the “owned
by Zionists” post “repeats and ampllifies
[sic] the well known
antisemitic trope that the Jews control the media”.
The “no room for Zionism” posts
Riemer made two posts on 12 November 2023 which are reproduced in ASOC [58] as
to ASOC [59] these posts remain accessible online.
[60] is as follows.
The “No room for Zionism in our Unions” Speech and Posts had the
following imputations:
people and Israeli people should be excluded from any participation in Unions in
Australia including in the National Tertiary
Education Union.
of the racism, settler-colonialism and apartheid engaged in by Jewish people and
Israeli people there is no room for such
people in the Union movement in
Australia, including in the National Tertiary Education Union.
the reference in ASOC [60] to a “Speech”, it is worth noting that
the speech given by Dr Riemer (apparently at
a protest in Botany the day before
the posts) is not pleaded except in so far as the first of the posts makes
reference to it. In
effect, the first post refers to a message having been
delivered in a speech the day before (that there was “no room”
specified -isms in unions) and the second post restates that message (perhaps
giving increased prominence to “Zionism”).
The Lattouf sacking post
post by Dr Riemer on 12 November 2023 addressed the controversy concerning the
dismissal of the radio announcer Antoinette
Lattouf. This post (
the Lattouf
sacking post
) is set out in the ASOC as follows.
[63] is as follows.
The Lattouf sacking Post had the following imputations:
people and/or Israeli people are “unbridled McCarthyists” when they
supported the sacking of ABC presenter Antoinette
Jewish people and/or Israeli people are a threat to the public and that threat
is getting worse.
The “Zionist racists” post
29 December 2023 Dr Riemer reposted (apparently twice) a post on his X page
the “Zionist racists” post
), which is set out at ASOC [64]
as follows.
Riemer’s reposting of this material is referred to in the ASOC as
“the Zionists are racists Reposts”. It should
be noted, although it
is obvious, that the words “Zionists are racists” do not appear in
the material as reproduced in
the ASOC and this shorthand reference is at least
conclusory and potentially misleading.
[66] is as follows.
The Zionists are racists Reposts had the following imputation:
people, Israeli people and Zionists are racists.
The “smartwash” repost
24 December 2023 Dr Riemer reposted a post which is set out in ASOC [67] as
[69] asserts as follows.
The Zionists smartwash Repost had the following imputation:
people, Israeli people and Zionists deceptively and falsely proclaim that the
atrocities commited [sic] by Israel were normal
lawful activities.
The licence to lie and slander post
2 February 2024 Dr Riemer posted a post reproducing media reporting to the
effect that earlier claims about antisemitic chants
at a pro-Palestine rally in
Sydney had been found to be incorrect. The post (
the licence to lie and
slander post
) is set out at ASOC [70] as follows.
to ASOC [71] the licence to lie and slander post remains accessible.
[72] is as follows.
The Zionists’ “Licence to Lie and Slander” Post had the
following imputation:
people, Israeli people and Zionists are people who lie and slander in pursuing
their causes.
[73] asserts that, by making “those imputations”, the post
“repeats and amplifies the well known antisemitic
trope that the Jews are
deceptive”.
The “Zionists support genocide” repost
5 March 2024 Dr Riemer reposted a post (
the “Zionists support
genocide” repost
) which is set out at ASOC [74] as follows.
[76] is as follows.
The “Zionists support genocide” Repost had the following
imputations:
people, Israeli people and Zionists support genocide;
people, Israeli people and Zionists are hypocrites.
The “genocide-enablers” post
19 March 2024 Dr Riemer posted on his Facebook page in terms which are set out
at ASOC [77] as follows (
the “genocide-enablers”
[78] is as follows.
The “genocide enablers” Post had the following imputation:
Israeli people at the Tel Aviv University stall at Sydney University and other
Jewish people or Israeli people are genocide enablers.
Jewish peole [sic] and Israeli people are not welcome on the Sydney University
The “Nazis” repost
29 April 2024 Dr Riemer reposted a post which is set out at ASOC [79] as follows
the “Nazis” repost
ASOC labels this as “the ‘akin to Nazis’ Repost”. This
too is conclusory and potentially misleading —
particularly in its use of
quotation marks — as the material that Dr Riemer reposted did not use that
[81] is as follows.
The “akin to Nazis” Repost had the following imputations:
people, Israeli people and Zionists, are akin to Nazis and misogynists.
people, Israeli people and Zionists have no right to cultural safety.
The “Genocide” post and speech
3 May 2024 Dr Riemer posted material on his X page, an excerpt from which is set
out at ASOC [82] as follows.
“Safety means opposing Genocide”:
A ‘march for a single campus’: Let’s reflect on that. Zionists
clearly think that if they talk about safety, then
they’ll be able to make
people think that they’re the victims, and forget that, actually,
they’re supporting a
genocidal slaughter. They think safety on campus will
turn the debate in their favour and put us on the back foot.”
“What happens when we tell Zionists that there just is no identity that
can have as its condition the dispossession and slaughter
of an entire people?
They instantly tell us that we’re making them feel unsafe”
is described in the ASOC as a “Post and Speech”, but the pleading
does not specify who made the speech and when (or
whether it is relied on as a
distinct act).
[84] is as follows.
The paragraphs set out above, and the speech contain the following imputations:
a. Jewish people, Israeli people and Zionists support the genocidal slaughter of
Palestinians.
b. Jewish people, Israeli people and Zionists mislead people into thinking they
feel unsafe when what they are really doing seeking
[sic] freedom to support
Alleged contravention of s 18C by Dr Riemer
[85] alleges, in relation to each of the statements set out above, that it was
an act which was done in a public place, in the
sight and hearing of people who
were in a public place, and not done in private.
[88] is as follows.
The impugned acts were done or made because of the race, national or ethnic
origin of the people reasonably likely to be offended,
insulted, humiliated or
intimidate [sic] by the posting including because:
a. References to Zionists are, properly understood, to be a reference to (at
least) a majority of Jewish people and Israeli people
in Australia;
b. The subject matter of the impugned acts was related by context to events that
were themseves [sic] directly related to the race,
ethnic origin or national
origin (Jewish and/or Israeli) of the victims of the events of October 7; and
c. Dr Reimer has a tendency to engage in conduct which does and is intended to
offend and/or insult and/or humiliate and/or intimidate
Jewish persons and
Israeli persons.
[89] alleges that, in the premises, Dr Riemer contravened s 18C of the RDA.
[86] and [87] seek, for the purpose of reaching these conclusions, to bring the
various statements to account in a cumulative
way. They are as
Dr Riemer’s making of each of the impugned acts, by conveying any or all
of the imputations alleged, when considered individually
and/or cumulatively
and/or collectively, were reasonably likely in all the circumstances, to offend,
insult, humiliate or intimidate
Jewish persons or Israeli persons in Australia.
The reliance in the Amended Statement of Claim concerning Dr Riemer’s
impugned acts is cumulative, with the consequence that
each can be relied upon
cumulatively or collectively for the purposes of establishing both the causation
and racial elements in s18C
of the RDA.
Alleged liability of the University
ASOC [90]-[94] it is alleged that the Overland article (see [
] above) and the “no room for
Zionism” speech and posts (see [
] above) were made in connection with
Dr Riemer’s duties as an employee of the University and the University is
therefore vicariously
liable for these acts under s 18E of the RDA.
present purposes it is not necessary to refer to this aspect of the ASOC in any
detail. The University reserves its position on
vicarious liability but accepts
for the purposes of its interlocutory application that, if the Overland article
room for Zionism” speech and posts contravened s 18C, it
would be liable.
Complaint to the Australian Human Rights
[95]-[97] allege that the applicants lodged a complaint with the Australian
Human Rights Commission (
) and that the complaint was terminated
under s 46PH(1B)(b) of the AHRC Act. These are necessary prerequisites to the
commencement
of proceedings for an alleged contravention of the RDA in this
Court which are not presently in issue.
Summary dismissal
its face, the University’s interlocutory application sought the
“dismissal” of identified paragraphs of the ASOC.
understood, summary judgment under r 26.01 of the Rules or s 31A of the FCA Act
is something that occurs in relation to
a proceeding or a claim for relief, and
is a different exercise from striking out parts of the pleading by which a party
make out a claim. I have treated the University’s interlocutory
application as seeking the dismissal of the originating application
in so far as
it relies on the identified paragraphs of the ASOC. Prima facie at least, that
would involve the dismissal of prayer
2 (which seeks a declaration against the
University) and the dismissal of other prayers in so far as the proposed orders
are directed
against the University.
particular paragraphs that are the focus of this aspect of the
University’s interlocutory application are:
(a) ASOC [52] and [53] (which plead that specified imputations arise from the
Overland article) and [60] (which pleads that specified
imputations arise from
the “no room for Zionism” speech and posts);
(b) ASOC [86]-[89] (which allege that Dr Riemer’s statements contravened s
18C) in so far as they depend on ASOC [52], [53]
and [60]); and
(c) ASOC [90]-[94] (which allege that the University is vicariously liable).
noted earlier, the University presently attacks ASOC [90]-[94] only on the basis
that the alleged contraventions of s 18C for which
it is said to be vicariously
liable were not contraventions.
Approach to summary dismissal
large body of authority affirms that the powers in r 26.01 and s 31A must be
exercised with caution (see eg
Commonwealth
[2010] HCA 28
241 CLR 118
CJ and Gummow J), [60] (Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell
)). To give judgment against a party without a
trial is a large step which (apart from cases involving default or want of
prosecution)
is warranted only if the Court is satisfied that the expense of a
trial is unjustifiable because the party has no prospect (or “no
reasonable prospect” under s 31A) of succeeding at trial (see eg
Webster v Lampard
[1993] HCA 57
(1993) 177 CLR 598
at 602 (Mason CJ, Deane and Dawson
). While a need to undertake complicated legal
analysis before it can be concluded that there is no prospect of success is not
to summary judgment (see
British American Tobacco Ltd v Western
[2003] HCA 47
Jefferson Ford Pty Limited v Ford Motor Company of Australia
[2008] FCAFC 60
167 FCR 372
Jefferson Ford
General Steel
Inc v Commissioner for Railways
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
at 130 (Barwick CJ)), a conclusion at
that level of definitiveness is necessary.
Applications
for summary dismissal of a proceeding or part of a proceeding are not limited to
the traditional demurrer, in which it
is contended that the claimant’s
case must fail even if all of the facts they allege are established (and
argument thus proceeds
on the assumption that those facts will be made out).
Evidence can be adduced seeking to prove that some essential factual foundation
for the claim is absent. Where evidence of that kind is adduced, “the onus
shifts to the opposing party to point to some factual
or evidentiary issues
making a trial necessary” (
Prior v South West Aboriginal Land and Sea
Council Aboriginal Corporation
[2020] FCA 808
(McKerracher J), citing
Jefferson Ford
at [127] (Gordon
Evidence on the present application
support of a submission that the imputation set out at ASOC [52(a)] did not
reasonably arise from the first extract at ASOC [52],
the written submissions of
the University referred to an article published in
in May 2025
and a transcript of submissions made by some Jewish organisations to a recent
NSW parliamentary inquiry into antisemitism.
These documents were annexed to an
affidavit of the University’s solicitor dated 28 August 2025 (
Woodbury affidavit
) and were said to show that a reasonable person in the
class of Jewish and/or Israeli people in Australia would not regard the
in the first extract (which, it will be recalled, refer in an adverse
way to “Zionists”) as based on Jewish or Israeli
18 September 2025 the applicants filed an affidavit of their solicitor (
18 September McCoach affidavit
). No provision had been made for this
evidence in the timetabling orders and no leave had been sought. The affidavit
had 30 annexures
(referred to as exhibits) totalling 2344 pages.
documents annexed to these affidavits were not things that one would normally
find annexed to a solicitor’s affidavit (such
as correspondence) or things
that the deponent purported to, or could, give any evidence about, even on
information and belief. One
annexure to the 18 September McCoach affidavit
comprised material appearing on Dr Riemer’s X page that was not referred
in the ASOC (the relevance of which to the interlocutory application is not
apparent). The remainder (1886 pages in total) were documents
produced by other
organisations and transcripts of hearings, drawn from various sources and
bundled together, apparently said to
be relevant to the substantive merits of
the claims against Dr Riemer.
Riemer objected to all of the annexures to the 18 September McCoach affidavit on
several grounds including hearsay and relevance.
(Although Dr Riemer was not
directly involved in the summary dismissal application, he clearly had an
interest in it and was entitled
to be heard on it. The 18 September McCoach
affidavit was also relied on by the applicants in response to Dr Riemer’s
application, which is discussed below, although its relevance to that
application was harder to understand.) The applicants made
corresponding
objections to the documents annexed to the Woodbury affidavit. I deferred ruling
on these objections.
for the applicants handed up a bundle described as “Applicants’
Condensed Evidence Documents”, said to comprise
the pages of the evidence
that he wished to rely on. Relating this material to the affidavits was not easy
because the bundle had
no index. More importantly, providing excerpts of
documents did not significantly assist in circumstances where the admissibility
or utility of those documents was in contest and the whole documents needed to
be before the Court for that purpose.
make individual rulings on the admissibility of all of the annexures to the
Woodbury affidavit and the 18 September McCoach affidavit,
in the context of an
interlocutory application, would not be an appropriate use of judicial
resources. It suffices to say that this
evidence did not assist in resolving any
issue on the University’s summary dismissal application, for the following
The University’s evidence
the light of
Evidence Act 1995
), the documents annexed to the Woodbury affidavit may be taken to be
some evidence that the statements recorded in those documents
represent the
views of the persons who made them. However, in an application of the present
kind (which, if successful, disposes
of part of the proceeding), evidence sworn
on information and belief is not sufficient to establish the absence of a real
Lombard Australia Ltd v Mulley
(1976) 9 ACTR 23
(Blackburn J). The position is, if anything, clearer where (as here) the witness
merely annexes a document and does not depose
to a belief that any statement in
it is true. Accordingly, to the extent that statements recorded in the annexures
to the Woodbury
affidavit purport to say anything about the opinions or
understandings of Jewish persons in Australia generally, or a significant
of those persons, they are not entitled to be given any weight in relation to
the facts in issue in the present application.
This is the case even if they can
be admitted on an interlocutory application by virtue of
. Clearly, also, it is not possible for the Court itself to infer anything
generally from the
statements of a relatively small number of persons recorded in these annexures.
None of these materials would
be admissible at a final hearing, except possibly
as part of the material on which an expert opinion might be based.
The applicants’ evidence
follows is that, to the extent that the University’s summary dismissal
application relies on factual contentions concerning
how Jewish and/or Israeli
persons in Australia perceive criticisms of Zionism, the evidence advanced by
the University is manifestly
insufficient to place any onus on the applicants to
prove the existence of a factual foundation for their pleading in this respect.
This makes it strictly unnecessary to rule on the admissibility of the material
annexed to the 18 September McCoach affidavit or
assess its probative value.
However, it is appropriate to note the following points.
there is something to be said for the view that the respondent to an application
for summary judgment may prove that there
is a real issue to be tried by way of
an affidavit deposed on information and belief (and there is old English
authority that the
affidavit may be sworn by a solicitor’s clerk:
Hallett v Andrews
(1898) 42 Sol Jo 68).
However, the applicants in the
present case did not take that course. Mr McCoach states at [2] that, unless
otherwise stated, he
makes his affidavit “on my own knowledge, information
and belief, including information provided to me by or on behalf of one
of the applicants which I believe to be true”. What this formulaic
statement means is, with respect, far from clear;
however, I do not think he can
be taken to be deposing to a belief in the truth of all of the statements by
different persons set
out in the many pages of annexures.
a summary judgment application is not a trial and it is proper to assume that
the evidence of the respondent to that application,
if not “inherently
incredible”, will be accepted (
at 604). However, where the
onus has shifted to the respondent to demonstrate that there is a factual issue
that should go to trial,
something probative must be adduced.
as an exercise in seeking to prove a factual basis for the allegations in the
ASOC, the assemblage of documents annexed to
the 18 September McCoach affidavit
was unsatisfactory. This does not matter for the purpose of determining the
summary dismissal
application, but it has some relevance to questions of costs.
None of the material to which I was taken appeared likely to be admissible
final hearing to prove the beliefs or understandings of Jewish or Israeli
persons in Australia. Several of the documents (those
numbered DPM-13, DPM-24
and DPM-28 to DPM-30) were submissions to Commonwealth parliamentary inquiries
and transcripts of proceedings
in Parliament, which are inadmissible by reason
of parliamentary privilege:
Parliamentary Privileges Act 1987
is a transcript of proceedings in, and DPM-27 is a submission
that was made to, a Committee of the NSW Legislative Council which
may also be
subject to privilege). More generally, the statements in the documents on which
I was invited to rely appeared to be
of three kinds:
(a) high-level conclusions about Jewish beliefs, attitudes and experiences, of a
kind that might possibly be admissible if stated
as part of an expert report,
(i) which were introduced as hearsay, without qualifying the makers of the
statements as experts and without substantial articulation
of the basis for the
opinions expressed; and
(ii) many of which proved upon fairly cursory examination to have been made by
one or more of the applicants or by persons and organisations
associated with
the applicants (therefore lacking the disinterestedness that the Court expects
of an expert witness);
(b) findings of a SafeWork investigation into the University, based on a
complaint by a staff member who is proposed to be joined
as an applicant in
Toltz v Keane
, in which it is apparent that the investigator was briefed
by that staff member; and
(c) documents said to show the outcomes of surveys, which (for the reasons
explained in written submissions handed up by counsel
for Dr Riemer) were based
on unsatisfactory methodologies and do not appear to have had any regard to the
Survey Evidence Practice Note (GPN-SURV)
compliance with technical or procedural rules governing admissibility on a final
hearing should obviously not be expected of
the applicants in the present
circumstances. However, documents not constituting business records or part of
, tendered on a standalone basis as evidence of the truth
of assertions made in those documents (or the opinions of individuals quoted
the documents), are unlikely to be probative of anything. At most, such
documents might serve to indicate that the party tendering
them has the capacity
to produce something admissible and supportive of its case at a final hearing.
The material tendered on this
application does not, on my reading of it, support
such an inference to any material degree.
The ASOC, the impugned statements and s 18C
The questions that arise
oral submissions of senior counsel for the University did not dwell on the
evidentiary issues canvassed above. He accepted that,
for the purposes of the
summary dismissal application, the applicants’ case was to be taken at its
highest. This included assuming
that the allegation at ASOC [10] set out above,
that a substantial proportion of Jewish and/or Israeli people identify as
would be made out. The submission ultimately advanced was to the
effect that the pleaded extracts from the
article and the
“no room for Zionism” speech and posts could not reasonably be read
as carrying the imputations attributed
to them by the ASOC.
of this argument, in the context of a summary dismissal application, involves
consideration of the meaning of these statements
as a matter of ordinary
language and of the extent to which, for the purposes of s 18C(1), the range of
meanings that might be attributed
to the statements (and hence their capacity to
offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate members of an identified group) depends
evidence concerning the particular perspectives of members of the group.
There is (for reasons outlined above) no useful evidence
currently before the
Court on the perspectives of members of the relevant group, but it is necessary
to proceed on the basis that
such evidence might be adduced at a final
Distracting arguments
for the applicants made the surprising submission that the University’s
argument could not be a sufficient basis for
summary dismissal because the case
advanced at trial would not be limited to the imputations pleaded. Reference was
made in this
connection to
Jones v Scully
[2002] FCA 1080
120 FCR 243
), where Hely J observed that the identification of
“imputations” by an applicant in a claim under s 18C was a
tool” but not a substitute for the statutory test, and to
Clarke v Nationwide News Pty Ltd trading as the Sunday Times
201 FCR 389
), where Barker J
At the hearing, senior counsel for the applicant clarified the way in which the
applicant put her case and stated it was not advanced
on the basis of the
imputations pleaded in the statement of claim but that the imputations pleaded
should be regarded as identifying
categories of meaning that the Court might
accept in determining whether the comments complained of contravene the RD Act
Senior counsel for the respondent responded to the applicant’s case
advanced on this basis and the Court will also rule on
this basis.
was also observed that the identification of “imputations” is a
pleading technique, apparently borrowed from defamation
cases, that is not used
at all in some cases of alleged breach of s 18C.
provide no support for the applicants’ position. In the
passage cited from
, Hely J was making the uncontroversial
observation that the course adopted by the parties in framing their cases could
not be allowed
to distract from the test which the statute required to be
applied to the facts as found. That observation says nothing about the
fact-finding task or the disciplines to be imposed on parties in the
articulation of their cases. In
, Barker J was recording that the
pleadings had been overtaken by the way both parties presented their cases at
applicants have elected to proceed by way of pleadings and the document now
before the Court is the second version of their statement
of claim. The ASOC
records that it was settled by senior counsel. No application to amend it has
been made. It must be treated as
the definitive statement of the case that the
applicants will advance; that is, of
of Dr Riemer that they say
contravened s 18C and
those acts contravened the section. This is the
only version of the case to which the respondents must (and indeed can) respond.
ASOC [86] alleges that Dr Riemer’s statements, considered individually or
cumulatively, were reasonably likely to offend, insult,
humiliate or intimidate
Jewish persons or Israeli persons in Australia “by conveying any or all of
the imputations alleged”.
inherent right to go beyond the pleaded case can be assumed. Questions as to
whether the applicants have reasonable prospects of
successfully advancing their
claims must be tested by reference to the case as they have pleaded it.
also informed me from the bar table that the text of Dr Riemer’s speech,
referred to in the “no room for Zionism”
posts, had been served on
the respondents some time ago and was intended to be relied upon. This is a
distraction in circumstances
where the making of the speech is not distinctly
pleaded as an instance of contravening conduct, the relevant parts of the speech
are not particularised, and no steps have been taken to amend the ASOC to
include this material.
The approach to determining whether an act comes within s
University’s argument is directed at whether the relevant statements of Dr
Riemer had the quality of being reasonably likely
to “offend, insult,
humiliate or intimidate” for the purposes of s 18C(1)(a). Obviously, an
act can contravene s 18C(1)
only if it has that quality. The argument does not
require consideration of s 18C(1)(b) except to the extent that its language
the construction of s 18C(1)(a).
(b) of s 18C(1) is relevant to the construction of para (a) in that it is clear
that the “group of people” referred
to in para (a) (who are likely
to be offended, insulted, humiliated or intimidated) is the same as “the
group” in para
(b). It is necessarily a group “some or all” of
whose members share a “race, colour or national or ethnic origin”
that forms the reason for the doing of the relevant act. At least ordinarily,
therefore, the “group” is one that is defined
by the race, colour or
national or ethnic origin of some or all of its members: see
[2024] FCA 1264
(Stewart J) (
the present case, it is pleaded at ASOC [86] that Dr Riemer’s statements
were reasonably likely to offend, insult, humiliate
or intimidate “Jewish
persons or Israeli persons in Australia”.
Wertheim v Haddad
[2025] FCA 720
; 311 FCR 263 at
), Stewart J said:
The asserted cause of action is based on the speeches themselves, ie the
“act” referred to in s 18C said in this case
to be unlawful is the
act of delivering (and publishing) the speeches. The applicants use the device
of identifying “imputations”
to isolate the “stings” in
the speeches that are said to cause offence, etc. In answering the question
whether the identified
act is reasonably likely to offend, etc, “the
conduct should be analysed from the point of view of the hypothetical
representative
in relation to the claim that the group of people were
Eatock v Bolt
[2011] FCA 1103
197 FCR 261
Bromberg J [(
Eatock v Bolt
)]. The “ordinary” or
“reasonable” member or members of the group are to be isolated so
that reactions that
are extreme or atypical will be disregarded:
In my view, it is the perspective of that hypothetical group member that must be
adopted in assessing, objectively, whether the imputations
are conveyed by the
speeches. That is because the assessment of the likely effect of the speeches on
that hypothetical person and
their reaction cannot be done in relation to a
meaning that that person would not understand the speeches to convey, and it can
be done in relation to a meaning that that person would understand the
speeches to convey. That said, I am not sure that it makes
any difference at
this stage of the analysis – the speeches will convey the same meanings to
the ordinary, reasonable listener
who is a Jew in Australia as they do to the
ordinary, reasonable listener who is conceived of as a member of the broader
community. It is therefore possible to proceed to assess whether the
speeches convey the pleaded imputations without first having
to identify the
relevant characteristics of the hypothetical ordinary, reasonable Jew in
involved five “speeches” given by the respondent, an Islamic
preacher, in November 2023. Stewart J found that the imputations
pleaded by the
applicant in relation to three of those speeches were made out (at [157]-[160])
and went on to find in relation to
those speeches that the elements of s 18C(1)
were satisfied. One important point to note about this is that his Honour
treated the
ascertainment of the
of the speeches (by reference to
pleaded “imputations”) as a necessary step that was anterior to the
consideration of
whether the conveying of that meaning was reasonably likely to
offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate members of the identified
pleading of imputations invites this approach. The University’s argument
in this case arises at the same stage of
the analysis.
University places some emphasis on what Stewart J said about the speech
identified as Speech B. This was entitled “Murdered
by Israel” and
took the form of commentary on events in Gaza and exhortations to Muslims to
support the Palestinians in Gaza.
The pleaded imputations in relation to this
speech were framed in terms of “Jews” controlling the media and
Jewish people” being filthy. These imputations were found not
to be made out. At [107] Stewart J said:
I do not consider that the ordinary, reasonable listener would understand Mr
Haddad in these passages, either in isolation or in
the context of the sermon as
a whole, to be saying anything about Jews generally or about all Jews. He is
quite specific in the sermon.
He is critical of Israel, the IDF and Zionists. As
mentioned, Jews are only mentioned in relation to the Holocaust, and not in a
critical or disparaging way. It is only if the ordinary, reasonable listener
heard the sermon in the knowledge of what Mr Haddad
had said in Speech A that
they might conclude that the references to Zionists was a reference to all Jews
because of what he says
is to be understood. The ordinary, reasonable listener would understand
all Jews are Zionists or support the actions of Israel in Gaza and that
disparagement of Zionism constitutes disparagement
of a philosophy or ideology
and not a race or ethnic group. Needless to say, political criticism of Israel,
however inflammatory
or adversarial, is not by its nature criticism of Jews in
general or based on Jewish racial or ethnic identity: see
South African Human
Rights Commission on behalf of South African Jewish Board of Deputies v Masuku
[2022] ZACC 5
2022 (4) SA 1 (CC)
and [161]-[166] per Khampepe J
for the Court. Indeed, the applicants did not submit that it is. The conclusion
that it is not antisemitic
to criticise Israel is the corollary of the
conclusion that to blame Jews for the actions of Israel is antisemitic; the one
from the other.
J made similar observations in
at [134]-[135] concerning what
was identified as Speech D.
was relied on by the respondent in
Cassuto v Kostakidis
[2025] FCA 1226
), on an application to strike out the
pleading in that case as (among other things) failing to disclose a reasonable
cause of action.
The subject matter of the relevant statements in that case was,
again, recent events in Gaza. They were summarised as follows (at
... a comment about the Israeli government getting some “of its own
medicine” for conducting a genocide in Gaza; a report
of a speech by the
leader of a Lebanese terrorist organisation suggesting that the Israel army is
doing poorly in a conflict and
that Israelis with dual citizenship would be
well-advised to return to the countries from whom they hold their other
citizenship.
respondent in
relied on the passages in
above to support an argument which was encapsulated by McDonald J at [33] as
being “that criticism of Israel is not
capable of constituting the kind of
racial discrimination that Part IIA of the RD Act seeks to prevent”. His
Honour rejected
that argument (at [47]), having noted the differences between
the issues being discussed by Stewart J in the passages referred to
posed by the submission made in
. In particular, Stewart J was
considering whether a particular speech conveyed particular imputations
(concerning “Jews”)
and not a more general question about whether
criticising Israel,
, is capable of being an act that is reasonably
likely to offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate a group of people defined by
to race, colour or national or ethnic origin. Additionally, in
(as in this case), the relevant group was defined by reference to
“Israeli” nationality as well as Jewishness.
to the issues in the present application, McDonald J said at
I accept that there is a clear conceptual distinction between disparagement of
Zionism, a philosophy or ideology, and disparagement
of Jewish people as a race
or ethnic group (or disparagement of people of Israeli national origin). It is
clear enough that not all
Jewish people or Israeli citizens are Zionists, and
not all Jewish people or Israeli citizens support the actions of the State of
Israel. It is plainly possible to criticise Zionism, or the actions of Israel,
without disparaging Jewish people or Israeli citizens
in general.
However, having regard to the terms of s 18C(1) of the RD Act, it is not
immediately obvious that conduct which consists of speech
that is about an
ideology or political position, or which amounts to criticism of official action
by a country, can
contravene s 18C. It is not an express
requirement that, for conduct (including speech) to contravene s 18C, it must be
a race, ethnicity or nationality, or people of a race,
ethnicity or nationality. It may be arguable that, as a matter of construction,
it is necessary to read in a limitation of this kind in some way. However, the
contrary position is also at least reasonably arguable.
(Emphasis in original.)
passages in
must be treated with caution because McDonald J was
considering a much broader and more ambitious argument than that advanced by
University in the present application. It is apparent from the discussion at
[41] and [45]-[46] that the argument sought to address
para (b) of s 18C(1)
rather than (or as well as) para (a). The present application, as noted above,
concerns only a confined aspect
of the issues raised by s 18C(1)(a) in relation
to the relevant statements: what meanings they are to be taken to convey, for
purpose of deciding whether they are reasonably likely to offend, insult,
humiliate or intimidate the group or groups of people identified
, while I respectfully agree with what Stewart J said at [107]
concerning the ability of an “ordinary, reasonable listener”
distinguish between disparagement of Zionism or political criticism of Israel on
the one hand and criticism of “Jews in
general” on the other, his
Honour’s observations in that paragraph were made in the course of
reaching factual findings
context. They cannot be applied in any straightforward way to the present
application.
relevant statement of principle in
is at [43]-[44] (quoted at
] above). There, his Honour
referred to passages in
Eatock v Bolt
at [250]-[251] which, as I read
them, are directed to s 18C(1)(a) as a whole rather than to a distinct
preliminary step of ascertaining
the meaning of particular words. However, that
separation of the inquiry into distinct steps is not mandated by the statutory
and is not necessarily required. I do not think there was any error in
applying the language of
Eatock v Bolt
at [250] — “... the
conduct is to be analysed from the point of view of the hypothetical
representative of the group”
— to the assessment of whether
particular imputations are conveyed by a speech or (as in this case) an article
or a social
media post. This is consistent with the language of s 18C(1)(a),
which focuses attention on whether an act is “reasonably likely”
offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate, relevantly, an identified group of
important statement in
, for present purposes, is therefore to be
found in the first two sentences of [44], where Stewart J says that the question
particular imputations are conveyed must be assessed objectively and
“from the perspective of that hypothetical group member”.
statement that follows — that “the speeches will convey the same
meanings to the ordinary, reasonable listener who
is a Jew in Australia as they
do to the ordinary, reasonable listener who is conceived of as a member of the
broader Australian community”
— is, as I read it, an observation
Application to this case
an ordinary reasonable reader of social media posts who is a Jewish person in
Australia would understand the
article and Dr Riemer’s
posts, in the context in which they were published, is a question that could
potentially be influenced
by evidence. Additionally this case is complicated, in
comparison with
, by the identification of the relevant group as
“Jewish persons
or Israeli persons
in Australia” (ASOC [86]
(emphasis added)) and by the allegation at ASOC [10] (which, as senior counsel
accepted, must be assumed
to be provable) that “a substantial proportion
of Jewish and/or Israeli people identify themselves as Zionists”. These
factors raise a possibility that, accepting that an ordinary reasonable reader
can distinguish between criticisms of Zionism and
disparagement of Jewish
people, that may not be sufficient to resolve questions as to whether the
pleaded imputations arise from
article and the “no
room for Zionism” posts. It may not be enough because it is possible, at
least in principle, that
evidence might show that the words used by Dr Riemer
have particular significations or resonances for reasonable readers who are
Jewish and/or Israeli persons.
applicants have, as noted above, chosen to go into evidence on the
University’s interlocutory application. I have outlined
above why that
evidence does not assist and would be largely if not wholly inadmissible on a
final hearing. However, in the light
of the low evidentiary bar faced by a
respondent to an application for summary judgment, it is not appropriate to
proceed on the
basis that the applicants have put their best foot forward
(despite an invitation by counsel for Dr Riemer to do so).
these reasons, the University’s application for summary judgment must be
Riemer seeks to strike out 11 distinct parts of the ASOC. These will be
considered in turn. The University joins in some aspects
of this application.
The University also seeks to strike out some other aspects of the ASOC that seek
to rely on Dr Riemer’s
various statements in a cumulative or interrelating
way. I will consider each of the paragraphs to which objection is taken in
“Or is eligible to be” in ASOC [7]
[7] alleges that each of the applicants is a Jewish person or a person who
“is, or is eligible to be, an Israeli citizen
)”. This language appears to be intended both to plead an
allegation concerning the individual applicants’ nationality
and to define
the term “Israeli person” for the purposes of the ASOC.
Riemer makes two complaints about the inclusion of persons “eligible to
be” Israeli citizens within the concept of
an “Israeli
(a) It creates an unworkably broad class of people, because Israel’s
nationality law extends eligibility for citizenship to
a wide range of relatives
(including spouses and spouses of children and spouses of grandchildren) of
(b) Thus extended, the category of “Israeli person” encompasses a
group of people who “share no common characteristic
that could properly
cause them to constitute a protected group for the purposes of the [RDA]”.
so far as ASOC [7] alleges that the applicants themselves are or are eligible to
be Israeli citizens, it poses a confined factual
issue that can be resolved by
evidence about the applicants’ circumstances and about Israeli law.
so far as the paragraph defines “Israeli person”, it has the
consequences that:
(a) each of the pleaded imputations in ASOC [40], [43], [47], [52], [53], [56],
[60], [63], [66], [69], [72], [76], [78], [81] and
[84] is an imputation not
only about Jewish people (as a religious or ethnic group) or citizens or
residents of Israel, but about
all people in the world who have a connection
with Israel that entitles them to become citizens of that country; and
(b) the group of persons alleged to be reasonably likely to be offended,
insulted, humiliated or intimidated by Dr Riemer’s
statements includes all
people in Australia who have a connection with Israel that entitles them to
become citizens of that country.
Riemer’s submissions cite Israel’s
Nationality Law 5712-1952
but he has not, for the purposes of this interlocutory application, sought to
prove the content of Israeli law by adducing evidence
on the topic. The
principle that in the absence of proof the law of another country is taken to be
the same as Australian law does
not appear to assist; and I would be hesitant to
state any firm conclusions about the meaning of an Israeli statute (if it were
without assistance. I am therefore not currently in a position to
ascertain how wide the category of “Israeli persons”
reason of the addition of the words “or is eligible to be”.
the category is as broad as Dr Riemer’s submissions suggest, one result
would seem to be that the applicants will have difficulty
showing that Dr
Riemer’s statements contained adverse imputations about (for example)
anyone who is the grandchild, or the
spouse of a child, of a Jew. Many if not
most of the pleaded imputations would appear to be difficult to make out if they
broad. That would seem to be a problem for the applicants, given that
they have chosen to base their case on imputations. However,
understand either of the respondents to submit that the applicants’ claim
was unviable and should be dismissed for
this reason. Counsel for Dr Riemer
recognised this and said that her client was raising the point now, rather than
in final address,
in the interests of efficiency and to assist in meeting the
“overarching purpose” in s 37M of the FCA Act. However, while
is imposed on parties by s 37N to conduct a proceeding in a way that is
consistent with the overarching purpose, the sanctions
available for failure to
comply with that duty do not include striking out parts of a party’s
other significant issue that is potentially raised is whether a group comprising
all persons who are or are eligible to become
Israeli citizens is capable of
being seen as a group who share a “race, colour or national or ethnic
origin” for the
purposes of s 18C(1). While it is obvious that Israel is a
nation-state and there are therefore people who have Israeli “national
origin” (see, eg,
Kaplan v State of Victoria (No 8)
[2023] FCA 1092
at [1716] (Mortimer CJ)), whether citizenship or mere eligibility to obtain
citizenship aligns with “national origin”
is another matter
altogether. In
Macabenta v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
[1998] FCA 1643
(1998) 90 FCR 202
at 209-210, the Full Court (Carr, Sundberg and
North JJ) observed in relation to s 10 of the RDA that the phrase
or ethnic origin” had been included alongside
“race” in an attempt to give colour to the concept of racial
discrimination
National origin may in some cases be resolved by a person’s place of
birth. In other cases it may be necessary to have regard
to the national origin
of a parent or each parent or other ancestors either in conjunction with the
person’s place of birth
or disregarding that factor ... However, no
[International Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Racial
Discrimination] purpose
is in any manner frustrated by drawing a distinction
between national origin and nationality, the latter being a purely legal status
(and a transient one at that).
J referred to this observation in
therefore appears to be a real question as to whether the classes of persons
described in each of the pleaded imputations form
a “group” in the
sense relevant to s 18C(1). As noted above, because s 18C(1)(b) can only be
satisfied if a motivation
for the relevant act is the “race colour or
national or ethnic origin” of the group or some or all of its members, it
is necessary that the group is in some sense defined by its members (or some of
them) sharing one of those characteristics. However,
this question only
crystallises when one reaches ASOC [88], where it is pleaded that the impugned
acts of Dr Riemer were done “because
of the race, national or ethnic
origin of the people reasonably likely to be offended, insulted, humiliated or
intimidate [sic] by
the posting”. ASOC [88] is not sought to be struck out
by Dr Riemer’s interlocutory application. In any event, it would
appropriate to reach a firm conclusion as to whether Israeli citizenship or
eligibility for that citizenship corresponds with
a “national
origin” — or the consequences for the applicants’ pleaded case
if it does not — without
a firm evidentiary foundation.
“Descent” in ASOC [8(a)] and
“nationality” in ASOC 8(b)
of ASOC [8] reads “For the purposes of the [RDA]”. It
indicates that sub-paras (a) and (b) are intended to establish
persons” and “Israeli persons” as groups of persons who share
characteristics that are identified
in s 18C(1)(b). In this context, references
to characteristics that are not referred to in s 18C(1)(b) are embarrassing and
be struck out. I understood counsel for the applicants to accept that the
term “nationality” should be replaced by “national
origin” to reflect the language of s 18C(1).
Aspects of ASOC [10] and ASOC [88(a)]
Riemer objects to the assertion in ASOC [10] that Zionists are
“predominantly Jewish people and/or Israeli” people.
An objection
was also raised to the second sentence of ASOC [10], which asserts that a
“substantial proportion” of Jewish
and/or Israeli people identify
themselves as Zionists, but this was not pressed in oral argument. The
University makes a broader
objection to ASOC [10] and to [88(a)], which alleges
that “[r]eferences to Zionists are, properly understood, to be a reference
to (at least) a majority of Jewish people and Israeli people in
Australia”.
[10] is not defining a word for the purposes of the pleading. The term
“Zionist” appears mainly in the extracts from
Dr Riemer’s
posts and its pleaded meaning appears to be intended, at least in part, as an
allegation about what that expression
means as a matter of ordinary parlance.
Whether this is properly a matter for pleading (or evidence) is a question that
can be left
to another day.
addition to seeking to establish the meaning of “Zionists” (people
who adhere to a particular political philosophy),
ASOC [10] pleads two facts.
(It would be preferable if these pleadings had been divided into two or three
paragraphs, as one or more
of them might be able to be admitted by the
respondents as a standalone proposition.) One fact is that Zionists are
“predominantly”
Jewish or Israeli people; the other (to which Dr
Riemer did not press an objection) is that a substantial proportion of Jewish
Israeli people identify as Zionists. These facts are evidently sought to
be proved in order to help to establish the proposition
in ASOC [88(a)] and thus
to construe Dr Riemer’s criticisms of “Zionists” as attacks on
Jewish people or Israeli
University submits that this combination of propositions cannot suffice to
establish a contravention of s 18C, because the Court
has held that not all
Jewish or Israeli people are Zionists and that Zionism is a philosophy or
ideology rather than a race or ethnic
group. While the premises in this argument
are factual rather than legal in nature, I accept that the Court in this case is
unlikely to come to a different view; indeed I do not understand the
applicants to contend for a different view. ASOC [88(a)], read
with ASOC [10],
constitutes a proposition that a reference to “Zionists” (not
) is a reference to a group of people that includes at least a
majority of Jewish or Israeli people. As drafted, it is a proposition
meaning of a word (“properly understood”) rather than how a group of
people understand that word, but it is
nevertheless something capable of being
the subject of argument and a finding. It is apparently advanced (with [88(b)
and (c)]) as
a step along the way to the proposition in the
ASOC [88], which is a proposition about
the impugned acts were done
by Dr Riemer. The argument may ultimately not work, but I do not regard it as
entirely precluded by the
proposition that Zionism is not a race or an ethnic
group. I will therefore refuse the application to strike out ASOC [88(a)] and
the whole of ASOC [10].
problem with the allegation that Zionists are “predominantly” Jewish
or Israeli people is that it is expressed on
a global basis. Read according to
its terms, if not admitted, it will require the parties to adduce evidence of
the religious affiliations
and nationalities of people identified as Zionists
worldwide. That may well be possible but it is a much larger exercise than is
necessary for the purposes of ASOC [88(a)] (which limits itself to Jewish people
and Israeli people in Australia). ASOC [10] is thus
significantly broader than
it needs to be for the purposes of the applicants’ case. The words
objected to in the first sentence
will be struck out, with leave to reformulate
the sentence.
ASOC [21] to [24]
is useful at this point to set out ASOC [21]-[24]. Dr Riemer seeks to strike out
the text that is struck through in the following
intifadas were, and were known as, the armed and violent uprising of
Palestinians against Israeli occupation of the West Bank
(including East
Jerusalem) and Gaza strip.
first intifada began in December 1987 and ended in September 1993. The second
intifada began in December 2000 and had run its
course by late 2005. The two
uprisings resulted in the death of
more than 5,000
Palestinians
Jews or Israelis.
first intifada began with rioting but after the first year it shifted from
throwing rocks and Molotov cocktails at Israeli targets
to attacking Jews or
Israelis with rifles, hand grenades and explosives.
second intifada was much more violent than the first. The violence included
directly attacking Jewish or Israeli civilian centres,
but also attacks on
vehicles and civilians through suicide bombings, drive by shootings and rocket
attacks. Over 1,000 Jews or Israelis
were killed, and thousands of Jews or
Israelis were severely injured, in those attacks. During the approximate
five-year uprising,
more than 4,300 fatalities were registered with a similar
ratio of Palestinian to Jewish or Israeli deaths to the first intifada
second intifada being slightly more than 3 to 1.
Riemer submits that:
...these paragraphs are ambiguous, unhelpful, inaccurate, probably
non-justiciable, and will give rise to significant delay with
no forensic
purpose. They also fail to disclose a cause of action.
causes and course of the two intifadas are complicated and emotive aspects of
recent history. In some cases there may be no alternative
to hearing evidence
and making findings on such issues, but it is not apparent that this is such a
case. It may be necessary for
some facts to be established concerning the
signification of the word “intifada” to ordinary reasonable readers
in Australia
who are Jewish persons or Israeli persons in order to determine
what imputations arise from the statements by Dr Riemer which are
the subject of
ASOC [33], [38] and [39]. However, ASOC [21]-[24] do not appear to undertake
this task. Rather, they plead features
of the two intifadas at a level of
generality and as objective facts. They invite controversy as to matters that do
not need to be
determined.
will allow ASOC [21]-[22] to remain in their current form (aside from the words
“and were known as” in [21], whose meaning
and relevance are
obscure), as they plead basic facts concerning the intifadas which can usefully
serve as a foundation for understanding
of the “global intifada”
post and speech and the chanting in which Dr Riemer is said to have
participated. In this context
I do not regard the words “armed and
violent” in ASOC [21] as unnecessarily pejorative or as asking the Court
sides in the ongoing struggle between Palestinian people on the one hand
and Israel (and Israeli settlers) on the other. Whether
the intifadas were armed
and violent may be important to understanding the signification of the term
“intifada” in Dr
Riemer’s posts and his speech. Nor do I
consider the reference to the numbers of people killed in ASOC [22] to be
the figures are either correct or not, and the scale of the loss of
life that occurred may also be relevant to understanding the
meanings conveyed
by the term “intifada” or the capacity of that term to offend or
intimidate.
[23] and [24], however, invite an evidentiary battle on issues that do not
appear to be relevant to any claim for relief. They
should be struck
[25] is as follows.
The Palestinians engaging in the violence described above against Jewish persons
or Israeli persons did so because they were, or
were believed to be, Jewish
persons or Israeli persons.
[25] raises the same difficulties as the paragraphs that precede it.
Additionally, it pleads (as an objective fact) a collective,
motivation on the part of thousands of people in connection with events on the
other side of the world more than twenty
years ago. It is trite to observe that
none of those persons are likely to be available to give evidence. Their
motivations in participating
in the two intifadas are clearly not relevant to
any claim against Dr Riemer, although Jewish and Israeli people’s
perceptions
[28] is as follows.
The Hamas Covenants express intention is to dismantle Israel as ‘
Zionist entity’
and to create an Islamic State in its place.
accept that an expressed intention on the part of Hamas to destroy the State of
Israel may have some relevance to how a reasonable
reader who is a Jewish or an
Israeli person would understand some of Dr Riemer’s statements that are
the subject of complaint
(in particular the
article, which
criticises calls to condemn Hamas). However, it was put in submissions by Dr
Riemer, and effectively accepted by counsel
for the applicants, that there is
more than one set of public documents that could be described as Hamas
“covenants”.
This problem is one that can be remedied by
particulars, which counsel for the applicants was prepared to provide.
[32] pleads the subjective beliefs and motivations of (apparently all)
Hamas’s “leadership, commanders, members and
operatives in the
field” in connection with Hamas’s attack on Israel on 7 October
2023. It is hard to see how an allegation
pleaded in these terms could be
established in an Australian court. In any event, Hamas’s beliefs and
motivations are not relevant
to any claim against Dr Riemer (although widely
held and reasonably based perceptions about those motivations might be
ASOC [32] should be struck out.
Part of the “particulars” to ASOC
[33], which has been set out above, reproduces Dr Riemer’s “global
intifada” post, which includes part of a
photograph of what appears to be
a poster or advertisement. ASOC [34] alleges that that photograph, when clicked
on, becomes visible
as a larger picture.
to that larger picture, the body of ASOC [34] says only that it “states at
A student meeting hosted by Solidarity
Under the heading “Particulars”, the following text
is a pro-Palestinian student group that closely follows and mimics Dr Riemer.
Further particulars are provided by letter
of the Applicant’s solicitors
of 30 July 2025.
that text appears what I take to be a reproduction of the “larger
picture” referred to in the body of ASOC
[34]. It is unclear whether this
reproduction is intended to form part of the pleading in ASOC [34] or part of
the so-called particulars
to that pleading.
say “so-called” particulars because a statement concerning the
nature and habits of Solidarity does not on any conventional
understanding
constitute particulars of the allegation in the body of ASOC [34]. Rather, it is
a further allegation to which, I infer,
Dr Riemer is expected to plead. Dr
Riemer is entitled to some clarity about this.
Riemer is also entitled to have the “further particulars”, referred
to in the so-called particulars to ASOC [34], set
out in the ASOC or at least
annexed to it. It is apparent that those “further particulars”
existed at the time the ASOC
was filed (that document having been lodged and
accepted for filing on 30 July 2025), and incorporating into the ASOC whatever
contended to be relevant as particulars to ASOC [34] would have been a
simple matter of copying and pasting.
aims and activities of the group known as Solidarity may have some relevance to
the matters pleaded against Dr Riemer (although
that relevance is presently not
clear to me, unless it is also contended that Solidarity’s aims and
activities are known to
Jewish persons or Israeli persons generally). However,
the meaning of the formulation “closely follows and mimics Dr
is somewhat obscure. I do not consider that Dr Riemer can be
expected to plead to this allegation (or to digest it as a particular,
is really what it is) in its current form.
the multiple problems in ASOC [34], it should be struck out.
Images contained in ASOC [35]
[35] contains a description of Dr Riemer’s letter to the Vice-Chancellor,
which was annexed to the “global intifada”
post. Underneath ASOC
[35] are three photographs which have nothing to do with the text of the
paragraph. Counsel for the applicants
accepted that these photographs were in
the wrong place and should have been placed underneath ASOC [34].
photographs in their current location are simply confusing and they should be
struck out. If they are sought to be inserted in
a different place as part of a
round of further amendments, their relevance to the claims against Dr Riemer
will need to be explained.
ASOC [86], [87] and [88(c)]
paragraphs have been set out at [57] and [59] above.
[86] expressly invites a cumulative assessment of Dr Riemer’s statements
in connection with the issue posed by s 18C(1)(a).
(It should be noted that ASOC
[86] does other, unobjectionable, work as well: it links the pleading of
imputations with the allegation
of breach by alleging that, by conveying the
pleaded imputations, Dr Riemer’s statements were reasonably likely to
insult, humiliate or intimidate Jewish or Israeli persons. It is only
the words referring to a cumulative or collective effect that
are objected to at
[87], however, says that the applicants rely on the impugned acts
“cumulatively or collectively” for the purposes
of “both the
causation and racial elements” of s 18C (which I take to mean both paras
(1)(a) and (1)(b), although it
is not completely clear what the “racial
elements” means). While it is possible to see how the likelihood of people
offended or insulted might increase over the course of a series of acts,
how a person’s motivation in relation to individual
acts could be assessed
or established “cumulatively” is a mystery which the
applicant’s submissions did not attempt
to explain. In this connection,
ASOC [88(c)] points to what is perhaps the more conventional approach of
asserting that Dr Riemer
can be found to have had the requisite motivation for
the purposes of s 18C(1)(b) because he has a tendency to engage in conduct
particular kind.
ASOC [86] and [87]
Dr Riemer and the University point out that s 18C(1), according to its terms,
operates by reference to a particular “act”
which is reasonably
likely to have a particular effect and is done “because of” a
particular factor. Neither in s 18C
nor elsewhere in the RDA is there any
provision for several acts of a person to be found to contravene the section by
reference to
a “cumulative” impact.
applicants submit that there are precedents in the case law for treating acts
cumulatively in assessing whether there has been
a contravention of s 18C.
However, none of the cases to which reference was made provides support for this
at [30]-[31] refers to a pleading by which several comments
were sought to be relied upon “singularly or together”. This
reference to Barker J’s summary of the pleadings does not advance matters,
in circumstances where (as noted earlier) the pleadings
were effectively
superseded by the way the case was presented at trial.
McGlade v Lightfoot
[2002] FCA 1457
124 FCR 106 (Carr
considered two statements that had been made by the respondent. The respondent
did not appear at the final hearing, with the result
that his Honour did not
have the benefit of full argument. At [64]-[65], his Honour was fortified in his
conclusion that one of these
statements was likely to offend or insult the
relevant persons by the fact that it was not made on its own, but was made
the context of” the other statement. I do not read this
statement (which was not elaborated by reference to the Act or any
case law) as
supporting the view that a series of acts that do not contravene s 18C can be
elevated into a contravention by considering
them cumulatively. Rather, it
supports the view that whether an act is likely to offend, insult, harass or
intimidate a group of
people must be addressed in context, and that context may
in some circumstances include other acts of the respondent.
Eatock v Bolt
two newspaper articles were in issue. The applicants
refer to [16], [21]-[22] and [28], where Bromberg J summarised the pleadings
respect of the articles. Some of these passages actually refer to propositions
accumulating within an individual article, but
they do include a proposition
that the articles “taken individually and together” conveyed certain
imputations (at [22]).
At [286] his Honour concluded that the listed imputations
were with one exception “conveyed by each” of the articles,
all imputations were conveyed by the two articles taken together. His Honour
It is convenient that I proceed to assess the imputations as collectively
conveyed by both of the articles.
This is the way the parties approached the
... and that seems to me to be justified.
(Emphasis added.)
The aggregation of imputations was thus an agreed approach, and one that is
qualitatively different from seeking to establish that
contravention of s 18C
arises from the combination of several acts even if they do not individually
contravene the section.
Although separated by significant time, the Newspaper Articles deal with largely
the same subject matter and many of the same named
individuals. The second
article refers to Mr Bolt having written earlier about “similar
It is likely that the attention of many members of the group of
people concerned, would have been drawn to both articles and that
have read or re-read both articles together. In any event, the conclusions I
have arrived at would not be different if
the reaction to the articles was to be
assessed article by article rather than collectively.
(Emphasis added; citation omitted.)
Eatock v Bolt
, therefore, two articles were considered together: (i)
with the acquiescence of all parties; (ii) in the light of factual findings
to both; and (iii) observing that it did not make
a difference to the outcome.
This is qualitatively different from the task sought to be undertaken by ASOC
(d) It appears that in
Prior v Wood
[2017] FCA 193
there was an attempt
to rely on the cumulative effect of several social media posts which did not
find favour with Dowsett J. His
Honour noted that there had been “no
attempt to explain how the effect of any relevant post would have been affected
being read with another post, or in the context of all of the
posts” (at [123]; see also [124]). At [141] his Honour accepted
“to some extent, Mr Powell’s posts must be read cumulatively, and in
the context of other posts with which they
are patently associated”; but
this says nothing as to whether statements made on different occasions or in
different social
media threads can have a “cumulative” effect
resulting in a contravention of s 18C. It is, again, a question of assessing
each pleaded act in its full context.
Wotton v State of Queensland (No 5)
[2016] FCA 1457
), Mortimer J (as her Honour then was) criticised the
respondents’ final submissions for taking too narrow a view of the
and addressing factual allegations in isolation from each other. The
applicants’ submissions had addressed a range of conduct
categories, each of which potentially involved several “acts” for
the purposes of s 9 of the RDA. The respondents
appear to have accepted, in
general, that the applicants had alleged a series of acts that “whether
taken individually, or
in groups, or cumulatively, can be assessed in terms of
whether they contravene s 9” (at [88]). That apparent agreement between
the parties means that the case is not authority for a proposition concerning
the legitimacy of addressing several “acts”
cumulatively (
[2005] HCA 64
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Heydon JJ)).
In any event,
was not a s 18C case; it concerned discriminatory
acts contravening s 9 of the RDA, and there was therefore no need to establish
the likely effect of identified acts on a group of persons as an element of the
asserted contraventions.
at [1671] Mortimer CJ considered that allegations
concerning swastika graffiti and antisemitic bullying could be considered
for the purpose of assessing compensation. In relation to the applicant
to whom this observation related, her Honour had earlier
concluded at [1353]
that none of the conduct of the respondents contravened s 18C. The observation
at [1671] is thus directed at
the assessment of compensation for breach of
provisions other than s 18C. It does not have a bearing on the issues currently
J pointed to the difficulty facing any cumulative assessment of acts for the
purpose of establishing a contravention of s
(set out above at [
observed, in relation to Speech B, that it was only if the ordinary reasonable
listener heard the sermon with knowledge
of what the respondent had said in
Speech A that they might understand his reference to Zionists in a particular
way. His Honour
continued at [108]:
Although there may have been a small overlap, Speech B was addressed to a
different audience to Speech A and for a different purpose.
It did not form part
of the ongoing lecture series on the Jews of Medina in which there were
cross-textual allusions. Listeners could
not be expected to consider the content
of Speech B together with the other speeches as part of a coherent body of work
for a joint
purpose. I do not consider that what was said in Speech A can cast
light on the meaning of what was said in Speech B from the perspective
ordinary, reasonable listener.
are findings of fact in the circumstances of a particular case, but they
demonstrate the difference between
Eatock v Bolt
point, with respect, to the correct understanding of how s 18C works. Each
impugned act must be considered in its full context,
but there is a need for
evidence to show what that context is and how (if at all) it affects the
likelihood of people in the relevant
group being offended, insulted, humiliated
or intimidated for the purposes of s 18C(1)(a). Section 18C(1)(a) requires a
likelihood that an identified act had or will have a specified
effect, and leaves no room for acts that do not meet that test to
together with other similar acts to create a contravention.
applicants referred to other passages in
at [124], [168]-[171]
and [172] as asserted counterweights to this passage, but on my reading they do
not assist. Paragraph [124]
assesses the imputations arising from “Speech
C” on the express understanding that it was part of the same lecture
as “Speech A” and addressed to the same audience. Paragraphs
[168]-[171] address whether, as a matter of construction
of s 18C, an applicant
must establish that members of the relevant group became aware of the impugned
act; and paragraph [172] contains
a factual finding that “the
speeches” were reasonably likely to come to the attention of the group
described as Jews
in Australia.
University also pointed to what it described as prejudice to it, arising from
the applicants’ attempt to rely on all of
Dr Riemer’s statements
collectively while the University is alleged to be vicariously liable in respect
of only a subset of
them. There is at least some incongruity in this position,
which lends further weight to the respondents’ arguments. The applicants
evidently accept that the University can only be held responsible for a subset
of Dr Riemer’s statements, being those that
have particular connections
with his employment by the University; however, they seek to establish
contravention of s 18C by Dr Riemer,
and hence the liability of the University,
by a cumulative analysis of all of the impugned statements (including those for
they apparently accept, the University cannot be held responsible).
these reasons I am satisfied that ASOC [87], and the words “when
considered individually and/or cumulatively and/or collectively”
[86], should be struck out as failing to disclose a reasonable cause of
ASOC [88(c)]
[88(c)] is in a somewhat different position. Rather than calling for a
cumulative assessment of Dr Riemer’s statements,
it in substance seeks to
treat each statement as part of the context in which the others were made in
order to establish that Dr
Riemer’s motivation satisfied s 18C(1)(b). This
may be said to be a question of evidence rather than a matter for pleading,
ASOC [88(c)] is possibly intended to serve as notice for the purposes of
Evidence Act
. However, the sub-paragraph is potentially useful in that it
gives notice to the respondents as to how the applicants propose to
his statements were made “because of” the race, national or ethnic
origin of the people reasonably likely
to be offended by them. It should not be
struck out.
Disposition
the reasons set out above I will make orders to the following effect.
(a) The University’s application will be dismissed in so far as it seeks
summary judgment.
(b) The following parts of the ASOC will be struck out:
(i) “descent” in [8(a)];
(ii) “nationality” in [8(b)];
(iii) “predominantly Jewish people and/or Israeli” in [10];
(iv) “and were known as” in [21];
(v) [23], [24] and [25];
(vii) [34];
(viii) the images subjoined to [35];
(ix) the words “when considered individually and/or cumulatively and/or
collectively” in [86];
(c) The applicants will have leave to file a further amended statement of claim
making any amendments that are necessary in the light
of these passages having
been struck out.
(d) The parties will be directed to provide agreed or competing short minutes of
order providing a timetable for necessary steps
up to the close of pleadings,
including the provision of particulars to ASOC [28], and to indicate whether
they are content for such
orders to be made in chambers.
to s 46PSA of the AHRC Act, I would deal with the issue of costs in the
following way:
(a) each party bear their own costs of Dr Riemer’s interlocutory
application (on the basis that each achieved partial success);
(b) the University pay 50 percent of the applicants’ costs of its
interlocutory application (on the basis that the application
was in large part
unsuccessful, but the University should not have to pay all of the costs of the
fruitless evidentiary contest).
I have not heard submissions on the effect that s 46PSA might have on the power
to order costs in relation to the two interlocutory
applications. Section 46PSA
applies to proceedings commenced under s 46PO. In its current form (which took
effect on 2 October 2024),
s 46PSA(2) provides that the Court
each respondent to pay “the applicant’s costs” if the
applicant is “successful in proceedings”.
That requirement is
subject to an exception where the applicant’s costs are incurred as a
result of their own “unreasonable
act or omission”. Meanwhile, under
s 46PSA(5), an applicant “
be ordered” (emphasis
added) to pay the costs of another party (with limited exceptions under
subsection (6) where the proceedings
are instituted without reasonable cause or
the costs arise from unreasonable conduct by the applicant).
questions that require resolution would appear to include whether s 46PSA(2) is
enlivened by an applicant achieving success or
partial success in an
interlocutory skirmish, or requires the costs of the whole proceeding to be
dealt with at the end and in the
light of whether the applicant has been
successful, and whether any aspect of the conduct of these interlocutory
applications comes
within s 46PSA(4) or (6). These are issues on which it is
preferable that the parties be heard.
will therefore be reserved.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
fifty-five (155) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment
Honourable Justice
Dated: 14 November 2025
Fourth Applicant:
RTF format (28.7 MB)
Signed PDF/A format