Hay Point Services Pty Ltd v Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union [2012] FWAFB 9173 (25 October 2012)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
REASONS FOR DECISION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Appeal of decision
Hay Point Services Pty Ltd
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(C2012/4420)
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT KAUFMAN
DEPUTY PRESIDENT SMITH
COMMISSIONER LEE
MELBOURNE, 25 OCTOBER 2012
Characterisation of dispute
On 28 February 2012 the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (Mining and Energy Division) filed an application for Fair
Work Australia to deal with a dispute in accordance with the dispute settlement procedure contained in clause 22 of the
Hay Point Services Pty Ltd Enterprise Agreement 2010.
The dispute was said to relate to clause 10 - Policies and procedures and clause 16 - Health, safety and community. The dispute arose
after Hay Point Services Pty Ltd (
) made changes to its “Fitness for Work Policy” (
). These were implemented on 1 March 2012.
The CFMEU had informed HPS that it considered that in implementing the Policy in the way it had HPS was in breach of clause 16 of
the Agreement.
The matter was listed before Commissioner Spencer, at which time HPS objected to her dealing with various aspects of the alleged
dispute on the basis that those aspects did not relate to a matter arising under the agreement as required by clause 22.
The Commissioner dealt with the objection as a preliminary matter and on 13 June 2012 published a decision where she found that the
dispute notified by the CFMEU was a dispute over the application of a clause in the agreement and that the jurisdiction of Fair Work
Australia was enlivened. She listed the matter for conciliation.
HPS seeks permission to appeal against that decision on the basis that two of the issues in dispute did not relate to a matter arising
under the Agreement and that, accordingly, Fair Work Australia lacks jurisdiction to deal with them, and the Commissioner erred in
finding to the contrary. It was also asserted that the Commissioner applied the wrong test and failed to give proper or adequate
reasons for her decision.
It is apparent that the Commissioner asked herself the wrong question: whether the dispute was a
dispute over the application
the Agreement
- and thus fell into error. What the Commissioner was required to determine was whether the dispute
related to a matter arising under
the Agreement, as that is all that the Act and the Agreement empowered Fair Work Australia to do.
Having found error we grant permission to appeal. The appeal proceeds by way of rehearing.
On the appeal, Mr S Wood SC, as he did below, mounted an argument to the effect that although some aspects of the dispute related
to a matter arising under the agreement other aspects of the dispute did not.
Mr Wood submitted that Fair Work Australia has jurisdiction to deal with the relating matters but not the non-relating matters.
We do not accept that submission. The dispute is a dispute about the introduction of the new Policy. HPS concedes that the dispute
as to some of its aspects relates to a matter arising under the Agreement. That is clearly so and the concession is properly made.
To seek to dissect the dispute into several components is highly artificial and, in our view, untenable. Given that the dispute,
or at least part of it, relates to a matter arising under the Agreement, the disputes resolution process in clause 22 is enlivened.
That process allows the parties to refer the dispute to Fair Work Australia if the parties have been unable to resolve their differences.
The process requires Fair Work Australia, as a first stage, to attempt to resolve the dispute as it considers appropriate, including
by mediation, conciliation, expressing an opinion or making a recommendation. It is only if the dispute is unable to be resolved
in the first stage that Fair Work Australia is able to arbitrate and make a binding determination.
It is trite to say that during the first stage no binding determination can be made by Fair Work Australia.
We see no jurisdictional impediment to the matter progressing to the first stage. During that stage the nature of the dispute might
change as agreement is reached on some aspects or other aspects are clarified or restated, as is typically what occurs during conciliation
or mediation. As was said, albeit in relation to different legislation, “[i]f the functions of an industrial conciliator were
circumscribed by the ambit of a prospective or actual dispute, they would lack the flexibility and sophistication exhibited even
by the conciliation processes of primitive tribal societies.”
We would allow the appeal and remit the matter to Commissioner Spencer to deal with in accordance with the provisions of clause 22
of the Agreement.
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
Mr C. Saunders
of counsel for Hay Point Services Pty Ltd
Mr J. Fetter
of counsel with
Mr C. Newman
for the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
Hearing details:
12 September
Final written submissions:
[2012] FWA 4606
Section 186(6)
of the Act; clause 22 of the Agreement
R v Bain; Ex parte Cadbury Schweppes Australia Ltd
[1984] HCA 9
(1984) 159 CLR 163
per Brennan & Deane JJ
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code A, PR530681>
No downloadable files available