Watson Chiarella Pty Ltd v John Alexander Comino [2021] ADO 2 (29 November 2021)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE
REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re: Request by Watson
Chiarella Pty Ltd for revocation of registration of design numbers 201811005 and
201811810 both in the name
of John Alexander Comino
Debrett Lyons
REPRESENTATION:
P W Flynn SC of Counsel instructed by MDW
Registered Owner:
A D B Fox of Counsel instructed by Foundry
Intellectual Property.
Request for revocation of two designs pursuant to
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) – whether requestor is
sole person entitled to be the owner of the designs – whether requestor is
sole or joint
designer of the designs – owner found to be the sole
designer and entitled to remain recorded as owner for both designs.
decision with reasons concerns a request for revocation on the basis of entitled
the Request
Designs Act 2003
) of design numbers 201811005 and 201811810 (
the Designs
The Request was filed on 18 December 2019 by an entity described at the time as
‘The Trustee for the MWMC Unit Trust’.
This was later corrected to
Watson Chiarella Pty Ltd (
the Requestor
Designs stand in the name of John Alexander Comino (
registered details are as follows:
201811005 (
the 005 Design
), for a “ball valve”, filed 20
February 2018, registered 15 March 2018 and certified on 24 October 2019; and
201811810 (
the 810 Design
), also for a “ball valve”, filed 23
March 2018 and registered 18 April 2018, registered on 18 March 2018 and
on 30 April 2020.
Designs differ little from each other and in ways which are described later.
For now it is enough to understand that the products
at issue, ball valves, are
inline valves of the kind well known in plumbing applications, requiring an
inlet and an outlet which
must be compatible with standard piping, as well as a
tap operable to either allow or prevent the flow of a liquid, usually water,
therethrough. A typical representation of both Designs, being a left-hand view
taken from the Register, is shown below as a reference
The dramatis personae
Owner is the sole director and shareholder of an Australian company, Strongcast
Uff. Giacomo Cimberio S.p.A (
) is an Italian industrial design
and fabrication company;
Valve Industries Pty Ltd (
) is Cimberio’s exclusive Australian
distributor.
Requestor (Watson Chiarella Pty Ltd) is a law firm trading as MDW Law. The
Requestor acts for Cimberio and AVI in these procedings.
The Request
seeks revocation of the Designs on the bases that, at the time they were
registered, (i) the Owner was not entitled to be
entered on the Register of
Designs as the registered owner of the Designs, or (ii) Cimberio should have
been entered on the Register
of Designs as a registered owner of the Designs.
the Request lie the assertions that Cimberio is the sole entitled person since
drawings of the Designs were first prepared
by employees of Cimberio before the
priority dates of the Designs, or in the alternative, that Cimberio and the
Owner are co-entitled
and since the Designs did not nominate Cimberio as such
they should now be revoked.
is no claim that the Designs were not new and distinctive at their relevant
filing dates. The only question is one of entitlement.
The Evidence and Hearing
(detailed below) was filed by the parties after which they were invited to
request a hearing. Both parties asked to be heard.
In advance of the hearing
they provided outline submissions which I have taken into account along with
oral argument made during
a video-conference hearing which took place on 7 June
2021 before me, acting in my capacity as a delegate of the Registrar of Designs.
the hearing the Requestor was represented by P W Flynn SC of Counsel instructed
by MDW Law and the Owner was represented by Mr
A D B Fox of Counsel instructed
by Foundry Intellectual Property.
evidence filed on behalf of the Requestor consists of declarations by:
Cimberio, a director of Cimberio, made 29 June 2020, 1 September 2020 and 2
December 2020;
Mr Trent Kilner,
a director of AVI, made 29 June 2020, 1 September 2020, and 2 December
Cerutti, an employee of Cimberio, made 29 June 2020;
Mr Augusto Riva,
an employee of Cimberio, made 1 September 2020; and
Mr Gary Gibson,
from GRG Consulting Engineers, made 2 December 2020.
evidence filed on behalf of the Owner consists of declarations by:
The Owner, Mr
John Alexander Comino, made 29 June 2020, 28 August 2020 and 2 December 2020;
Mr William S
Hunter, mechanical engineer, made 31 August 2020 and 2 December 2020.
addition and before the hearing, the Requestor filed sets of transparencies as
Overlay of the
C9746 valve with Design 810;
Overlay of the
C6827/5 valve with Design 810; and
Overlay of the
C6827/3 valve with Design 810.
The entitlement claims in overview
Owner opposes revocation of the Designs asserting that he is the person who
created the Designs, as he conceived of the Designs,
reduced them to visible
form and is thus the sole person entitled to the Designs. The Owner asserts
that at his request Cimberio
manufactured certain bespoke plumbing fittings for
Strongcast. The Owner further asserts that Cimberio was not engaged to design
any products, but was commissioned to prepare engineering drawings for the
subsequent manufacture of commercial quantities of products
to specifications
given by the Owner.
Requestor’s primary submission is that all significant aspects of the
shape, configuration, pattern or ornamentation of
the Designs were copied from
prior art comprising ball valves designed by Cimberio. Further, that minor
additions to or variations
upon that prior art by the Owner are principally
utilitarian and have little effect on the overall visual impression of the
Further background to the dispute
was established in Italy in 1957 and has since designed and made a great many
fittings for plumbing, heating, air conditioning,
and gas and water distribution
systems. It does business internationally via a network of subsidiaries and
distributors.
stated, AVI is Cimberio’s Australian distributor. There is no evidence of
direct dealings between the Owner or Strongcast
and Cimberio but the Owner has
done business with AVI over many years and had an agreement with AVI whereby AVI
sourced plumbing
fittings for Strongcast from Cimberio.
in turn provides plumbing fittings including ball valves of the kind described
above to its customers being water utility
companies in Australia. From time to
time those companies or the public regulators require conformity of those
fittings with particular
specifications. Other times modifications are
suggested by customers.
has provided ball valves to a customer, Unity Water. Strongcast recieved
idea of a locking mechanism to
the valve. Certain prototypes followed resulting in contact and discussion
between the Owner and
AVI concerning the final design and fabrication of a valve
incorporating a locking mechanism.
the Owner claims to have conceived of a further idea which was then reduced to a
prototype model whereby the same ball valve
had a female connecting thread
machined into the bore of the water inlet nozzle, thus providing for both male
and female coupling
still, the Owner thought to reduce to a prototype model the same valve with a
female connecting thread machined into the bore
of both the water inlet nozzle
and the water outlet nozzle, thus further expanding the valve’s coupling
what follows in this decision the ball valves are generally referred to by the
codes given to them by Cimberio, and it is the so-named
C6827 product (
C6827 valve
) in its original and then modified forms that it alleges became
the Designs.
Development of the Designs – the Requestor’s
Requestor’s evidence is that Cimberio is a long established company that
produces tens of millions of finished products
annually. Many of these are
unique in the sense that Cimberio will respond to customer requirements largely
by adapting existing
stock componentry to the customer’s request.
Cimberio states that the core parts of ball valves - the body, ball, nut and
handle - are stock parts. It employs a technical and design team which selects
the base valve or components suitable to produce
a finished product meeting the
customer’s needs, adapting it as necessary and where that is not possible,
it develops specific
custom components.
so-called family of ball valves, being the C6827 valve and related valves were
created by Augusto Riva, Alfredo Cerutti and Tiziano
Guidetti, all members of
the technical and design team, who assigned their rights in the design of those
valves to Cimberio.
Requestor disputes that the Owner made any design contribution as a matter of
fact, but in the alternative submits that, from
a design perspective, the
additions allegedly made by the Owner are on any view insufficient to constitute
him as the sole, or even
a joint designer of the Designs. The basis on which a
design becomes registered is as a new and distinctive combination of all of
elements. The Requestor states that it is an error in law for the Owner to
contend that he is the designer of certain ball valves
merely because he alleges
he contributed some functional and visually minor features to them.
Development of the Designs – the Owner’s
The 810 Design
Owner’s submission is that before the priority dates and following
of introducing a locking
mechanism to ball valves sourced from Cimberio. The Owner designed a plate that
could be retrofitted onto
the valve and also drilled a hole into the valve
handle so that the handle could be secured in a closed position using a padlock
when the handle was rotated 90 degrees and the holes aligned. Photographs of
this prototype which on the evidence made their way
to Cimberio are shown
Owner commissioned a business, RCR Laser, to manufacture stainless steel plates
of the kind just described and commissioned Machinery
Solutions Pty Ltd to drill
7mm holes into the handles. The valves were reassembled with the stainless
plate in place and, according
to the evidence, sold to customers.
described above, the Owner later thought to modify the valve in yet another way
which became the product of 810 Design. The Owner
commissioned Machinery
Solutions Pty Ltd to prepare a prototype of this double coupling valve by
machining an internal female thread
into the inlet bore of the nozzle of the
valve. Photographs (shown below) of that prototype were taken and sent to AVI in
April 2017.
Owner contacted AVI to relay his desire for commercial quantities of a ball
valve that included both the locking mechanism and
the dual thread. This was
passed on to Cimberio with the result that some fitness testing apropos the
added internal thread was
undertaken at the Owner’s request at the
Australian National Testing Laboratory. The later test report was positive but
some to-ing and fro-ing regarding the lockable handle resulted in the
engineering drawing shown below produced by Cimberio (the “wing”
marked thereon for clarity).
The 005 Design
was to become the 005 Design is all but identical to the 810 Design, differing
only in that a female internal thread is provided
on both the inlet and outlet
sides of the valve. The Owner commissioned Machinery Solutions Pty Ltd again to
prepare a prototype,
shown below, noting that this prototype does not show the
locking plate:
both cases, the Owner used a local company, Infinity Designs, to prepare
drawings suitable for the applications for the
Preliminary findings
submissions canvas certain arguments which I have found best to consider first
in order to make way for my primary findings.
These matters relate less to the
application of the law on entitlement as they do to the credibility of the
parties’ claims.
The Owner and AVI
first concerns the nature of the arrangements between the Owner and AVI. The
Owner gives evidence that in 2013 Strongcast entered
into a so-called
Distribution Agreement with AVI whereby AVI sourced off the shelf plumbing
fittings for Strongcast from Cimberio.
That agreement defines their
relationship as vendor and vendee. Trent Kilner, a director of AVI, gives
evidence that the relationship
between Strongcast and AVI was one of distributor
and importer. Whilst I cannot take issue with those characterisations I am
that the picture of an arm’s length relationship between the two
businesses suits the Requestor, not least because of the Owner’s
to characterise AVI, for certain purposes, as its agent.
note here that I am not influenced by the Requestor’s attempts throughout
its submissions to draw a line between the Owner
and Strongcast. One is the
controlling mind of the other and I can not appreciate in the evidence where
anything of significance
might be seen differently by strictly observing the
corporate veil. As such, when I have referred to actions taken, or
representation
made, by the Owner or by Strongcast the choice is merely
contextual and no other distinction is being made.
said, the Requestor is correct in stating that there is no evidence of an
express agency between either the Owner or Strongcast
and AVI. I find that the
Requestor is also correct in stating that there is no evidence of an implied
agency between the two arising
out of the conduct of the parties. Indeed, on
the facts there is much to support a characterisation of AVI as Cimberio’s
agent more than as its distributor. Nevertheless, I have remained
cautious of the Requestor’s written submission that “[t]his
case where Strongcast (let alone Comino) commissioned Cimberio to produce a
design or to prepare drawings” for the
reason that its accuracy seems to
depend on a formal understanding of commissioned work when all that might matter
for the purposes
of entitlement are the circumstances of the Owner’s
this context I note, too, the existence of a so-called “Confidentiality
Deed” between Strongcast and AVI. The Requestor
is quick to point out
that the Deed does not relate to the Designs and has was not fully executed but
neither of those shortcomings
distract me from the observation that the Owner
and AVI either contemplated or considered themselves likely to engage in
confidential
dealings or disclosures.
find that the relationship between AVI and the Owner went further than a simple
supplier/customer or vendor/vendee arrangement and
did, on the evidence, show a
course of dealings where AVI acted as a conduit to information flow in both
directions between the Owner
and Cimberio.
Payments and
sign-off on drawings
are two aspects to the payments matter. One is the Requestor’s claim that
“Cimberio has borne the entirety of the
capital costs in the development
of [the 810 Design]” and
“has never been paid for
[that] design work”.
insinuation of course is that if Cimberio was truly commissioned by the Owner to
produce drawings according to the Owner’s
specifications then commercial
practice would ordinarily make the Owner liable for that work. However, the
nature of the relationship
between the parties here where they are dealing in
commercial quantities and – by its own evidence – Cimberio has the
practice of modifying existing stock parts, might very much suggest to me the
likelihood of a commercial understanding that the fabricator
would absorb such
costs. On the evidence as a whole I can read nothing into this claim in terms
of how it might inform my decision
on entitlement.
second is the claim that the Owner had not paid Cimberio in full for certain
matters unrelated to these Designs. This claim arose
in the context of sign-off
of the drawings for the ball valve modications. The evidence is that when the
ball valve modifications
as described were put to AVI, AVI requested that they
be made in writing. It is said by the Requestor that “AVI was concerned
that Strongcast would renege on any purchase order for the manufactured valve
and wanted to confirm their customer’s requirements
before approaching
AVI’s manufacturer, Cimberio, and requesting that Cimberio produce designs
which responded to those general
requirements”, and later, that
“Cimberio requires all its customers to approve the final drawings before
manufacturing
to ‘lock in’ a design and avoid requests for changes
after manufacturing has commenced. This was particularly important
Strongcast had previously reneged on promises to purchase commercial
quantities.”
more, the implication of this claim is that it was only because of this alleged
prior default that Cimberio requested sign-off
by the Owner when what might
elsewise be inferred from that request is confirmation that the drawings
authentically reflected the
brief given. Again, I can read nothing into this
claim in terms of how it might help my decision on entitlement.
final aspect of the Requestor’s submissions that I would like to dispose
of here is anything arising from the assertion that
“the drawing used by
Mr. Comino to base the representations for [the Designs] were subject to
Cimberio’s copyright”
and that “Cimberio has not waived its
claim to copyright has no direct relevance to the entitlement claim which is the
basis of these proceedings for, as the Registrar’s
delegate, Mr Richards
wrote in the case of
John Michael Jarvie v Comtec Industries Pty Ltd
[2018] ADO 5
... authoring drawings is not
the same as being the designer of the thing those drawings depict—the
drawings could potentially
be subject to copyright, but the ownership of this
is a fitting place to turn more specifically to the law as it relates to these
proceedings.
of the Act provides that a person may apply to the Registrar for revocation
of the registration of a design under
Pursuant to
Registrar is satisfied that:
(a) a person or persons
were entitled persons at the time the design was
first registered, and one or more of the original registered
owners of the design was not an entitled person at that
(b) each original registered owner of
the design was an entitled person at the time when
the design was first registered, but another
person or persons
were also entitled persons at that time;
the Registrar may make a written
declaration specifying that a person whom the Registrar is satisfied
was an entitled person at the
time the design was
first registered is an entitled person under
this subsection.
effect of such a declaration is that the parties will be notified that the
registration is revoked
The making of the declaration under
is discretionary and the onus is on the Requestor to satisfy the Registrar of
the disputed issues on the balance of
probabilities.
of the Act provides:
Who is entitled to be registered as the registered owner of a design
(1) A person mentioned in any of the following paragraphs is entitled to be
entered on the Register as the registered owner of a design
that has not yet
been registered:
(a) the person who created the design (the
(b) if the designer created the design in the course of employment, or under a
contract, with another person—the other person,
unless the designer and
the other person have agreed to the contrary;
(c) a person who derives title to the design from a person mentioned in
paragraph (a) or (b), or by devolution by will or by operation
(d) a person who would, on registration of the design, be entitled to have the
exclusive rights in the design assigned to the person;
(e) the legal personal representative of a deceased person mentioned in
paragraph (a), (b), (c) or (d).
(2) Despite subsection (1), a person is not entitled to be entered on
the Register as the registered owner of a design that has not
registered if:
(a) the person has assigned all of the person’s rights in the design to
another person; or
(b) the person’s rights in the design have devolved on another person by
operation of law.
(3) To avoid doubt:
(a) more than one person may be entitled to be entered on the Register as the
registered owner of a design; and
(b) unless the contrary intention appears, a reference to the registered owner
of a registered design in this Act is a reference
to each of the registered
owners of the design.
(4) No person other than a person mentioned in paragraph (1)(a), (b),
(c), (d) or (e) is entitled to be entered on the Register as
the registered
owner of a design that has not yet been registered.
stated, the designer is the person who created the design.
“design”, in relation to a product, to mean “the overall
appearance of the product resulting from one
or more visual features of the
Section 7(1)
goes on to state that “visual
features”, in relation to a product, include “the shape,
configuration, pattern and
ornamentation of the product”.
case law has identified the designer as the person whose mind conceives the
relevant shape, configuration, pattern or ornamentation
applicable to the
product and reduces it to visible
Application
to one side for the moment the Requestor’s submission that the Owner
created nothing in the Designs, the Requestor’s
fallback argument is that
anything the Owner might have contributed is simply functional and, in any
event, trivial over that which
the Requestor lays claim as its prior art
are difficulties in law with that argument. Those difficulties are exemplified
and augmented by other problematic issues in
the following
submission:
[The] internal thread is necessarily invisible when its
normal application when installed (that is, when the internal thread has been
screwed over another fitting). The internal threads are not visible in ordinary
use. The hole in the handle and the locking wing,
in the mind of an informed
user, are not features which affect the core operation of the ball valve. They
are not important visual
features of the designs sufficient to alter the overall
impression of the valve, which is otherwise entirely identical with C6827
which have received public certification, and have been publicly marketed,
supplied and used in Australia continuously from
24 October 2013.
first place,
provides that a “visual feature” may serve a
functional purpose. More importantly, to repeat the point made earlier,
are not proceedings for invalidation of a design, and so whilst
that a design is a registrable design if it is “new and distinctive”
when compared with the prior art base for
the design as it existed before the
priority date, it is only newness (not distinctiveness) which is relevant to
entitlement. That
was made clear in
Australian Fitness Supplies Pty Ltd v
Rasheed Rane
[2013] ADO 6
“I add here that more
than once when drawing comparisons between the Design and published material,
the statement of grounds
claims that the published material is identical or
substantially similar in overall impression to the registered design.
not the test. The relevant provisions refer repeatedly to
‘the design’. The test of entitlement is in my view equivalent
to the test for ‘newness’, rather than the
‘distinctiveness’ test.”
a jurisprudential standpoint, this must be correct. It is therefore essential
to note that
states that a design is “new” unless it is
to a design that forms part of the prior art base for the
that reason the Requestor’s submissions, for example, that “[t]he
informed user
of [the Designs] are plumbers who might install these
valves in water metering applications” or that “[the Designs] are
substantially similar in overall impression
to C6827” (
) show a misapplication of the law.
Section 16(2)
states that a design
is distinctive unless it is
substantially similar in overall impression
to a design that forms part of the prior art base for the design.
deals with factors to be considered in assessing substantial similarity in
overall impression and is refereable to the standard of
informed user
. But, as I have said,
entitlement is concerned only with ‘the design’ and with its
newness, not distinctiveness. So
the italicised concepts (above) are outside and
irrelevant to the assessment of entitlement.
I must ignore the Requestor’s claims that what the Owner may have
contributed was, in the abstract, known to the engineering
world. I am largely
at one with the Owner’s submission that:
It is irrelevant that
the Designs contained a number of features from previous Cimberio ball valves,
which it should be noted are
also features of the ball valves of many other
manufacturers. Ownership of prior art does not mean that a person is an
person. Further, the delegate must consider what is new, or novel, in
relation to the product, not valves or plumbing equipment generally.
be recalled that the definition of “design” is in relation to a
too, the sets of transparencies filed by the Requestor referred to in [15] which
allow visual comparison of the Design representations
with drawings prepared by
Cimberio, are largely a distraction, as are the repeated statements thoughout
submissions that anything
the Owner added was
essential questions are (i) what was new to the Designs, and (ii) who created
what was new. In short, the answer to (i) is that
the visual features in the
810 Design, not part of the prior art, are: (a) the addition of a side wing to
the body of the valve,
(b) the addition of a hole to the valve handle/lever, and
(c) the addition of a female internal thread to the nozzle of the valve
already had an outside male thread.
The new visual features of the 005 Design are (a) to (c) above, plus (d) the
addition of a second female internal thread to the other
nozzle of the
is only (d) which is a new feature of the 005 Design over the 810 Design and
this brings me to say something of the internal threads
in both Designs. The
Requestor comments that “[t]his internal thread is necessarily invisible
when its normal application
when installed (that is, when the internal thread
has been screwed over another fitting). The internal threads are not visible in
ordinary use.” So much is true but the issue is not whether the feature
but whether it is a
visual feature
. As the representations of
the Designs go, I find that the addition(s) of the internal threads is new, but
it is not a visible design
feature. It follows that when the alleged feature of
the internal screw threads is subtracted from the Designs, the same
considerations
apply to both Designs when it comes to determination of point
(ii) - who created the new features.
Requestor’s submissions can be largely contracted since much space is
given over to discussion of Cimberio’s drawings
and how the above
identified features, (a) to (c), compare with or are shown in those drawings.
At their highest the drawings for
the C6827 valve are essentially identical to
the Designs. No other drawings show any better the Design features together and
it is enough to focus on the origin of the C6827 valve.
broadest statement is that Cimberio did not ever receive instructions to produce
drawings for the C6827 valve for Mr Comino.
This statement seems to carry a
false suggestion since all I believe is being said is that Cimberio did not
receive any directions
from Mr Comino himself, or from Strongcast directly, and
that Cimberio’s dealings were only with AVI; perhaps in addition that
Cimberio only produced anything at AVI’s request as its distributor. I do
not think it says anything reliable about what was
communicated, perhaps
indirectly, concerning the features of the Designs.
next most forceful evidence filed by the Requestor are the declarations of
Roberto Cimberio, Alfredo Cerutti and Augusto Riva
who each give evidence that
Cimberio designed C6827 and its related valves. Cimberio’s design team
lays claim to conception
of the C6827 valve, however beyond that assertion the
supporting statements seem to circle the point of conception, referring instead
(i) Cimberio’s long history of designing ball valves and
fittings for plumbing and other purposes (something the Owner does
(ii) Cimberio’s
modus operandi
when it comes to new design
requests as outlined at [25];
(iii) the design and development of each of the thirteen sub-components which
when combined gave rise to the C6827 valve, including
the valve body, stem,
ball, gaskets, elastic and anti-friction rings, self-locking nut, gland screw
and handle (something else the
Owner does not contest, nor that those components
were in public use before the filing of the
(iv) the “iterative development of the Cimberio 36496/0 ball valve
family, and previous related
visual features of the 810 Design are all present in the C6827 valve but it is
the Owner’s assertion that each of those
features was conceived and
designed by the Owner. Putting aside the addition(s) of the internal threads, I
accept the Owner’s
account of the motivation for the locking handle.
Whilst the Requestor states that utility providers/regulators had published
concerning locking mechanisms I do not see how that fact would cause
me to think that the Owner’s primary motivation was anything
other than to
accommodate his existing customers, in this case, Unity Water. So motivated, he
produced and commissioned the production
of prototypes, photographed them and
provided the photos to AVI. His request was for Cimberio to integrate the
locking plate with
the body of the valve, add the hole to the handle, and
produce engineering drawings for the manufacture of valves which included
features. Modifications to Cimberio’s initial drawing were suggested by
the Owner and implemented by Cimberio. It is
immaterial to that narrative that
lockable ball valves were known, manufactured or made public in other design
forms (by Cimberio
or anyone else), or that water supply regulators had
promulgated information about such things.
the other hand, there is evidence of Cimberio’s “engagement”,
I will call it for now, in the process. The final
form of the locking plate
(side wing) in C6827 is not that of the retrofittable plate of the Owner’s
experimental mock-up or
the stainless manufactured plate which the Owner
retrofitted to existing valves. In addition, there is the fact that Cimberio
the C6827 valve to visual form by way of the engineering drawing.
Requestor’s submissions are that:
At the highest, Mr Comino
conceived a function (for instance, a lockable handle) that Cimberio then gave
effect to with the use of
its configurations and previous components and which
it then reduced to writing on copyrighted drawings. Mr Comino’s role was
to suggest the addition of a lockable handle. But such a role does not
constitute him as a designer. He provided no clarity or
instructions as to that
feature. He did not describe its shape, position, material or any other
feature. The sole level of detail
given by him was that “the wing needs to
come out further to clear the body of the valve, otherwise it is difficult to
a padlock.” He then did nothing more than point to a previous
Cimberio locking wing on a previous Cimberio ball valve. That
specifying a functional feature that he wanted for admittedly functional
reasons, using a previous design by Cimberio as
a shorthand way to describe what
he wished to specify. Mr. Comino did not conceive of the shape, the dimensions,
the position, the
colour or any other design aspect of the locking wing. Each
of these were conceived by Cimberio and reduced to visual form by it
Further, and in any event, to the extent that Mr Comino did conceive of any
design aspect of the locking wing (which is denied),
the locking wing made an
insignificant contribution to the overall visual impression of the valve as
distinct from Cimberio’s
contribution as embodied in the prior art valves,
such that any such contribution by Mr Comino is insufficient to constitute him
designer of the valve.
the case of
Mr Whelan received drawings which had been
prepared by the requestor in that case. The drawings included improvements the
had conceived. The Delegate stated at:
From this point,
Mr Whelan declares that he applied his skills as an engineer to certain
technical problems with the above designs.
The result of Mr Whelan’s
labours was the drawings that depict the Designs. .... I note that there are
differences, particularly
to the sheet pile component. Taking Mr Whelan’s
declaration at face value, these may represent a significant application of
engineering nous, but this is not the point. Designs are concerned with visual
appearance. Visually then, the two iterations of the
sheet pile are very close
and the pin pile is almost identical.
Requestor has shown how, through many years and iterations, and in particular
the spark of inspiration that hit him in early 2014,
he arrived at the
‘Before’ shapes ... Mr Whelan’s case is, at its highest, that
he took the ‘Before’
shapes and applied his skill as an engineer to
them, resulting in the ‘After’ shapes. Mr Whelan is therefore
not the person whose mind conceived of these shapes—his
contribution was a refinement of shapes already conceived in the mind
Requestor. Mr Whelan’s work was that of a drafter and engineering
consultant tasked with ironing out the kinks in someone
else’s original
LED Technologies Pty Ltd v Elecspress Pty Ltd
provided sample products and drawings to an overseas manufacturer which then
created engineering drawings for the products.
Gordon J stated at
On the facts just described, it is clear that Mr Ottobre is
the person who conceived the relevant shape, configuration and pattern
designs and reduced it to a visible form; “M” simply converted that
design to an electronic form in order to facilitate
the production process. Put
another way, it was Mr Ottobre, not “M”, who had the idea for dual
and triple combination
LED lamps in one base. It was Mr Ottobre who reduced that
idea to visible form in the sketches. As the engineering drawings marked
“1”, “2” and “3” on Annex C record, it was
Mr Ottobre’s sketches which contained the features
different from those in
any other previous design. Accordingly, Mr Ottobre was “the person who
created the design ...
summary, Cimberio acknowledges that in 2017 the ball valves later modificed by
the Owner did not include a locking plate/wing.
The earliest appearance of both
the locking wing and drill holes in the handle was in early 2018, after the
Owner had communicated
those ideas by photographs and in writing. The Requestor
concedes that the Owner discussed these modifications with AVI but asserts
the discussion lacked specificity and detail. In my assessment the photographs,
at the very least, communicate all that is
entailed in what is an easily
comprehensible idea. Moreover, that idea – in both of its specific
aspects – made it way
into the engineering drawings.
Cimberio design team members, Augusto Riva and Alfredo Cerutti, give evidence
that the C6827 valve reflects a number of “eccentricities”
Cimberio manufacturing process, evidenced in the drawings, which were unknown to
the Owner. I can accept that to be most
likely true, but it is no more than
consistent with Cimberio’s role to refine the final form and “iron
out the kinks”.
too, Mr Kilner describes Cimberio’s work considering materials, thickness,
torque ratings, strength ratings and other engineerings
considerations before
finalizing the drawings. I accept that reduction of the Designs to drawings
from which workable products took
their shape required engineering skill and
“nous” but, as the cases highlight, this is not determinative of
who, in law,
is the designer.
assessment is that the Requestor believes Cimberio’s function as a
draftsman and problem solver is equivalent to a role as
designer. There is
little doubt in my mind that this belief is genuine and that in the engineering
community that equivalence might
be a notion commonly held, but it is not the
test of creation or the determinant of design entitlement under the Act. As to
drawings themselves, recall that it was Mr Ottobre who reduced an idea to
visible form in
, not the polished final drawings. In my
assessment the photographed prototypes hold more weight than those sketches.
have no issue with the Requestor’s claim to engagement in the process of
formalising the Designs but I do not, on the facts
and bearing in mind the onus,
find that it was the designer or co-designer of the Designs.
Decision and Costs
of the Act is set out above. I am not satisfied that a person or persons
other than the Owner were entitled persons at the times
of registration of the
Designs. I am satisfied that the Owner was an entitled person. For these
reasons there is no cause to revoke
the Designs.
Owner has sought an award of costs. The ordinary course is for costs to follow
the event and I award costs against the Requestor.
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and Designs
Australian Fitness Supplies
Pty Ltd v Rasheed Rane
[2013] ADO 6
Chris Ford Enterprises Pty
Ltd v BH & JR Badenhop Pty Ltd
(1985) 7 FCR 75
, 80 quoted in
Technologies Pty Ltd v Elecspess Pty Ltd
[2008] FCA 1941
(2008) 80 IPR 85
Hunter 1 at [22] and
Hunter 2 at [5]. See also Gibson at
Hunter 1 at [29] and
Hunter 2 at [5]. See also Gibson at
Even less relevant is
the expert evidence that “[the internal thread(s) might be viewed as an
optional feature which, if removed,
would not affect the core operation or
application of the
[30] above the letters “CIM” inside a lozenge device can be seen
cast into the valve handle which the Owner
Declaration of
Roberto Cimberio (Support),
[2008] FCA 1941
(2009) AIPC
, Federal Court of Australia, 18 December 2008.
RTF format (5.84 MB)
Signed PDF/A format