Reference by APRA AMCOS (Summonses) [2025] ACopyT 1 (17 January 2025)
Reference by APRA AMCOS (Summonses)
[2025] ACopyT 1
File number:
CT 1 of 2021
The Tribunal:
(PRESIDENT)
Date of decision:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
applications to issue summonses – where summonses objected to
Legislation:
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
Counsel for the Applicants:
Mr M Hall SC with Ms R De Stoop and Ms M Evetts
Solicitor for the Applicants:
Banki Haddock Fiora
Solicitor for Netflix, Inc:
Simpsons Solicitors
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
CT 1 of 2021
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
REFERENCE BY:
AUSTRALASIAN PERFORMING RIGHT ASSOCIATION LIMITED ABN 42 000 016
AUSTRALASIAN MECHANICAL COPYRIGHT OWNERS’ SOCIETY LIMITED
ABN 78 001 678 851
PERRAM J (PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
AMCOS and Netflix, Inc provide to the Associate to the President by 5 pm on 20
January 2025 a final form of the summonses each
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
PERRAM J (PRESIDENT):
first question is whether a summons in the form provided to my chambers should
be issued to Netflix (at the request of APRA AMCOS)
(Cth). Netflix consents to paragraph 1(c) and APRA
AMCOS does not press paragraph 1(e). Paragraphs 2 and 3 are machinery
paragraphs.
The disputed paragraphs are therefore paragraphs 1(a), (b) and (d).
I accept that paragraph 1(a) seeks relevant material. Netflix
asserts in the
proceeding that the rates paid by SVOD providers in the United States are
relevant to the pricing exercise in this
case. Since Netflix is a subscription
video on demand (‘SVOD’) provider in the United States I do not see
that it can
contend that the summons seeks material which is irrelevant. The
fact that the material is confidential is an issue disconnected
relevance. The parties may formulate an appropriate confidentiality regime. I
am likewise unpersuaded that this paragraph
imposes an undue burden. Netflix
accepts that paragraph 1(b) is relevant but contends that it should be allowed
to redact certain
figures in order to head off third party claims for
confidentiality. The regime in place adequately deals with confidentiality and
the position of third parties. I see no reason not to let that regime take its
course. I am unpersuaded that paragraph 1(d) seeks
material that is not
relevant. There is no evidence that it would be burdensome. The paragraph will
be permitted.
second question is whether a summons in the form provided to my chambers should
be issued to APRA AMCOS (at the request of Netflix).
The final form of the
summons was marked up with red deletions and blue additions. The parties’
submissions dealt with disputes
were made about the additions and deletions made to paragraphs 4, 5 and 6. In
final form of the summons, paragraph 7 had been deleted and new paragraphs
5A, 5B, 8A and 8B added. Netflix made submissions about
paragraphs 5A, 5B, 8A
is no dispute about paragraphs 1 to 3. Paragraph 4 is also agreed if it is
limited (as it now is) to board resolutions. Following
APRA AMCOS’s
submissions about paragraph 5 (which raised the spectre of a great burden in
responding to the paragraph), Netflix
narrowed the paragraph so that it only
sought materials of the kind designated by subparagraphs (a)-(c) that were
before the Honourable
Dr Bennett AC SC in the arbitration between APRA and
FreeTV. I am satisfied that the paragraph seeks material which is relevant
that, so confined, it is not burdensome. After receipt of APRA AMCOS’s
submissions, Netflix narrowed the paragraph to
matters considered by Mr Mallett
or the persons referred to by him at paragraph 19(d) of his statement. I am
satisfied that the
material is relevant and that production would not be
burdensome. There were minor amendments to subparagraphs (b)-(c) which I also
accept as appropriate. Netflix then submitted that new paragraphs 5A and 5B
should also be permitted. I do not know what APRA AMCOS’s
position on
that is but I am satisfied that what is sought is relevant and not burdensome.
7 is not pressed. I accept that what is sought by paragraph 8 is relevant
however I am also satisfied that responding to
it would be burdensome at this
stage and therefore it will not be permitted. Netflix formulated alternative
paragraphs 8A and 8B
to which APRA AMCOS would consent if that conclusion was
reached. Paragraphs 8A and 8B will be permitted.
form of the draft summons to Netflix is returnable before the Tribunal on 24
January 2025. On the other hand, the summons to
APRA AMCOS seeks production to
Netflix. I do not mind which course is taken but they should be the same. No
party has raised an
issue about the date of 24 January 2025. The parties should
provide my chambers with the final form of the summonses for issue as
I certify that the preceding five (5) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination of the Tribunal
constituted
by the Honourable Justice Perram
(President)
Dated: 17 January 2025
RTF format (269 KB)
Signed PDF/A format