M v Body Corporate [2010] PrivCmrA 15 (24 December 2010)
Case Citation:
M v Body Corporate
[2010] PrivCmrA 15
Subject Heading:
Accuracy and security of personal information
National Privacy Principles 3 and 4.1 in Schedule 3 of the
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
The complainant belonged to a body corporate and had listed their post office
box as their mailing address.
They began receiving correspondence from the body corporate at their
residential address rather than their post office box.
The complainant advised the body corporate of the error and it updated the
complainant’s postal address. Not satisfied with
this action, they
complained to the Commissioner.
NPP 3 provides that an organisation must take reasonable steps to make sure
that the personal information it collects, uses or discloses
is accurate,
complete and up-to-date.
NPP 4.1 provides that an organisation must take reasonable steps to protect
the personal information it holds from misuse and loss
and from unauthorised
access, modification or disclosure.
The Commissioner conducted preliminary inquiries into the complaint under
The body corporate advised that it had sent an address update form to the
complainant. The complainant completed the form, confirming
their post office
box as their mailing address and updated their residential address. A staff
member at the body corporate made an
error by updating the complainant’s
residential address as the mailing address.
The Commissioner assessed whether the body corporate had reasonable steps in
place to ensure data quality under NPP 3. The body corporate
had policies in
place that set out the steps staff should take when amending client details.
The body corporate also conducted regular
staff training on these (and other)
procedures. The practice of regularly sending its clients forms to update their
details was a
relevant step by the body corporate.
Although addressing the mail to the residential address was a use of
inaccurate information under NPP 3, the Commissioner concluded
that it was a
one-off error which did not suggest that the body corporate had not taken
reasonable steps to protect the individual’s
personal information.
Therefore, given the steps it had in place, the Commissioner found that the body
corporate had met its obligation
under NPP 3.
The Commissioner also found that the body corporate’s general security
procedures and training met its obligation under NPP
The Commissioner declined to investigate the complaint under
section 41(1)(a)
on the grounds that the body corporate had not interfered
with the complainant's privacy.
Office of the Australian Information
Commissioner
December 2010
RTF format (120 KB)
Signed PDF/A format