The King v AR [2025] HCATrans 78 (13 November 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 078
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Sydney No S111 of 2025
B e t w e e n
BEECH‑JONES
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA ON THURSDAY,
13 NOVEMBER 2025, AT 10.00 AM
MS H.R. ROBERTS, SC
May it please
the Court, I appear with
MS E.R. NICHOLSON, SC
the appellant. (instructed by Solicitor for Public Prosecutions
MR T.A. GAME, SC
your Honours please, I appear with
MS K.J. EDWARDS, SC
MS G.E.L. HUXLEY
MS R.L. McMAHON
for the respondent. (instructed by KOA
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Game.
Ms Roberts.
MS ROBERTS:
Your Honours, the
propositions for which the Director contends in this appeal turn on an
application of existing authority of this
Court concerning the admissibility of
and jury directions with respect to tendency evidence. The error in the
judgment of the New
South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal arose from a
misapplication of those principles, primarily those recently settled by this
The error which underpins the
reasons and conclusions of the Court of Criminal Appeal has the effect of
requiring that tendency evidence
which relies solely upon conduct arising from
charged acts is subject to rules which differ from those applicable to other
evidence. To treat tendency evidence differently at a level of
principle based on its evidentiary source, we submit, does not find
Evidence Act
nor in authority of this Court, and that erroneous
reasoning directly informed the approach of the Court of Criminal Appeal when
considering the question of misdirection and what we submit is the erroneous
conclusion of miscarriage in this case.
Appreciating that
your Honours are already familiar with the materials in this matter, but in
order to situate the legal issues in
their evidentiary context, I will briefly
turn to the factual background. The present case concerned as
10‑year‑old
complainant; 12 years old by the time of trial.
She was the daughter of the accused’s partner of about a year. The
relationship
had been intermittent. The accused is, of course the respondent in
this Court, but when discussing the trial context I have used
“accused” for clarity.
The accused did not live with the
complainant or her mother. However, he did spend time with the complainant,
including taking her
to and from school on occasion. He also had his own
children. The complainant had a mobile phone and she and the accused had
and there was evidence of them exchanging messages by text message and
over a messaging application both before and after the dates
of the offending.
The relationship between them was described as a good relationship in which the
complainant trusted the accused,
and the accused referred to the complainant by
nicknames which were derivatives of her first name.
Your Honours,
there were seven charges on the trial indictment. The trial indictment is at
the core appeal book at page 5. These
included alternatives and concerned
three occasions. The two occasions about which the complainant complained first
comprise counts
3 and onwards. These occurred at her mother’s home
on movie nights, and they became counts 3 – in the
alternative, 4
– and then the second occasion
counts 5 – in the alternative, 6 – and count 7,
and these were the occasions for
which the guilty verdicts were
The complaint arose in circumstances where the accused and the
complainant’s mother had separated and the complainant was aware
and a few days later she came to believe that they were resuming the
relationship, she became upset and said she did not
want to see the accused and
told her mother, in that context, that he had touched her inappropriately. This
was, according to the
evidence of the mother, on 18 October 2020 and the
complainant was first interviewed by police on 20 October 2020.
complainant complained about a third occasion in mid‑2022, in the period
leading‑up to the trial. She gave evidence
that she had had a vivid
dream – her words – about being locked in an apartment and
that this had prompted her memory
of an occasion when she had a sleepover at the
accused’s home and he had sexually touched her. This allegation became
1 – in the alternative, 2 – on the trial
indictment.
Your Honours, all of the offences were alleged to have
taken place during the period of the September‑October school holidays
2020. Although time was not made of the essence in any formal
sense – and that appears in the summing‑up, I will
your Honours to it, but at core appeal book 38 – the
relative timing of the three occasions was a significant issue
between the
The complainant had described the sleepover incident as
occurring after the two occasions at her mother’s house, although she
acknowledge in her evidence at trial that she was not certain, whereas, based on
other evidence establishing a sleepover date
– which was not
disputed, that is, the fact of a sleepover was not disputed – the
Crown had presented its case with the
sleepover incident on a specific date, as
your Honours will see from counts 1 and 2, which was, if not the
first, certainly the second
in time of the three occasions.
sleepover incident was described in the Court of Criminal Appeal judgment as the
West Gosford incident. That therefore, as your
Honours will
appreciate from that summary, had a delayed complaint. It had an issue
concerning the circumstances in which the complainant
had remembered
it – that is, following the dream – and it had conflict between
the Crown case and the complainant’s
account as to its relevant timing,
relative to the other occasions. So, these were the matters all capable of
contributing to what
the Court of Criminal Appeal described as:
the comparative frailty of counts 1 and 2.
described counts 1 and 2 as having “reliability issues”.
And, of course, the verdicts of acquittal were returned
in respect of those
counts. The conduct on each occasion was similar but not exactly the
same – not identical.
If I can just briefly ask
your Honours go to the complainant’s account in the appellant’s
book of further materials.
First, commencing at page 8 of the
appellant’s book of further materials, the complainant is here describing
what became counts
3 and in the alternative, 4, commencing on
page 8 at question 35 but then described over on page 9 at
questions 44 through to 46.
Your Honours, despite the reference
to the “second time” in answer to question 45, her answer to
question 46 is a description
of what she says is the first
She says she is watching a movie with the accused at her
mother’s house in the late evening. She is lying on the
she later goes on to describe the details of the
arrangements, but she is lying on the couch with her head on the accused’s
lap. Her mother went to bed and she fell asleep and woke to the accused
touching her vagina with his hand. She said she was not
sure at that
time – that is in answer to question 46:
I wasn’t really like sure if he was being affectionate or whatever and
I didn’t even know if he did it on purpose . .
just, um, sat up to like, to let him know that I was awake –
Then, your Honours, over on pages 13 to 14 she gives a more
detailed description of the details of the sexual offence, and then she
was “awake and feeling that” – this is in answer to
question 102 – for:
like maybe five minutes and then like I realised what was
happening –
Then, what did the accused do:
he didn’t really say anything. He just continued watching the movie,
but he got his hand, like, out of my pants and put his
hand on my thigh.
Then, in answer to question 121, over the page:
I was trying to figure out what was happening, so I just finished the rest of
the movie and them, um, I said, “Goodnight.”
And he said,
“Goodnight,” to my mum and he left.
The next occasion, which becomes counts 5, 6 and 7, was also a
movie night at her mother’s house, and the complainant turned
describing that starting in the middle of page 15 of that first interview.
On this occasion she describes lying on the couch
with her head on a pillow, not
on but next to the accused.
Where is that
MS ROBERTS:
I am sorry, your Honour, that is at the
answer to question 124, in the middle of that answer:
I was lying down, my head not on his lap, though –
Where is the pillow, though?
MS ROBERTS:
At the top of page 16, your Honour, I
apologise ‑ ‑ ‑
I see. All right, thank you. I misunderstood.
MS ROBERTS:
‑ ‑ ‑ she describes having a pillow. And this
time she says, as well as his hand on her vagina with fingers
inside, she
had – she woke up and her right hand was touching the accused’s
penis “outside of his clothes”
with his hand on top of hers. She
says outside the clothes in answer to question 134.
Then over at
page 20, there is – in the second half of the page –
further description of that aspect of the offence of
the incident. That is
count 7 – questions 185 through to 191. The
complainant describes on that occasion, in answer to question
page 16, that she – when she realised she:
kind of just stood up and . . . said, um,
“Goodnight.”
The accused said:
“I can stay for as long as you want. Um, I don’t mind. You can
like fall asleep again.”
And she says:
I’m like, oh, it’s fine, I think I’m just going to go to
bed now. Um, ‘cause that time, like, I kind of realised
wasn’t normal.
Which is a reference back to her earlier description
of being unsure if it was affectionate or not on purpose, in respect of the
occasion. So, the complainant complained after these events and gave her
first interview in October 2020, and then it was in June
2022 when she
recalled the sleepover incident the subject of the
Your Honours will find a description of that at the
appellant’s book of further materials, page 50, commencing at about
29. So, she has gone to the accused’s house to stay the
night. He has younger children there, and there is watching a movie
late in the
evening and she is on the couch and says there she:
fell asleep and then I woke up and he was touching me.
And then she says:
it was like the same as last time –
and gives that
description, and says that she:
got up and I went to the bathroom and I think that was the last time it
happened. I'm not entirely sure. But it was the one that
I can remember um,
happened last.
And then she said she came out from the bathroom and
I needed to go to bed ‘cause it was getting really
late . . . I said, I'm going to bed
At page 56, again in terms of the relative timing
issue and the complainant’s responses from question 100, she says
woke up she describes what she noticed. She got worried and
got worried . . . and I sort of jumped up because it had
happened before –
and refers to happening before:
at mum’s house on the couch, both times.
So, your Honours
can see, in our submission, that the acts are similar and the circumstances are
similar, but what that also means
is that the overall conduct of the accused
displayed the type of similarity which is capable of lending probative force to
The Crown relied on tendency evidence and the
notice – in fact, while we are still in the appellant’s book,
that tendency
notice from the trial, is at pages 218 to 219 of the
appellant’s book of further materials and is not in contest –
only evidence relied on to establish the tendency described there was the
evidence of the complainant which was also the same evidence
relied upon to
establish the counts on the indictment.
So, it was solely the charged
acts on the indictment which formed the tendency evidence. The
description – the way in which
the tendency was
articulated – appears on page 218, in paragraph 2 there;
that is the particular state of mind. The paragraph
which has given rise to the
controversy which is the description of:
to act on that sexual interest by penetrating her vagina with his fingers
and/or sexually touching her when she had fallen asleep
beside him watching a
The Crown’s application to rely on tendency at trial was ultimately
not opposed at trial, and that can be seen in her Honour
judge’s short judgment with respect to the application, which is at page
220 of the applicant’s book of further
The admission of
the evidence for a tendency purpose at trial was not challenged either at trial
or in the Court of Criminal Appeal.
The challenge in the Court of Criminal
Appeal was pleaded as three subgrounds wholly concerned with the directions to
the jury as
they dealt with the tendency evidence. The notice of appeal in the
Court of Criminal Appeal is at core appeal book 148.
The directions
to the jury with respect to the tendency evidence at trial specifically start in
the core appeal book at page 67.
If I could go to those at this point,
your Honours. The trial judge introduces the direction. The first
substantive paragraph
there commences:
Part of the Crown case is that –
In line 2, there are two typographical errors there:
“intercourse” should read “interest” and
“complaint”
should read “complainant”. Then it is
clearly stated:
The Crown says you would be satisfied the accused had this tendency because
of his conduct in relation to the three occasions it is
alleged that he sexually
assaulted the complainant.
The next point that the trial judge goes to is the clarification
the Crown does not rely on the text messages –
part of the tendency evidence, pause to note here that that arose from a concern
raised by the trial judge in fact about
the Crown Prosecutor’s closing
address; a concern that in the way he had described the evidence of text
messages, he had conflated
them into the sexual interest submission for the
tendency evidence.
So, that direction was for the purpose of correcting
that, and that was not a matter – a further complaint about at trial,
nor on appeal. The direction then moves to the impugned portion of the
direction, which is where the trial judge directs the jury
to decide whether the
accused did in fact conduct himself in the way the Crown alleges and to
determine what conduct occurred, on
page 68. So:
For the purpose of determining whether the accused has the relevant tendency,
you do not consider each of the three occasions in
I pause to say that, with respect, that is quite
correct. You look at them collectively, and then the portion about which
is made is the reference there to deciding:
what conduct occurred.
Which is repeated again in the next paragraph.
We also accept that the Crown Prosecutor, in his closing address to the jury,
himself in a very similar way to the way this direction was given.
The direction was, of course – as your Honours would
– consistent with the form of the direction in the New
South Wales Court’s Bench Book at the time. I do not say that
has any relevance other than it explains why it was expressed in that
Roberts ‑ ‑ ‑
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
‑ ‑ ‑ in the tendency notice – the
last sentence of paragraph 3 of the notice says:
The Crown seeks to rely upon the evidence with respect to the counts for each
one of those three occasions . . . as tendency evidence
respect to counts representing the other occasions.
MS ROBERTS:
Do you say that
the direction was consistent with that aspect of the tendency
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, in the sense that what that is
intending to convey, as I apprehended, is this concept
cross‑admissibility, so that the
idea that is being conveyed is that the
Crown is relying on the evidence in respect of each count in, as is sometimes
and is termed in
example – as cross‑admissible in respect of the other counts,
rather than – but the tendency – the form
of the reasoning
is not confined in this way.
The form of the reasoning is to consider
all of the evidence collectively to determine if the tendency exists or if the
accused has
the tendency – or the jury is satisfied – and
then to consider whether the existence of that tendency renders more likely
commission of, or the proof of, an individual count when that count is being
considered.
If the jury found the conduct on
occasion A, but not on B and
MS ROBERTS:
your Honour.
‑ ‑ ‑ in considering this issue of tendency,
they could not – based on that last sentence in the tendency
they would not rely on the tendency demonstrated by conduct on occasion A
to prove the conduct on occasion C. That is right,
MS ROBERTS:
Excuse me, your Honour. If
your Honour’s question is directed towards – I hope that I
have understood it correctly –
the question of whether the jury is
expected or required to put aside the evidence of the count under consideration
as part of the
tendency evidence when considering that count, we would say no;
we would say that that proposition is dealt with in
. I think it is
at paragraphs [35] and [36].
If it is expressed incorrectly in
the tendency notice, or if the tendency notice does not conform precisely to
that, it is to be
borne in mind that, of course, the purpose of this document is
to give notice to the accused person at trial of how it is that the
putting its case, but the ultimate question is really how the case is put to the
jury, with respect to the question of misdirection.
So, if you have a tendency notice that alleges a tendency to do a particular act
in identical terms to an indictment that contains
two identical counts on
different occasions – two counts of conduct that occur in identical
terms on different occasions –
and those exact terms form the part of
the tendency notice, do you say that that is a tendency that can be established
on the balance
of probabilities and relied upon then to prove exactly the same
conduct or one of either of the charged offences?
MS ROBERTS:
At a level of principle, your Honour, yes, because
radical inroad to the onus of proof and burden of proof,
MS ROBERTS:
Well, that is the – otherwise
it is – if the two counts involved two separate complainants on a
tendency basis, it
matter of principle, your answer should be the same, whether it is two separate
complainants or the same complainant.
MS ROBERTS:
answer is the same as the matter of principle. Yes, your Honour. It is
that if there are two separate complainants, question
10 is not to be asked
in the same way. It is well established that if there are two separate
complainants and the offending is relevantly
similar, if not
identical – to respond more directly to your Honour’s
question – then, in order for those trials
to be run together, it
would be – the question would be raised as to whether the evidence
can be relied upon – whether
tendency reasoning can be relied
In our submission, the answer to that would be yes. At a level of
principle, the same answer must follow when it involves a single
complainant,
and that this ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
Sorry, in the two cases, though, you may reform – the
formulation of the tendency will be different, though. If it is two
complainants,
the tendency would be not formulated by reference to the name of a
person, it would be like a child under their care in those circumstances,
whereas in a case with a single complainant it is at least more common that the
tendency is framed as sexual interest in that child.
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
That affects the
reasoning that the jury are invited to embark upon by reference to the tendency
that is formulated. Is that where
MS ROBERTS:
degree, it does. Yes, your Honour, in that the – something must
be – there must be some feature about the different
conduct on the separate occasions which gives it probative value for the purpose
of establishing a tendency and then considering
whether that tendency makes the
conduct on the charged occasion more likely, in
circumstances ‑ ‑ ‑
Well, picking up Justice Beech‑Jones’ question, the
formulation is different, is it not, because when you have two complainants
tendency is tendency in relation to conduct or some aspect of the behaviour,
which is arguably common to both to give rise to
the tendency?
Yes, your Honour.
Here, if you
look at the tendency notice at page 218 of the book of further materials,
it is the level at which this tendency is crafted
is, I think, one of the issues
which arises from it being limited to a single complainant, in the sense that it
is a tendency to
a particular state of mind. Namely, a sexual interest in the
complainant.
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
And then the question which arises is the specificity of (b). In
other words, is it appropriate to have it limited to the conduct
the subject of
the charges in the alternative and/or is it to be crafted at a more general
level of to act on that sexual interest
when she had fallen asleep beside him
watching a movie? That is the difficulty, is it not, here? When you have a
single complainant,
you are directed more markedly to identify the specificity
at which you describe the tendency itself.
MS ROBERTS:
are two – yes, that is the issue which concerned the Court of
Criminal Appeal, although we say that the finding that
this problem was similar
, which I will come to, was incorrect.
to one side, we are dealing with principle for the
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
So, if you are right that you can have it both for a single complainant and
for two complainants, and the rule is the same, the rule
is in a sense the
question. The rule is the specificity at which you craft the tendency, which is
the discussion in the cases that
this Court has dealt with before; the more
general the more difficult, the more specific more difficult, depending upon
you look at it.
MS ROBERTS:
speaking – or ordinarily – a more specific tendency has
greater probative force,
and when you get so specific that you are replicating the charge, it has the
greatest probably force because it is the charge
Yes, quite, but the issue does not disappear if
more‑general words are used. There are two aspects to the specificity of
this tendency. One is the reference to the first part of it which is, in
effect, the elements of the offence. The second part of
circumstances. That is, when she had fallen asleep beside him watching a
They are not, obviously enough – not elements of the
offence, but they are important circumstances which say something about
conduct of this particular accused, and which are capable of having quite high
probative force in respect of a tendency and tendency
reasoning. That is
because of the – that goes beyond, we say – in response to
propositions against us – that goes
beyond just questions of
explaining the complainant’s behaviour because it goes to the state of
explaining the accused’s
behaviour, but even if in this case –
sorry, your Honour.
What can the tendency
evidence, or the tendency reasoning, add in the scenario that I was positing,
which is that the jury finds that
the only conduct that occurred was on
occasion A?
MS ROBERTS:
If the jury is only satisfied
that the conduct occurred on occasion A, your Honour, but yet considers
that that discloses a tendency
on the part of the accused to behave in a
particular way, when the jury comes to consider occasions B and C, if the
directions are
appropriate, then the tendency evidence will not be able to add
But they are not going to be considering
counts B and C because they have decided that that conduct did not
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
So, they are really only considering what that tendency adds to the
proof of conduct of occasion A.
MS ROBERTS:
It cannot add anything, can
MS ROBERTS:
No, but that is because the jury does not
approach it in – or the reasoning – this Court said in
– is not linear like that. The
question is to consider whether the tendency exists first and then to take it
into account,
or not, when considering whether each of the counts are made
Are the jury not going to go cross‑eyed if
they have decided that there is a tendency existing only by reference to
A and then, having considered all of the evidence collectively,
working out how they apply that to whether or not the charge relating
occasion A has been proved beyond reasonable doubt? It cannot add
MS ROBERTS:
Well, your Honour, this
particular concern was something raised in
New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal decision which is then
discussed by this Court in
– and the proposal that there
be a jury direction which addressed matters in that way was rejected in
paragraph [34] of this
Court’s decision in
, which is in
the joint book of authorities at page 372, where your Honour
said – it is a slightly different proposition that
is being put, but
the idea ‑ ‑ ‑
you would say the answer is in paragraph [35],
MS ROBERTS:
In our submission, the answer
to – our answer certainly to your Honour
Justice Gleeson’s question is in paragraphs
[34] and [35]
, and the reasoning they are in, but if I could perhaps return to
the question ‑ ‑ ‑
Could I just ask you one question, Ms Roberts?
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
You mentioned before that your form of reasoning is not linear. Would
you at some point address what the respondents say at paragraph
oral outline, where they contended – on the particular circumstances
here – the reasoning has to be linear?
You do not have to do it
straight away, just when it suits you. It is where they say:
The Crown’s approach: prove offence A, B and C (taken
together) occurred at some standard below beyond reasonable doubt, to
tendency to commit offences of the description of A, B and C, to
make it more likely the accused committed offences A, B
and therefore prove the accused committed each of the offences A, B
and C beyond reasonable doubt.
They say that is linear
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour, they
But address when it suits you.
The purpose of section 97(1)(b) of the
Evidence Act
question of whether the tendency:
evidence, have significant probative value.
One would need to be testing the evidence both at the level of its
ability to establish a tendency, by reference to that
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
‑ ‑ ‑ and then by reference to its ability
to establish guilt, if that tendency exists.
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
So, if you have a single
charged act, it would be hard, perhaps, to get over the significant probative
value of a tendency from one
MS ROBERTS:
That is what
MS ROBERTS:
your Honour?
That is what
in [35]. It says:
Tendency evidence has been described as evidence that on “another
occasion or occasions” different to the occasion the
subject of a charge,
the accused “acted in a particular way”.
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour, but the Court goes on to
qualify that to some
degree ‑ ‑ ‑
any assessment of whether evidence relating to “another occasion or
occasions” to a particular charged act –
which includes the evidence of that charged act.
In other words, you need others to create the
MS ROBERTS:
At the stage of admissibility, yes,
your Honour. The way to, or the suggestion that the reasoning is
linear – perhaps if I
could come to
your Honour Justice Steward’s
question ‑ ‑ ‑
the answer in the fact that the tendency notice did express the conduct with a
degree of specification, but not so detailed as
to actually replicate what the
accused was alleged to have done on the three
MS ROBERTS:
That is only part of our answer
to – or certainly that is part of our proposition as to why the Court
of Criminal Appeal’s
reasoning was in error.
But is that the reason why it is not linear? Because there is a necessary
difference, a sufficient difference, in specificity between
the tendency notice
and what was actually alleged, that a jury can be satisfied about the tendency
on the balance of probabilities
and then go on and use that tendency to
determine guilt beyond reasonable doubt.
MS ROBERTS:
part, your Honour, yes. So, it is that the expression of the tendency in
this matter does not directly or entirely coincide
with the elements of the
offence that need to be determined for the purpose of the charged act. What it
does is describe conduct
in particular circumstances. Of course,
section 97 of the
Evidence Act
uses that expression –
that is, whether has acted “in a particular way” on an occasion or
Whereas it is clear that – I mean, the legislature
has made clear, by the enactment of 97A that, in cases of child sexual
the question of the particular sexual behaviour – that is,
the very particulars of the elements – do not have to be similar
the same in order to be relevant for the purposes – or be capable of
giving rise to a tendency or having a high probative
value. That rests in
sexual conduct with the child of itself.
But the particulars about the
way in which – the circumstances in which – the accused
conducted himself are not, evidently
enough, part of the elements of the
offence. So, in being satisfied that there is a tendency to behave in this way,
it does not
answer the question, of itself, of whether the accused has committed
the offences, partly because, of course, the burden and standard
of proof issue,
but also because unlike in
, there is not entire coincidence of
particulars. I mean,
was a case about a course of conduct, so the
particulars were particulars of the charge; they were not a description of
circumstances
that were not necessary elements of the offending. So, it is
quite different, we say, to that.
In answer to
your Honour Justice Steward’s question about linear
reasoning, if I could – this argument was raised in
commences in the joint book of authorities at 407, but the paragraphs are
involved two counts and one complainant. There is an
extract from the directions there at paragraph 42, which are very similar
the directions given in the present trial, in that they ask the jury
consider the evidence relating to this alleged conduct of the accused and
decide whether he did in fact conduct himself in the way
And the jury is told there that:
although you are looking at the two episodes of conduct that are the subject
of the charges, you are not . . .
considering –
this direction:
whether those episodes of misconduct have been proven beyond reasonable
and it continues in very similar terms to the
direction in the present case, the complaint made in that decision –
the submission
put on behalf of the applicant there concerned this assumption of
the linear process of reasoning at paragraph 43, and the
There were three episodes of conduct, were there not, though?
In the present case, yes, your Honour.
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, there was an
uncharged act as well, yes.
Yes. So, there were not
just the two counts, there was the uncharged act as well?
No, no, sorry, I did not – I apologise for the lack of
precision there. There were two counts and a third occasion, which
And they were required to consider the
three occasions collectively to determine whether or not there was a
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour, but his Honour
Justice Basten, at paragraph 43 of the judgment, held that the
reasoning process is not a linear
The proper approach is to have regard to all the evidence of relied on in
proof of the tendency as evidence of the tendency alleged.
given this process, and then:
the tendency may be relied on in proof of the charge.
This is the
portion of the judgment where his Honour says:
it is preferable not to direct a jury to make findings as to the conduct
relied on in proof of a charge. Rather the jury should be
directed with respect
to finding the alleged tendency.
That passage and reasoning is expressly adopted as correct by this Court
at [26]. Also, your Honours in that judgment
at [36], when considering the argument in
with respect to
giving a different direction with respect to charged conduct or asking the jury
not to consider conduct with respect
to a particular count when determining that
count as part of the tendency evidence, that complexity, which I have just
poorly, but your Honours in
at [34] rejected
the idea of directions of this kind and confirmed at [36] that:
The means to address that danger –
or the concern, or the
risk – danger, as is expressed there, that the jury will conflate or
misunderstand the standard of proof
has already been noted. Then, at
paragraph [37], that is where what has come to be known as the
direction is set out.
GAGELER CJ:
It is interesting. Sometimes
the complaint is, it is said, that the reasoning is circular, sometimes the
complaint is that it is
linear. But in each case, do you say that there is
anything wrong with the jury being directed to look to the charged acts to
on the balance of probabilities whether they show a tendency, and then
from that tendency, to determine guilt of each of the charged
acts? Is there
anything wrong in principle with that?
MS ROBERTS:
This is what
I was coming to, and I am sorry, I think I did not complete my answer to
your Honour the Chief Justice earlier about
whether the problem with
particularisation on the tendency notice is that it causes the jury to look at
the conduct, because as a
matter of principle, it really must be accepted that
the jury has to look at the conduct, because the jury needs to determine whether
they are satisfied that the accused has a tendency to conduct
himself – or behave – in a particular way. And if the
evidence that is relied upon are the occasions when he is alleged to have
sexually touched this complainant when she is asleep, then
be – at some level, they must be considering whether those things
occurred as the question leading to whether they
are satisfied that the tendency
GAGELER CJ:
Justice Steward drew your attention to
paragraph 3 of Mr Game’s outline.
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
It is not apparent to me
whether you say: yes, that is what is involved and there is nothing wrong with
it – or whether you
are deflecting it in some way.
No, I am sorry, your Honour. I think perhaps I was
responding to the title or headline of “linear reasoning”. We
accept that the Crown made that submission to the jury, that the jury should
consider whether they were satisfied that the accused
had done those things and
therefore had a tendency to do them, or some of them.
That is the way
that the jury must consider it, because they are going to need to consider the
conduct to be satisfied of the tendency.
So, to that extent, as a matter of
logic, the particularity or the specificity with which the tendency is described
should not affect or cause the risk to be greater or
lesser, apart from if it goes to the extent that it does not operate properly,
, where it covers every particular of the charge and all
charges with respect to complainants.
The Director maintains that it is
appropriate, where a behavioural tendency is particular or does have some
specific features about
it, that that be advanced as the tendency for which the
Crown contends and the tendency that the Crown relies on, because probative
value for the purpose of admissibility, but also for the purpose of deployment
of the tendency as an aspect of the reasoning in the
Crown case, does depend or
can depend on specificity, because of the two stages: does the accused have the
tendency to behave in
the particular way, and then to what extent does that
tendency make more likely that he conducted himself in that way on the charged
BEECH-JONES J:
Ms Roberts, sorry, do I understand
your position to be that
is not authority that it is an error
per se for a jury to be invited to look at the individual acts and that,
consistent with Justice
, the question – the
potential danger of doing so is to confuse about the standard of proof, because
tendency only has to be
established on the balance of probabilities –
or to a lesser standard – whereas the guilt has to be beyond
So, that is why it is a good idea not to invite the
making of findings about individual acts in the course of determining whether
the tendency exists, but it is not a miscarriage per se, you just have to
look overall at whether the jury were invited or directed
in terms that confused
the burden of proof.
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour,
thank you. We do not – we accept that this summing‑up was not
phrased in terms of paragraph [37]
, of course, but that
does not mean that the jury was misdirected, because the inferential reasoning
process involved requires, of
course, the jury to consider whether the accused
has acted in a way which gives rise to their satisfaction that he has a tendency
to act in that particular way.
If the only conduct relied on for that
purpose is the conduct the subject of the charges then, necessarily, the jury is
considering
that conduct at two stages for different purposes, and the
directions need to – we say in this case, the directions
delineate adequately and appropriately. It might be that I
could just go to that right now. That is in the core appeal book at
So, following the directions to look at the occasions “collectively to
decide”, the jury is told:
you then need to consider whether it enables the inference to be drawn that
the accused has the tendency asserted by the Crown. That
is, to have a sexual
interest in the complainant and to act on that sexual interest in the manner
alleged by the Crown.
And her Honour then reminds the jury about
directions I gave you earlier about drawing
inferences –
and the care that should be taken when drawing
inferences. And that is a reference back to her Honour’s earlier
direction, which is
where is the inference paragraph you are referring to
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, I am just – I am sorry,
your Honour – page 31 of the core appeal book,
your Honour. They are then told that:
If you are not satisfied that any of the conduct the Crown relies upon
occurred, then there is no basis upon which the tendency could
That is evident, and I know that there is a complaint about
that, because it does not go on to say, in effect, that if they are not
satisfied any of the conduct occurred then, in this particular case, they are
not going to be satisfied of any of the counts.
But her Honour
does, in other parts of the summing‑up, draw the jury’s attention
quite clearly and conventionally to
the need to be satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt of each of the charges and of each of the counts on the indictment
considered individually.
She then goes on to differentiate, however, and say
that you can use the tendency, if you find it:
in considering whether it is more likely he committed the specific
offences . . . However –
her Honour warns the jury:
it is essential you consider in relation to each charge whether the accused
acted in that particular way and had that particular state
of mind on that
specific occasion. Finding the accused did have the
tendency . . . is not enough . . . It is simply
part of the
process of reasoning –
and it goes on. I will not read that, but her Honour gives that
direction again in slightly different words in the second body paragraph
appeal book 69. Then, in the final paragraph, her Honour
I will now summarise the case for the Crown and the case for the accused on
this issue of tendency.
and then merely says:
The Crown argues that the conduct of the accused on each of the three alleged
occasions establishes the tendency asserted. The defence
argues that you would
not be satisfied that any of the conduct alleged on the three occasions has
occurred so that the tendency would
not be established.
her Honour does not at that point – and then moves on to
complaint directions, and then comes, at the top of page 71, to
evidence in respect of the counts. The further mention of the tendency evidence
is at core appeal book 75, when setting out
the evidence relied upon by the
Crown to establish each of the counts.
In that sense, her Honour
does not dwell on the question of the details of the tendency or the details of
the conduct at that stage
of the summing‑up, when she is addressing the
jury – directing the jury – with respect to the tendency
I think, perhaps, I did not complete my answer to a question about
the use or the purpose of tendency evidence when the evidence
is otherwise
cross‑admissible as between counts on the indictment.
pointed out by the respondent, in a joint trial of this nature it is admissible
in any event as, simply, a form of circumstantial
evidence. We accept that but
we do not accept the submission about it, which is that the additional
contribution of the evidence
as tendency evidence is limited in those
circumstances. If I can just illustrate that by reference to the evidence in
the present
Part of the complainant’s description, as
your Honours have heard, of the first incident included her saying that she
at the time if the respondent’s conduct may not have been on
purpose or may have just been affectionate. And then when she
came to describe
the second incident, she conducted herself a little bit differently and said
that at that time I kind of realised
what had occurred. That evidence may be
understood to be admissible between counts on the basis that the
cross‑referencing
between occasions is necessary to fully understand the
circumstances and the complainant’s responses on each
But if it is to be relied upon for any more, if it is to be
relied upon for the purpose of the accused’s conduct on each occasion,
for example – it did not arise in this case, but for example, if
there was a suggestion that his conduct on the first occasion
was accidental or
misinterpreted and if his conduct on the second occasion was to be relied upon
to answer that – it did not
arise in this case – that is
reasoning concerning his conduct and it is reasoning concerning – it
is tendency reasoning.
So, a tendency use of the evidence has significance that
extends beyond an explanation of the complainant’s conduct or extends
beyond a context use. That is in
at paragraphs 50
If it is accepted that the accused has a tendency to
sexually touch the complainant in these circumstances – when she is
with him watching a movie – it is capable of rendering more
probable the occurrence of an individual charged act or rendering
more probable
the fact that he did it on another occasion. That is the use of the evidence
which is significantly different from
and more probative than the use of the
evidence in the more limited way. That is the mode of reasoning or the purpose
of the evidence
that is available and also regulated by section 97 of the
Evidence Act
and as a matter of principle.
So, to return,
perhaps, to our primary asserted errors in the judgment, we make the following
points. If I could take your Honours
to the judgment of the Court of
Criminal Appeal at core appeal book 186, starting at paragraph 87, the
Court of Criminal Appeal found
that the direction:
was at odds with
and then, at 88, that
that is not necessarily the end of the matter. The question is whether there
was a misdirection overall in
that the jury would:
be deflected from their task of determining whether the charges were each
proved beyond reasonable doubt.
GAGELER CJ:
all of that is correct?
MS ROBERTS:
your Honour. Their Honours then, at paragraph 89, say
a fundamental issue lies in the framing of the tendency notice.
I just emphasise that language because the court introduces that second
issue as “fundamental”, and we say it was fundamental
their Honours’ reasoning in the Court of Criminal Appeal towards the
outcome of miscarriage. We say that in response to
the respondent’s
contention that aspects of the reasoning were of no significance to
their Honours’ conclusion of misdirection.
It is of course
the case, as is set out at 90, that the way the tendency was formulated, it
did replicate detail in terms of how
the offences were allegedly committed, and
it is correct that it did rely only on evidence of charged acts and not
uncharged acts.
But then what their Honours next say at paragraph 91
A direction in this case superficially could comply with
. . . but the reality is that the jury would have no
alternative but to go to the evidence of the acts charged, and no other
to determine if the tendency to do those same acts was
established.
As a matter of principle, the second part of that paragraph or that
passage – we agree that the jury must look at the evidence
acts charged in order to determine if they are satisfied that the accused had a
tendency. In our submission, or our understanding,
the purpose of the guidance
and direction in
at [37] is not to say that the jury cannot
look at that evidence, but it is to ameliorate or address the potential risk of
misunderstanding
or misapplying the burden and standard of proof.
the Court of Criminal Appeal, with respect, erred if their reason and conclusion
here that emerges from 91 is that there is a
fundamental problem if the
jury must look at evidence of charged acts to determine if a tendency exists,
because what then follows
from that is that they have, in effect, held that the
Crown cannot rely on evidence of solely charged acts.
You do not dispute 91 in the terms it is expressed, but
you just say you cannot draw from 91 a conclusion that it is per se
in order to rely upon the evidence of the acts charged to establish an
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour. We do
submit, but it is not determinative, that the use of the word
“superficially” there suggests
something about the
direction, which we do not accept, which is that it cannot achieve what this
Court has said that it can, but that is a matter of interpretation
So, if the Court of Criminal Appeal is saying that no
direction can ameliorate the risk that arises when a tendency is based on
acts, then we say, respectfully, that that is wrong and inconsistent
with the authority of this Court and has the effect of precluding
the Crown from
relying on tendency evidence based solely on charged acts.
Ms Roberts, can I just ask two questions; you can come to it when you
want to. If you accept that you can have a tendency evidence
in respect of an
indictments with three counts, and one says I am entitled to rely upon or frame
a tendency in a way which would
pick up those three acts as a
tendency – two questions, the first is this: do all those acts have
to be of a similar kind,
or is it the framing of the tendency notice itself
which dictates it? The reason why I ask is because here, the tendency notice
was expressed as sexual – I forget the precise words, now, but it was
framed in a way which was sexual interest by an act and/or
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
That is the bit that concerns me. So, if one accepts you can have a
tendency which picks up and is entitled to look at the three
similar nature, one can understand that. How does it work, in the context of
MS ROBERTS:
The framing of the tendency in this
case, involving the and/or, it might be thought to be intending to deal with the
fact that the
charges were framed in the alternative, so that the conduct,
legally speaking, either met the definition of a penetrative sexual
offence or,
as alternative, sexual touching offence, plus there is count 7, which is a
sexual touching ‑ ‑ ‑
So, is that two tendencies?
MS ROBERTS:
So, what I am trying to work out about specificity and
generality ‑ ‑ ‑
MS ROBERTS:
We would say no, your Honour, because the notice could have said: act
on that sexual interest by sexually touching the complainant
while she is asleep
watching a movie. It could have said: act on that sexual interest while the
complainant was asleep watching
a movie. In
, the tendency was
pleaded in quite a specific way, but not one that referred to elements of the
offence. The notice is not in your
Honour’s judgment, but it is
summarised at paragraph 4. It involved, of course, two complainants, but
the particular way of
acting was described as:
“position ‑ ‑ ‑
to engage in sexual activity –
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
So, my question is, is that the preferable –
“preferable” is the wrong way, because every case is different, but
is that the problem with the tendency notice in this
MS ROBERTS:
It is not the problem that has
been – I do not understand that to have been suggested that that is
the problem.
MS ROBERTS:
mean, that could be an admissibility problem but, of course, it was not. There
is no admissibility problem raised. It certainly
could have been phrased in the
way that your Honour suggests – for example, engage in sexual
activity with the complainant
in circumstances where she is asleep and watching
a movie. That formulation, which perhaps might be preferable, but it does not
change the issue as between the
parties ‑ ‑ ‑
does not change your proposition that one can have a number of counts on an
indictment; the tendency notice can, by reference
to an identified tendency,
require a jury to look at that conduct collectively to determine whether there
is a tendency on the balance
of probabilities and then turn to each of the
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, or perhaps to an indeterminate
standard. But, yes, your Honour, not to beyond reasonable
BEECH‑JONES J:
there had been a count on the indictment that did not involve sexual
touching – some other sexual conduct, then there may
be a problem, if
there had been a direction purporting to allow the jury to use that tendency as
pleaded, if it was identified on
count ‑ ‑ ‑
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
‑ ‑ ‑ and then the only way the Crown might
have had to avoid that was to recast that part of the tendency at
a more general
level, but that may rob it of its particular probative force. But that did not
happen and that was not an issue.
MS ROBERTS:
If I understand
that, count 7 is potentially the issue, but because that did not involve
the sexual intercourse offence, or the
sexual act offence, but the occasion did.
So, for that
reason ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
It was not an issue?
MS ROBERTS:
‑ ‑ ‑ this just did not arise as a
complaint either about clarity or specificity. As I understand it, even if
notice had said: engage in sexual activity while the complainant was asleep
watching a movie, the complaint would be
BEECH‑JONES J:
MS ROBERTS:
‑ ‑ ‑ because the jury would need, still,
to go to the conduct, whether or not that conduct was described at
that level of
specificity. In terms of probative force, it is the – in a case like
this, it is the circumstances, it is the
sleeping and the movie that are the
circumstances that give rise to the probative force of the tendency, more so
than whether or
not the individual sexual act meets the definition of a
penetrative sexual act or sexual touching.
When one comes to
admissibility, 97A makes clear – that is reproduced in,
your Honours, joint book page 65 – that is
an amendment,
and this concerns admissibility and not the later reasoning process, but it sets
out at subsection (5), in a child
sexual offence proceeding there is a
presumption that the tendency evidence will have significant probative value,
and then there
is a list of matters which:
are not to be taken into account . . . unless . . . there
are exceptional circumstances –
and one of those is subsection (a) and also – (a) would
not apply in the charged act context, but it is that if the sexual acts
themselves the same, that is not considered a basis upon which tendency
evidence – that is, a tendency to engage in
any sexual activity with
a child does not have significant probative value – in the usual
course, in the ordinary course.
Returning to the Court of Criminal
Appeal judgment, with respect to
, we submit that, with respect,
the Court of Criminal Appeal misapprehended a critical aspect of that decision,
and that was that
the tendency notice in
required that, in order
to find the tendency established, the jury must consider every particular.
Those are particulars in the
legal sense of the term, because they were course
of conduct offences. So, must consider every particular of the offences against
both complainants. So, it was pleaded as a tendency, in effect, to keep both of
the named complainants as slaves by way of doing
the particularised
at 61, which is extracted in the judgment
below in this case, what was striking about that, the conduct set out in the
tendency notice,
was it comprised every particular of the conduct comprising the
four offences in relation to both complainants. So, it is not just
coincidence of overall description of how the offending took place.
submit, that the analogous flaw in the present case would have been to assert
that the respondent had a tendency to conduct himself
on the particular ways
alleged both in terms of the legal elements on each but on each and all of the
three occasions and all of
the charges on the indictment. So, we just say the
flaw – the error – is not the same, and the reliance by
the New South
Wales Court of Criminal Appeal on the reasoning and outcome in
is, with respect, misplaced and also was critical to the way in
which their Honours reasoned. That is confirmed in the Court of
Appeal judgment at paragraph 105, at core appeal
Your Honours, as set out in our outline, it is our
submission that the error of reasoning in this particular decision gives rise
the proposition that the Crown is unable to or ought not be permitted to rely on
tendency evidence arising only from charged acts
because there is no direction,
in their Honours’ view, that could ameliorate it. And we say, with
respect, that is not correct
because at a level of principle, the principle is
applicable to the way in which the admissibility of tendency evidence operates
and the way in which the reasoning operates. It must be or should be the same,
regardless of the source of the evidence.
That does not mean that the
directions to the jury need to be the same or that the considerations do not
vary with the individual
factual and evidentiary circumstances of the case, but
to make separate rules for one type of evidence is inconsistent with, in our
respectful submission, the
reasoning of this Court in
– although not considering this exact question, it is
inconsistent with the reasoning concerning the nature of the inferential
reasoning process involved in tendency evidence.
We secondly say that
the erroneous reasoning by the Court of Criminal Appeal was material to their
conclusion that there was a misdirection
and on the other hand, it is our
submission that the jury had been adequately, appropriately and properly
directed as to the onus
and standard of proof, including in the portions of the
summing‑up to which I have already taken your Honours, but also the
other references in the summing‑up which are contained in our written
submissions. And so, having regard to the whole of the
summing‑up, the
jury was not deflected from its fundamental task.
I covered my outline,
probably not in order, but I think in answer to your Honours’
questions, perhaps I have covered the points,
so unless there are any further
questions ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
There is reference in the Court of Criminal Appeal’s judgment to
section 161A(3).
MS ROBERTS:
your Honour.
GAGELER CJ:
Do we need to be concerned with
that, in your submission?
MS ROBERTS:
No, other than an
awareness of it in the sense that it confirms that a jury is not to be directed,
that evidence needs to be proved
beyond reasonable doubt when it is adduced as
tendency evidence. But that is a proposition dealt with in
your Honours’ decision
, and that aspect of the Court
of Criminal Appeal judgment is not further raised.
GAGELER CJ:
MS ROBERTS:
your Honours.
GAGELER CJ:
If the Court pleases. Broadly speaking, I will follow our outline, though
when I come to 3 I will pause and take your Honours through
submit are deeper problems with the kind of directions given in this case and
why those problems so manifest and take the
jury off their correct path in terms
of how they deal with the tendency evidence. Otherwise, I will follow the
I am going to begin, first of all, a comment about the nature
of this trial. So, this kind of a trial, this is really the most
straightforward,
from an evidentiary point of view, of sexual assault trials.
You have a single complainant, a limited number of allegations, over
period of time, complaint evidence in respect of the significant incidents, and
then there is a separate body of evidence,
a late complaint and a separate
incident about which there are particular frailties.
And, as the Crown
concedes, in a case like this, the evidence is cross-admissible regardless.
There is no need for the prosecutor
to get to tendency. So, it is not a
problem, for example, of two complainants, of why are they being heard together.
It is not a
problem of why the charged acts are being admitted.
all there for them, and that needs to be recognised because when that is
recognised, it enables one to appreciate the modest
contribution that tendency
makes to that, and directions need to accord that modest contribution. And if
directions were given in
accordance with
, then the problems in this
case would not have occurred, and it would be given the modest weight to which
it was accorded, and the
Crown would not be cut out of any of their
submissions.
If I just start – I am just going to give your
Honours an example, just to see how plainly it is that the Crown can get
everything,
in terms of the incidents, the coincidence, the
emerging – and this is important – the emerging evidence
of sexual interest.
So, it is one thing to say sexual emerges from the case; it
is another thing to say sexual interest carries the case forwards,
independently.
But, of course, the Crown goes far further than that in
this case. They go much further than saying sexual interest carries the
forwards. They are going right to the charges and to the specificity of the
charges, and all of them, and everything about
them. So, if you just look, for
example, in the
opening ‑ ‑ ‑
But you do not say ‑ ‑ ‑
You can ask me a question.
Sorry – you do not say that is per se bad, though?
No, I am not saying it is per se – no, I do not say they
cannot go to that. It is how you deal with it. And I am also going
to your Honours what we would draw as a distinction between linear and
non‑linear reasoning. I will give your Honours
some examples of how
non‑linear reasoning could apply in a case like this. But you could not
do it with the tendency notice
framed in these terms, you would have to reframe
the notice. But I am not saying tendency cannot run in a case like this, and I
can put some instances to you as to how that would work.
I will pause at
a certain point and take your Honours through some steps that I say
demonstrate the deeper problems with the reasoning
that is involved in the case
that has been put, but the Crown is telling you they have a problem. I am
saying they actually do not
have a problem. They can get at everything they
need, and they only conceded today that the evidence was intra‑admissible.
But everybody – this is the sort of trial that is so – as
I said, this is the sort of trial in which there are dozens
myself, have done many of these trials – they are not complicated,
from an evidentiary point of view.
Yet here we have three or four pages
of the most complicated and confusing directions about tendency, and the
question is: what
would the jury take from those directions in the context of
this case? And that is an important factor in understanding whether
there has been a miscarriage of justice. So, if you look at the Crown’s
opening – and I am only going to glance
at it – but if you
look at the Crown’s opening at 5 to 7 in our supplementary
materials, you can see that he is ranging
freely through the complaint
Counts 3 to 7 are dealt with – and we will
come to this a little bit later, when we come to the
summing‑up – they
are dealt with as a unity, they are dealt
with as a singular thing. But then when you go to the Crown’s closing
37 to 39 in this book, you see he gives seven reasons why
you should accept the complainant’s evidence. You see at 37,
– consistency – at the bottom of the
Where are you reading
Page 37 of the supplementary
How is this relevant to
relevant, your Honour, because the relevance of this is to show you that
the contribution of tendency to this case is very
modest, and that needs to be
appreciated in terms of directions that are given. My point is there is
actually not a problem, because
the Crown can get at everything they need in
terms of the relationship between the incidents, and that is important in
working out
what sort of directions should be given about tendency.
will do this as quickly as I can: the first is there; the second is “the
detail”; the third on the next page is not
embellishing; the fourth, on
the bottom of the page, is “demeanour”; the fifth is “the
surrounding circumstances”,
on the top of 39; the sixth is the
circumstances of complaint; and the seventh is complaint again. It is just a
glance at it, but
you can see from that the thing is treated as a unity. And if
you go to her Honour’s summing‑up, we will just give
Honours one example from the summing‑up. If you look at the
summing‑up in the appeal book at page 76, from:
I’ll now come to counts 3 and 4 . . . 3, 4, 5,
right through those three to page 81, they are dealt
with this as a single unity. It is not as though they are broken up. It is
similar count. So, when one is talking about – in one of examples,
for example, of nonlinear tendency reasoning –
it might to be to use
counts, incidents, 2 and 3 as tendency in respect of
incident 1. That would be nonlinear reasoning, and that
is the stronger
counts being used as tendency in relation to the frailer one. That it is not
how it was left, but that is a use.
That is a tendency use that could be done
and it would not be objectionable to do so.
My first point, then, in
paragraph 1, is they have got the whole lot – they have all they
need – so, tendency might add
something to this but the tendency is
really in the idea that he did this same thing on three occasions. And it is
still all coming
from the complainant. That is to say, there is no
corroboration, there is no external account. So, sometimes – it is
unusual, for example, if there is one count that has got corroboration, for
that one to be the one that is focused on for tendency
purposes, because you can
carry that through.
We do not have that feature in this case except for
the difference in relative strength between incidents 2 and 3 and what
called the West Gosford incident. And I would not dispute that
you could give a tendency direction that focused on those and enabled
carry that through to the West Gosford incident, but that is not how the
jury were directed in this case.
BEECH‑JONES J:
But how would that direction be consistent with
? That would be the
sort of direction
was saying maybe do not do. That is
why – they cut both ways.
Your Honour – maybe not but it is logical, it can work. And it
is not really problematic, and it is not logically problematic,
it does not fall
apart, and I am going to say that these kinds of directions are logically
problematic and they do fall apart, for
some reasons that I am going to come to
shortly. This is not that linear reasoning, this is different
linear – sorry, my answer
to your question I am just being
given – which will happen again, I expect – by
Ms Edwards.
BEECH‑JONES J:
always accept what Ms Edwards tells
That is different –
she is my Praetorian Guard, your Honour. So, that is different linear
reasoning, and it is fine –
I was going to come to this
later – but another form of non‑linear reasoning that the
Crown ‑ ‑ ‑
I must say, this whole “linear”,
“non‑linear” – I just find those labels do not
really help
me. I know they are used in some of the cases. I mean,
“linear” sounds good – “linear reasoning”,
one thing follows from another. I do not – whenever you are using
“linear”, “non‑linear” in
this context, I really
do not know what we are talking about or why it is a
Why I am talking about it is
it is dealt with in paragraph [26], it is
adopted ‑ ‑ ‑
No, I know it is referred to in cases, but what does it
really mean in a particular context?
I will explain
what the problem is when I come to it shortly, your Honour.
We draw that from – the Crown
is – the passage drawn from
says it is not linear reasoning
because you do it another way, i.e. do not do it in accordance with that,
because if you find A to
prove the tendency to prove A, you have engaged
in – whether you call it linear or circular, there is a problem with
the reasoning.
Well, “linear” is opposite
of “circular”. This is what I do not get about any of
Well, whatever you call it, your Honour,
Do you think
the cases are saying the problem with being linear is it is really circular,
whereas I would have thought linear is not
That is what this – I am using it in the sense in which it is
, and I am using it to demonstrate that the form of reasoning
that was adopted in this case is not the form of reasoning contemplated
Justice Basten in
and approved by this Court
The problem
with that reasoning was that it was repetitive and confusing.
You do not have the problem of
repetition where you are only trying to apply a tendency reasoning in relation
to the frailer counts,
which are the West Gosford counts.
Yes. That is in the scenario that I have just put about linear –
yes, that is correct.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Game, perhaps you
could just describe the logical processes involved without the
I will explain the
logical ‑ ‑ ‑
just clarify – we are talking about the directions, not what a
coming to the directions.
It is only the directions.
We do not really know how a jury ever reasons. So, we are just looking at what
the directions are instructing.
I am coming to the
directions, your Honour, shortly. But what I am trying to set up is what
is the problem – why there is a
deeper problem. Now, if you look at
paragraph 3 of our
submissions ‑ ‑ ‑
this the outline of oral argument?
Our outline of
argument – we have set out what we describe as that form of
reasoning. But if you look at the Crown’s
opening – it is in
our supplementary material – you will see that at
line 15 – and this is picked up in the summing‑up,
how it is ‑ ‑ ‑
Page 12 of the supplementary
Thank you, Mr Game.
The Crown says that you would be satisfied the accused had this tendency to
act in that way because of his conduct, the subject of
the seven counts on the
indictment, and that this tendency makes it more likely that he committed each
of the offences
BEECH-JONES J:
am sorry, Mr Game, I missed that. Where were you are reading
Line 15 of our supplementary material, from
addresses of counsel.
BEECH-JONES J:
Sorry, what page is that? I know I am
being ‑ ‑ ‑
at 12 of the supplementary material, at line 15.
I have it, yes.
So it starts:
The Crown says that you would be satisfied –
And whatever
you call it, we say that reasoning is impermissible.
Sorry, why is it impermissible?
Because ‑ ‑ ‑
aside [37] in
, which is not fatal – I accept that it
does not comply with
[37], but that is not in dispute here. That
is said to be not fatal. You have to look
I will come
to that in one moment, your Honour. So, then he says the same thing again
at 37 to 39 – sorry, at 43, I beg your
But 43 is ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES
Is that a line or a page?
I am not sure why we keep going to the
Crown, given that that is not the issue. Why are we not looking at the
direction itself?
Well, I am coming to the direction in
a moment, your Honour. I am coming to the direction quite shortly, but I
am doing this as quickly
as I possibly can.
But I am setting it up to show you what the problem
is. So, you will see at line 15 the Crown introduces what is described as
relationship evidence, and the judge in the directions takes that
to decide if you are satisfied . . . you do not consider each
of the acts in isolation, you should consider all of the evidence and
what conduct you are satisfied occurred. If you decide
that . . . some of the conduct
occurred . . . had that tendency –
there you have charges – tendency to charges, and it picks up the
idea of some of it, but I wanted to just focus on the
fact that he introduced
the idea of the relationship evidence.
Now, another way that you could
frame a tendency not framed in this case but would not involve the problems of
this summing‑up,
and would comply with
would be to
identify antecedent behaviour. That is to say, grooming leading to sexual
conduct, and that that does not involve proof
of the offences in that kind of
confronting way. It simply says there is a tendency to groom and it leads to
sexual conduct.
There you have what is described in this case as a
form of nonlinear reasoning, because you are not latching on in that precise way
to proof of the offences. It does not deprive the Crown of the particularity,
but it describes the tendency in a way that it is
understood what it is you are
actually trying to bring forward in the case – what you are trying to
bring additional to the
case. That is an idea that would work, so we are not
saying tendency cannot work in this situation. We are saying it cannot work
the way that it is actually done. Now, if I could just pause
GAGELER CJ:
you would be relying on different evidence of different
That is correct, but very much antecedent
conduct leading to – of course, the tendency is a sexual interest and
to act on it. So, you are interested in antecedent conduct, in
tendency. Now, if – I am going
ask, as a matter of principle, is your submission to suggest that where you have
the ability to, as you describe it,
bring forward all of the material by the
Crown – incidents, coincidence, et cetera – that
tendency evidence has to be
something different and
additional?
Well, no, I am not saying it has to be
something different and additional. I am saying that if you have tendency
evidence, you
need to understand the limited role that it plays, particularly
when it is coming from the same witness. It has a very – in
circumstances of this case, it has a quite limited – it brings to the
case a quite limited additional aspect, and the additional
aspect is she said it
happened three times in similar circumstances.
Is that another way of saying that a case like this, where a jury is being asked
to decide whether the acts occurred beyond reasonable
doubt, it does not add
much if they first decided that they existed as a matter of
probability.
That is exactly right, your Honour,
Is that a question of significant
probative – I suppose there are two questions. One is: is that a
question of significant
probative value? But the second question is that the
significant probative value is addressed by taking the evidence at its highest.
So, presumably, there is another issue about how the jury is going to reason
when there is a prospect that not all of the evidence
is going to be
Yes, your Honour. Yes, I agree, I
accept that admissibility raises a different problem than directions, but I am
assuming the evidence
gets through section 97 and 101, but I am still
saying it still has got ‑ ‑ ‑
I guess what I am saying is that if the tendency reasoning can add
little or nothing ‑ ‑ ‑
‑ ‑ ‑ to the
reasoning process, is that something that goes to significant probative
It does, but it also goes to how –
where the evidence is coming from is quite important in terms of what directions
gets. That is the point. The source of the evidence needs to be
appreciated when you are directing on it, because it still depends
entirely upon
acceptance of the credibility of the complainant; you are not getting anything
from anywhere else.
The Crown is wrong to say that it is not about the
credibility of the complainant; it is all about the credibility of the
complainant,
ultimately. It is all about whether you believe her. That is why,
for example, looking at text messages, antecedent material is
the kind of thing
one looks to in building a tendency case. That is to say, external evidence
that has some character that carries
the case forwards. Those are the sorts of
fact situations that were dealt with in
So, I just want to
pause here and go through some steps as to why we say there is a problem with
the kind of reasoning that is adopted
in this case. In a case such as this,
where it is coming all from one witness and there are only two – or,
at most, three
incidents, but we say the West Gosford incident really could
not have played a part, so I am going to say two, but it would apply
to three as
GAGELER CJ:
Would this problem that you are about to point
out apply if there were 12 incidents?
would not be the same problem. It would be ameliorated. It would be a much
less of a problem. That is pointed out in
Justice Dhanji’s judgment
in that paragraph we set out in our submissions, from a case called
The problem is ameliorated, but there is still a logical issue; the logical
issue gets weaker, and the reason is this.
I am going to go through some
steps. The first is this. If you have an allegation that a person did X,
then tendency contributes
to that allegation by bringing to the evidence of a
present inclination to do X. Evidence of that inclination makes it more
that it is correct that when this person says – it is correct
when this person says: X happened. So, simplest example: child
steps out of
classroom, says teacher did X to me.
You are not making an
assumption that the teacher from that is likely to behave in that particular
way, you are trying to see from
other evidence if he is likely to behave in that
way. That is the power of tendency. That is where it is coming in, because we
know that that person – if we have tendency evidence from an external
source – has a present desire or a present inclination
That is at the very heart of tendency reasoning. That is the
first step. So, the next step is: where do we get the evidence that
had the tendency – or, that is to say, the inclination –
to do X? If we get it externally from X, then the
inference is potentially
safe and it can be quite strong.
GAGELER CJ:
So, who is X in
X is just an allegation. That a person
did X. We are just
saying ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
mean you do not get it from the complainant. You get it from someone
We are getting it from this – you
know what I am saying. We get it from somewhere else and it is safe. So, the
example of course is
, where the allegation of doing the
separate thing comes from another incident of doing a very like
To another person.
To another person, yes. But if we get it from combining the allegation
of X itself with an additional allegation Y, then the inference
BEECH-JONES J:
the same complainant?
From the same –
it can be from the same complainant, but I am just
saying ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Were you saying it does not have an external source? That is what I am
trying ‑ ‑ ‑
does not matter. If it does not have an external source, then to that extent,
the inference is weakened. It is undercut, to
the extent that the inference is
drawn from X.
GAGELER CJ:
X being the
The act, yes. So, to the extent that it is
drawn from X, the inference is undercut, because you are trying to work out
the person has got the inclination to do that thing.
Can I just translate this, Mr Game, into your (a), (b)
and (c) ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes, that is right
GAGELER CJ:
paragraph 3?
I am really talking about (a),
(b) and (c). I am
trying ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
are talking about (a), (b) and (c) and you are saying “X”, but
what you are really saying the problem is that (c)
is common both to the
establishment of the tendency and to the thing that the tendency inclines the
accused to do. Is that the logical
that is right. So, the problem does not exist if there is A, B, C, D, E,
F, G, H, I, J, K, and the problem gets more and
more acute if there is just A
and B; the tendency gets weaker.
GAGELER CJ:
Well, the problem
would still exist if you go up to K or Z, but it would be
That is right. It is diluted. That is
exactly right. The problem is diluted.
GAGELER CJ:
And it would
not exist if you used (a) and (b) to infer a tendency to do something
that amounts to (c). Is that right?
example of incidents 2 and 3 proving incident 1,
GAGELER CJ:
I get it, and so this is your fundamental
logical flaw
right, yes. This is what Justice Dhanji worked through in
paragraph 276 of
, that we extract. So, then if – the
problem does not exist if the source is external, or if there are large number
of allegations
– or it is diluted if there are a large number of
allegations, but if there are just two allegations, then the problem is
Really, your best example is if there is one
allegation ‑ ‑ ‑
We have one in this case.
No, no, but one allegation,
one charge, one tendency. The reason there is no way you can prove a tendency
from the single act
is because the problem is so acute that it is impossible to
prove the tendency independently of the act.
section 97 would not permit it anyway, because it is not other evidence,
but the thing is ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES
So, the premise of this logical conundrum you are seeking to establish
is that it has got through 97.
troubled about 97, but I
BEECH-JONES J:
your purpose is: yes, there is significant probative value of the asserted
tendency, let us deal with two or more, but
there is still a problem. Is that
where we are at?
There is a problem when you burn it
down to just a very few allegations coming from a single source, and I am saying
that one could
live directions of the kind given in
, but I am also
saying there is more than one way to frame this tendency that ameliorates or
avoids that problem. I have given you
two examples of how that could be
And the problem is the potential undermining of
the burden of proof.
Exactly, that is
precisely – it is the same problem, just looked at from a
different – so, when the Court in
is talking about the
standard of proof problem, that is the same problem. It is the identical
problem, just looked at from a slightly
different lens.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, you are positing a residual – a category of case where it has
got through 97, but because the evidence comes from the one
source, the
complainant, and because there are so few of the incidents that there is an
appreciable risk that the jury will get confused
over the standard of
The answer is yes, you have to take particular
care in this type of case.
But it is also where the
tendency is framed at a level of particularity
is my next step, your Honour.
So, the third step is this – sorry, I
beg your pardon – if the third step is to do a very specific thing
that coincides
with the allegation, then it becomes very important to work out
how that tendency was established. The reason for this is that such
tendency is highly probative, if not conclusive.
So that in the example
of: child walks out of room, says teacher did a very peculiarly described
thing, and we know the teacher
has got a tendency to do a very – we
are going to believe pretty quickly what the child has to say because it is so
that it is conclusive. So, if the very specific thing –
this is still in step 3 – is drawn from external sources, it
highly probative. That is
of course is the
classic example.
But the converse may apply if the thing is drawn from
the specificity of the allegations that you are trying to prove. So, there
real danger that comes into it, which is the fourth step, because if the very
high level of specificity of the inclination is
being drawn from the incident
itself, then the reasoning falls away.
I must say, this
is so in the abstract. I mean, much will depend upon the nature of
the – I am just not following these as
sort of self‑evident,
standalone, logical propositions expressed at a level of A, B, C
and X. I just ‑ ‑ ‑
What I am trying to explain or put is why there is a problem when
you have a very – and why it is logically – what
have to do is to avoid this, I will call it a sleight of hand; it is
a mental sleight of hand to think the thing is carrying your
forwards when it is
GAGELER CJ:
Or to introduce another metaphor, it is
bootstrapping, I suppose.
It is bootstrapping, yes.
So, this is not high philosophy, this is just working through what the steps are
involved in this process
of thought.
So, when you get
to this step about the specificity of the tendency, you say the conduct relied
upon to establish the tendency is
the acts charged. So, it is not from a
separate source.
complain about the specificity of the tendency notice giving rise to two issues,
as I understand it: the bootstrapping argument
and the confusion, or the
possibility of confusion, about the burden of proof.
Yes, your Honour.
You might be coming to
this. Is that solved in the context of these particular concerns by making the
tendency more general?
My answer – sorry. I
am being told there is a
third ‑ ‑ ‑
Praetorian Guards had a habit of murdering of their emperors.
I know; this is coming. Sorry, your Honour, the answer –
can I just ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
That makes you Caligula, which I will not dwell upon.
So, the answer is this, your Honours. To make it work, you need to
describe the thing in general terms, but that does not mean you
cannot refer to
what actually happened.
Well, here – can we
come to the facts of this case?
your Honour.
Here we have charges in the
alternative.
conduct is put in different ways in terms of characterisation for legal
So, when one
looks at the tendency as it is put, it is:
a particular state of mind, namely a sexual interest in [the
complainant] ‑ ‑ ‑
And then (b):
to act on that sexual interest –
by the two alternative
when she had fallen asleep beside him watching a movie.
Now, Ms Roberts says, properly the
things of most probative value to me are the circumstances in which it occurred.
Namely, falling
asleep beside him watching a movie. How is that solved to
address your two issues, if at all?
So, I am not sure
that I have an immediate answer to your question, your Honour, but you did
focus before on the words “and/or”,
and that was an earlier
question. The words “and/or” raise their own kind of problem, but
that. In a sense, that is not the critical – this is a question of
principle. You are going through these
Could you just go back ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes, I will.
Could you ask me the question
again, I am sorry?
That is all right. So, as I
understand it, your complaint is, listen, if it comes from an external source,
you do not have these
problems. It is ameliorated if you have multiple
problems, but when you have, for example, two counts, one person, the source for
the tendency is the complainant, you have this issue. You accept you could
still have a tendency, but it just does not add much.
But you have to do it in a way where the
specificity does not give rise to these two
issues ‑ ‑ ‑
understand your argument.
Yes, that is
My question is, well, in this case, looking
at this tendency notice, which is specific by reference to alternative counts,
it be solved by the form of a tendency notice, or you do not seek to
address that at all?
So, yes, it would be solved by the
terms of the tendency notice because what you would not be bringing to the
tendency that is the
additional thing in the case is the very high level of
probity that is attached to the tendency to do the very thing charged, and
the doing of the very thing charged creates an additional – it
creates a special danger.
So, does that mean you would
excise “by” down to “her” in the notice? You take out
the specificity of the
Yes, you would,
That is what I am trying to work
That is right. Yes, you would take it out.
Absolutely, yes. Sorry, the answer is yes.
answer to the question it is solved by a more general
tendency ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes, your Honour.
‑ ‑ ‑ in order to avoid the two
issues you identify.
Yes. So, if you have –
would work with a general – with a tendency notice
in general terms.
But could it not also be solved by
a very careful direction, as
Yes, it could be.
If that is the case, does that
mean that you are really not contesting ground 2(b) in the notice of
appeal? So, we are really only
dealing with the question of whether the
direction was erroneous or involved a miscarriage of justice?
Just one moment, your Honour. So, your Honour, with respect to
the Court of Criminal Appeal’s judgment, we do not accept the
appellant’s construction on the judgment. So, that – and we
also say that that is really just – that is not ratio,
that part of
the judgment, and I will take your Honour to the judgment shortly, and we
say the ratio relies elsewhere and we do defend
the judgment. So, we are not
really concerned about trying to save that particular paragraph of the judgment,
we say that is just
an observation, but I will come to what I say about the
judgment quite shortly.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Mr Game, just
so I understand the big picture complaint, leaving aside the identification of
so‑called problems and not
BEECH‑JONES J: ‑ ‑ ‑
is you just saying: look, what happened here on its combination of
circumstances was an unacceptable undermining of the burden of
That is all we say,
ultimately.
BEECH‑JONES J:
That is what your inquiry is
That is all we say,
ultimately.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Yes, okay. All
Yes, that is all we say, but I will
say – I am also trying to say the Crown is telling you there are huge
problems. There are
not really, there are just other ways of looking at this,
and they are readily available, and they have been used, and they are used;
are regularly used, and they are available to prosecutors.
Can I ask a separate question. In this matter, all of the evidence we are
looking at was admissible in any event?
was inter-admissible, yes.
So, we are not looking at
section 97 in any way it to get it into evidence.
No, exactly, your Honour, but
remember Ms Roberts said that even if you frame the tendency notice in
general terms, you are still requiring the jury to look
at the conduct on the
balance of probabilities first. Is not your real complaint in a case like this,
particular circumstances,
is there really should not be a tendency direction
given at all?
Well, your Honour, I am not
going that far because of where
Because the
evidence is in, anyway.
I am not going that far,
because we do not have to go that far.
Well, then it
is a tendency direction but also a warning about the particular issue you are
concerned with.
Yes, but admissibility and
directions are very, very closely related, as
kind of pointed out,
but my point is we are assuming it gets – I mean, there is an
antecedent problem here, because the tendency
notice we say is fundamentally
flawed for the reasons that I have given, but I am assuming – and I
am saying that is what feeds
in to the directions that are ultimately given
But I am not saying you cannot leave tendency in this
case. I am not saying it does not have any role. I am accepting it does have
some role, but the some role is quite limited, and the some role in a case like
this is she said it happened not once, but three
times ‑ ‑ ‑
complaint is that the
direction is not enough. You need something
more in a case like this.
My point is that you
need something that explains the modest contribution of the evidence, but if we
direction, we would not be here. We might not be here, given
the problem with the specificity of it, but can I come, your Honours,
what is actually said in these directions, and then I will come to the Court of
Criminal Appeal’s judgment.
I know you have been taken through
this before, but in our outline – I have been through what I say is
this kind of hidden
problem about very few incidents being carried through in
this way. Now, the Crown says, well, it does not coincide precisely with
particulars, but it does, because it picks up everything. So, right at the
beginning on page 67 of the appeal book:
Part of the Crown case is that the accused had a tendency to have
a . . . sexual –
it says “interest”:
by penetrating her vagina with his fingers and/or sexually touching
So, that picks up all of the allegations – nothing more and
nothing less – and the alternatives. It is quite specific
offence. So, when she had fallen asleep beside him watching a movie. It is
quite specific to an offence and watching the
As I said before,
if such a tendency was established, it would be conclusive, because, say you
said incident 3: I bring to it a
tendency to sexually assault her while
watching a movie – say she has made that allegation, well of course
there is nothing
else to decide. You are so close. That
BEECH-JONES J:
you reconcile with the verdict on counts 1 and 2?
Yes, your Honour, because counts 1 and 2 had their own
BEECH-JONES J:
is how the Court of Criminal Appeal dealt with them.
BEECH-JONES J:
But, if you were indulging in reasoning, you might have been well satisfied
of the tendency, if you were not looking at it serially,
based on counts 3
to 7, but still acquit it on counts 1 and 2.
Yes, but, your Honour, they may well have decided, on the basis on
these directions, they were not satisfied that conduct occurred
at all, and
therefore they did not carry it forwards. That is how the Court of
Criminal Appeal dealt with it.
BEECH-JONES J:
with 3 and 7. They were satisfied beyond reasonable
I am sorry, I meant 1
BEECH-JONES J:
But your point was, once you found
the tendency, the counts were all over and I am pointing out that does
not – that is not
reconcilable with verdicts on counts 1
Yes, it is, your Honour, because
counts 1 and 2 had some fundamental frailties. The case came forward just
before the trial, it
BEECH-JONES J:
understand the frailties, but it is an instance where there was the tendency but
it was not enough, that is my point. Is it not?
Contrary to just what you were
Yes, but, if they were told they were not
satisfied about some conduct they were to put it to one side. I am not saying,
in principle,
that could not occur, but the acquittals on count 1 and 2 do
not tell you anything about what actually happened in this case because
cases had such frailties to them, and that is how the Court of
Criminal Appeal dealt with it.
The frailties – not only
did the allegations come very late but it was said that the recitation was
entirely in terms of this
happening after the other incidents. So, after
incident 2, there was incident – it is described as the third
thing that happened,
but on the Crown case it was the first thing that happened,
so the narrative has a fundamental flaw in it.
the direction to put conduct to one side if they were not satisfied that it
Not exactly, but I am coming
But broadly in those
terms ‑ ‑ ‑
those terms.
that put in relation to tendency evidence or in relation to the assessment of
whether each of the charges
was proved.
It is not clear
but that comes on the next page, your Honour. So then, they are being
asked – why I am going through this is
to show that the danger in
is very real in a case like this if you direct in these terms, but
bearing in mind that this is a very straightforward case and suddenly
three pages of complex directions that lawyers and judges have a great deal of
difficulty understanding or even articulating
what they mean. So, the Crown
says – this is about line 10:
The Crown says you would be satisfied the accused had this tendency because
of his conduct in relation to the three occasions –
So, there it is. It is nothing more or less than the charges. Then the
Judge puts the text messages to one side. As I say, there
is a certain irony in
that because you can see how you might actually find a form of reasoning that
picked up antecedent conduct
that actually worked as a tendency, and it might be
in terms of – and to engage in sexual conduct.
Just to come
framed might be less probative, but it has still
got its uses, it is still quite
useful, and so sexual interest – acting on it – is kind of
a useful piece of tendency,
and the text messages would constitute an objective
piece of evidence that could actually be looked at to see. So, it has been put
to one side. Then, towards the bottom of the page, it says:
the three occasions when the accused sexually assaulted the complainant
Now, we are now – we are trying to prove that – the
prosecution is trying to prove this, and yet now this is an assumption
built into these directions, on:
the three occasions when . . . reveals –
I said, it is one thing to say sexual interest emerges from the evidence, it is
another thing to say that it is there as a compelling
piece of evidence that
takes the case forwards. This is assuming that it is sitting there as a
compelling piece of evidence that
takes the case forwards, and to act on that
sexual interest more likely that he committed the offences. Again, the emphasis
and over again upon proving the conduct, you see at the bottom:
decide whether he did –
the conduct. It is not leaving the jury with a choice about deciding
whether he committed the offences. It is: you have to decide
whether he did
the conduct. That is to say, committed the offences. Then we come to the next
page where it says to considering
So, we now have A, B
and C together to decide whether he did this at a standard beyond
reasonable doubt. We now have less than reasonable
doubt, from the three of
them together, a compelling desire to sexually penetrate when she is sitting
watching TV, and yet if there
are only two incidents left, 50 per cent
of the contribution of it is coming from one of the incidents, and that is the
is buried in these directions.
BEECH‑JONES J:
So, what part are you reading it from then?
page 68, your Honour. Then the Crown says that is defensible. I say
it is indefensible in the context of a case such as this.
Then the next
paragraph says:
If you decide that all or at least some of the conduct
What has happened to the “some of the conduct” that did not
occur? Because if you are not satisfied it occurred on the
probabilities, it is gone, but then some of it – so, now it could
just be – in the A, B, C example, it could
and it is not saying A can prove B and C or other occasions, it
is saying A can prove A.
So, what this direction
is – what has happened here, is that it has been lifted from a
direction about uncharged acts, or other
conduct. That is why it says,
“some of the conduct”. That is why it is in these terms. It has
been picked up from
a direction about uncharged acts and then it is thrown in to
pick up all of the charged acts, and that is – and so when you
down to the next bit further down the page, you can see it is still a
drop‑in from directions about uncharged acts because
If you are not satisfied that any of the conduct the Crown relies upon
occurred, then there is no basis upon which the
That must be about other conduct, because otherwise
you would not be thinking about the case anymore, it would all be over and done
with. And yet, there is an assumption that you go on considering the case. So,
it is relatively clear, we would say, that these
are directions that are
inappositely picked up from the Bench Book, somehow got in there in relation to
uncharged or other conduct.
Now this has been picked up to turn the
offences themselves into the subject matter of the direction with specific
directions to
make findings about the proof of the conduct, and the conduct
being at the very high level of specificity that I spoke of, and then
same thing. It goes through:
more likely he committed the specific offences –
is – whatever you like to call it, it leaves the problem of the
circularity. Then, on the following page – again,
this direction
direction in some other context, because
we have only got the charged acts. So,
what are we talking about? Because there is nothing left. If you have
considered all the
evidence – that includes the accused
evidence – there is nothing left to consider. And then we see
BEECH-JONES J:
it says is finding that the tendency – because the tendency has a
life separate to the things that establish it, that tendency
been – and if it has been established, it has been established on a
standard below beyond reasonable doubt. All it is
simply saying is well, if you
have got the tendency, it is not enough to prove the charge beyond reasonable
Yes, but, your Honour, in a case such as
this, where it is the very thing charged, there is nothing more or less than the
and the tendency is to commit the offence in its precise terms, it is
BEECH-JONES J:
Well, taken to its logical connection
that denies the use of tendency being established from charged acts, unless they
beyond reasonable doubt, which is where
No, it does not, your Honour, it just means
that you have got specific problem in a case where you have got a very small
allegations where you particularise the thing in the very terms
framed. It does not mean that the sky is going to fall in. One
just has to
think ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
I am not talking about the sky falling in, I am just talking about what has
already been decided, following
where this will drive it back is that if you have a two‑count offence,
tendency based on uncharged acts, you have got to
prove them beyond reasonable
doubt to get there.
I have already explained why there
are other ways in which you can put quite coherently, your Honour, and the
suggestion that this
argument is kind of retrograde, which is what
your Honour is putting to
BEECH-JONES J:
Well, I am testing
‑ ‑ ‑ is not made out when you consider the
actual terms of these directions. And the actual terms of these directions
carry through them explicit, flawed reasoning in the manner which I have
described and, in my submission, it cannot be refuted when
you have only got two
incidents. Say you only did have two incidents and so you did this this way,
still you would have to point
out to the jury that 50 per cent of the
tendency is coming from the thing you are trying to prove.
The problem
with it is this. It is not about whether something goes forwards or backwards.
The problem with this is this, it is
that you are using something that is a very
weak inference. It is a very weak inference because you have undermined it by
the thing itself, and you wanted to know if you could prove it. You
wanted to know if there was something that made it more likely.
thing to account. If you only have two things then you have thrown the logic of
it away. That is to say, it is not
persuasive. And if a jury is going to deal
with this thing, they would need to understand that there is such a
This buries the problem in a major way, and it buries the
problem because these are not directions that are made for this kind of
situation at all. These are directions for completely different situations:
where there is external evidence, where there are uncharged
acts, where there
are multiple complainants, where you have quite different considerations. If
you are going to give directions
in a case such as this and you are going to go
to this level, the jury would need to understand the problem involved in what
are being invited to do if you are going to do it this way. And there is
not a hint of that in these directions.
really by way of saying, look, even this tendency notice is not per se
bad – these directions might not themselves have
been per se
bad – but the trial judge needed to say something to the effect that
in a case of this nature, where the tendency
evidence is so closely related to
the counts that are charged, the jury had to be very careful not to use any
inference drawn from
the tendency evidence to divert them from the ultimate task
of establishing that each count had been established beyond reasonable
If you are going to do it this way, yes,
your Honour. I did not actually answer the question from
Justice Steward, who asked me a
similar question – the answer
is, yes, your Honour. So, yes, there needs to be something that explains
what is actually going
on this – what is actually going on in this
case? You do not get that from these directions.
That is the point in
that is made about giving very careful
directions.
That is right. So, then, it goes
on – I will just finish it:
any of the occasions that are subject of the charges.
And then we go down to the – we see the same thing:
it will include the tendency alleged . . . provided you are
satisfied it has been established –
So, again, the – and then, the following bit, there is
complete coincidence:
The Crown argues that the conduct of the accused on each of three alleged
occasions establishes the tendency asserted.
That is really saying: we prove the charges, we prove the tendency,
therefore, we prove the charges. Not only have we heard that
once, it has been
said over and over again, and the jury had been invited over and over again to
make findings about this. So, that
is what I wanted to say about the
directions.
I just want to say something briefly about the judgment, and
then I will be finished. Our position in relation to the judgment is
that 91 is just an observation. The critical part of the
judgment – and it deals with
as well, at 94, because
what is drawn from
is the same, that if you establish
there is no remaining purpose –
because the offences will have been established. But the ratio of the
case is in the last sentence of 94:
This was the practical effect in this case . . . given
the framing of the tendency notice, the direction to decide whether the conduct
occurred, the close similarity between those two alleged incidents and the
comparative frailty of counts 1 and 2.
So, they are bringing
together the various factors. It is not really the way the Crown has put it.
Then, when you go to 98, the
problem about framing the thing “in the
same terms”. Then, at 105, this is really the ratio about
miscarriage –
last few lines:
viewed in the context of the summing up as a whole, did not adequately direct
the jury and it was likely that the jury’s attention
would be deflected
from applying the required standard of proof in
respect ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES J:
Sorry, what paragraph are you
reading from, Mr Game?
Last bit of
BEECH‑JONES J:
Paragraph 105.
That is what we
wanted to say about the judgment. Those are our – the usurping will
be complete relatively soon, I assume.
Those are our submissions, if the Court
GAGELER CJ:
Thank you, Mr Game.
Ms Roberts.
MS ROBERTS:
Thank you. Your Honours,
I will be quite brief. I only seek to respond to the proposition that the
tendency evidence is not highly
probative or cannot be highly probative because
it comes from the complainant and the submission that tendency reasoning plays a
limited role in a trial of this nature beyond the other ways in which the
evidence might be cross-admissible.
With respect to the first of those
propositions, could I take your Honours to
paragraphs 50 to 51, which your Honours will find at pages 336 to
337 of the joint book of authorities. This Court,
GAGELER CJ:
Paragraph 51?
MS ROBERTS:
Paragraph 51 of the
judgment, your Honour:
The juridical basis of cross-admissibility of evidence of charged acts and
of the admissibility of evidence of uncharged acts in
such cases rests on the
“very high probative value” of that kind of evidence which results
from ordinary human experience
that, where a person is sexually attracted to
another and has acted on that sexual attraction and the opportunity presents
to do so again, he or she will seek to gratify his or her sexual
attraction to that other person by engaging in sexual acts of various
That comes from
, and there is that extract from
and then the observation at 51:
Although there is a lack of independence in the sense that the evidence of
uncharged acts –
That was the issue, of course, at hand in
depends on the complainant’s account, once the evidence is admitted,
and assuming it is accepted, it adds a further element
to the process of
reasoning to guilt and so, therefore, may be seen as significantly probative of
the accused’s guilt of the
charged offences.
And we say that is an important further element of reasoning and not
appropriately described as playing a very limited role. The
question of limited
role or limited probative value might be thought of more as an admissibility
question and of course, in order
to be admitted, the evidence has to “have
significant probative value” and the reasoning thereafter, as
your Honours
at paragraph [24], the reasoning
engaged in by the jury – the trier of fact, the jury in a trial like
similar to the manner in which an assessment
admissibility is undertaken. That is:
first assessing the strength of the evidence in establishing the
this is paragraph [24] of
your Honours:
and then considering “the extent to which the tendency makes more
likely the elements of the offence charged”.
Those are the matters
for the jury to consider once the evidence is admitted. So, we would respond to
say that it would not be an
appropriate direction to tell the jury, explain to
the jury, about the modest contribution of the evidence, to adopt that phrase
from one of my learned friend’s submissions. So, the reason that we say
that the evidence has an important role and not a
limited role is both as a
matter of principle – and I have taken your Honours to
– but in a practical sense.
In the context of
this case, as an example – and I have already said some of these
things, but in
at paragraph 40 – perhaps I do not
need to go to it, but this Court speaks – about the prospect, in the
plurality judgment,
in a trial where it may be that a child’s
account – the complainant’s account – is challenged
on the basis
that there has been a misinterpretation of conduct, or the
complainant has made a mistake or misunderstood what has occurred.
the facts of this particular case, and based on the complainant’s own
account, I think it is quite easy to see how that
could have been a possible
challenge to the first of the incidents on the complainant’s recollection,
that she had misunderstood
quite a non‑criminal and innocent conduct by an
accused. And it is tendency reasoning to take into account his conduct on
occasions to be satisfied that the complainant has not misunderstood, in this
case, what happened on a different occasion.
Similarly, its application
to what have been described as the frailer or the weaker counts – the
other occasion – this
case is that very example where the reliability
of the complainant’s account was tested. Now, it was tested quite in
in that it was suggested that it just was not reliable because of the
contribution of the dream. Although, I note she did not dream
offence, but had a dream which caused her to, she said, recall the
But the other aspect of it was the timing, and the relative
timing, and the reliability aspects of that. So, it may be that in
circumstances
where it is suggested as it was that the complainant
has – that she has dreamt up this offence, if satisfied of the
on the part of the accused to engage in similar conduct on other
occasions, that may strengthen – that is an acceptable and
form of reasoning for the Crown to rely on.
In this case, of course,
those counts – there was an acquittal in respect of those counts,
which we say as an aside, contrary
to what the Court of Criminal Appeal took
from that, are at least consistent with – we do not seek to place too
much reliance
on it, but at least consistent with the jury having proper
attention to the onus and standard of proof, and considering the counts
themselves and not substituting any conclusions in respect of the tendency for
the counts.
The third aspect is that if the evidence is not admitted as
tendency evidence, then it may give rise to the need to give what is
known as an
anti‑tendency direction. Your Honours, it is not on our list, but
that is discussed in your Honour’s judgment
[2021] HCA 33
274 CLR 531
, at paragraphs 41 to 43.
This Court did not
conclude that that was required in the circumstances of that case, but the
concept of warning the jury that they
may not engage in tendency reasoning with
respect to the other conduct of
the accused is a warning that it may be
required to be given in circumstances where the evidence is not admissible for a
purpose, and that is a significant matter with respect to directing the
jury how they can reason.
So, for all of those reasons, we submit that
the evidence is of importance and is of significance and ought not to be viewed
a limited role or being unimportant as to whether or not the Crown is
permitted to advance its case on the basis of tendency reasoning.
those are the matters in reply, your Honours. Thank you.
Thank you, Ms Roberts. The Court will consider its decision in
this matter and will adjourn until Tuesday, 2 December.
12.31 PM THE MATTER WAS ADJOURNED
RTF format (1.49 MB)
Signed PDF/A format