1911230 (Refugee) [2024] AATA 4446 (11 October 2024)
1911230 (Refugee)
[2024] AATA 4446
(11 October 2024)
DECISION RECORD
Migration & Refugee Division
REPRESENTATIVE:
Mrs Susan Elizabeth Murphy
(MARN: 1687696)
CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
Gabrielle Simm
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the
following directions:
(i) that the first, second and third named applicants satisfy s 36(2)(a)
of the Migration Act; and
(ii) that the fourth and fifth named applicants satisfy
s 36(2)(b)(i) of the Migration Act, on the basis of membership of the
same family unit as the first named applicant.
Statement made on 11 October 2024 at 11:03am
REFUGEE – protection visa – Venezuela
– political opinion – anti-government and anti-corruption opinions
participation in protests and social media activities – robbery,
bribery, threats and attempted kidnapping by pro-government
paramilitary groups
– forced to resign from state-owned corporation job – appearance in
mainstream media after activities
in Australia – spontaneous and detailed
evidence, despite some incoherence because of distress – activities in
not for purpose of strengthening claim – deepening economic and
social conditions – effective state protection not available,
modification of behaviour not required – passports and visas for another
country now expired – older child now not
member of family unit and claims
considered separately – members of family unit younger children –
decision under review
LEGISLATION
Migration Act
(1), (2), (3)(c)(iii), (4)(b), (5), (6),
(2)(a), (b)(i),
Migration Regulations 1994
1.05(2), 1.12(4)(b)
1919942 (Refugee), AATA, 3
August 2023
references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has been
omitted from this decision pursuant to section 431
Migration Act 1958
replaced with generic information which does not allow the identification of an
applicant, or their relative or other dependants.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR
This is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the
Minister for Home Affairs on 8 April 2019 to refuse to
grant the applicants
protection visas under
Migration Act 1958
The applicants who claim to be citizens of Venezuela applied for the visas on
14 September 2017. The delegate refused to grant the
visas on the basis that the
applicants were not targeted for serious harm due to their political opinion so
they were not refugees.
Further, they were not eligible for complementary
protection as harm arising from random criminal violence does not meet the
intentionality
requirement of significant harm.
applicants appeared before the Tribunal on 12 August 2024 and 9
September 2024 to give evidence and present arguments. The Tribunal
hearing was
conducted with the assistance of an interpreter in the Spanish (Central and
South America) and English languages.
The applicants were represented in relation to the review.
CRITERIA FOR A PROTECTION VISA
The criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and
Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) (the Regulations). An
applicant for the visa must meet one of the alternative criteria in
s 36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That
is, he or she is either a person in
respect of whom Australia has protection obligations under the
‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other ‘complementary
protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same family unit as such a
person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same class.
Section 36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the
applicant for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the
Minister is satisfied Australia has protection obligations because the person is
A person is a refugee if, in the case of a person who has a nationality, they
are outside the country of their nationality and,
owing to a well-founded fear
of persecution, are unable or unwilling to avail themselves of the protection of
that country: s 5H(1)(a).
In the case of a person without a nationality,
they are a refugee if they are outside the country of their former habitual
and, owing to a well-founded fear of persecution, are unable or
unwilling to return to that country: s 5H(1)(b).
Under s 5J(1), a person has a well-founded fear of persecution if they
fear being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality,
membership of
a particular social group or political opinion, there is a real chance they
would be persecuted for one or more of
those reasons, and the real chance of
persecution relates to all areas of the relevant country. Additional
requirements relating
to a ‘well-founded fear of persecution’ and
circumstances in which a person will be taken not to have such a fear are
out in ss 5J(2)-(6) and ss 5K-LA, which are extracted in the
attachment to this decision.
If a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s 36(2)(a), he
or she may nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant
of the visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection obligations
because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of being
removed from
Australia to a receiving country, there is a real risk that he or
she will suffer significant harm: s 36(2)(aa) (‘the complementary
protection criterion’). The meaning of significant harm, and the
circumstances in which a person will be taken not to face
a real risk of
significant harm, are set out in ss 36(2A) and (2B), which are extracted in
the attachment to this decision.
Mandatory considerations
In accordance with Ministerial Direction No.84, made under s 499 of the
Act, the Tribunal has taken account of the ‘Refugee
Law Guidelines’
and ‘Complementary Protection Guidelines’ prepared by the Department
of Home Affairs, and country
information assessments prepared by the Department
of Foreign Affairs and Trade expressly for protection status determination
to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
Country of Nationality
The applicants have given consistent evidence that they are citizens of
Venezuela and provided copies of their Venezuelan passports
to the Tribunal and
to the Department. The Tribunal finds that the applicants are Venezuelan
citizens and has assessed their claims
against Venezuela as country of
nationality and the receiving country.
Applicants’ backgrounds
The first applicant
] is a [Age]-year-old woman born in [City 1],
Venezuela. She identifies as being of Latino ethnicity and a Christian. Based on
documentary,
oral and written evidence, the Tribunal accepts the following
matters to be true:
first applicant]’s mother lives in Caracas and manages the [shop] owned by
her daughter and son-in-law. [The first applicant]
is in contact with her about
once a week, depending on whether electricity and telecommunications are
functioning in Caracas. Her
father passed away in November 2018.
first applicant] is the eldest of three children. She has two brothers, [Mr A],
born [Date], and [Mr B], born [Date]. [Mr A]
lives in [Country 1] and he and his
sister are in touch on special occasions such as birthdays. [Mr B] lives with
their mother in
Caracas and sometimes speaks with his sister when she calls
their mother.
son, [the third applicant] was born on [Date]. When he was around one year old,
[the first applicant] separated from his father
and they later divorced.
completing the equivalent of year 12, [the first applicant] completed a Bachelor
of [Subject 1] in 2002. She then started a
Masters in [Subject 2] at [University
1] but did not complete it.
March 2008 she married [the second applicant]. They have two sons: [the fourth
applicant], born [Date] and [the fifth applicant],
born [Date].
is [an occupation 1]. From July 2006 until July 2008 she was [job position] at
[Employer 1]. From November 2005-July 2006 she
was [job position] at [Employer
2]. From July 2008 -February 2011, she was the [higher job position] at
[Employer 3].
February until August 2011 she was unemployed and lived on her savings. From
August 2011 until her departure for Australia in
October 2016, she and her
husband ran a [shop] in Caracas.
first applicant] has undertaken trips abroad including for work to [Country 2]
(2007), [Country 3] (2010), [Country 4] (2015)
and [Country 5] (2016) and
holidays to [Country 2] (2012, 2013, 2015), [Country 6] (2012), [Country 7]
(2014, twice; 2016), [Country
4] (2015), and [Country 8] (2015).
and her family arrived in Australia [in] October 2016, apart from her son [the
third applicant] who had arrived [in] September
arriving in Australia, she has done a range of work, including in [work
sectors], and assisting her husband in his business.
She has also been studying
English and has obtained a Diploma of [Subject 3].
The second applicant
] is a [Age]-year-old man from [City 2] ,
Venezeula. He identifies as being of Latino ethnicity and a Christian. Based on
documentary,
oral and written evidence, the Tribunal accepts the following
matters to be true:
mother is retired and lives in [Location]. His father has passed away.
has one sister who is [an occupation 2]. She lives in [Country 5] with her
husband. He has two brothers, [Mr C], who is a lawyer
and another who is [an
occupation 3]. Both live in [Location].
started a Bachelor degree in [Subject 4] at [University 2] in [City 3] in [Year]
from which he withdrew in [Year].
worked as [an occupation 4] at [a workplace 1] November 2009-August 2011, as the
manager in a [workplace 2] 2006-2009 and as a
[workplace 3] manager
managed the [shop] with his wife from August 2011 until his departure for
Australia in October 2016.
arriving in Australia in December 2016, he has worked as [occupations] and
started his own business part time. He then resigned
from his other job and has
worked in his business full time since 2021.
The third applicant
] is a [Age]-year-old man from Caracas, Venezuela.
He identifies as being of Latino ethnicity and a Christian. Based on
documentary,
oral and written evidence, and that of [Ms D], the Tribunal accepts
the following matters to be true:
mother and father separated when he was about one year old. They later divorced.
He last had contact with his biological father
in 2018 via social media. His
father was in Caracas at the time.
attended three years of primary school in [City 1] then moved to Caracas when he
was about [Age] years old. He completed high school
in Caracas.
worked in customer service in the [shop] run by his parents from 2012 until
started a Bachelor of [Subject 5] degree at [University 3] in February 2014,
from which he withdrew in August 2016.
arrived in Sydney on a student visa [in] September 2016. He studied general
English at a private college.
Australia he worked as [occupations]. In 2019 he got his certificate to work as
[an occupation 5] but, due to covid-19 lockdowns,
he did not find work in the
industry until 2021. He also helped [the second applicant] with his [business]
during lockdown in 2020-21.
and [Ms D], an Australian citizen, met in August 2022. They have been in a
committed relationship since December 2022 and started
living together in April
2023. They share finances, visit each other’s families, go on holidays
together and provide emotional
support to each other.
The fourth applicant
] is aged [Age] and [
the fifth applicant
is aged [Age]. They rely on the claims of their mother.
Member of the same family unit
[The fourth and fifth applicants] are members of the same family unit as their
mother within the definition of s5(1) of the Act
as they are dependent
The Tribunal invited submissions on whether [the third applicant] was a member
of the same family unit as his mother. In April 2019
the delegate assessed him
as being dependent on her because at that time, he was [Age] years old, had only
worked in the family business
in Venezuela and was not always paid, and had
undertaken some casual work in Australia but was not financially independent of
parents. However, he is now [Age] years old, works as [an occupation 5], is
financially independent of his parents and lives with
his de facto partner in
The applicants’ representative provided submissions on his own claims
independent of those of his mother. As a result of my
findings on those claims,
the issue of same family unit is no longer relevant to him.
When they applied for protection in September 2017, [the first applicant]
presented as the main applicant with the other applicants adopting her
claims. However, due to the finding that [the third applicant]
is not a member
of the same family unit as his mother, his claims are considered separately. In
addition, at hearing [the second
applicant] made claims in his own right. [The
fourth and fifth applicants] continue to rely on their mother’s claims for
protection.
In summary, [
the first applicant
] claims that she cannot return to
Venezuela due to her anti-government political opinion expressed in social media
and participating
in person in protests in Venezuela and Australia. In
Venezuela, she claims that she and her family were targeted by
, pro-government forces that have been described as being
paramilitaries and parapolice, and that she fears being jailed, tortured
killed. Government authorities, such as those at the airport and the police, are
corrupt and will not protect them. She and her
family cannot be safe anywhere in
Venezuela. Since arriving in Australia, she and her family have continued to
express their anti-government
opinion through social media postings and
participating in protests in Melbourne. Following the July 2024 election, the
in Venezuela has deteriorated markedly for opponents of President
Maduro. If returned to Venezuela now, the applicants would be at
greater risk
than when they left the country.
[The first applicant] set out her claims in her protection visa application and
a statutory declaration dated 20 September 2017
provided to the Department. In
her statement she declares that she was forced to resign in 2011 from her job as
[higher job position]
at [Employer 3], the government owned [corporation], due
to her anti-government and anti-corruption stance. She claims that the [shop]
she ran with her husband was broken into by
in November 2015.
The perpetrators stole a computer and her son’s mobile phone and
threatened to kill him. The police did not
attend and [the second applicant]
later paid a bribe to the perpetrators. Nevertheless, two days after the bribe
was paid, her son
was the target of an attempted kidnapping. She also claims to
have received threats on [Social media 1] following anti-government
online 2014 – 2016 and to have been targeted on three occasions by
on motorbikes while driving her car in late 2015.
At the review stage, the applicants’ representative provided a detailed
submission dated 24 June 2024. In addition to legal
argument supported by
references to country information, copies of [the first applicant]’s posts
to [Social media 1] accompanied
by a certified translation into English; photos
of the applicants protesting against the Venezuelan government in Australia;
reports on Venezuelan politics; reports from a psychologist, a mental
health nurse at [Hospital] and her pastoral counsellor on [the
applicant’s] mental health; and three letters of support, two from friends
in Australia dated June 2024 and one from
a former colleague in [Country 2]
dated April 2019.
At the first hearing, [the first applicant] expanded upon her claims,
summarised where relevant as follows. If returned to Venezuela,
she and her
family were at risk because of her political views. They would likely be
detained at the airport because they had been
abroad for over seven years, which
would trigger further investigation. The authorities would check her social
media accounts and
could take retaliatory measures against her or her family.
When the Tribunal suggested that some of her social media posts were a
ago, she responded that the government could call her a traitor to the country
and make an example of her to terrorise
the population. She was not a
high-profile person like a politician and was just an ordinary person but this
meant that she could
be kidnapped using arrest as a cover, as had occurred to a
Spanish citizen recently. They could also kidnap or kill her husband and
put them in jail and make them disappear.
Further, [the first applicant] felt a responsibility to express her political
opinion on social media to protest against a regime
that had destroyed her
country. She posted on [Social media 1], and had used [Social media 2 and 3] in
the past. A few years ago,
she decided to distance herself from politics to
protect her mental health and had stopped posting, but in the leadup to and
the 2024 elections, she became active again. The Tribunal noted that
some of the posts could be construed as critical of the government,
political aspect was less evident in others relating to traffic jams or queues
in supermarkets. She responded that the
government was responsible for traffic
jams by setting up checkpoints for trucks that had no purpose apart from showing
the population
how powerful they were and to stress drivers. The postings about
supermarket queues aimed to highlight the lack of food and how the
destroying the country.
At the first hearing, [the first applicant] gave evidence about the three
occasions when she was approached by motorcyclists who
attempted to intimidate
her when she was driving. She stated that she recognised them as
based on the clothes they were wearing and the symbols they
wore. The first time they approached her, they were wearing khaki. They
wearing a militia uniform provided by the regime when they perform public acts.
She referred to the eyes of Chavez and a red
star like in the Cuban flag by
are recognisable by Venezuelans. She said that
were also recognisable by the slang they used, although as
they were riding motorbikes and she was driving, she did not hear them
The first applicant
] gave evidence that she and her family had also
participated in protests against the government of Venezuela since arriving in
One of the protests was to thank Australia for being on the right
side by opposing the Venezuelan government. At another protest
at [Venue] in
2017 or 2018, someone had called her a ‘fascist’. The government
might be monitoring demonstrations in
Melbourne, for example, by sending people
from the Venezuelan Embassy in Canberra. The photos she provided had been on the
source 1] website and might have been elsewhere online. She had posted one
on social media of her family at a protest with [the fourth
applicant] holding a
placard. They had also participated in the plebiscite against Maduro in 2017,
which had been organised by the
Opposition as the
Constitution
provided for the
right to remove the President if sufficient votes were obtained. The plebiscite
was an opportunity to express their
wish for the government to leave power and
not retain control of the national assembly.
At the first hearing, [
the second applicant
] provided context for the
claims made by his wife and articulated his own claims for the first time. He
stated that the level of
risk to the family had increased since 2016 when they
left, not just because of what his wife had posted in 2016, but due to what
was posting in 2024. In addition, the severity of harm had increased. He showed
the Tribunal a recent video of a protest in Caracas
where the police force was
standing facing the protestors, 20-30 in a line with more at the back. The
started shooting at the demonstrators. The police left the
scene so the protestors ran away. He claimed that this indicated that
were abdicating control to the
and that people were more
afraid of the
than they were of the police.
[The second applicant] gave evidence on how he recognised the perpetrators in
the [shop] robbery and the attempted kidnapping as
. Following
the [shop], he paid a bribe to a 22 year old man to keep his family safe. The
man was wearing a red shirt but he did not
remember whether it had a flag or a
red star. The man said ‘calladito es mas bonito,’ a phrase which
means, ‘keep
your mouth shut’. Another phrase the
use is ‘Traidor a la patria, vende patria, meaning ‘traitor to the
country, sells out the country’.
After the attempted kidnapping of [the third applicant] in the mall, [the
second applicant] received a call from his mobile phone
number, although he was
with him at the time, so he realised something was wrong. He approached the
National Guard, who had machine
guns, for help. He observed six Colectivos, five
men and one woman. Some of them were wearing red and some were on motorbikes.
National Guard recognised them as
as the National Guard
worked together. By paying the National Guard on this
occasion, he was able to use them to provide security for the family on this
occasion, while realising this was not a permanent solution.
[The second applicant] claimed to be at risk not just as his wife’s
husband but as an opponent of the government who would
not stop protesting
against it. Even though he did not use social media, all his family and friends
were opponents of the government.
His brother [Mr C] was a lawyer who
represented ordinary people who were political prisoners due to their opposition
to the government.
Both his brothers tried to keep a low profile and reduce
their risk by painting the walls of their house red and keeping a photo
former President Hugo Chavez at home. Currently every lawyer and their family
members in Venezuela were at risk but [Mr C] had
not experienced any problems
with the government so far. He had tried to reduce the risk to [Mr C] in the
lead up to and following
the 2024 elections by not contacting him. When asked
why he had not mentioned his brother’s role in representing government
opponents before, he responded that he had not been aware of it.
At the second hearing,
the first applicant
] gave evidence that
the timing of the incidents made her think that the people behind the [shop]
robbery and the intimidation by
motorcyclists while she was driving were
. These incidents occurred immediately after she received the
threats via social media warning her to keep quiet about her political
After the July 2024 election in Venezuela, her fears for herself and her family
had heightened.
were in the streets checking people’s
phones to monitor their social media postings. If they found any anti-government
they would take them to jail immediately. There were about 200 people in
jail for opposing the government. Unfortunately, the
authority than the official authorities.
[The first applicant] identified arriving at the airport in Venezuela as the
time when she and her family would be at highest risk.
The day before the second
hearing, the Opposition Presidential candidate, Edmundo González Urratia,
had been granted asylum
in Spain, but he was protected to some extent by his
high political profile. Lower profile people were at the mercy of the
dictatorship.
She did not trust anyone in the Venezuelan government. For
example, she and her husband had not renewed [the fifth applicant]’s
passport when it expired, even though it is his only form of identification and
the photo is of him as a baby, because the people
in the Venezuelan Embassy in
Canberra could be spies and could not be trusted.
second hearing,
the second applicant
compared how
people recognise tradespeople in Melbourne through their hi-vis clothes with how
people recognise
in Venezuela through their clothing. This had
been the case for 25 years. Government supporters were rewarded when they
pointed out
government opponents. The
worked together with the
police. Police drove their cars over the heads of protestors for having
participated in demonstrations against
the government and 20 or 30 police
officers were shown grabbing, kicking and punishing a woman just because she was
protesting. He
and his family were at imminent risk because their views differed
from those of the regime, including the national guard, the police
[The first and second applicants] gave evidence about what life would be like
for their sons, [the fourth and fifth applicants],
if they had to return to
Venezuela now. [The first applicant] claimed that her sons’ lives were in
Australia. [The fifth applicant]
had arrived in Australia at the age of [Age] so
he didn’t remember anything about Venezuela, English was his first
and his friends, school and church were in Australia. Their sons would
love to see their grandmother in Venezuela but their life
was in Australia. She
could not imagine the impact of returning on them. [The second applicant]
claimed that their sons would be
at imminent risk if returned to Venezuela. As
they spoke English, they could be identified as imperialist. The government was
people who came from the US or any country that was against it. People
who supported the government felt that they had a responsibility
government know who opposed them.
The third applicant
] was included as a dependent in his mother’s
protection visa application. However, the Tribunal notes that two of her key
related to [the third applicant]. They are: first, the [shop] robbery
threatened to kill him, and second, the incident in
the mall a few days later when a child attempted to lure him away to facilitate
his kidnapping by
Before the first hearing, the applicants’ representative provided a
submission to the Tribunal, including a statutory declaration
by [the third
applicant] dated 19 June 2024. In it, he reiterated the claims made by his
mother in her application and elaborated
on his own claims. In describing the
robbery of the [shop] in 2015, he stated that he knew that the men who held him
at gunpoint
because they wore distinct red t-shirts and hats with the Venezuelan flag. They
also called me names like “maldito escuálido”
(which means
“scrawny” but here it’s used as an insult for opposition
members of the government) and “maldito
apátrida.” (damned
stateless person). ...
He stated that the man who held him at gunpoint said
“hasta la Victoria siempre” (a famous revolutionary slogan meaning
“until victory, always) when leaving, which
was terrifying as it
reinforced their determination to intimidate us into no longer speaking out
against the government.
He described his political activities as having attended protests multiple
times in Venezuela and signing against Maduro in the
2017 plebiscite while in
Australia. He claimed that he would not be able to hide his contempt and disgust
with the government if
forced to return. Having lived in Australia, his family
would be prime targets for extortion by
. His younger brothers
especially would be targets for kidnapping as he had been targeted. Further, the
Venezuelan government restricted
access to essential services for political
dissidents. Community informants and surveillance were used to identify and
monitor government
opponents. He referred to the impact on the mental health of
everyone in the family, particularly his mother’s; his concerns
safety and wellbeing of family members if they were forced to return to
Venezuela, in which he outlined his concerns particularly
for his younger
brothers; and his relationship with his partner [Ms D].
At hearing,
the third applicant
] gave evidence that he worried
that, if he had to return to Venezuela, the government or
would find out his family was not affiliated with the government. The family
could face jail, torture, or death as a result. He would
be at risk for the
following reasons:
returning from abroad, he would be assumed to be wealthy. Returning by plane, he
would be forced to pass through government
controls at the airport and
government officials would see that he had been living in Australia. This would
prompt them to inquire
government was already a problem. If he were interviewed by officials at
airport, he would not hide his views. Arriving at the airport would also
facilitate the government arresting and detaining him
if they wanted to.
He shared a
family name with his mother so it would not be hard for government officials or
to ‘connect the dots’ to mother’s
anti-government social media posts. Often they adopted a strategy of harming
family members in order to silence a critic.
The government
might find out about his political activism in Venezuela. He had protested at
every single opportunity when he was
at university in Venezuela. When asked
whether he would protest if he had to return to Venezuela, even though he had
not been to
many protests in Australia, he claimed that he would. In Venezuela,
it was more immediately relevant and it was about physically
voicing his opinion
against the government.
The government
might find out about his political activism in Australia. He had participated in
the plebiscite in 2017 to sign against
the government which had been organised
by the leader of the opposition at the time. A photo of him signing the
plebiscite was provided.
The plebiscite aimed to draw international attention to
what was happening in Venezuela. He was 21 at the time and did not know much
stay up to date with politics in Venezuela but sometimes
found it too depressing
so he would dip in and out.
He had reduced
his social media postings revealing his political opinion while in Australia. He
had stopped posting his political
views on [Social media 2 and 3] media in
Australia since covid. When asked whether he would post on social media if he
had to return
to Venezuela, he replied that it was necessary to voice his
The stress of
his past experiences, combined with the uncertainty and worry about the future,
had negatively affected his mental health.
The incident where
had robbed the [shop] when he was alone there made him paranoid long afterwards.
He was always checking to make sure he had locked
the door, looking over his
shoulder and trying not to make a mistake that would lead to his family being
As the oldest
son, he tried to keep his emotions under control but he was concerned for other
family members too. He worried about
his mother and tried to seem like he was OK
even though he was terrified. He also worried about his two younger brothers and
hate for them to have to go through the sort of things he went through
when he was younger in Venezuela. At the same time he thought
it was good to
belong to a family who stood up for their beliefs.
The third applicant
’s partner,
evidence at the first hearing confirming her statutory declaration dated 19 June
2024 provided to the Tribunal before the first
hearing. Based on her oral and
written evidence, the Tribunal accepts the following matters to be true:
[Ms D] met [the
third applicant] in August 2022. They have been in a committed relationship
since December 2022.
In April 2023
[the third applicant] moved into her house and in January 2024 he terminated the
lease on his own apartment.
They spend as
much time as possible together. In November 2023 they got a dog together as a
symbol of their commitment to building
a life together.
The uncertainty
over her partner’s visa status has exacerbated her pre-existing anxiety,
depression and sleep issues. She also
worries about his family, including his
little brothers. The hearing has escalated her stress levels and she and her
partner have
put a plan to study on hold in order to prepare for the review.
If her partner
is forced to return to Venezuela, [Ms D] does not want to be separated from him.
However, she fears for her safety
in Venezuela, given the Australian
government’s ‘do not travel’ advice to Australian citizens and
the fact that
she does not speak Spanish.
The Tribunal found [Ms D] to be a credible witness, whose oral evidence was
consistent with her written statement. She provided
a frank and spontaneous
account from her perspective that corroborated [the third applicant]’s
On 4 September 2024, the Tribunal received a submission from the
applicants’ representative (the second submission). The submission
that [the third applicant]’s evidence at hearing that he had stopped
posting on social media was ‘not quite right’
and provided examples
of several of [the third applicant]’s posts on social media. They included
several posts mocking the
Venezuelan government in 2020- 2021; reference to his
participation in the 2017 plebiscite against Maduro, a photo of which is still
posted to his [Social media 2] page; and his participation on 17 August 2024 in
demonstrations in Melbourne against the government.
She also provided details of
the political protests in which he participated in Venezuela in 2014.
FINDINGS AND REASONS
Findings on [the first applicant’s] past experiences
The Tribunal accepts [the first applicant]’s claims that she expressed
her anti-government opinion on social media in Venezuela.
I accept that in
November 2015 she was targeted in three incidents by
motorbikes in an attempt to intimidate and silence her. I accept that the [shop]
owned by her and [the second applicant]
was robbed by
threatened to kill [the third applicant], the only person present, and stole his
laptop and mobile phone. I accept that [the
first applicant’s] political
opinion may have been one of the reasons she was forced to resign from her job
as [higher job
position] at [the state-owned company]. I accept that she has
participated in protests against the government of Venezuela since
arriving in
Australia, including the Opposition-organised plebiscite on 16 July 2017 and
numerous other protests, including in the
leadup to, and following the contested
outcome of, the July 2024 presidential election.
[The first applicant]’s claims have been consistent across her protection
visa application, her interview with the Minister’s
delegate, and her
written and oral evidence before the Tribunal. Her oral evidence was detailed
and spontaneous. Her evidence on
identifying the
always coherent as her distress on speaking about these issues sometimes
hampered communication. However, the evidence provided
by other family members
and the country information supported her claim that she and her family were
targeted as a result of her
political opinion rather than being the victims of
random criminal attacks.
Assessment of [the first applicant’s] Refugee Claims:
Sur place claims
Section 5J(6) of the Act provides that in determining whether the applicants
have a well founded fear of persecution, any conduct
they engaged in in
Australia is to be disregarded unless they engaged in the conduct otherwise than
for the purpose of strengthening
their claim to be a refugee.
Since arriving in Australia, [the first applicant] has attended demonstrations
against the Venezuelan government; participated in
the 2017 plebiscite organised
by the Opposition; and have made social media posting demonstrating
anti-government political opinion.
The Tribunal received a letter dated 2 August
2024 from [the first applicant] addressed to her representative expressing her
disappointment
at the contested election result and her determination to
continue to keep posting against the Maduro regime, along with an article
analysing the election result dated 1 August 2024. Most
recently, the applicants participated in the 17 August 2024 demonstration
protesting against the government’s crackdown against demonstrators in
Venezuela following the contested election result. The
timing of this activism
might raise a question about whether it was undertaken to strengthen their
claims to be refugees.
Having carefully considered the evidence taken as a whole and in context, the
Tribunal finds that [the first applicant's] activism
was undertaken as a
manifestation of her anti-government political opinion, evidenced before she
arrived in Australia. Her continued
political activism has been in response to
events in Venezuela. Her participation in the 17 August 2024 demonstration in
is a response to the Venezuelan presidential elections held on 28 July
2024, the announcement that Maduro had won the election, and
the ensuing
demonstrations and crackdowns by the government. Hence the Tribunal is satisfied
that this conduct was not undertaken
to strengthen her refugee claims and should
be taken into account.
Real chance of serious harm
[The first and second applicants] have articulated a fear of arrest, detention,
and death for themselves and for their children.
This clearly amounts to serious
harm within s5J(5) of the Act, which provides ‘a threat to the
person’s life or liberty’
or ‘significant physical
ill-treatment of the person’ as indicative
The serious harm
identified would meet the requirement of s5J(4)(b) of the Act.
Under s5J(1)(b) the applicants have a well founded fear of persecution if there
is a real chance that, if they returned to Venezuela,
they would be persecuted
for a refugee reason.
The country information on Venezuela strongly supports the applicants’
claims that they face a real chance of serious harm
if returned to Venezuela.
Since Nicolás Maduro took over as President from Hugo Chávez in
2013, the plummeting price
of oil has meant that the party’s populist
policies have been unable to be
The result has been a
deepening social, economic and humanitarian crisis. According to UNHCR, 7.7
million Venezuelans had left their
country as at the end of
Maduro’s reign has
become increasingly authoritarian, demonising his political opponents and
reducing the space for civil society
and political
The Tribunal also refers to
the country information contained in AAT decision 1919942, much of which remains
At the same time, his government has fostered the growth of non-state actors to
extend the reach of the state. An example of these
which received training, funding and arms from the state beginning in the
Chávez and then
Maduro used them to impose social and political control on communities and to
repress the political opposition.
Variously described as para-police or para-military forces, they have evolved
over time from community collectives with their roots
in 1960s guerrilla
movements, through less autonomous groups supporting Chávez in 2007-12,
to a ‘“repressive”
police initiative’ since 2014,
‘dressing as civilians and riding in motorcycle
Following the presidential election on 28 July 2024, the risk of harm to
opposition supporters has increased. The government claimed
victory at midnight
on 28 July but without providing evidence in the form of tally sheets from each
voting station. Based on reports
from its observers who took photos of tally
sheets at 90% of voting stations, the Opposition won the
On 29 July,
spontaneous demonstrations against the government broke out which the security
used force to
The government claimed
that it had arrested over 2400
protestors.
A UN Human Rights
Council-mandated inquiry found that 25 people had died and hundreds were
detained or injured in the brutal repression
of protests, describing it as
‘one of the most acute human rights crises in the country’s recent
The country information suggests that the Supreme Court and the National
Electoral Commission lack independence and rarely find
against the executive
branch of government.
control also extends to media outlets, so social media provides a rare
opportunity for Venezuelans to express their
In this context,
social media activism is more significant than it might be elsewhere where there
are greater opportunities for political
activism. As a result, the government
monitors social media and uses digital means to control
Following the recent
election, the National Police Force initiated a campaign known as
, or ‘Operation Knock Knock’, encouraging Venezuelans to
report on fellow citizens who challenge the government’s
claim to victory,
including in their social media profiles. Some of them received a knock at the
door from police, who arrested and
This campaign extends the
government’s reach by enlisting private citizens who support the
government.
In relation to future risk, the Tribunal has considered [the first applicant's]
evidence that her mother, who is managing the [shop]
in Caracas, had not been
when they last spoke. It might be thought that
this indicates that the chance of serious harm to the applicants if they
returned to
Venezuela would be less than a real chance. However, a single
elderly woman running a [shop] is less likely to be seen as a threat
government than a family including three adults, at least two of whom have
social media profiles that mark them as government
opponents and who have
previously been targeted for intimidation. Their profile would also be higher
after returning from an English-speaking
country after 7 years away with
children who speak English. After carefully considering this evidence, in the
context of the evidence
taken as a whole and in light of the country
information, the Tribunal considers that the fact that [the first
applicant’s]
mother has not been contacted by government supporters to
date does not reduce the risk of harm to the applicants below the threshold
real chance.
The Tribunal accepts that there is a real chance that, if [the first applicant]
returned to Venezuela, she would be persecuted for
a refugee reason now or in
the foreseeable future.
Reason for the feared harm
If a person fears persecution for one or more of the reasons mentioned in
s5J(1)(a) (race, religion, nationality, membership of
a particular social group
or political opinion), that reason must be the essential and significant reason
for the persecution: s5J(4)(a).
The delegate accepted that the [shop] robbery occurred and that [the first
applicant] had been targeted by motorcyclists on three
occasions while driving.
However, she did not accept that these incidents were related to the
applicants’ political opinion;
instead, she attributed them to crime. The
Tribunal focussed much of its questioning on ascertaining the identity and
the perpetrators in these incidents. Each of the applicants
independently provided detailed and specific evidence on the dress, speech
behaviour of the perpetrators and the context of the incidents. Their evidence
was consistent with each other’s evidence
and correlates with the country
information on
. The Tribunal accepts that the harm feared by
the applicants is for the reason of their political opinion which is against the
government.
Further, the country information indicates that opponents of the Maduro
government are systematically targeted for that reason.
In addition to their
targeting by
, before the Department, the applicants referred
Carnet de la Patria
(homeland card) could be used to identify
and discriminate against them. Obtaining a card is dependent on providing
personal information,
including past voting practices, which the Maduro
government then uses to target its opponents. While the card is not mandatory,
Venezuelan citizens have been denied medical treatment, access to pensions and
food rations for not having one.
The country information suggests that private businesses are also required to
carnet de la patria
, so that even buying milk is difficult
without the card. The data harvested in this way is used systematically to
discriminate against
opponents of the
government.
The Tribunal accepts
that this conduct is systematic and discriminatory.
For these reasons, I am satisfied that the harm feared is for a refugee reason,
ie political opinion, consistent with s5J(1)(a)
of the Act. Further, I am
satisfied that political opinion is the essential and significant reason for the
persecution consistent
with s5J(4)(b).
Real chance in all areas of Venezuela s5J(1)(c)
In assessing whether [the first applicant’s] real chance of being
persecuted extends to all areas of Venezuela, the Tribunal
has considered
evidence that Caracas is the safest place in Venezuela due to the higher
population density. She claimed that government
authorities and non-state actors
such as the
exert firmer control in areas outside the capital
where opposition to the government is more obvious. Nevertheless, as noted in
findings on the applicants’ past experiences, they have
experienced harm, including robbery, threats to life, attempted kidnapping,
potentially life-threatening encounters with motorcyclists in Caracas. Current
media reporting on the situation in Venezuela
discussed above, as well as the
sources referred to in submissions from the applicants’ representative and
the video shown
by [the second applicant] during the hearing, demonstrate that
Caracas is far from safe for government opponents.
The Tribunal accepts that a real chance of harm exists wherever [the first
applicant] lives in Venezuela.
Effective State Protection s5J(2)
A person does not have a well-founded fear of persecution if effective
protection measures are available to the person in a receiving
country: s 5J(2).
Section 5LA(1) provides that effective protection measures are available if the
State, or a party or organisation
(including an international organisation) that
controls the relevant State or a substantial part of its territory, is willing
able to offer such protection.
The threat to the applicants emanates from the state and its organs. These
include government agents, such as the police and national
guard, and non-state
actors, such as the pro-government
Colectivos.
As discussed above, the
country information indicates that government opponents are systematically
targeted. Further, there is no
party or organisation controlling the State or
part of its territory to provide protection as an alternative to the State.
The Tribunal finds that effective protection is not available to [the first
applicant] in Venezuela.
Behaviour modification
Under s5J(3) of the Act, a person does not have a well-founded fear of
persecution if she could take reasonable steps to modify
her behaviour so as to
avoid a real chance of persecution. This is subject to exceptions including a
modification that would alter
his or her political beliefs or conceal his or her
true political beliefs: s5J(3)(c)(iii).
The Tribunal accepts that, even if [the first applicant] could modify her
behaviour to reduce her chance of persecution, she is
not required to do so in
relation to her political beliefs.
Conclusion on [the first applicant’s] refugee
For these reasons, the Tribunal accepts that [the first applicant] meets the
criteria for a protection visa because she is a refugee.
Findings on [the second applicant]’s past experiences
[The second applicant]’s evidence was detailed, spontaneous and
consistent with the accounts of other family members and the
information. I accept his evidence that the robbery of the [shop] and the
attempted kidnapping of [the third applicant] were
carried out by
. I accept that he paid bribes to a
to members of the National Guard to keep his family safe. I accept that,
although he does not use social media himself,
he is associated with his family
members who do and that the Venezuelan authorities target family members as part
of a strategy to
silence their critics.
In relation to his claim made at hearing that his brother [Mr C] is a lawyer
who represents people opposed to the government, I
have considered whether I
should draw an adverse inference to the credibility of this claim as it was not
before the primary decision-maker.
However, I accept [the second applicant]'s
explanation for not doing so, namely, that he was not aware of it, as reasonable
context where he limits his contact with [Mr C] to reduce the risk of harm
Assessment of [the second applicant]’s Refugee Claims:
Sur place claims
Section 5J(6) of the Act provides that in determining whether the applicants
have a well founded fear of persecution, any conduct
they engaged in in
Australia is to be disregarded unless they engaged in the conduct otherwise than
for the purpose of strengthening
their claim to be a refugee.
Since arriving in Australia, [the second applicant] has attended demonstrations
against the Venezuelan government; participated
in the 2017 plebiscite organised
by the Opposition; and made social media postings demonstrating anti-government
political opinion.
The applicants’ representative photos and evidence that
a photo of a protest on 17 August 2024 in Melbourne showing [the second
applicant] has been syndicated to media organisations around the world,
including [News source 2] in [Countries]. The timing of this
activism might
raise a question about whether it was undertaken to strengthen their claims to
be refugees.
Having carefully considered the evidence taken as a whole and in context, the
Tribunal finds that [the second applicant]’s
activism was undertaken in
response to events in Venezuela. His participation in the [August] 2024
demonstration in Melbourne is
a response to the Venezuelan presidential
elections held on 28 July 2024, the announcement that Maduro had won the
election, and
the ensuing demonstrations and crackdowns by the government. Hence
the Tribunal is satisfied that this conduct was not undertaken
to strengthen his
refugee claims and should be taken into account.
Real chance of serious harm
[The second applicant] has articulated a fear of arrest, detention, and death
for himself and his family. This clearly amounts
to serious harm within s5J(5)
of the Act, which provides ‘a threat to the person’s life or
liberty’ or ‘significant
physical ill-treatment of the person’
as indicative examples.
serious harm identified would meet the requirement of s5J(4)(b) of the Act.
Under s5J(1)(b) the applicants have a well founded fear of persecution if there
is a real chance that, if they returned to Venezuela,
they would be persecuted
for a refugee reason.
The country information on Venezuela discussed above at [50]-[53] strongly
supports [the second applicant]’s claims that he
faces a real chance of
serious harm if returned to Venezuela. This risk arises from his participation
in anti-government activity
in Australia manifesting actual political opinion as
well as from his wife’s current and former social media postings, from
which anti-government political opinion may be imputed; his interactions with
and National Guard to negotiate protection for his family; and
his profile as a Venezuelan assumed to be wealthy and therefore at
extortion after living in an English-speaking country for around 8 years, which
would trigger further inquiries upon arrival
at the airport in Venezuela.
As noted in relation to the findings on [the second applicant]’s past
experiences, the Tribunal has declined to draw an adverse
inference about his
claim that he may be at risk of harm due to his brother [Mr C]’s work as a
lawyer in representing government
opponents. However, given that [Mr C] has not
experienced threats or harm from authorities or non-state actors in Venezuela,
chance of harm to [the second applicant] as a result of his brother’s
activities is not more than remote.
The Tribunal accepts that there is a real chance that, if [the second
applicant] returned to Venezuela, he would be persecuted for
a refugee reason
now or in the foreseeable future.
Reason for the feared harm
If a person fears persecution for one or more of the reasons mentioned in
s5J(1)(a) (race, religion, nationality, membership of
a particular social group
or political opinion), that reason must be the essential and significant reason
for the persecution: s5J(4)(a).
The delegate accepted that the [shop] robbery occurred and that [the first
applicant] had been targeted by motorcyclists on three
occasions while driving.
However, she did not accept that these incidents were related to the
applicants’ political opinion;
instead, she attributed them to crime. The
Tribunal focussed much of its questioning on ascertaining the identity and
the perpetrators in these incidents. Each of the applicants
independently provided detailed and specific evidence on the dress, speech
behaviour of the perpetrators and the context of the incidents. Their evidence
was consistent with each other’s evidence
and correlates with the country
information on
The Tribunal
accepts that the harm feared by the applicants is for the reason of their
political opinion which is against the Maduro
government.
Further, the country information indicates that opponents of the Maduro
government are systematically targeted for that reason as
discussed above at [
The Tribunal accepts that
this conduct is systematic and discriminatory.
For these reasons, I am satisfied that the harm feared is for a refugee reason,
ie political opinion, consistent with s5J(1)(a)
of the Act. Further, I am
satisfied that political opinion is the essential and significant reason for the
persecution consistent
with s5J(4)(b).
Real chance in all areas of Venezuela s5J(1)(c)
In assessing whether the applicants’ real chance of being persecuted
extends to all areas of Venezuela, the Tribunal has considered
applicant’s] evidence that Caracas is the safest place in Venezuela due to
the higher population density. She claimed
that government authorities and
non-state actors such as the
exert firmer control in areas
outside the capital where opposition to the government is more obvious.
Nevertheless, as noted above
in the findings, the applicants experienced harm,
including robbery, threats to life, attempted kidnapping, and potentially
life-threatening
encounters with motorcyclists in Caracas. Current media
reporting on the situation in Venezuela discussed above, as well as the sources
referred to in submissions from the applicants’ representative and the
video shown by [the second applicant] during the hearing,
demonstrate that
Caracas is far from safe for government opponents.
The Tribunal accepts that a real chance of harm exists wherever [the second
applicant] lives in Venezuela.
Effective State Protection s5J(2)
A person does not have a well-founded fear of persecution if effective
protection measures are available to the person in a receiving
country: s 5J(2).
Section 5LA(1) provides that effective protection measures are available if the
State, or a party or organisation
(including an international organisation) that
controls the relevant State or a substantial part of its territory, is willing
able to offer such protection.
The threat to the applicants emanates from the state and its organs. These
include government agents, such as the police and national
guard, and non-state
actors, such as the pro-government
Colectivos.
As discussed above, the
country information indicates that government opponents are systematically
targeted. Further, there is no
party or organisation controlling the State or
part of its territory to provide protection as an alternative to the State.
The Tribunal finds that effective protection is not available to [the second
applicant] in Venezuela.
Behaviour modification
Under s5J(3) of the Act, a person does not have a well-founded fear of
persecution if he could take reasonable steps to modify his
behaviour so as to
avoid a real chance of persecution. This is subject to exceptions including a
modification that would alter his
political beliefs or conceal his true
political beliefs: s5J(3)(c)(iii).
The Tribunal is satisfied that, even if [the second applicant] could modify his
behaviour to reduce his chance of persecution, he
is not required to do so in
relation to his political beliefs.
Findings on [the third applicant]’s past
experiences
The Tribunal accepts [the third applicant]’s claims that he has expressed
anti-government opinions online and in person in
Venezuela and in Australia. I
accept that he attended protests against the government when he was a university
student in Caracas.
I accept that the [shop] owned by his mother and step-father
was robbed by
who threatened to kill him and stole his laptop
and mobile phone. I accept that an unsuccessful attempt was made to kidnap him a
few days later in a mall opposite the bookstore. I accept that these incidents
were not random criminal attacks but were carried
out by non-state actors
supportive of the government in an attempt to silence his mother and stop her
expressing anti-government
opinions on social media.
I accept that, since arriving in Australia, [the third applicant] has
participated in several protests against the government of
Venezuela including
the Opposition-organised plebiscite on 16 July 2017. I accept that, since
arriving in Australia, he has also
made social media postings mocking the
Venezuelan government. His answers to the Tribunal’s questions at the
first hearing
regarding the 2017 plebiscite suggest that he does not have a
detailed knowledge of Venezuelan politics. However, his oral evidence
matters was spontaneous and consistent with his written claims to the Department
and the Tribunal.
Assessment of [the third applicant]’s Refugee
Sur place claims
Section 5J(6) of the Act provides that in determining whether the applicants
have a well founded fear of persecution, any conduct
they engaged in in
Australia is to be disregarded unless they engaged in the conduct otherwise than
for the purpose of strengthening
their claim to be a refugee.
Since arriving in Australia, [the third applicant] has attended demonstrations
against the Venezuelan government; participated in
the 2017 plebiscite organised
by the Opposition; and made social media postings demonstrating anti-government
political opinion.
For example, during the covid-19 lockdowns in Melbourne in
2020-2021, he posted clips of a comedian satirising the Venezuelan government,
as he saw parallels between the authoritarian approach of the Venezuelan
government and the Victoria government’s management
of the pandemic. The
timing of this activism might raise a question about whether it was undertaken
to strengthen their claims to
be refugees.
Having carefully considered the evidence taken as a whole and in context, the
Tribunal finds that [the third applicant]’s
activism was undertaken in
response to events in Venezuela. In addition, some of his social media postings
during Melbourne’s
covid-19 lockdowns were motivated by parallels he drew
between the Victorian government and the Venezuelan government. Hence the
Tribunal is satisfied that this conduct was not undertaken to strengthen his
refugee claims and should be taken into account.
Real chance of serious harm
[The third applicant] fears arrest, detention, and death for himself and for
his family. This clearly amounts to serious harm within
s5J(5) of the Act, which
provides ‘a threat to the person’s life or liberty’ or
‘significant physical ill-treatment
of the person’ as indicative
The serious harm
identified would meet the requirement of s5J(4)(b) of the Act.
Under s5J(1)(b) [the third applicant] has a well-founded fear of persecution if
there is a real chance that, if he returned to Venezuela,
he would be persecuted
for a refugee reason.
Given his limited participation in anti-government street protests in
Venezuela, I do not accept that [the third applicant] would
protest in person if
returned to Venezuela. However, I accept that if he were to return to Venezuela
now or in the foreseeable future,
his arrival at the airport after 8 years
abroad would trigger inquiries by airport authorities. I accept that his having
from Australia would raise expectations that he was wealthy, making him
a target for extortion attempts from government agents and
non-state actors.
Based on his past experiences of harm in Venezuela; his association with his
mother and her online anti-government
social media activism; and his own
anti-government postings online since arriving in Australia, I accept that he
would be imputed
to hold an anti-government political opinion. I accept that he
would continue to engage in limited anti-government activism on social
The country information discussed above at [50] – [53] supports his claim
that he would face a real chance of serious
harm, from state actors, such as
border authorities at the airport and the police, and non-state actors, such as
Colectivos.
For these reasons, the Tribunal finds that [the third applicant] would face a
real chance of serious harm if returned to Venezuela.
Reason for the feared harm
If a person fears persecution for one or more of the reasons mentioned in
s5J(1)(a) (race, religion, nationality, membership of
a particular social group
or political opinion), that reason must be the essential and significant reason
for the persecution: s5J(4)(a).
The country information referenced above at [56]-[58] supports [the third
applicant]’s claim that opponents of the Maduro
government are targeted
for this reason. The Tribunal considers that the harm feared by [the third
applicant] is for the reason of
his political opinion which is against the
Maduro government.
The delegate accepted that the [shop] robbery occurred. However, she did not
accept that it related to the applicants’ political
opinion; instead, she
attributed it to random crime. She accepted that an attempt was made to kidnap
[the third applicant] at the
mall, which she attributed to an opportunistic
criminal act. As discussed above at [64], the applicants’ evidence was
with each other’s evidence and correlates with the country
information on
The Tribunal
accepts that the harm feared by the applicants is for the reason of their
political opinion which is against the Maduro
government.
Further, the country information indicates that opponents of the Maduro
government are systematically targeted for that reason as
discussed above at [
The Tribunal accepts that
this conduct is systematic and discriminatory.
For these reasons, I am satisfied that the harm feared is for a refugee reason,
ie political opinion, consistent with s5J(1)(a)
of the Act. Further, I am
satisfied that political opinion is the essential and significant reason for the
persecution consistent
with s5J(4)(b).
Real chance in all areas of Venezuela s5J(1)(c)
The analysis above at [60] applies equally to [the third applicant]. The
Tribunal accepts that a real chance of harm exists wherever
he lives in
Effective State Protection s5J(2)
A person does not have a well-founded fear of persecution if effective
protection measures are available to the person in a receiving
country: s 5J(2).
Section 5LA(1) provides that effective protection measures are available if the
State, or a party or organisation
(including an international organisation) that
controls the relevant State or a substantial part of its territory, is willing
able to offer such protection.
The threat to the applicants emanates from the state and its organs. These
include government agents, such as the police and national
guard, and non-state
actors, such as the pro-government
Colectivos.
As discussed above, the
country information indicates that government opponents are systematically
targeted. Further, there is no
party or organisation controlling the State or
part of its territory to provide protection as an alternative to the State.
The Tribunal finds that effective protection is not available to [the third
applicant] in Venezuela.
Behaviour modification
Under s5J(3) of the Act, a person does not have a well-founded fear of
persecution if he could take reasonable steps to modify his
behaviour so as to
avoid a real chance of persecution. This is subject to exceptions including a
modification that would alter his
political beliefs or conceal his true
political beliefs: s5J(3)(c)(iii).
The Tribunal is satisfied that, even if [the third applicant] could modify his
behaviour to reduce his chance of persecution, he
is not required to do so in
relation to his political beliefs.
Conclusion on [the third applicant]’s refugee
For these reasons, the Tribunal accepts that [the third applicant] faces a
well-founded fear of persecution on return to Venezuela
for reasons of his
imputed (anti-government) political opinion and that he is a refugee.
Third country protection
Given these findings, the Tribunal has gone on to consider if the applicants
have a right to enter and reside in the US and are
therefore not owed protection
of the Act. This section provides that Australia is taken not to
have protection obligations to non-citizens who have not taken all
steps to avail themselves of a right to enter and reside in a country apart from
When they arrived in Australia, the applicants all held [visas] for [Country
9], allowing them to enter temporarily for business
and tourism purposes. [The]
visa holders are not allowed to study, work or permanently reside in [Country
9]. Since then, their passports
and the visas have expired. I accept that the
applicants do not have a right to enter or reside in [Country 9].
Based on this evidence, the applicants do not have a right to enter and reside
in a country other than Venezuela. I accept that
of the Act does not
apply to the applicants.
CONCLUSIONS
For the reasons given above the Tribunal is satisfied that [the first named
applicant], [the second named applicant] and [the third
named applicant] are
persons in respect of whom Australia has protection obligations and satisfies
the criterion set out in
The Tribunal is satisfied that [the first applicant] and [the second
applicant]’s sons [the fourth and fifth applicants] are
members of the
same family unit as the first named applicant for the purposes of
s 36(2)(b)(i).
As such, the fate of their application depends on the
outcome of the first named applicant’s application. It follows that they
will be entitled to a protection visa provided the criterion in
s 36(2)(b)(ii)
and the remaining criteria for the visa are met.
The Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the following
directions:
(i) that the first, second and third named applicants
Migration Act
(ii) that the fourth and fifth named applicants satisfy
s 36(2)(b)(i)
Migration Act
, on the basis of membership of the same family unit as the
first named applicant.
Gabrielle Simm
ATTACHMENT - Extract from
Migration Act 1958
5 (1) Interpretation
cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment
means an act or
omission by which:
(a) severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally
inflicted on a person; or
(b) pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on
a person so long as, in all the circumstances, the
act or omission could
reasonably be regarded as cruel or inhuman in nature;
but does not include an act or omission:
(c) that is not inconsistent with Article 7 of the Covenant; or
(d) arising only from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions that are
not inconsistent with the Articles of the Covenant.
degrading treatment or punishment
means an act or omission that
causes, and is intended to cause, extreme humiliation which is unreasonable, but
does not include an
act or omission:
(a) that is not inconsistent with Article 7 of the Covenant; or
(b) that causes, and is intended to cause, extreme humiliation arising only
from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions
that are not inconsistent
with the Articles of the Covenant.
means an act or omission by which severe pain or
suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a
(a) for the purpose of obtaining from the person or from a third person
information or a confession; or
(b) for the purpose of punishing the person for an act which that person or a
third person has committed or is suspected of having
committed; or
(c) for the purpose of intimidating or coercing the person or a third person;
(d) for a purpose related to a purpose mentioned in paragraph (a), (b) or (c);
(e) for any reason based on discrimination that is inconsistent with the
Articles of the Covenant;
but does not include an act or omission arising only from, inherent in or
incidental to, lawful sanctions that are not inconsistent
with the Articles of
the Covenant.
receiving country
, in relation to a non-citizen, means:
(a) a country of which the non-citizen is a national, to be determined solely by
reference to the law of the relevant country; or
(b) if the non-citizen has no country of nationality—a country of his or
her former habitual residence, regardless of whether
it would be possible to
return the non-citizen to the country.
5H Meaning of refugee
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person in Australia, the person is a
(a) in a case where the person has a nationality – is outside the country
of his or her nationality and, owing to a well-founded
fear of persecution, is
unable or unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that
country; or
(b) in a case where the person does not have a nationality – is outside
the country of his or her former habitual residence
and owing to a well-founded
fear of persecution, is unable or unwilling to return to it.
Note: For the meaning of
well-founded fear of persecution
section 5J.
5J Meaning of well-founded fear of persecution
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, the person has a
well-founded fear of
persecution
(a) the person fears being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group or political
(b) there is a real chance that, if the person returned to the receiving
country, the person would be persecuted for one or more
of the reasons mentioned
in paragraph (a); and
(c) the real chance of persecution relates to all areas of a receiving country.
Note: For membership of a particular social group, see
sections 5K
(2) A person does not have a
well-founded fear of persecution
if effective protection measures are available to the person in a receiving
Note: For effective protection measures, see
section 5LA.
(3) A person does not have a
well-founded fear of persecution
if the person could take reasonable steps to modify his or her behaviour so as
to avoid a real chance of persecution in a receiving
country, other than a
modification that would:
(a) conflict with a characteristic that is fundamental to the person’s
identity or conscience; or
(b) conceal an innate or immutable characteristic of the person; or
(c) without limiting paragraph (a) or (b), require the person to do any of the
(i) alter his or her religious beliefs, including by renouncing a religious
conversion, or conceal his or her true religious beliefs,
or cease to be
involved in the practice of his or her faith;
(ii) conceal his or her true race, ethnicity, nationality or country of
(iii) alter his or her political beliefs or conceal his or her true political
(iv) conceal a physical, psychological or intellectual disability;
(v) enter into or remain in a marriage to which that person is opposed, or
accept the forced marriage of a child;
(vi) alter his or her sexual orientation or gender identity or conceal his or
her true sexual orientation, gender identity or intersex
(4) If a person fears persecution for one or more of the reasons mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a):
(a) that reason must be the essential and significant reason, or those reasons
must be the essential and significant reasons, for
the persecution; and
(b) the persecution must involve serious harm to the person; and
(c) the persecution must involve systematic and discriminatory conduct.
(5) Without limiting what is serious harm for the purposes of
paragraph (4)(b), the following are instances of
serious harm
for the purposes of that paragraph:
(a) a threat to the person’s life or liberty;
(b) significant physical harassment of the person;
(c) significant physical ill‑treatment of the person;
(d) significant economic hardship that threatens the person’s capacity to
(e) denial of access to basic services, where the denial threatens the
person’s capacity to subsist;
(f) denial of capacity to earn a livelihood of any kind, where the denial
threatens the person’s capacity to subsist.
(6) In determining whether the person has a
well‑founded fear of
persecution
for one or more of the reasons mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a), any conduct engaged in by the person in Australia is to
be disregarded
unless the person satisfies the Minister that the person engaged
in the conduct otherwise than for the purpose of strengthening the
person’s claim to be a refugee.
5K Membership of a particular social group
consisting of family
For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person (the
first person
), in determining whether the
first person has a well‑founded fear of persecution for the reason of
membership of a particular
social group that consists of the first
person’s family:
(a) disregard any fear of persecution, or any persecution, that any other member
or former member (whether alive or dead) of the
family has ever experienced,
where the reason for the fear or persecution is not a reason mentioned in
paragraph 5J(1)(a); and
(b) disregard any fear of persecution, or any persecution, that:
(i) the first person has ever experienced; or
(ii) any other member or former member (whether alive or dead) of the family has
ever experienced;
where it is reasonable to conclude that the fear or persecution would not
exist if it were assumed that the fear or persecution mentioned
paragraph (a) had never existed.
may be relevant for determining family relationships
for the purposes of this section.
5L Membership of a particular social group
other than family
For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, the person is to be treated as a member
of a particular
social group (other than the person’s family) if:
(a) a characteristic is shared by each member of the group; and
(b) the person shares, or is perceived as sharing, the characteristic; and
(c) any of the following apply:
(i) the characteristic is an innate or immutable characteristic;
(ii) the characteristic is so fundamental to a member’s identity or
conscience, the member should not be forced to renounce
(iii) the characteristic distinguishes the group from society; and
(d) the characteristic is not a fear of persecution.
5LA Effective protection measures
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, effective protection measures are
available to the person in
a receiving country if:
(a) protection against persecution could be provided to the person by:
(i) the relevant State; or
(ii) a party or organisation, including an international organisation, that
controls the relevant State or a substantial part of
the territory of the
relevant State; and
(b) the relevant State, party or organisation mentioned in paragraph (a) is
willing and able to offer such protection.
(2) A relevant State, party or organisation mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a) is taken to be able to offer protection against
persecution
to a person if:
(a) the person can access the protection; and
(b) the protection is durable; and
(c) in the case of protection provided by the relevant State—the
protection consists of an appropriate criminal law, a reasonably
police force and an impartial judicial system.
36 Protection visas – criteria provided for by this Act
(2) A criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant for the visa
(a) a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection obligations because the person
is a refugee; or
(aa) a non-citizen in Australia (other than a non-citizen mentioned in paragraph
(a)) in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial grounds for believing that, as
a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of the non-citizen being removed from
Australia to a receiving country, there is a real risk that the non-citizen will
suffer significant harm; or
(b) a non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a
non-citizen who:
(i) is mentioned in paragraph (a); and
(ii) holds a protection visa of the same class as that applied for by the
applicant; or
(c) a non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a
non-citizen who:
(i) is mentioned in paragraph (aa); and
(ii) holds a protection visa of the same class as that applied for by the
(2A) A non‑citizen will suffer
significant harm
(a) the non‑citizen will be arbitrarily deprived of his or her life; or
(b) the death penalty will be carried out on the non‑citizen; or
(c) the non‑citizen will be subjected to torture; or
(d) the non‑citizen will be subjected to cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment; or
(e) the non‑citizen will be subjected to degrading treatment or
punishment.
(2B) However, there is taken not to be a real risk that a non‑citizen
will suffer significant harm in a country if the Minister
is satisfied that:
(a) it would be reasonable for the non‑citizen to relocate to an area of
the country where there would not be a real risk that
the non‑citizen will
suffer significant harm; or
(b) the non‑citizen could obtain, from an authority of the country,
protection such that there would not be a real risk that
the non‑citizen
will suffer significant harm; or
(c) the real risk is one faced by the population of the country generally and is
not faced by the non‑citizen personally.
Migration Regulations 1994
Reg. 1.12, s4(b); Reg.1.05,
Section 5J(5)(a) and (c)
respectively.
Diana Roy and
Amelia Cheatham,
Venezuela: The Rise and
Fall of a Petrostate | Council on Foreign Relations (cfr.org)
situation | Global Focus
(unhcr.org)
Polga-Hecimovich and Raúl Sánchez Urribarrí,
‘Political survival and. . . authoritarian
consolidation? The
Maduro Government and Venezuela’s Political Crisis’ (2024)
Pensamiento Propio
AAT Case no
1919942, 3 August 2023, Member Kate Chapple, [14]-[21].
El-ascenso-del-Estado-criminal-hibrido-en-Venezuela-InSight-Crime-1.pdf
(insightcrime.org)
Alejandro Velasco, From
‘Grupos de Trabajo’ to ‘Colectivos’: The Evolution of
Armed Pro-Government Groups
in the Chávez Era’ (2022) 31(2)
Espacio Abierto
, cited in ‘Venezuela: Pro-government groups (also
)’, VEN200954,
to Information Requests - Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada
(irb-cisr.gc.ca)
, 7 February
Regina Garcia Cano,
‘Human Rights Group implicates Venezuelan security forces in killings
during post-election protests’
Washington Post
, 4 September
Phil Gunson,
‘Venezuela: What Next after its Election Uproar?’ Crisis Group,
https://www.crisisgroup.org/latin-america-caribbean/andes/venezuela/venezueal-what-next-after-its-election-uproar
2 August 2024.
Brutal Crackdown on Protesters, Voters | Human Rights Watch
Report of the
Independent International Fact-finding mission of the Bolivarian Republic of
Venezuela, UN Doc A/HRC/57/57, 17 September
Venezuela’s
Supreme Court, a tribunal that dispenses justice tailored to Nicolás
Maduro’s needs | International
| EL PAÍS English (elpais.com)
23 August 2024,
Venezuela, restrictions and self-censorship limit coverage of opposition ahead
of election - Committee to Protect Journalists (cpj.org)
Venezuela’s
many means of surveillance and control’ - Access Now
, 29 August 2024;
Threats, and Snitching Apps: Maduro’s Weaponized Social Media | Caracas
Venezuela security forces
swoop on activists as repression worsens (bbc.com)
Angus Berwick,
‘How ZTE helps Venezuela create China-style social control’
Venezuelan ID, created with China's ZTE, tracks citizen behavior
(reuters.com)
14 November 2018.
Section 5J(5)(a) and
(c) respectively.
Section 5J(5)(a) and (c)
respectively.
RTF format (622 KB)
Signed PDF/A format