URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/cth/AUEPIP/2009/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:26:06
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
National Assessment Guidelines for Dredging [2009] AUEPIP 1 (1 January 2009)
National Assessment
Guidelines for Dredging
© Commonwealth of Australia 2009
These guidelines were issued under the authority of the Department of the
Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts.
This work is copyright.
In addition to any use as permitted under the
information presented in this document may be reproduced in whole or part
for study or training purposes, subject to the inclusion
of acknowledgment of
the source and provided no commercial usage or sale of the material occurs.
Reproduction for purposes other than those given above requires written
permission from the Commonwealth Department of the Environment,
Water, Heritage
and the Arts. Inquiries and requests for permission concerning reproduction and
rights should be addressed to:
Assistant Secretary
Environment Assessment Branch
Department of the Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts
GPO Box 787
Canberra ACT 2601
The views and opinions contained in this document are not necessarily those
of the Commonwealth Government. The contents of this document
have been compiled
using a range of source materials and while reasonable care has been taken in
its compilation, the Commonwealth
Government does not accept responsibility for
the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this document and shall not be
for any loss or damage that may be occasioned directly or indirectly
through the use of or reliance on the contents of the document
This document is also available on the Internet at:
http://www.environment.gov.au
For bibliographic purposes, these guidelines may be cited as:
National Assessment Guidelines for Dredging, Commonwealth of Australia,
Canberra, 2009
A healthy marine environment is essential for Australia’s current and
future well being. Australia has entered international
agreements and
implements legislation to help preserve marine ecosystems and prevent marine
The international agreement relating to the dumping of wastes and other
matter in Australian waters, including dredged material, is
called the London
Australia implements its
obligations under the London Protocol through the Commonwealth
Environment
Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981
(the Sea Dumping Act).
Through the Sea Dumping Act, the Australian Government assesses proposals to
load and dump wastes and other matter at sea, permits
acceptable activities, and
places conditions of approval, to mitigate and manage environmental impacts.
The National Assessment Guidelines for Dredging set out the framework for the
environmental impact assessment and permitting of the
ocean disposal of dredged
material. The framework includes:
• evaluating alternatives to ocean disposal
• assessing loading and disposal sites
• assessing potential impacts on the marine environment and other
• determining management and monitoring requirements.
The Guidelines are intended to provide greater certainty about the assessment
and permitting process as well as provide some guidance
on opportunities for
longer-term strategic planning.
These Guidelines should be read in conjunction with the Sea Dumping Act and
its Regulations
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(EPBC Act), the
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975
Act) and Australia’s international obligations outlined in the London
Acknowledgements
National Assessment Guidelines for Dredging
(2009) have been
prepared with the assistance of many organisations and individuals.
Particular thanks are extended to Dr Ian Irvine (Pollution Research Pty Ltd),
the primary consultant for developing the technical
component of the guidelines.
Other important contributors were Dr Graeme Batley and Dr Stuart Simpson (CSIRO
Centre for Environmental
Contaminants Research), Ms Sue Fryda-Blackwell (Ports
Australia) and Dr Rick Krassoi (Ecotox Services Australasia Pty Ltd). Many
agencies, organisations and individuals provided input through the public
comment phase and stakeholder workshop.
1. Introduction 7
1.1 Using these guidelines 7
2. The legislative framework 8
2.1 Australian Government responsibilities 8
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(EPBC Act) 8
2.1.3 Interaction between the Sea Dumping Act and the EPBC Act 11
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975
2.2 State government responsibilities 11
3. The sea dumping permit process 12
3.1 Requirement for a permit 12
3.2 Permit process 12
3.3 Permit duration 13
3.4 Fees 14
3.5 Timeframes 14
3.6 Consultation 14
3.7 Compliance and enforcement 14
4. The assessment framework 15
4.1 Disposal alternatives and waste minimisation 15
4.1.1 Evaluating alternatives 15
4.1.2 Waste prevention 16
4.2 Assessment of sediment quality 16
4.2.1 Phase I – Evaluation of existing information 18
4.2.2 Phase II – Sampling and analysis of sediments 19
4.2.3 Phase III – Elutriate and bioavailability testing 20
4.2.4 Phase IV – Toxicity and bioaccumulation testing 20
4.2.5 Phase V – Weight-of-evidence assessment 21
4.3 Assessing potential impacts on the environment 21
4.3.1 Site Assessment 22
4.3.2 Analysis of Impacts 24
4.4 Management and monitoring 25
4.4.1 Management Measures 25
4.4.2 Monitoring 28
Appendicies
Appendix A: Dredged material assessment – detailed guidelines 30
Appendix B: Components of sampling and analysis plans and reports 53
Appendix C: Consultation on sea dumping proposals 55
Appendix D: Sampling methods and design of sampling programs 57
Appendix E: Introduced marine pests 68
Appendix F: Field and laboratory quality assurance and quality control 70
Appendix G: Examples of impact hypotheses and associated monitoring
programs 72
Appendix H: Guide to recommended procedures for sample collection,
preservation
and storage 73
Reference list 77
Glossary 79
1. Introduction
The Australian Government’s objectives under the Sea Dumping Act are to
protect and preserve the marine environment from pollution
related to dumping at
sea, minimising impacts on marine living resources, human health and other uses
of the marine environment.
The regulatory framework set out in these Guidelines is applied to ensure the
impacts of dredged material loading and disposal are
adequately assessed and,
when ocean disposal is permitted, that impacts are managed responsibly
and effectively.
Dredging in Australian waters occurs in a diverse range of environments
involving a range of sediments, which vary from clean to contaminated.
remote from pollution sources, sediments are unlikely to contain contaminants,
while in ports and harbours adjacent to urbanised
or industrialised areas,
sediments may contain high levels of contamination from metals or synthetic
organic compounds. Some marine
environments are also more sensitive
than others, for example, coral reefs or fish nursery areas, and require a
higher level of protection
and/or management.
Port operators account for the majority of sea dumping permit applications.
Ports are fundamental to Australia’s economy and
well planned dredging
activities, in conjunction with timely and effective environmental assessments,
are essential to maximise their
efficiency.
The regulatory framework seeks to balance the needs of ports with the
protection of the marine environment and the interests of other
stakeholders. It
provides for the case-by-case assessment of individual dredging proposals, but
also encourages longer-term strategic
planning, to align the needs and goals of
ports with our shared objective of protecting Australia’s marine
environment.
The Guidelines seek to provide clear, consistent standards and criteria for
assessment of dredged material. The Guidelines also seek
to facilitate better
decision-making by regulators, by improving the quality of information on which
assessments are based.
1.1 Using these guidelines
The Legislative Framework includes guidance on the London Protocol and
Australian legislation.
The Sea Dumping Permit Process outlines the permit process under the Sea
Dumping Act.
The Assessment Framework outlines requirements through:
• Evaluation of Disposal Alternatives and Waste Minimisation
• Assessment of Sediment Quality
• Assessment of Loading and Disposal Sites and Potential Impacts,
• Management and Monitoring.
Detailed guidance on various aspects of the assessment are provided in
Appendices A to H.
2. The legislative framework
2.1 Australian Government responsibilities
There are three key Commonwealth Acts related to the regulation of ocean
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981
(the Sea Dumping
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
(the EPBC Act), and
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975
will assist proponents to identify what approvals are
required for proposed activities.
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981
Under the Sea Dumping Act, the Australian Government regulates the dumping,
and loading for the purposes of dumping, of wastes and
other matter at sea.
The Sea Dumping Act applies in all Australian waters, and to all Australian
vessels and Australian aircraft, anywhere at sea. Australian
waters includes any
waters on the landward side of the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), or the
Continental Shelf of Australia where
it extends beyond the EEZ
), except areas determined to be Internal Waters.
Proponents should contact the Determining Authority to identify the boundaries
Internal Waters within their area of interest.
The Sea Dumping Act implements Australia’s obligations under the
1996 Protocol to the
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution
by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 1972
(the London Protocol). The
London Protocol entered into force for its parties in 2006.
Annex 2 to the London Protocol sets out the assessment process that must be
followed by countries assessing proposals for ocean disposal.
Waste Specific
Guidances have also been developed to assist in assessing each of the categories
of materials that may be dumped under
the Protocol. These processes are
reflected in Australia’s regulatory framework and within these
Guidelines.
Australia reports annually to the International Maritime Organization on all
permitted and emergency sea dumping activities in Australian
Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999
The EPBC Act has streamlined the environmental assessment and approvals
process for actions that are likely to have a significant
impact on matters
of national environmental significance. It also establishes an integrated regime
for biodiversity conservation
and the assessment and management of important
protected areas.
An activity, or action, will require assessment and approval under Part 9 of
the EPBC Act, if it is likely to have a significant impact
on one or more of the
following matters of national environmental significance:
• World Heritage Properties
• Ramsar wetlands
• Listed threatened species and ecological communities
• Listed migratory species
• The environment of the Commonwealth marine areas
• National heritage places
• Nuclear actions, and
• Actions on Commonwealth land or involving a Commonwealth agency.
FIGURE 1: Legislative framework and permitting requirements
FIGURE 2: Maritime zones in Australian waters
(Copyright: Commonwealth of Australia, Geoscience Australia 2008
www.ga.gov.au)
2.1.3 Interaction between the Sea Dumping Act and the EPBC Act
In assessing a permit application under the Sea Dumping Act, the Determining
Authority must also consider advice from the Commonwealth
Environment Minister
(or delegate) (under section 160), if the action is likely to have a significant
impact on ‘the environment’,
including an impact within state or
territory waters. In practice, an EPBC Act assessment is usually required for
such actions, and
the granting of a sea dumping permit is based on that
assessment and any recommendations following from it.
Where assessment is required under both the Sea Dumping and the EPBC Acts,
the assessment processes will be coordinated as much as
possible. However,
proponents should seek advice from the Determining Authority on the requirements
of both Acts, to ensure the project
is referred and assessed under both at the
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Act 1975
Within the boundaries of the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park, the Great
Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority (GBRMPA) has been delegated
authority under
the Sea Dumping Act and has legislative authority under the
Great Barrier
Reef Marine Park Act 1975
for a range of activities within and outside the
Marine Park, including the loading and disposal of dredged material.
Proponents who wish to dredge or dispose of dredged material in the Great
Barrier Reef Marine Park should consult
indirect impacts of their activities on the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park.
2.2 State Government Responsibilities
The Sea Dumping Act does not apply where dumping is to occur entirely in
Internal Waters, within the limits of a State or the Northern
Territory. Such
waters include rivers, the gulfs in South Australia, and some bays, such as
Sydney Harbour and Port Phillip Bay.
Further information on Australian maritime
boundaries can be found through Geoscience Australia’s website at
www.ga.gov.au.
If unsure of whether waters are within the limits of the state,
For activities that occur ‘within the limits’, State and Northern
Territory Governments are primarily responsible for
regulating loading and
dumping activities.
In most instances, the States and the Northern Territory have requirements
under their own legislation for dredging and dumping that
occurs within their
adjacent coastal waters to three nautical miles. Proponents should contact
the relevant State or Territory authority
to determine the nature and scope of
any approvals required in addition to the sea dumping permit, such as
requirements relating
to submerged lands.
There remains a requirement for approval under the EPBC Act, for dredging and
dumping activities that occur within waters within the
limits of a State or the
Northern Territory that are likely to have a significant impact on a matter
of national environmental significance.
3. The sea dumping permit process
3.1 Requirement for a permit
A permit is required under the Sea Dumping Act to authorise the dumping, and
the loading for the purposes of dumping, of any wastes
or other matter into
Australian waters, or from an Australian vessel or platform, anywhere at
Dumping, or loading for the purposes of dumping, other than in accordance
with a permit, is a criminal offence under the Sea Dumping
Act, and may incur a
substantial penalty (Refer s.36 and s.37 of the Sea Dumping Act), including
imprisonment.
At the time a permit is granted, or at any time while a permit is in force,
the Minister or Delegate may impose, vary, suspend or
revoke any conditions
under the permit, and, in circumstances of a breach of the Act or a permit, or
in order to properly regulate
dumping, may vary, suspend or revoke a permit.
The holder of a permit may also apply for the variation of a permit, or the
variation, revocation or suspension of a condition imposed
in respect of a
Application forms can be found at: www.environment.gov.au/coasts/pollution.
3.2 Permit process
Application and assessment
The steps involved in assessing permit applications are:
• the proponent considers alternatives to ocean disposal and consults
stakeholders
• the proponent undertakes initial discussions with the Determining
Authority, to discuss the scope of the project and the anticipated
requirements
• the proponent develops and submits a draft Sampling and Analysis Plan
(SAP) to the Determining Authority for approval (see
unless an exemption from testing has been obtained
• the Determining Authority assigns a project officer, who reviews the
draft SAP and its methods, and who may request clarification
information before the SAP can be approved
• once approved, the proponent implements the SAP
• once the SAP analysis and report, and any baseline monitoring, have
been completed, the applicant submits a completed permit
application, including
SAP results and details of stakeholder consultation, together with all other
relevant supporting documentation
• the Determining Authority publishes notice of the application in the
Commonwealth Gazette
• the Determining Authority undertakes an initial assessment to
determine whether sufficient information has been provided to
application to be assessed, if not, additional information is formally requested
from the applicant
• the Determining Authority determines whether or not the proposed
dumping activity is likely to have a significant impact upon
the environment
and, if so, advice is sought under Section 160 of the EPBC Act, including an
assessment under that Act
• the applicant may be required to undertake additional consultation
with stakeholders, particularly once the sediment has been
characterised
• once any additional information is received and found suitable, the
Determining Authority prepares a final assessment and
draft permit decision
• where applicable, the Determining Authority consults with the
applicant on proposed conditions
• after comments on the draft permit are received and considered, the
Minister or Delegate considers the draft permit and a
decision is made
• after a decision is made, details are provided to the applicant
– either a copy of the signed permit or a statement
of reasons as to why
the application was refused, and
• the Determining Authority publishes notice of the decision in the
Commonwealth Gazette.
Permit implementation
Permits are granted with conditions which are appended to the permit and
specify: approved activity, location and volume of the material
to be dredged
and location of the disposal site(s); loading and disposal methods and measures
to mitigate impacts; environmental
monitoring; and reporting. If a permit is
granted, it is the responsibility of the permit holder to ensure any conditions
under the permit are incorporated into project planning and
implementation. Permit implementation involves:
• undertaking the approved activity in accordance with the details
specified in the permit including the volume and type of
material to be dumped,
location of the disposal site, loading and disposal methods
• development of an environment management plan or other plans (e.g.
monitoring, contingency plans), to be approved by the Determining
Authority (if
required), before loading and dumping can commence
• providing monitoring, adaptive management and additional reporting
(if required) during dredging and dumping, if adverse impacts
are detected
• auditing of conditions or plans may be required, as may retention of
records for audit purposes (the Determining Authority
may also undertake its own
audit), and
• providing a summary report of the dredging activity to the
Determining Authority by 31 January each year to facilitate annual
reporting of
all dumping permits to the International Maritime Organization, in accordance
with the London Protocol.
3.3 Permit duration
Capital dredging
If a permit is granted for capital dredging, it is issued for a period which
reflects an appropriate timeframe for the works to be
undertaken, determined in
consultation with the proponent.
Maintenance dredging
The Determining Authority will grant long-term permits for maintenance
dredging on the following basis:
• an assessment of the applicant’s capacity to meet their
obligations under the Act and any permit granted
• establishment of a Technical Advisory and Consultative Committee
(TACC) for long-term management, and
• development and implementation by the applicant of a satisfactory
long term Environment Management Plan (EMP) for loading
and dumping activities,
which provides for sampling and analysis to support future permit
applications.
Fees reflect the cost of administering the permit process. Fees for permit
applications and variations are prescribed under the
Environment Protection
(Sea Dumping) Regulations 1983
. Permit application fees relate to the type
of material being dumped and, in the case of dredge material, are classified in
categories relative to the quantity and quality of the material and the
duration of the permit sought.
In accordance with the Regulations, the application fee must be paid within
30 days of the application being made and a permit decision,
including a permit
variation, can not be made before the application fee is paid.
3.5 Timeframes
The statutory timeframe for a decision to grant, or to refuse to grant, a
permit, is 90 calendar days from receiving the application.
If additional
information is required for the purpose of the application assessment, it will
be requested in writing within 60 days.
The statutory timeframe on the
application may be stopped, pending receipt of the information requested. When
sufficient information
has been received, the statutory timeframe will re-start
from Day 1.
3.6 Consultation
Proponents should consult with stakeholders prior to submission of an
application. Consultation early in the project, when disposal
options are still
being evaluated, is preferable and can contribute to achieving broad acceptance
of the best solutions.
Formal, written consultation should include providing stakeholders with all
the details of the application such as: the alternatives
investigated, the
proposed location and timing, any contamination issues, predicted impacts,
mitigation measures, and proposals for
ongoing management and monitoring.
Applications should document the consultation undertaken, the stakeholders
engaged, any issues raised and how they were addressed.
For ongoing maintenance
dredging and new capital dredging in a port, consultation through a Technical
Advisory and Consultative Committees
(TACC) is recommended. Further consultation
may also be required during the assessment process as issues arise. Refer to
for further guidance on consultation.
3.7 Compliance and Enforcement
Compliance and enforcement activities under the Sea Dumping Act operate in
accordance with the
Compliance and Enforcement
. This document sets out
the policy framework used when dealing with possible contraventions of
Commonwealth environment legislation.
The purpose of this policy is to inform proponents of the factors that will
be taken into account in determining appropriate responses
to contraventions,
including whether legal proceedings will be pursued. The approach and procedures
for individual cases may vary
where there are specific legislative
requirements.
4. The assessment framework
The Assessment Framework involves the following steps:
4.1 Disposal alternatives and waste minimisation
The objectives of the London Protocol and the Sea Dumping Act include
minimising pollution caused by ocean disposal. Evaluating the
alternatives to
ocean disposal and identifying and implementing measures to prevent pollution
are important first steps in the assessment
4.1.1 Evaluating Alternatives
All alternatives to ocean disposal need to be evaluated, including the
environmental, social and economic impacts of each disposal
option. Consultation
with potentially affected stakeholders or potential users of the dredged
material will be required.
Important elements of assessing disposal options for dredged material
• Are there opportunities to beneficially use or recycle such
• If they have no beneficial use, can they be treated to destroy,
reduce or remove the hazardous constituents?
• If hazardous constituents are destroyed, reduced or removed, do the
materials have beneficial uses?
• What are the comparative risks to the environment and human health of
the alternatives?
• What are the costs and benefits of the alternatives?
It is important to recognise the potential value of dredged material as a
resource. Possible beneficial uses include engineered uses
(land reclamation,
beach nourishment, offshore berms, and capping material), agriculture and
product uses (aquaculture, construction
material, liners) and environmental
enhancement (restoration and establishment of wetlands, upland habitats, nesting
islands, and
fisheries).
Material which is unacceptable for ocean disposal is, in many cases, quite
acceptable for onshore disposal. Often the contaminants
of concern will not
readily leach in land disposal sites and the dredged material may even gain an
inert or solid waste classification,
rather than hazardous or industrial waste.
Suitability and requirements for determining onshore disposal options should be
with State or Territory authorities.
A permit shall be refused if the determining authority finds that appropriate
opportunities exist to re-use, recycle or treat material
without undue risks to
human health or the environment or disproportionate costs.
4.1.2 Waste prevention
A waste prevention audit must be undertaken to identify opportunities for
preventing or minimising pollution and any future sediment
contamination. The
audit evaluates:
• The types, amounts and relative hazard of wastes generated
• The waste sources, and
• The feasibility of waste reduction and prevention techniques.
For dredged material, it should focus on identifying and managing
controllable sources of sediment contamination, such as port loading
un-loading activities.
Port authorities would generally be in a position to reduce berth
contamination due to careless handling of materials. Some port authorities
routinely sample berth faces and adopt a “polluter pays” approach by
charging berth users the clean-up costs for any
contamination found. This
strategy encourages better performance by port users, minimising contamination
levels and treatment/disposal
costs for ports.
Waste prevention strategies and measures can be included in environment
management plans, where they can be a focus for ongoing review
improvement (refer
4.4 Management and Monitoring
Application Information Requirements
Applicants need to clearly demonstrate that all alternatives have been
evaluated. The above questions should be answered and a discussion
environmental, social and economic impacts of all options should be included in
the application. Reasons for why alternatives
are unsuitable should also be
included in the application.
4.2 Assessment of sediment quality
This Section provides a decision-tree approach for assessing potential
contaminants, comprising five phases as summarised in Figure
3. The aim of this
assessment is to determine the suitability of the dredged sediment for ocean
Results of sediment quality assessment can often be equivocal. Accordingly,
data must be collected from several lines of evidence
(e.g. chemical testing,
toxicity testing, bioavailability testing) to allow meaningful assessment of
dredged material contamination
and its acceptability for ocean disposal. Samples
of sediment must also be collected that adequately characterise the sediments to
be dredged.
At various points, the material may be classified as suitable for ocean
disposal, in which case a sea dumping permit may be sought
without further
chemical testing. In the very rare cases where a weight-of-evidence assessment
may be necessary, it will rely on
information provided by all the lines of
evidence obtained through these phases.
Physical testing will still be required for the assessment of turbidity, and
post-placement behaviour, unless it is demonstrated that
the available data is
sufficient.
FIGURE 3: Assessment of potential contaminants
4.2.1 Phase I – Evaluation of existing information
Phase I involves reviewing existing information on the material proposed for
sea disposal, to determine which contaminants need investigation
and to assess
whether the existing information sufficiently characterises the sediments
without further testing. Further detail is
provided in
Existing chemical or toxicity data for the sediments of the area to be
dredged will have a maximum currency of five years, where there
is no reason to
believe that the contamination status has changed significantly, after which new
data would need to be gathered.
New data will be required where contamination of
the site is likely to have increased or new pollution sources are present (such
as a new industry or accidental spills). Information and data older than 5 years
may be useful in some parts of an assessment to
demonstrate trends over
If the proponent believes further testing is not warranted, based on the
evaluation of existing information, they should contact the
Determining
Authority prior to submitting a permit application to seek exemption from
further testing.
Data needs to be collated and analysed, with evidence and supporting advice
provided to the Determining Authority. Where there is
insufficient valid
information to identify and/or characterise potential contaminants, the
assessment moves to Phase II.
Exemptions from Sediment Testing Requirements
Exemptions from some or all of the sediment testing requirements are possible
under certain circumstances. All exemptions require
approval from the
Determining Authority.
Sediments which meet the following criteria may not require further chemical
(a) Dredged material composed predominantly of gravel, sand or rock, or any
other naturally occurring bottom material with particle
sizes larger than silt,
but only where this material is found in areas of high current or wave energy
where the seabed consists of
shifting gravel and sandbars, or
(b) The site from which the material is to be taken is sufficiently far
removed from known existing and historical sources of pollution
reasonable assurance that the material has not been contaminated and the
material is substantially the same as the substrate
at the disposal
. An estuary whose catchment consisted entirely of
undisturbed bushland distant from major urban, industrial and agricultural areas
could be exempted from testing. However, an estuary with a catchment of
undisturbed bushland near a major urban, industrial or agricultural
not be exempted, nor would an estuary that was undisturbed save for a village or
small town or transport corridor.
. Large capital dredging projects in remote or offshore
areas, where there is currently no development which could have resulted in
contaminated sediments, may be exempted from chemical testing on the basis that
they represent clean natural materials.
The applicant is still required to consider issues such as turbidity,
nutrients and environmental impacts despite being exempt from
4.2.2 Phase II – Sampling and analysis of sediments
Phase II involves identifying and investigating the
contaminants which could be present at elevated levels in the sediments of the
dredge area and therefore require analysis
(the contaminants list). While the
ports and harbours of major cities are likely to contain a wide variety of
chemicals, these will
vary greatly due to historical and geographical factors.
The sediments from smaller ports may be largely clean except in inner harbour
and berth areas, or near outfalls and stormwater discharges.
The Determining Authority approves a Sampling and Analysis Plan (SAP) prior
to sampling to ensure that adequate data are collected
for the assessment
process (Appendix B). The SAP outlines the dredging proposal (volumes and areas)
then sets out the study objectives
and the proposed sampling, analysis and
quality assurance/quality control procedures.
The draft SAP will need to be reviewed by the Determining Authority and
approved prior to sampling, and it is not uncommon for changes
to the draft plan
to be required. Sufficient time should be set aside for the SAP review process.
Detailed guidance on SAP requirements
is provided at
Where possible, the SAP should include procedures for later stages of the
assessment shown on
(i.e. elutriate, bioavailability and
toxicity testing). Otherwise, if these procedures are subsequently required, and
have not been
included in the initial SAP, a supplementary SAP will
be required.
Guidance on sampling and analysis methods is provided in
and on quality assurance and quality control in
Phase II assessment procedures include comparison to the Screening Levels at
, and to ambient baseline levels for sediments of comparable
grainsize in the vicinity of the disposal site. Where these levels are
exceeded, elutriate and bioavailability testing under Phase III is required.
4.2.3 Phase III – Elutriate and bioavailability testing
Sediment contaminants will generally be present in a variety of forms, but
only the bioavailable fraction will impact organisms. This
will vary with
changes in sediment chemistry across an area, with depth, and over time due to
disturbance of the sediment (either
naturally or from human activity), or from
seasonal changes in the sediments or its overlying water column.
Elutriate testing
– Elutriate testing assesses impacts to water
quality. Test results are normally compared to the relevant ANZECC/ARMCANZ
marine water quality trigger values for 95 per cent protection, or
subsequent updates to these values, except where the water body
has been zoned
to have a higher (or lower) level of protection, in which case the relevant
ANZECC/ARMCANZ (2000a,b) trigger values
are to be used. If all contaminants are
below the relevant guideline values after initial dilution (i.e., after four
), effects on organisms in the water column
would not be expected during disposal. If any contaminants are present at levels
their relevant guideline values, loading and disposal could cause adverse
effects on water quality, and loading and disposal controls
are evaluated to
determine if impacts can be mitigated. If they can be mitigated the assessment
proceeds to bioavailability testing.
If not, the dredged material is
unacceptable for open water disposal.
Bioavailability testing
– Bioavailability testing assesses
potential impacts on sediment quality. There are a variety of methods available
to investigate
contaminant bioavailability. If tests indicate that the
bioavailability of the relevant contaminants is below the specified criteria,
the dredged material is chemically acceptable for ocean disposal. If the
bioavailability is above the criteria, the sediment is potentially
toxic and the
assessment proceeds to Phase
4.2.4 Phase IV – Toxicity and bioaccumulation testing
Toxicity testing
– Acute and chronic toxicity testing is
undertaken when results indicate that the sediment is potentially toxic, and
a minimum of three sensitive test organisms, representing the main
contaminant exposure routes. The proponent needs to justify why
the selected
tests are considered appropriate. If all tests are passed, the sediment is not
considered toxic, and is chemically acceptable
for ocean disposal. The
guidelines in PHASE IV – TOXICITY AND BIOACCUMULATION TESTING (
) set out assessment criteria for situations where some tests, or some
samples, show toxicity while others do not.
Where there are no appropriate toxicity tests which are sensitive near the
Screening Levels for particular contaminants, pore water
testing should be done
and the data compared to the relevant ANZECC/ARMCANZ marine water quality
trigger values. In the rare situation
where there is no such guideline, or
where scattered toxicity has been found throughout a dredge area, and it is
not associated with
any hot spot, a Phase V weight-of-evidence assessment
may be undertaken.
Note that, for marine areas zoned for a high level of ecological protection,
any significant toxicity may render the sediments unacceptable
disposal in that area.
Bioaccumulation testing
– Bioaccumulation testing is undertaken
when the sediment contains bioaccumulating substances, such as mercury, dioxins
organochlorine pesticides, at levels exceeding the ANZECC/ARMCANZ SQG-High
. Bioaccumulation may be a concern even where
toxicity has not been identified. PHASE IV – TOXICITY AND BIOACCUMULATION
) sets out assessment criteria for situations
where some tests, or some samples, show bioaccumulation while others do not.
Very Small Dredging Programs
– The Determining Authority can
exempt very small dredging programs (less than 15 000 cubic metres) from
toxicity testing in
certain circumstances. However, screening, elutriate and
bioavailability testing would be required and this exemption from toxicity
testing would not apply where such sediments contain bioavailable contaminants
exceeding the SQG-High values in Table 4. If the sediments
bioaccumulating substances at levels greater than those set out in Table 4,
bioaccumulation testing would also be required.
4.2.5 Phase V – Weight-of-evidence assessment
In rare circumstances, as noted above, it may be possible to go beyond the
assessment of toxicity (or bioaccumulation) to make a more
definitive evaluation
of the potential effects of the contaminated sediment after disposal, using a
weight-of-evidence assessment.
This would occur in the rare situation when there
are no appropriate toxicity tests which are sensitive near the Screening Levels
for particular contaminants, and no relevant ANZECC/ARMCANZ marine water quality
trigger value with which to compare pore water data.
It would also occur where
the results of toxicity or bioaccumulation testing are equivocal.
A weight-of-evidence assessment takes into account the outcomes of each
available line of evidence. Lines of evidence may include:
• Sediment chemistry (including elutriate testing, porewater chemistry
and dilute acid extract of metals)
• Toxicity (endpoint relative to negative control), each test type
• Bioaccumulation, and
• Ecology (e.g. benthic community structure).
Each line of evidence is tabulated, ranked, weighted, according to its
reliability as an assessment tool and its ecological significance,
and they are
then combined to arrive at an overall assessment of whether the material is
acceptable or unacceptable for ocean disposal.
provides more
information on this approach.
Where sediments are found to be unacceptable for unconfined ocean disposal
after the weight-of-evidence assessment, and should the
proponent, after
evaluating alternatives, still wish to consider ocean disposal, they will need
to investigate management options,
such as treatment, control measures and
confined disposal, to see if impacts can be successfully mitigated (see
Assessing Potential Impacts on the Environment
4.4 Management and
4.3 Assessing potential impacts on the environment
Once it has been determined that sediment is suitable for ocean disposal, an
assessment of the potential impacts on the receiving
environment should be
undertaken. This assessment will inform proponents of the suitability of sites
for disposal and will assist
in the development of future mitigation and
management measures.
Dredging activities may impact the marine environment from both loading and
disposal operations. The loading and disposal techniques
will influence the
potential impacts and their extent, and therefore the information requirements
for the assessment of the existing
environment.
Potential impacts of loading and disposal elements may include direct and
indirect physical impacts, biological impacts, and impacts
on other users of the
marine environment. The environmental impact assessment will define the nature,
temporal and spatial scales,
and duration of expected impacts.
Loading site
Sediment is considered “loaded” once it has been removed from
the bottom of the sea floor and has been taken up into the
dredging mechanism.
Loading site impacts may occur from events such as overflow dredging, clamshell
spills and leaking hopper seals.
Loading impacts do not include the physical
impacts at the dredge head from material that is not loaded (e.g. agitation
If unsure whether the technique to be used constitutes loading, consult
the relevant Determining Authority.
4.3.1 Site Assessment
The existing environment needs to be assessed so the impacts of loading and
disposal can be assessed and measured. Site assessments
will include the
collation of a detailed information base drawn from a range of sources from
which to make informed decisions about
the impacts. Assessments should be
consistent with any relevant Commonwealth Marine Bioregional Plans. Assessments
should also be
made in consultation with users and other stakeholders of
potential sites. Ideally, a number of alternative sites will be considered.
At existing loading or disposal sites, much of the assessment information
required may already be available. In some cases, further
investigation may be
needed, where a change in the nature and/or volume of dumping is planned, or to
provide data necessary for proper
assessment of the environmental impacts at the
site over time.
The impact assessment should provide a concise statement of the potential
direct and indirect impacts of loading and disposal. These
are likely to be
influenced by the techniques used to load and dispose of dredged material and
the physical properties of the sediment
There are four key elements to consider in identifying potential impacts.
1. Physical environment
Information required
Information regarding the physical, chemical and biological characteristics
of the water column and seabed are required for potential
sites. This will
include marine surveys and benthic habitat maps as necessary. This may include
details of:
• bathymetry and water temperature
• grain size analysis
• whether the disposal site is retentive or dispersive
• proximity to areas of special scientific or biological importance,
such as sanctuaries or marine reserves
• extent and condition of existing marine habitats
• proximity to habitats with sensitive receptors such as coral or algal
reefs or seagrass, and
• proximity to spawning, feeding, nursery, recruitment, migration and
other critically important habitats.
Impact identification
Direct and indirect impacts may result from:
• temporary decreases in water transparency
• increased concentrations in suspended matter
• increased rates in sedimentation
• disposal of sediments with high organic matter
• changes to bathymetry
• changes to sediment composition
• removal or burial of sessile and motile organisms that are unable to
burrow up through the deposited layer, and
• introduced marine pests.
Cumulative effects need to be taken into account when repeated or multiple
dumping operations occur. It is also important to consider
possible interactions
with other disposal practices in the area, including historical, existing and
planned disposals.
As a result of these effects, direct physical impacts may include:
• reduction of light penetration, leading to sub-lethal effects or
death of light sensitive organisms and habitats
• changes to benthic community structures and habitats
• physical collision of the dredge with marine fauna
• reduced vitality or death of sessile benthic fauna through clogging
of feeding mechanisms or smothering (especially filter-feeding
organisms and
sensitive habitats)
• alteration of current velocities and wave conditions affecting
sediment regimes and leading to erosion of areas (such as seagrass
• a reduction in dissolved oxygen levels due to an increase in nutrient
concentrations potentially resulting in anoxia/hypoxia.
At a retentive site the impact assessment will delineate the area that will
be altered by the dumped material and identify effects
to the area. In most
cases, the primary dumping zone will be entirely smothered. In this case, the
assessment should project the
likely time scale of recovery or recolonisation
after disposal, as well as the nature of recolonisation (i.e. whether the
community structure will be altered). The assessment should also specify
the likelihood, scale and severity of residual impacts outside
this primary
At a dispersive site, impact assessment will define the area likely to be
altered in the shorter term and the severity of any changes.
Applicants should
also specify the likely extent of long term transport of material from the
disposal site, compare this flux with
existing transport fluxes in the area and
assess the likely scale and severity of effects in the long term.
2. Biological environment
Information required
Biological characteristics of a site may include important, listed,
threatened species or communities and migratory species that use
Temporal/seasonal and spatial characteristics should be considered, to identify
potentially critical times when loading
or disposal should not take
place including:
• periods of migration from one part of an ecosystem to another (e.g.
from an estuary to open sea or vice versa), and
• growing, feeding, resting and breeding periods of sensitive or
threatened species.
Impact identification
Potential impacts to the biology of species include
• disruption of the lifecycle (breeding, feeding, migration, resting)
of a species
• adversely effecting the spatial distribution of a species
• fragmentation of an important population
• introduction of disease that may impact the population, and
• practices that interfere with the recovery of a species.
3. Other uses
Information required
Consultation with relevant Commonwealth and State environmental, maritime
safety and fisheries agencies and other organisations may
assist in determining
the significance of the loading and disposal sites and nearby areas to other
users. Other uses may include:
• shipping lanes and navigation
• military exclusion zones
• engineering uses of the seafloor, including mining or undersea cables
• public use of the shoreline
• prospective oil and gas exploration and development
• fishing, and
• areas of high aesthetic value or of significant cultural or
historical importance (e.g. historic shipwrecks).
Impact identification
Potential impacts of the activity on other uses of the sea should be
considered. These impacts could be seasonal, temporary or permanent.
Displacement of other users may also result in environment impacts in other
areas. Human health risks and exclusion of future uses
considerations.
4. Economic and operational feasibility
Information required
The location and size of the disposal site and its proximity to the dredge
site are important issues for the assessment. Information
is required to
demonstrate that it is:
• large enough, unless it is an acknowledged dispersion site, to have
the bulk of the deposited spoil remain either within the
site limits or within a
predicted area of impact after dumping
• large enough to accommodate anticipated volumes of solid waste and/or
liquid wastes to be diluted to near background levels
before or upon reaching
site boundaries
• not so large that monitoring would require excessive time and money,
• large enough in relation to anticipated volumes for dumping so that
it would serve its function for many years.
Impact identification
The assessment may consider the anticipated loading rates per day, week,
month or year and the allowable reduction in water depth
over the site from
mounding of material. A comparison of the various potential sites will consider
the economic and operational feasibility
of each site.
4.3.2 Analysis of Impacts
Following the identification of potential impacts, a risk assessment may be
required. Analysis may be qualitative or quantitative.
Methods for risk analysis
are described in the Australian/New Zealand Standard for risk management (AS/NZS
4360:1999, HB 203:2000).
Quantitative analysis to address impacts of turbidity in sensitive
environments includes physical tests of basic sediment characteristics
) to predict the behaviour of material after loading and
disposal. This would include full grainsize analysis both for the chemical
assessment, for prediction of turbidity plume characteristics during and after
disposal and to assess whether the material proposed
for dumping is physically
different to the substrate at the disposal site, so that the post-placement
behaviour of the dredged material
can be determined. In some cases fine
sediments, particularly when removed by hydraulic dredging, can have a very high
water content
and low density, and can be prone to gravity flow across quite
shallow slopes. Such sediments should also be tested in the processed
(that is, after dredging). This needs to be taken into account in any modeling.
It may also be necessary to provide evidence
of the calibration and validation
of any models using site specific forcing and input data. This will include
sediment movement anticipated
from loading and disposal, relative to existing
sediment levels and movement.
It is considered that the potential for dredge vessels to translocate pest
species, whether via spoil or attached to uncleaned equipment
Consequently the spreading of marine pests should be considered in all risk
analysis of any new dredging operations. Introduced
marine species are discussed
Application Information Requirements
Applicants need to clearly characterise both loading and disposal sites,
to inform the assessment of how they may be impacted. This
may require baseline
assessment of sediments at and near the loading and disposal site as well as
nearby sensitive elements of the
marine environment and a consideration of other
uses of the area.
4.4 Management and monitoring
Once the likelihood and consequence of potential impacts of the activity have
been predicted, management measures should be evaluated
to determine if the
impacts can be controlled or mitigated. Monitoring of environmental impacts and
the effectiveness of management
measures will be important components in
managing impacts. Consideration should be given to adoption of assessment and
approaches consistent with the Environmental Quality Management
Framework of the National Water Quality Management Strategy (ANZECC/ARMCANZ,
4.4.1 Management Measures
A range of management options is available to reduce or control the impacts
of loading and disposal. Some of these measures, such
as the control of overflow
dredging, apply during loading, while others apply at the disposal site.
Management measures include:
dredged material
– to reduce levels of
contaminants
loading and disposal management
– to reduce dispersal of
turbid plumes in sensitive environments
changing the location and/or timing of dredging and disposal
– to avoid or reduce impacts on sensitive benthic communities
altering the time of year of dredging and
– to avoid critical life-cycle phases such as coral spawning or whale
calving periods, and
use of specialised dredge equipment –
‘turtle excluding devices’, to reduce potential impacts on marine
Related issues which need to be considered include:
• availability of suitable equipment for proposed dredging/disposal
• ability to control placement of the material, and
• ability to monitor the site adequately.
Sediment Treatment Options
Treatment of sediments to remove contaminants may be considered, although
treatment methods may be prohibitively expensive. Treatment
options include
contaminated fraction separation, chemical separation, or instigation of natural
geochemical interaction of contaminants
with sea water or bottom sediment.
Management Options at the Point of Loading
The dredging method will have the greatest influence on impacts related to
loading. Overflow dredging techniques may produce turbid
plumes at the dredge
site, however, management techniques, such as discharge at water level or below,
can greatly reduce turbidity.
Targeting particular tidal conditions can also
reduce the impacts at sensitive receiving environments. Specialised dredge
such as turtle-excluding devices or silt curtains, can reduce the
likelihood of impacts, particularly from mobilisation of contaminated
Silt curtains are ineffective in high wave or current conditions, and are likely
to be impractical in large scale dredging.
Procedures for dealing with ‘Hot Spots’
Where feasible, pollution ‘hot spots’ (i.e. a contaminated layer
or area whose bulk composition exceeds the guideline
values set out in
) will need to be separately handled and subject to effective
disposal methods.
However, it may not be feasible to separate and remove the contaminated
material in some circumstances. It may be permissible to dump
uncontaminated material if the two combined materials meet the guidelines set
, e.g. a thin layer (less than 50 cm) of contaminated
sediment is on top of or within a less contaminated layer, and the bulk
composition
of the two layers is acceptable for ocean disposal. The thin layer
could not be readily removed by dredging techniques that are routinely
in Australia, which operate on a minimum thickness of approximately 0.5 m.
If contaminated material is unacceptable for unconfined ocean disposal, other
options will need to be investigated (e.g. onshore disposal
or confined
ocean\ disposal).
Management Options at Disposal Site
Upon release, most dredge material will sink directly to the seabed or form a
dense layer of suspended sediment just above it. Generally,
this material will
settle within hours or days, although if fine and of high water content, it is
liable to be resuspended and could
be dispersed by currents or waves. In high
energy environments, such as those typically found in south-eastern Australia,
even sand-sized
material will be moved by current and wave action if deposited
in water shallower than 60 metres.
However, some of the fines in the spoil will remain in suspension for days
and weeks and may be carried long distances by currents
before being dispersed.
Large dredging programs can produce extensive plumes that cause elevated
turbidity levels over large areas
for months, with potentially significant
impacts to sensitive marine areas or ecosystems. Deoxygenation of the water
column may also
occur and in shallow (poorly flushed) areas this may persist for
significant lengths of time. These effects will require careful
scheduling and
management.
Where dispersal in the receiving environment is undesirable, disposal should
be managed to reduce it in the water column or across
the seabed. Options
include modifying dredge equipment or timing, thin-layer placement, confined
disposal, or the use of sites with
particular characteristics (e.g. abiotic
Dredging equipment and timing
Submerged diffusers may reduce water column impacts because they release the
dredged material lower in the water column and reduce
the velocity of discharge.
This can reduce both the spread and re-suspension of fine sediments. Other
controls could include changing
the rate and timing of disposal.
Thin-layer placement
If burial of benthic organisms is a concern, thin-layer placement may be
considered. Deposition of dredged material in a layer of
less than 15 cm
facilitates benthic organisms burrowing up to the surface and improves the rate
of re-colonisation.
Confined disposal
Lateral containment can physically restrict material both during and after
disposal, resulting in smaller areas of seabed being affected
and also reducing
the potential for release of contaminants. Such sites can include existing
depressions or borrow pits, or constructed
depressions.
Confined disposal, however, presents significant environmental risks and
therefore investigation of both the cap and the contaminated
materials to be
capped would need to be done to a high level of certainty to ensure the long
term stability of the material dumped.
Capping involves covering contaminated material with a suitable thickness
(generally 1 metre or more) of clean material. This will
prevent impacts of
contaminants on benthic organisms after the site is recolonised. Capping can
take place with or without lateral
containment, but is best done in low energy
environments where the cap is not susceptible to erosion. Capping in the
sea via normal
barge dumping is unlikely to be effective where the dredged
material is fine material of high moisture content (slurry) as it is
be displaced from the depression by the capping process.
Management Plans
Management plans can be a useful way of planning for and implementing
management actions to mitigate environmental impacts, as well
as capturing
management commitments and statutory requirements. For long-term maintenance
dredging permits, environment management
plans will be integral to the
management of dredging, pollution control and reduction strategies, and
further research.
Plans should set out the framework for management, mitigation and monitoring
of impacts. They should detail the control strategies
for the project, including
environmental objectives, auditable performance criteria, corrective actions,
responsible personnel, monitoring
and reporting.
Management plans should generally include the following information:
overall management framework
– describe how the plan
integrates with the overall management framework
– put the proposal in the context of the local
environment, including history of dredging and dredge material disposal at the
description of the project –
provide information on
dredging and disposal for the term of the plan or permit, including the
location, staging, and timing of activities
information on approvals
– provide details of any
approvals, relevant conditions and any other statutory requirements
description of the existing environment
– characterise
the dredging and disposal sites and adjacent areas, including its water column,
sediments, biota, resources
and other uses (existing and potential) of the
description of the material for disposal –
a summary of sediment types, their status relevant to the values in these
description of potential impacts
– address both
potential short-term and long-term impacts and any uncertainties regarding the
predicted impacts
management strategies and actions
– describe strategies
and actions to mitigate impacts – including specific and auditable
measures; performance indicators;
monitoring requirements; corrective actions;
and responsibilities and timing for management and monitoring activities
contingency arrangements
– identify corrective actions
and contingency plans should undesirable or unforseen impacts occur
continuous improvement
– identify opportunities for
continuous improvement to prevent, minimise or mitigate environmental impacts in
the longer term
auditing requirements and reporting
– outline reporting
and documentation standards, timing and responsibility of any auditing or
review of management plan
– make provisions for a review
of the management plan, including consultation with the TACC, to ensure it
remains current.
4.4.2 Monitoring
Monitoring requirements are likely to be site and project specific.
Monitoring programs should be developed in conjunction with stakeholders,
usually through the TACC, and with the Determining Authority. Monitoring will be
a key component of any environmental management
In addition to any monitoring undertaken during the assessment, there are two
field monitoring.
Compliance monitoring measures compliance with the approved project and permit
conditions, while field monitoring
measures the condition, and changes in
condition, of the receiving environment.
Turbidity can have direct physical and ongoing effects (through resuspension
and resettlement) and requires monitoring in sensitive
areas during loading and
dumping, as well as post-impact monitoring of the extent of sediment smothering,
Monitoring the toxic contaminant effects on water quality and water-borne
biota is generally not practicable and potential impacts
are taken into account
in elutriate testing. Therefore, monitoring generally concentrates on effects on
the benthos.
A staged approach to monitoring is usually undertaken (see
Note that not all stages are always required, and for some locations, site
specific concerns may necessitate other kinds of investigations.
details examples of impact hypotheses and associate monitoring
requirements.
of the investigation involves physical monitoring. It involves
the collection of data on the areas of deposition, defining site boundaries,
determining the extent of accumulation of material within the areas of
deposition, and the transport of material away from the sites.
involves biological and chemical measurements.
FIGURE 4: Staged Disposal Site Monitoring Framework (after EC, 1996)
investigations would only be necessary where data collected in
Stages 1 or 2 indicates that the environmental quality of the study
area may be
impaired. Investigations could include further chemical and biological
assessment, investigation of the long-term stability
of the disposal site or
biological investigations.
The assessment of impacts helps define post-operational monitoring. While
monitoring will need to be tailored to each dredging and
dumping site, general
guidance is provided in
Application Information Requirements
If the proponent believes impacts can be mitigated, the application will
need to include reasoning and supporting evidence as to why
disposal would not
cause adverse environmental impacts.
Proposed monitoring and management measures will need to be provided in
sufficient detail to allow an assessment of their likely effectiveness.
Submission of a draft management plan is one option for detailing management
Appendix A:
Dredged material assessment –
detailed guidelines
The guidelines in this appendix detail the sediment assessment framework.
They should be used in conjunction with best practice, published
and accepted
scientific standards, such as marine water quality guidelines or
contaminated
soil guidelines. For example, the
Handbook for Sediment
Quality Assessment
, 2005) summarises the latest
science in relation to sediment quality investigation and assessment, with
particular reference to Australian
conditions.
The sediment assessment includes a decision-tree approach for assessing
potential contaminants, comprising five phases:
– evaluation of existing information
– sampling and analysis of sediments
– elutriate and bioavailability testing
– toxicity and bioaccumulation testing, and
– where necessary in rare cases, a weight-of-evidence
assessment.
Figure 5 sets out the framework for investigation and assessment of dredge
FIGURE 5: Sampling Design Decision Tree for the Assessment of
Contaminants
Phase I – evaluation of existing information
The objective of Phase I is to review existing information to determine
whether there is sufficient data for an informed assessment,
or whether further
testing is necessary. If further testing is required, the Phase I review will
also assist the design of the sampling
and analysis plan (see
Previous history of the area to be dredged and its catchment area
This should focus on potential pollution sources (such as mining, industry,
agriculture, transportation or urban areas), the location
of effluent or
stormwater discharge points into the waterway, any discharges, leaks or
spillages from port operations or nearby contaminated
sites, as well as previous
dredging, dumping, solid waste disposal or land-filling.
Useful References
Lists of industries and land uses associated with contamination can be
found in El Saadi & Langley (1991), ANZECC/NHMRC (1992)
and in detail in
Shineldecker (1992). Edwards
(1994) present a detailed approach to
the historical appraisal of contaminated sites.
The National Environment Protection Council’s Assessment of Site
Contamination Measure, NEPC 1999, and its individual Schedules
(10), all available on the http://www.ephc.gov.au/ website, set out current
Australian guidelines for contaminated site
investigations.
Site condition
Potential pollution problems from onshore sites may be identified by
inspecting the site (ANZECC/NHMRC 1992). The presence of waste,
oils or other
materials in drains may also indicate contamination of adjacent sediments.
Previous studies of the area to be dredged
Sediments from major ports will have been studied previously, and even in
small coastal towns and villages there may have been relevant
investigations. A
literature, environmental and planning studies,
unpublished consultant’s
reports and postgraduate theses for studies of sedimentology, sediment and water
pollution, oceanography
and marine ecology relating to the area to be dredged.
Relevant data includes bathymetry, chemical data, sediment grain size,
distribution and layering, sediment transport, currents, waves,
storm events and
marine ecology. All data should be reviewed to determine its quality in terms of
field sampling methods and quality
assurance/quality control (QA/QC) procedures,
as well as laboratory QA/QC and data validation.
Existing good quality data can significantly reduce the amount of sampling
and analysis required. Preferably, data should be less
than 5 years old.
However, data of unproven quality should not be discarded, as it may still
provide an indication of sediment chemistry,
but less reliance can be placed on
it. Information older than 5 years may also be useful to demonstrate trends over
Where testing has previously demonstrated the absence of certain substances
(e.g. organochlorine pesticides or PCBs) but at less stringent
Quantitation Limits (PQLs) than those listed in
, analysis of
samples to the current PQLs would be necessary, if the site history indicates
that such substances could be present.
Contaminants List
From the above data, the contaminants which need to be investigated can be
identified (the Contaminants List). The Contaminants List
should include:
• toxic substances known, from previous investigations, to occur in
dredge area sediments at levels greater than one-tenth of
the Screening Levels
• based on the historical review, substances potentially present at
such levels in the sediments to be dredged.
The investigation level is one-tenth of the Screening Level so as to pick up
the key contaminants which could be present. If the investigation
level were set
higher, e.g. at the Screening Level, some potential contaminants might be
omitted from analysis, yet could be present
in the dredge sediments at
significantly higher levels than have previously been found. That assumption,
i.e. that the highest levels
of contaminants in a dredge area had already been
identified, is unwarranted and dangerous.
If, based on the evaluation of existing information, the proponent believes
further testing is not warranted, they can contact the
Determining Authority
prior to their permit application, to seek exemption from further testing. This
can avoid stopping the statutory
timeframe to seek further information during
the assessment.
If further testing will be necessary, specific testing requirements are set
out in a Sampling and Analysis Plan (SAP), in Phase II
of the assessment
Phase II – sampling and analysis of sediments
Sediment investigation aims to collect and analyse representative samples
that adequately characterise the sediments to be dredged.
Single samples plus a
percentage of replicates are adequate for initial sampling, however for
bioavailability and toxicity testing,
a greater degree of compositing and/or
replication is necessary to ensure representativeness, given the smaller number
taken. Screening Level values (
) are used for the
initial assessment. If they are exceeded, further testing (Phase III) is
required to determine if the dredged material
is suitable for ocean disposal.
Before any sampling takes place, the proponent develops a draft Sampling and
Analysis Plan (SAP) (see
), to detail the proposed sampling and
analysis methods, and submits this to the Determining Authority for approval.
Where possible,
the SAP should include procedures for later stages of the
assessment shown on
(i.e. elutriate, bioavailability and
toxicity testing). If these procedures are subsequently required, and have not
been included
in the initial SAP, a supplementary SAP will be required.
Each step of the study must employ appropriate QA/QC, including
documentation. Guidance on sampling methods and design is provided
ANALYTICAL PARAMETERS
Contaminants List
The potential contaminants are generally identifiable from the site history
and previous sediment survey data.
lists the principal groups of
contaminants that could be present. Other contaminant groups may occasionally be
For large projects, where insufficient current information exists, a pilot
study may be appropriate to determine the Contaminants
List. In such a study,
approximately 20 per cent of the sampling locations required to characterise the
sediments (see Table 6) (randomly
selected from the area to be dredged) would be
analysed for all contaminants that are likely to be present, based on the site
Where certain chemicals or chemical groups are not found at significant
concentrations, these may, with the agreement of the Determining
Authority, be
removed from the analysis list for the remaining 80 per cent of the samples. The
latter samples are to be analysed
for all the chemicals or chemical groups
remaining on the Contaminants List. The Determining Authority may add other
contaminants
to the list.
Once the list is determined, the number of sampling locations is based on the
volume of potentially contaminated material to be dredged
Testing for other chemicals for which guideline values do not currently exist
and inorganic and organic compounds may be required
if a particular source is
identified near a dredging site. For example, if mineral sand concentrates are
being handled in bulk in
an area, in may be necessary to analyse for
radionuclides. Detection limits cannot be specified for all possible substances
ideally, should be no greater than one tenth of the lowest value found
in the sediments. Appropriate PQLs may be found in the scientific
literature and
need to be approved by the Determining Authority.
If the sediments to be dredged appear littered with significant amounts of
garbage material (such as, bottles, cans or other street
litter), the material
may be unacceptable for ocean disposal. Again, the applicant should consult the
Determining Authority.
Key Contaminants in Australia
The common metals and metalloids (e.g. copper, lead, zinc, chromium
cadmium, nickel, mercury and arsenic) are the most widespread
pollutants in
Australia, being present in most contaminated sediments, sometimes at high
Organotin compounds are common contaminants in ports and harbours and
are frequently present at high levels in berths and inner harbour
Petroleum hydrocarbons and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) are
also common but are normally found at elevated levels only
in restricted
Organochlorine pesticides and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are
common in a few harbours but absent from many.
Sediments in cities and near industrial areas commonly have multiple
groups of pollutants. Other contaminants may only be associated
with specific
industries, for example, dioxins with pesticide or paper-making plants,
radionuclides with mining or mineral processing,
sulphate with mining,
chlorinated compounds with chemical plants, non-organochlorine pesticides with
agriculture or pest control.
Practical Quantitation Limits (PQLs)
The Practical Quantitation Limits (PQLs) set out in
necessary to accurately determine contaminant concentrations at, or near,
natural levels, or to reliably detect organic
substances that may have impacts
at very low environmental concentrations. Laboratories in Australia have
demonstrated the ability
to meet these PQLs. The applicant will need to select a
laboratory that is capable of achieving these levels.
In some cases, detection of very low levels may be affected by matrix
interference. In this situation, the laboratory should strive
to achieve the
lowest PQL possible in these samples and document this in the report.
TABLE 1: Practical quantitation limits for typical sediment contaminants,
and other analytical parameters
Practical Quantitation Limit (PQL)
1. Basic Sediment Characteristics
Moisture Content
Total organic carbon
Particle size and settling rate
Size distribution (sieve + hydrometer) and rates of
settlement after 50% and 90% of settlement, in seawater if possible.
Bulk density of deposited sediment
Shear velocities required for resuspending or remobilising
the material.
2. Organic Compounds
Petroleum hydrocarbons
100 (mg/kg)
Phenol, phenolics
Volatile chlorinated hydrocarbons
0.05-5 (mg/kg)
Organochlorines including:
total chlordane, oxychlordane, dieldrin,
heptachlor, heptachlor epoxide, methoxychlor,
endrin, DDD, DDE, DDT, alpha and beta BHC,
endosulfan (total alpha, beta and sulphate),
hexachlorobenzene, lindane, aldrin
1 (µg/kg=ppb)
(each individual species)
Polycyclic Aromatic Hydrocarbons, including:
Napthalene, 2-methylnapthalene, acenapthalene, (each individual species)
acenapthene, Fluorene, Phenanthene, Anthracene,
Benz[b]fluoranthene, Fluoranthene, Indeno[1,2,3-cd]pyrene,
Benzo[k]fluoranthene, Chrysene, coronene, Dibenz[ah]anthracene, Benzo[e]pyrene,
benzo[a]pyrene, perylene, pyrene
Sum of PAHs
100 (µg/kg)
Chlorobenzenes
Other chlorinated organics
Benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene, xylene
200 (µg/kg)
Non-organochlorine pesticides, including:
organophosphates, carbamates, pyrethroids,
10-100 (µg/kg)
each individual
Miscellaneous organics
varies according to toxicity
Organotin compounds
3. Inorganic Compounds
Metals and metalloids (mg/kg)
0.25 (mg/kg)
0.1 (mg/kg)
0.1 (mg/kg)
* Microgram tin per kilogram
Not toxic contaminants but included because they can be useful
normalising elements
Physical Tests
When dredged material is released from a vessel, most of it will sink
directly to the sea bed or form a dense layer of suspended sediment
the sea bed. Generally this material will settle within a period of hours or
days, although if fine and of high water
content it is liable to be resuspended
and may subsequently be dispersed by currents or waves. In high energy
environments (e.g.
southeastern Australia) even sand-sized material will be
moved by current and wave action if deposited in water shallower than around
60m, and is likely to be dispersed over such a large area of the sea bed that
monitoring will be unable to detect it.
Physical tests of basic sediment characteristics (
sufficient to determine the likely behaviour of dredged material after disposal.
These tests include grainsize, settling
rate (ideally done in water of the same
salinity as exists at disposal site, although flocculation may preclude this),
the bulk density
of deposited sediment, and shear velocities required for
resuspending or remobilising the sediment.
SAMPLE ANALYSIS
Laboratory Requirements
It is important to use experienced National Association of Testing
Authorities -registered (NATA) laboratories with proven methods,
with a high
degree of quality assurance and quality control, and to check results with a
reference laboratory.
Laboratories should have a current NATA registration for the specific
chemical and physical parameters being analysed, except for
specialised analyses
for which no NATA-certification is available. They should be able to demonstrate
expertise in analysing marine
sediments, as some of the analytical problems
encountered are different to those from analysing other environmental samples,
some laboratories are unable to achieve the required Practical Quantitation
The transmittal sheet or chain-of-custody (CC) form that accompanies the
samples should indicate clearly when the samples are of marine
origin. The
proponent should be satisfied that the laboratory is using methods designed to
overcome interference from high salt levels.
Written verification of
methodologies and LORs should be sought and these verified against requirements
prior to commencement of
sampling/analysis, as use of unsuitable analysis
methods is common even when the CC forms are clearly marked ‘Marine
Laboratories must have an appropriate quality assurance and quality control
(QA/QC) system in place.
Sample Pretreatment
For bulk sediment chemical analyses, the whole sediment sample should be
analysed after removing gravel-sized (>2 mm) material
and the sample should
either be ground to ensure homogeneity or analysed wet if homogeneity can
be demonstrated.
The transmittal sheet or CC form should specify removal of gravel, and
homogenising of the sample if this is not done before submission
laboratory.
For the non-volatile metals a standard, strong acid extraction is recommended
(e.g. USEPA Method 200.8), as this is the most widely
used extraction procedure,
enabling comparison between the majority of data sets already available. USEPA
(1991) states that the
standard aqua regia extraction used in this method yields
consistent and reproducible results, although it may provide lower metal
recoveries in the presence of organic matter, and therefore Method 3050B, which
includes peroxide in the digestion step, may be more
appropriate.
Dilute acid extraction (e.g. with 1 M HCl) is not recommended because the
Screening Levels in
have been derived from strong acid analysis
data, and such data are therefore needed for purposes of the comparison. However
the total metal values are known to exceed the Screening Levels, it would
be acceptable to proceed directly to dilute acid extraction.
Dilute acid
extraction is also useful for bioavailability assessment of metals.
Volatile metals such as mercury should be analysed on wet samples.
For organics, most samples should be extracted wet, using a water-miscible
solvent and, if dried and ground, air or freeze drying
is recommended. Volatile
organics such as petroleum hydrocarbons are determined on wet samples from glass
containers with Teflon-lined
lids, without homogenisation or sieving.
Sediments for bioavailability testing, and especially pore water testing, or
speciation will require special handling procedures.
Where in doubt, consult the
analysing laboratory as to their particular requirements.
Chemical Analysis of the Total Sample
The recommended procedures are those specified in USEPA (1991 and subsequent
updates) that are already widely used in Australia, or
other standard methods
suitable for marine sediments, for example, the UNEP Reference Methods for
Marine Pollution Studies. The USEPA
(1991) methods are based largely on USEPA
(1986, SW-846) which is regularly updated and available online.
Laboratories may use alternative or modified procedures where these methods
demonstrably provide the necessary performance characteristics
and are validated
on the USEPA methods using standard reference materials (as is current practice
in Australia). This should be stated
in the SAP. Up-to-date methods are
available on the USEPA website.
Analytical methods are not specified further to ensure flexibility in
choosing analysts. For most parameters there are a variety of
acceptable methods
and laboratories should be free to choose any standard method that provides the
required quality of results. However,
these methods should be clearly outlined
in the SAP.
Tributyltin (TBT)
Analysis of sediment samples for TBT presents a range of difficulties which
have to do with sample inhomogeneity (TBT may be present
in paint flakes that
may not be randomly distributed), sample extraction and analysis. This may lead
to poor replication and hence
difficulty in determining the true value of TBT in
the sample.
Where the data from a site are highly variable, more samples or a
significantly higher number of replicates is indicated. The number
required to adequately characterise an area can be determined, assuming there is
existing data on TBT, by power analysis
Total Organic Carbon
Total organic carbon (TOC) should be determined using a high temperature
dilute acid treatment to remove carbonates
and bicarbonates. Proponents should check this has been done, as failure to
remove carbonates
is a common laboratory error. The loss on ignition method
should not be used as it does not give reliable results on marine
. Sediments which contain
significant amounts of coal or coke waste will give erroneously high results
using this method. Where coal
or coke waste could be present, sediments should
be visually inspected.
Where sediments contain high concentrations of hydrophobic organics, e.g.
PAHs, the black carbon (i.e. soot) content may need to be
determined as well as
total organic carbon, as hydrophobic organics are typically much more strongly
associated with black carbon
than with other natural organic matter (Simpson
All data for organic contaminants is normalised to the TOC concentration,
which provides a measure of bioavailability.
Physical Tests
Grain size analysis should be measured by wet sieving of the coarse fraction
into standard geological size classes, followed by pipette
or hydrometer
analysis of the fines, or other standard methods.
Data Validation
Sediment surveys frequently require analysis for a great many metals,
inorganics and organic compounds. The chemical matrix of sediments
and contains many compounds that can interfere with analysis. This is
particularly so for analysis of organics because
sediments frequently contain
thousands of naturally-occurring organic compounds, some of which can generate a
false positive (that
is, a compound will appear to be detected that is not
actually present).
False negatives can also occur if the signal from the compound being
determined is swamped or suppressed by another very abundant
compound. This
problem is particularly acute for trace and ultra-trace organics, such as
organochlorine pesticides, PAHs and other
pesticide groups.
Evaluate the following factors when validating analytical data.
Laboratory blanks are samples processed and analysed in the same way as the
sediments, the aim being to detect any contamination resulting
from sample
preparation, extraction or analysis. Blanks should be at or near the detection
limit of the method used. The statement
of analytical results should note
whether analyses are corrected for the blank values (analysis values within 5
times the blank values
should be flagged as estimates rather than precise
Standard samples are sediments of known composition that are included in each
batch as a check on analysis accuracy. Laboratories
analysing marine sediments
will already have appropriate standards for metals (see
The values found by the laboratory should be within the certified value for the
individual standard (typically 80-120 per cent
of the certified value). Where
recoveries lie outside this range the analyses should be qualified as either low
or high. Obtaining
standards for volatiles and many organics is not possible due
to holding times, and laboratory control samples should be used instead
1999), comprising either a standard reference material or a control matrix
fortified with analytes representative of the analyte
Matrix spikes should apply to all tests, including metals, before extraction
or digestion, and are used to prove that an analyte can
be added to and then
detected in sediment samples. Given the substantial interferences that can occur
at trace level this is a key
Data Quality / Quality Assurance parameter and
provides significant information. When the recovery of a matrix spike is below
expected for the analytical method performance this may indicate matrix
interference or heterogeneity. Further investigation may
be warranted including
alternative methods to accurately measure the analyte in the extract. Matrix
spike data should not be reported
if the naturally occurring levels in the
sample are greater than twice the spiking level (NEPC, 3B, 1999).
Where appropriate, e.g. chromatographic analysis of organics, surrogate
spikes should be added to all analyses, before extraction.
Surrogate spikes are
known additions to each sample, blank, reference material, duplicate and matrix
spike, of compounds that are
similar to the target analytes of interest in terms
of extraction, recovery and response. Surrogates however must be compounds which
are not expected in real samples and will not interfere with quantification of
target analytes. The purpose of surrogate spikes is
to provide a means of
checking every analysis to ensure that no gross errors have occurred at any
stage of the procedure.
Recovery rates should be within the limits specified for the analysis method
(typically 75-125 per cent). Duplicate samples are to
be spiked and the
duplicates should agree within the specified relative percent difference (RPD)
for the method (typically ±30-35
Replicate and duplicate samples
The precision (or repeatability) of the analyses is determined with duplicate
samples. Laboratory duplicates (that is, separately
extracted splits of a single
mixed sample, not aliquot splits after extraction) should be within an RPD of
±35 per cent. If
not, any batch of samples where the RPDs fall outside
these limits are to be flagged as estimates rather than precise values.
Field replicates (that is, two separate samples taken at the same location)
should agree within an RPD (or for three or more samples
at the one location,
the relative standard deviation, RSD) of ±50 per cent, although they may
not always do so where the sediments
are very heterogeneous or greatly differing
in grain size.
Other factors that need to be monitored include:
• if the laboratory met the Practical Quantitation Limits required for
all parameters
• whether holding times (that is, the maximum permissible time from
sampling to analysis) were met, and
• completeness (that is, the amount of valid data obtained for the
study). This can be affected by missing samples, analytical
problems or data
that are qualified under the above headings. Completeness should not normally be
less than 95 per cent.
Appropriate care should be taken when entering the laboratory data into
spreadsheets or databases. Ensure all data are checked for
correct entry.
It is not uncommon for outliers to occur in chemical data sets, particularly
for TBT, and these may be due to laboratory or other
errors. Outliers can
be detected by standard statistical means such as box or scatter plots, or
values exceeding two standard deviations.
Where outliers are detected, the
stored portion of the sample should be reanalysed in triplicate, and if the
original result is not
confirmed it can be discarded (TBT only) in favour of the
mean of the triplicates e.g. if three replicate measurements of sediments
give, 10, 15 and 500 µgSn/kg results (average = 175
µgSn/kg), whereas re-sampling and analyses result in (e.g.) <10,
50 µgSn/kg, then the value of 500 can be completely discarded (average
= (10+15+10+14+50)/5 = 20 µgSn/kg), but referenced
‘outlier’ that likely results from ‘infrequent paint
flakes’ (or similar, as appropriate).
DATA ANALYSIS AND REPORTING
The laboratory analysis results should be tabulated with the actual field
sample numbers used and the laboratory identification numbers.
All quality
assurance data (blanks, laboratory duplicates, spikes and statistical research
methods) should be reported for each sample
batch analysed. Completed results
should be emailed to applicants and/or their consultant, for review so that any
unusual values
can be queried and the samples reanalysed before their holding
time has expired. Holding times are presented in
times for certain substances may be considerably longer than those specified,
however suitable references would need to
be provided to justify reliance on
Include all field and laboratory data, including original laboratory
certificates, in the SAP report. The report should also evaluate
the quality
control data, including whether the data quality objectives in the SAP were met,
and which, if any, results were qualified
because they failed to meet data
quality guidelines.
After data validation, tabulated data should be compared to previous data for
the dredge area and the disposal site (if available).
Sediment quality data
should be plotted to display trends visually, and compared to plots from
previous surveys.
Sediment Quality Screening Levels
The acceptability of dredged material containing contaminants in excess of
the Screening Levels is determined by proceeding through
the decision-tree at
Interim sediment quality guidelines (ISQGs) were developed as part of the
ANZECC/ARMCANZ Guidelines for Fresh and Marine Water Quality
(ANZECC/ARMCANZ
2000a, b). These ISQGs are largely based on biological-effects-based guidelines
developed overseas by Long
. (1995), with some modifications to
reflect Australian conditions (e.g. for arsenic) or more recent information
(e.g. for TBT, PAH,
petroleum hydrocarbons, radionuclides). While their
suitability to Australian conditions has not been conclusively demonstrated,
they were considered the best available guide to likely contaminant effects on
Australian organisms
. Although the
Screening Levels were developed partly from studies using multiple contaminants,
they may not take multiple contaminants
fully into account. This would be
accounted for in toxicity testing.
The Screening Levels used in this document (
) are the same as
the ISQG-Low values in ANZECC/ARMCANZ 2000, as updated (in draft) by Simpson
(2008). The ISQG-High (also called maximum) values are not
presented in this Table except for TBT, as it is now recognised that they
uncertain ecological relevance. Instead, the acceptability of spoil containing
contaminants in excess of the Screening Levels
is determined by proceeding
. For TBT a maximum value is presented as even the
sub-acute toxicity tests currently available may be insensitive to TBT. This
may be used as a Maximum Value, not to be exceeded, or alternatively, the
TBT levels in sediment pore waters may be determined, for
comparison to the
ANZECC/ARMCANZ marine water quality trigger value for TBT (see Bioavailability
Testing, below). The comparison
is not a perfect one, as the above guidelines
relate to open, well-mixed waters, but it is the best available.
The levels in
are less broadly based than guidelines for water
quality, and will be revised in future editions of these Guidelines as
international
values are updated and/or specific Australian values developed.
The Australian sediment quality guidelines are to be revised as part of
revisions to the ANZECC/ARMCANZ (2000a, b) guidelines, under
the National Water
Quality Management Strategy (NWQMS), and will be made available, as revision
supplements, through the NWQMS website
For other contaminants (not in
), no level is available because
the quality of the data used for guidelines development was poor or because
guidelines developed
using different methods were inconsistent. Where
contaminants are found for which there are no Screening Levels, and these
contaminants
are present at levels exceeding regional ambient baseline levels in
sediments of comparable grainsize, bioavailability, toxicity
appropriate, bioaccumulation testing will be required.
TABLE 2: Screening levels (mg/kg dry weight except where noted)
For substances not listed, use the procedures set out in ANZECC/ARMCANZ
Analytical Parameter
Screening Level (ISQG Trigger Value)
METALS & METALLOIDS
(mg/kg=ppm)
ORGANICS***
(µg/kg=ppb)
Total polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs
Total petroleum hydrocarbon
Tributyltin (as Sn
RADIONUCLIDES** (sum of gross alpha and gross beta)
Source: Simpson et al., 2008
** Maximum (Bq/g is becquerels per gram)
*** Normalised to 1 per cent total organic carbon. Normalisation is only
appropriate over the TOC range 0.2-10 per cent (equates
to multiplication
factors of 5 times-0.1 times, respectively. Outside this range, use the end
value which applies
(e.g. for less than 0.2 per cent TOC, use 5 times the TBT value
For other metals, compare to ambient baseline levels for
sediments of comparable grainsize in the vicinity of the disposal site.
Sediments in Australia commonly have high natural levels of As
Screening Level is below PQL (Table 1). Reporting results for
the above substances should be either ‘detected’ or ‘not
detected’ unless a PQL better than the Screening Level could be
Where a numerical maximum value (ISQG-High) for TBT is
required, the USEPA’s final chronic value of 80 µg/kg may
Comparison of Data to Screening Levels
The upper 95 per cent confidence limit of the mean (95 per cent UCL) is used
to determine compliance with the Screening Levels (
). For the area
to be dredged, or a distinct site within the area, the mean and standard
deviation are calculated, and the upper 95
per cent confidence limit of the mean
determined. The USEPA’s ProUCL software can be obtained at
http://www.epa.gov/esd/tsc/software.htm.
ProUCL can calculate 95 per cent UCLs
from data sets with or without non-detect observations.
Where the data are normally distributed, the arithmetic mean is employed. If
the data are log-normally distributed (e.g. using the
Shapiro-Wilks Test), the
geometric mean is appropriate. However, if the data are log-normally
distributed, the Jack-knife or Bootstrap
methods should be used to calculate the
95 per cent UCL. Do not use the H-statistic, especially if the number of samples
than thirty (USEPA 1997, Alaska Department of Environmental
Conservation, 2003.
Values less than the PQL (Practical Quantitation Limit – see above)
should be noted as half the PQL.
A Screening Level is exceeded if the upper 95 per cent confidence limit of
the mean for a contaminant exceeds the value specified
95 per cent UCL does not exceed the Screening Level, this means there is a 95
per cent probability that the mean concentration
of that contaminant within the
material to be dredged will not exceed the Screening Level. If the 95 per cent
UCL of a contaminant
exceeds the specified Screening Level, it is a Contaminant
of Potential Concern (COPC) and comparison to ambient baseline levels
sediments of comparable grainsize is then required.
Comparison of Data to Ambient Baseline Concentration
Ambient baseline concentrations can be determined either by (a) sampling at a
new site prior to disposal (including nearby reference
sites); or (b) sampling
of sediment at reference areas in the vicinity of an existing disposal site, but
beyond the dispersion pattern
of dumped sediment. Such sites need to have
similar sediments and oceanography to the proposed disposal site, but do not
be pristine, as the aim is to determine the ambient concentrations of
contaminants in the sediments. Where there is existing data
available, it may be
used in a power analysis (
) to determine the number of
samples required to adequately determine ambient baseline concentrations. If
not, power analysis may
be done on the data from a pilot study. Because of the
great variation in area, volume and history of offshore disposal sites, it
not possible to generalise as to the number of samples required, however even
for a small site it should not be less than seven
samples, the minimum number
. For large sites, the proponent should present a reasoned
case for the amount of sampling proposed.
Where possible, the sediment at the reference areas should have comparable
grainsize and TOC content, since these parameters are the
dominant influences on
contaminant levels in sediment. For naturally occurring elements, such as heavy
metals, normalising to a reference
element enables a better determination of
ambient baseline level to be made, particularly where grainsize and TOC are not
comparable.
The contaminant ambient baseline concentrations should be used as the
assessment values, and the comparison is done using the 80
percentiles for the dredge and reference site sediments. If the mean of the
sediment concentrations for the substances in question
are at or below the
percentile of their ambient baseline levels in the vicinity of
the disposal site (ANZECC/ARMCANZ, 2000), the sediment is considered
chemically acceptable for ocean disposal even though the relevant Screening
Level(s) were exceeded. If found to be above ambient
baseline levels, again it
is a Contaminant of Potential Concern and Phase III testing is then required.
For metals, the ambient baseline levels alternatively may be determined using
trace element ratios, by normalising to ‘non-pollutant’
such as lithium (but not iron or aluminium in ports exporting such ores)(Loring
and Rantula, 1992; Daskailis and O’Connor,
For organics of exclusively human origin, the ambient baseline (if any) will
indicate the extent of dispersal by long range processes.
The ambient baseline
value may also be used to assess substances for which there are no Screening
Levels. For anthropogenic substances
not listed in Table 2, a suitable value may
need to be calculated from the relevant ANZECC/ARMCANZ (2000a, b) water quality
values. Methods are set out in that document.
Phase III – elutriate and bioavailability testing
Phase III testing of samples containing the Contaminants of Potential Concern
(COPC) requires both elutriate and bioavailability testing,
to determine if a
bioavailable fraction is present that would affect marine life.
The mean values from individual test procedures in Phase III will be compared
to the specified assessment criteria. Reference to the
ANZECC/ARMCANZ (2000a,b)
marine water quality criteria usually refers to use of the 95th percentile level
of protection, using methods
and criteria for comparison as outlined in that
document.Guidelines on the number of samples required, sampling and the degree
replication, are presented in
ELUTRIATE TESTING
Elutriate testing is required where the dredged material data exceeds the
Screening Level for any substance. The elutriate test is
designed to simulate
release of contaminants from a sediment during dredged material disposal.
Release can occur by physical processes
(e.g. directly from sediment pore water)
or a variety of chemical changes, such as oxidation of metal sulfides and
release of contaminants
adsorbed to particles or organic matter. Testing is
carried out using the USEPA’s standard seawater elutriate test (USEPA
Sample collection and handling requirements are set out in
Representative bulk or composite samples are to be tested using the elutriate
test, which is briefly described below.
The elutriate test is carried out by shaking the sediment samples with four
times the volume of seawater from the disposal site (where
this can readily be
obtained; if not, clean seawater from a nearby area) at room temperature for 30
minutes, then allowing the samples
to settle for one hour. The supernatant is
then centrifuged or filtered (0.45 µm) (and preferably centrifuged) within
minutes, and analysed using analytical methods appropriate for determining
ultratrace levels in seawater (where possible, at least
one tenth of the
ANZECC/ARMCANZ marine water quality trigger values without interference from
salt). The seawater used for the elutriate
test should also be analysed by the
same method, so that the results can later be corrected for the blank values.
Strict adherence
to the conditions of the test is required to ensure meaningful
data are obtained.
The relevant ANZECC/ARMCANZ (2000a,b) marine water quality trigger values
should not be exceeded after allowing for initial dilution,
“that mixing which occurs within four hours of dumping”. Initial
dilution will depend on a number of factors,
such as depth, layering in the
water column, and current velocities and directions.
Initial dilution may be calculated using the US Army Engineers Waterways
Research Station STFATE model, or other appropriate models.
Alternatively, it
may be approximated as: ‘the liquid and suspended particulate phases of
the waste may be assumed to be evenly
distributed after four hours over a column
of water bounded on the surface by the release zone and extending to the ocean
thermocline or halocline, if one exists, or to a depth of 20 m, whichever
is shallower,’ (USEPA, 1991). Knowing the volume
of material dumped on any
occasion, the minimum initial dilution can readily be calculated.
The elutriate test uses a dilution of 1:4, wet sediment: added seawater, and
will greatly overestimate water quality impacts given
that, within the four-hour
period, dilutions of the order of a hundred times or more (and often much more)
would normally be expected.
The test data are therefore corrected for the
calculated dilution factor after the four-hour mixing period (after taking
of the test dilution of 1:4) to assess whether or not the water quality
guidelines will be exceeded after disposal.
BIOAVAILABILITY TESTING
Sediment quality guidelines can only be used for screening purposes, because
different sediments with the same concentration of a
particular toxicant can
have widely differing toxicity, depending on sediment characteristics. In
particular, high levels of organic
matter will reduce the availability of many
organic compounds and some metals, while high levels of acid-volatile sulfides
decrease the availability of the metals Ag, Cd, Cu, Ni, Pb and Zn.
Sediment contaminants will generally be present in a variety of forms, but
only the bioavailable fraction will affect organisms. There
are a variety of
methods currently available to investigate contaminant bioavailability,
particularly for metals. The most generally
useful test, because of its broad
applicability, is to analyse pore water for the COPC and compare the data to the
ANZECC/ARMCANZ
2000 marine water quality trigger values. The comparison is not a
perfect one, as the above guidelines relate to open, well-mixed
waters, but it
is the best available.
Guidelines on the number of samples required, sampling and the degree of
replication, are presented in
The data from the available tests are assessed as follows:
(a) Dilute acid extraction of metals
The dilute acid metals data (95 per cent of UCL) can be compared to the
Screening Levels as set out in Table 2. Although this will
not be equivalent to
the bioavailable fraction, it will be a closer approximation to it than total
metal sediment data and will be
a guide to bioavailability, particularly to
sediment-ingesting organisms.
(b) Acid volatile sulfide and simultaneously extracted metals
This procedure is only useful for a few metals, principally Ag, Cd, Cu, Ni,
Pb and Zn (see Simpson
If AVS is in excess of SEM, on a molar basis, then it is assumed that the
above metals are unlikely to be bioavailable. The data
should be presented as
SEM-AVS (subtraction) rather than the traditional SEM:AVS (division), which can
misrepresent available concentrations
of SEM at low AVS levels. SEM-AVS provides
information on the absence, but not the presence, of bioavailable metals as
many other metal-binding phases in sediments.
Caution is necessary to interpret AVS/SEM data as these ratios are likely to
change over time. AVS/SEM ratios are also subject to
seasonal changes, and the
concentrations present in harbour sediments prior to dredging need not
necessarily re-establish in sediments
dumped offshore. Interpretation of the
results is discussed in more detail in Simpson
(c) Pore water concentrations
Pore water is assumed to represent the major route of exposure to sediment
contaminants by benthic organisms. Where pore water concentrations
lie below the
ANZECC/ARMCANZ (2000a, b) marine water quality trigger values 95th percentile it
is thought unlikely that there would
be adverse effects on such organisms. The
concentrations in the pore water provide information on the potential
bioavailability of
contaminants in the spoil after deposition at the disposal
site. The data can also be used to interpret toxic effects, especially
from the naturally-occurring stressors, ammonia and sulphide.
Pore water testing is particularly useful for determining the acceptability
of TBT-contaminated sediments for disposal, since toxicity
unresponsive except at high levels.
(d) Elutriate test concentrations
Elutriate tests investigate desorption of contaminants from sediment
particulates to waters. They are used to simulate the maximum
contaminant
release occurring during disposal of sediments at sea. In cases where it is not
possible to obtain sufficient pore water
for analysis, which needs to be
established to the satisfaction of the Determining Authority, or where the
chemical stability of
pore water cannot be assured, the elutriate test may also
the porewater contaminant concentrations (G. Batley,
pers. comm.). In this case, the 1:4 elutriate test data (without allowance for
initial dilution) would be compared to the ANZECC/ARMCANZ (2000a, b) marine
water quality trigger values 95th percentile.
Phase IV – toxicity and bioaccumulation testing
If any of the Contaminants of Potential Concern (COPC) have been found to be
bioavailable, toxicity testing is required.
TOXICITY TESTING
Sediment toxicity testing provides additional lines of evidence for
predicting the bioavailability, toxicity and bioaccumulation potential
sediment-borne contamination during and subsequent to loading and disposal.
The principal difficulties with sediment toxicity tests lie in maintaining
field chemistry under laboratory conditions, in the varying
sensitivities of
different test organisms to contaminants under different routes of exposure, and
in collecting suitable control
Guidelines on the number of toxicity samples and tests required, sampling and
the degree of replication, are presented in
Test Types and Organisms
Test species should be widely occurring, readily available, sensitive to the
COPC, ecologically or economically important, tolerant
of a broad range of
sediment types and easily handled in the laboratory (ASTM, 2003).
A small number of marine sediment toxicity tests are available in Australia.
Tests are listed in Simpson
, 2005, although many of these are not
in common use and some are no longer available. Other tests are in development.
Ideally, NATA-registered
laboratories and tests are preferred. However only a
handful of laboratories in Australia carry out sediment toxicity testing, all
are specialist laboratories in this field, and few of the tests used are
NATA-certified at this stage (although generally test protocols
are based on
standard procedures, e.g. ASTM tests). These labs should be consulted as to the
tests available at the time.
Whole sediment tests are preferred, where available, as these are considered
more ecologically relevant. However, in some cases it
may be necessary to use
sediment porewaters or elutriates for toxicity testing.
There are presently only a few whole sediment toxicity tests in common use in
Australia, i.e. benthic algae (
), amphipod (
) and occasionally bivalve (e.g.
Some sediment toxicity tests may only be relevant in restricted locations,
while others have a broad geographical relevance. It is
critical, therefore, to
discuss the proposed testing with the laboratory so that appropriate tests and
organisms may be selected.
There are also a number of tests which can be used to assess the toxicity of
marine sediment pore waters and elutriates.
Marine water tests
(Simpson et al., 2005).
There are a small number of such tests in common use in Australia. Two tests
are acute; the remainder are chronic or sub-chronic.
All but one test, using a
microalga, employ temperate organisms.
Toxicity testing for dredging proposals in tropical areas may need to use
temperate test organisms, as tropical tests are not yet
available for routine
use. Some test procedures developed for temperate waters, e.g. the use of oyster
larvae tests, could also apply
in many tropical waters. Temperate tests may also
be appropriate. The use of specific tests should be clearly justified by the
Where porewater or elutriate water are being used, microalgae and sea urchin
or oyster larvae tests may be appropriate.
Test Procedures
Toxicity testing procedures are described in detail in Simpson
(2005). It is important to use a suite of tests (with a minimum of three
different tests, and preferably more, including both acute
and chronic
endpoints, and at least one whole-sediment test) with different organisms having
different feeding requirements, sensitivities
and covering the range of exposure
routes: (i.e., water (e.g. epibenthic algae); water plus sediment uptake (e.g.
burrowing benthic
bivalves or burrowing amphipods); and sediment ingesters).
Ideally the test organisms used will be broadly relevant to the disposal
though specific disposal site organisms can rarely be used because it would take
a major and long term research project to
identify suitable test organisms, if
Toxicity tests may be rendered invalid if inappropriate control sediments,
which cause excessive mortality in the test organisms,
are used. Appropriate
control sediments must be obtained that are as closely matched as possible to
the sediments being tested, are
uncontaminated and not naturally toxic
themselves, and are suitable for the test organisms. Simpson
(2005) set out criteria for test validity.
Where a toxicity test shows less than a 20 per cent effect in the endpoint
(e.g. survival, growth) relative to the negative control,
the difference is not
significant and no toxicity is indicated. A 20-50 per cent effect in the
endpoint compared to the control indicates
significant
toxicity, and a greater than 50 per cent effect indicates a
of toxicity.
If any test shows toxicity, the cause must be assessed. Toxicity is commonly
due to either grain size effects or the presence of elevated
levels of ammonia
or hydrogen sulfide in the sediments, which can be of natural origin. These
causes must be accounted for before
toxicity can be attributed to sediment
contaminants (e.g. by the laboratory doing a simple TIE test (Toxicity
Identification and
Evaluation), or by measuring the ammonia levels in the
sediment porewater. The pass/fail criteria for the toxicity tests are those
specified in the individual test protocols.
Ammonia is generally not regarded as an issue if the porewater ammonia is of
natural origin, which is generally the case. However,
it may be of concern in
the case of organic-rich sediments such as those contaminated from industrial or
urban discharges. In the
latter case, the study should assess whether the
porewater ammonia levels will remain high after dumping. If so, they are
potentially
toxic and should be assessed accordingly. If, however, the porewater
levels are likely to drop to acceptable levels after dumping,
no concern is
Where contamination is present, it is common for some tests to find toxicity
while others show none, or for some tests sediments from
a dredge area to show
toxicity while others do not. Assessment procedures for this situation are set
out in the section headed ASSESSMENT
OF TOXICITY AND/OR BIOACCUMULATION
DATA below.
For sediments containing TBT above the Screening Level, standard toxicity
tests will fail to respond at TBT levels below the Maximum
level specified in
, because the guidelines are based on imposex effects on
gastropods. Furthermore, there is no point doing pore water toxicity tests
these are also only responsive at high TBT levels. The appropriate procedure is
to obtain sediment pore water (see Bioavailability,
above), analyse for TBT and
compare to the TBT ANZECC/ARMCANZ 2000 marine water quality guideline
In some cases, however (e.g. compacted fine sediments) it may not be possible
to obtain sufficient pore water for testing (300-500
ml required) even from
large sediment cores. In this case, after the unavailability of pore water has
been demonstrated to the satisfaction
of the Determining Authority, it will be
acceptable to carry out a seawater elutriate test, analyse for TBT and
compare data to the
ANZECC/ARMCANZ 2000 marine water quality guideline
Alternately, the Maximum Value in
can be used as a cut-off
point for ocean disposal.
Note that, for marine areas zoned for a high level of ecological protection,
any significant toxicity may render the sediments unacceptable
disposal in that area.
BIOACCUMULATION TESTING
Initially, a desk study (literature survey plus calculations) should be
carried out to determine which contaminants present, if any,
bioaccumulate (e.g. mercury, dioxins, organochlorines/PCBs). If bioaccumulating
substances were present above the SQG-High levels
(Table 4), bioaccumulation
tests are required, and bioaccumulation may be of concern even where toxicity
has not been identified.
Further guidance on procedures and assessment can be
found in Simpson
2005 and Simpson
., 2008, and in the
ASTM guide E1688 (2007),
Standard Guide for Determination of the
Bioaccumulation of Sediment-Associated Contaminants by Benthic
Invertebrates
Bioaccumulation of metals by invertebrates is complex and variable. In some
organisms, toxicity is due to the accumulation of lethal
body concentrations
(LBCs) or internal effect concentrations (IECs) in the organism, rather than the
total metal concentration in
water and sediment to which the organism is
exposed. However, where organisms can sequester certain metals into non-toxic
or regulate metals, the use of body concentration data is not
appropriate.
Evidence of metal accumulation in organisms exposed to
or spoil ground sediments versus controls will indicate whether metals are more
bioavailable at these sites and are, therefore,
a legitimate line of evidence.
However, because of the unknown exposure, it can be difficult to interpret such
results. Laboratory
or field exposure of test organisms to these sediments may
be more valuable.
If metal bioaccumulation data are taken into account in the sediment quality
assessment, an appropriate gut depuration interval must
be used before analysis
(typically 24 hours).
Hydrophobic Organic Chemicals
Many such contaminants are accumulated by marine organisms and, while some
(e.g. some PAHs) are readily metabolised, others (such
as PCBs) are resistant to
degradation and can also biomagnify up the food chain.
(2005) discuss various methods for assessing
bioaccumulation. These include direct measurement of bioaccumulation in suitable
and estimation of theoretical bioaccumulation potential, although the
latter may overestimate or underestimate bioaccumulation. Direct
bioaccumulation
tests are preferred, where suitable tests are available for ecologically
relevant organisms.
Bioaccumulation tests are generally run for 28 days, and use several test
species. The requirements for these species are similar
to those for toxicity
testing (above) except that the organisms need not be sensitive to contaminants.
In addition, test organisms
must provide adequate biomass for analysis, ingest
sediments and be inefficient metabolisers of contaminants, particularly PAHs.
least two bioaccumulation tests should occur on each sample. These should
include a deposit feeding bivalve mollusc and a burrowing
polychaete (Simpson
Alternatively, organisms collected from the site may be analysed, if
appropriate animals are available, after a suitable gut depuration
where whole organisms are to be analysed, typically 24 hours. Data would need to
be compared to organisms from appropriate
control sites.
Guidelines on the number of bioaccumulation tests required, sampling and the
degree of replication, are presented in
For bioaccumulation, if there are no significant differences in the
bioaccumulation data relative to controls (treatments or sites),
bioaccumulation
is not a concern. For any contaminant where bioaccumulated concentrations are
statistically greater than that measured
in the controls (treatments or sites),
bioaccumulation is a possible concern. Where bioaccumulated concentrations are
three or more
times greater than those measured in the controls (treatments or
sites), bioaccumulation is a significant concern (Simpson
If the bioavailability, bioaccumulation or toxicity assessments indicate that
significant effects from the contaminants are likely,
they are considered to be
Contaminants of Concern.
ASSESSMENT OF TOXICITY AND/OR BIOACCUMULATION DATA
For any dredge area, where toxicity (or bioaccumulation) is rated as very
significant or significant (columns 2 and 3 of
respectively)
in any of the tests on any of the samples
, and toxicity is
not considered due to natural causes (e.g. ammonia in sediments), if the
proponent still wishes to dispose of this
material at sea, they would need to
investigate the toxicity by:
(a) checking existing data to see if a coincident hot spot (i.e. a cluster
of two or more samples exceeding the relevant criteria)
can be defined using the
existing chemistry and/or toxicity data, and
(b) if no hot spot can be identified, doing step-out sampling and testing
(chemistry and toxicity) around the sample location where
toxicity was
found, to determine if a local hot spot is present.
There are three possible outcomes of this assessment:
(1) If any hot spots are identified, the sediments within them are
considered toxic and unacceptable for unconfined ocean disposal,
and therefore
would require separate handling and disposal as per the existing hot spot
provisions. The sediment outside the hot
spots would be acceptable for ocean
(2) If no hot spots can be identified, and toxicity is only found in a
single sample, the spoil may be considered acceptable for
ocean disposal on the
basis that the bulk composition of the dredge area, considering the initial
toxicity testing plus step-out
testing, indicates that it is non-toxic.
(3) If no hot spots can be identified, yet toxicity is found at scattered
locations throughout the dredge area, the toxicity of the
sediments is still an
issue. To resolve this, with the agreement of the Determining Authority the
proponent has the option of carrying
out a Weight-of-Evidence assessment which
may include other lines of evidence, including benthic community assessment. Any
Weight-of-Evidence
assessment would be carried out following the procedures set
out in Simpson
., 2008 draft
Revision of the ANZECC/ARMCANZ
Sediment Quality Guidelines
, or updates to that document.
TABLE 3: Assessment criteria
Kind of Test
Very significant Contamination
Significant Contamination
Uncontaminated
Sediment chemistry
(e.g. PAH, TBT, metals)
One or more analytes in a given category
> SQG-High**
One or more analytes in a given category between SL and SQG-High
No analytes exceed SL*
Dilute acid extract of metals
One or more analytes in a given category
> SQG-High **
One or more analytes in a given category between SL and SQG-High
No analytes exceed SL*
Elutriate chemistry after dilution
One or more analytes
in a given category
> 5 x WQG***
One or more analytes in a given category 1–5 x WQG
No analytes exceed WQG
Porewater chemistry (TBT, metals, organics etc, or elutriate used as
One or more analytes
in a given category
> 5 x WQG***, or fails 90% protection guideline
One or more analytes in a given category 1–5 x WQG, or to 90%
protection guideline
No analytes exceed WQG (95% protection)
(endpoint relative to negative control
), each test type
> 50% effect
20–50% effect
< 20% effect
Bioaccumulation
Bioaccumulated concentrations are
> 3 times that measured in the controls
Bioaccumulated concentrations are statistically greater than that measured
in the controls
No significant difference relative to controls
Overall assessment
Significant adverse effects predicted due to: elevated chemistry and
bioavailability; > 50% reduction in toxicological endpoints,
bioaccumulation.
Potential adverse effects predicted due to: elevated chemistry and
bioavailability, > 20% reduction in toxicological endpoints,
bioaccumulation.
No significant adverse effects predicted.
Modified after Simpson
(2005), Simpson
Not all lines of evidence need be used.
Use this in preference to total metals.
See Simpson
, 2008 for statistical definitions of
these terms.
* SL = Screening Level (
** SQG-High,
*** WQG = ANZECC/ARMCANZ 2000 marine water quality trigger values for 95%
protection.
The %-ranges that define significant (>20%) and high
(>50%) toxicity may be different for each toxicity test.
See Simpson
. 2008 for definition.
For the purposes of determining the sediment chemistry ranking in Table 3,
the values in Table 4 may be used.
TABLE 4: Sediment Quality High Values
Contaminant
METALS (mg/kg dry weight)
METALLOIDS (mg/kg dry weight)
ORGANOMETALLICS
Tributyltin (µg Sn/kg dry weight, 1% TOC)
ORGANICS (µg/kg dry weight, 1% TOC )
50 000 (45 000)
o,p’- + p,p’-DDD
270 e / 620
120 e / 220
Oils: Total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPHs) (mg/kg dry weight)
Source: Simpson
, 2008. The values in this table should be
replaced by relevant updates to this source.
Phase V – weight-of-evidence assessment
If the ecotoxicological and/or bioaccumulation assessment is ambivalent, or
in other rare circumstances as noted in the previous section,
a WOE assessment
may help the proponent demonstrate their case to the Determining Authority. The
WOE framework allows decisions to
be reached when a single line of evidence is
insufficient for making decisions, e.g. if sediment quality guidelines do not
for the contaminants, if there are no appropriate toxicity tests that are
sensitive to the contaminants of concern and no relevant
ANZECC/ARMCANZ marine
water quality guideline to compare pore water data to, or where scattered
toxicity is found in some samples
throughout a dredge area, but no hot spot can
be identified.
The preferred WOE procedure is set out in the draft revision of the
ANZECC/ARMCANZ sediment quality guidelines (Simpson
, 2008) and
this report (as updated) should be referred to for the background and for
further details of the procedure.
The WOE investigation should combine assessments of:
(i) sediment chemistry to measure contaminant concentrations, compare to
sediment quality guidelines (if available) and identify COPCs.
measurements may include chemistry-based bioavailability tests (e.g. pore water
measurements, AVS, or biomimetic approaches
for hydrophobic organic
contaminants)
(ii) toxicity testing (e.g. multiple species, varying exposure pathways,
acute and chronic endpoints such as mortality, reproduction,
development,
growth, avoidance)
(iii) bioaccumulation/biomagnifications where this is considered, on the
basis of the above assessment, to be an issue, and
(iv) where appropriate, and if suitable data are available, benthic community
structure (e.g. ecological malfunction).
Not all of the lines of evidence listed will necessarily be used in any
particular dredging assessment.
The WOE approach tabulates and ranks the results of relevant lines of
evidence, such as sediment chemistry (e.g. exceedance of trigger
elutriate and bioavailability testing (exceedance of the relevant criteria),
toxicity testing (elevated toxicity compared
to controls), bioaccumulation
(significant differences compared to controls), and benthic community structure
(reduced benthic diversity
or abundance relative to controls).
The approach outlined builds on previous publications on WOE assessment
frameworks (Chapman
., 2002; Chapman and Anderson, 2005; Simpson
., 2005; Wenning
Appendix B:
Components of sampling and analysis plans and reports
The SAP needs to be developed in consultation with the Determining Authority
for all phases of sediment assessment. For projects in
remote or logistically
difficult areas it may be more efficient to prepare a SAP that includes
bioavailability, toxicity and (in
some cases), bioaccumulation testing. Then, if
these tests are required, they can be carried out without the time taken to
and approve a second SAP.
An approved SAP will contain the following information:
• the objectives of the SAP, including data quality objectives
• a brief description of the dredging proposal, including the planned
dredging area or areas, the dredging depths, the types
of sediments involved and
the final volume of material to be removed (in cubic metres) for sea
• an evaluation of the history of the dredge area and its catchment,
and available data on the sediments to be dredged. This
will identify where
further information is required and any potentially
contaminated
sediments. At this stage it may be possible to rank sites or depths for
potential contamination status, so that sites with different
contamination types
or levels may be sampled separately
• a table showing the amounts to be dredged for each separate dredge
area, as well as differentiating between clean, contaminated
and potentially
contaminated materials.
Contaminants List
, based on the history of the catchment
and any previous sediment sampling
• consideration of environmental factors potentially affecting
contamination in the sediments (such as currents, bathymetry,
grain-size) or
which may limit or hinder the sampling program (for example depth, currents or
waves, rocky bottom, weather, wildlife
such as sharks, crocodiles or stingers,
remoteness)
• a rationale for the proposed sampling design, including maps showing
the dredging area/s and the proposed sampling locations.
This would include any
necessary water quality or oceanographic sampling to be carried out concurrently
as part of this assessment
• a contingency plan in case of adverse weather or critical failure of
• the equipment (vessel, sampling, sub-sampling and testing gear,
positioning equipment, sample containers, reports, charts
and data forms) and
personnel needed to implement the SAP, and a list of field measurements to be
carried out
• a list of sample numbers, including field replicates and quality
assurance samples, the approximate sampling locations and
details of the
position-fixing method, the proposed length of cores and depths of sub-samples
• step-by-step procedures for sampling and sub-sampling consistent with
; the volume of sample required for analysis and the types
and numbers of containers; procedures for collection of water and biota
where required; and procedures to ensure that samples (especially water samples
for trace analysis) are not contaminated
from pollution sources on the survey
boat (for example lead weights, zinc anodes, galvanised or brass surfaces,
metal-containing
sunscreens, anti-fouling paints or exposure to fuels or engine
• step-by-step procedures for sample handling, preservation, storage
• the laboratories to be used, a list of analyses required, the
proposed analytical methods, the detection limits of the proposed
whether the methods will achieve the specified Practical Quantitation Limits
, laboratory replicates, certified reference materials,
and QA/QC procedures, and
• procedures for data management, data quality validation and any
statistical routines proposed to be used.
An SAP Report (the report detailing the sampling and analysis work carried
out, and presenting and assessing the results) will contain
the following
information:
• Summary of the SAP, or SAP appended to report
• A description, supported by maps and tables, of the sampling carried
out, along with the actual sample locations, sample numbers
replicates and QA samples), completed CC forms, field logs and descriptions of
the sediments, and any problems encountered
or deviations from the procedures
set out in the SAP (including justifications for deviations)
• Presentation and review of the results, including QA/QC assessment of
both field and laboratory data, comparison to data quality
objectives, and data
validation. Graphs showing sediment contaminants over depth are particularly
useful for identifying patterns
of contaminant distribution and assist in
practically separating material into acceptable and not acceptable for ocean
Therefore presentation of results should include a visual presentation
of contaminant distribution at depths and across the site.
All laboratory and
field data to be appended in full
• Assessment of the results in accordance with these guidelines
• Brief description of the disposal site and summary of sediment data
for it, plus ambient baseline data for sediments of comparable
grainsize in the
vicinity of the disposal site, used for the ‘Background’
• Map and description of the marine communities in and around the area
and their sensitivity to physical effects
• The environmental values and environmental quality objectives
(including level of ecological protection) to be achieved, and
• Conclusions as to the acceptability or unacceptability of the spoil
for open water disposal and/or recommendations as to further
work required.
Appendix C:
Consultation on sea dumping proposals
Benefits of stakeholder consultation
Consultation can produce the following benefits:
• improved information base by accessing information held by other
stakeholders, not just those promoting the project
• development of consensus by identifying and acknowledging shared
views and objectives
• establishing ownership of the decision-making process and its
• resolution of different views through early and open discussion and
through clear, transparent processes and procedures
• extending understanding of technical issues, such as physical
processes and the changing nature of risk, and of the nature
of the proposal,
• establish links and networks useful in implementation of
recommendations.
Issues for stakeholders
For the dumping of dredged material, there are a range of issues which
stakeholders may have an interest in. For example:
• commercially or recreationally important biota may move out of areas
used as disposal sites affecting local businesses
• seasonality of fishing periods, migrations and breeding times may be
affected, which has implications for local fish stocks
• physical changes to the water column or the sea bed may also affect
commercial and recreational fishing
• navigational changes may occur as a result of the dredging activities
affecting fishing and other waterway users, and
• sea disposal may be incompatible with National Parks and with some
zones or categories of Marine Reserves and other Marine
Protected Areas.
Key stakeholders for sea dumping
Australian Government
Agencies that will generally need to be consulted include:
• Australian Fisheries Management Authority (AFMA)
• Australian Hydrographic Service
• Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA), and
• Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service (AQIS).
State and Territory agencies
Applicants will also need to consult relevant state and territory agencies.
Depending on the circumstances of the particular application,
this may include
agencies with the following responsibilities:
• environmental protection and marine conservation
• fishing and aquaculture
• native title, heritage protection and marine archaeology
• ports, harbours, marine transport and navigation safety
• offshore petroleum and mineral activities, and
• regional development and tourism.
Non-government bodies
It is usual practice to consult with national, State or Territory, or local
environmental non-government organisations. Depending
on the particular
application, applicants should also consult:
• commercial and recreational diving, fishing, boating and marine
tourism operators
• local and regional councils
• native title holders, registered claimants and local Indigenous
• local and regional environment groups and organisations, and
• chambers of commerce and other representative organisations.
Technical Advisory and Consultative Committees (TACCs)
Technical Advisory and Consultative Committees (TACCs) are an important
consultative mechanism for dredging proposals. A TACC is intended
ports and other proponents and the Determining Authority to access local
knowledge and reconcile various stakeholder interests.
Membership is drawn from relevant Commonwealth, State and Local Government,
and non-Government organisations and community groups
with expertise,
responsibilities or an interest in the subject matter.
The TACC is intended to:
• provide continuity of direction and effort in protecting the local
environment
• aid communication between stakeholders and provide a forum where
points of view can be discussed and conflicts resolved
• assist in the establishment, as appropriate, of longer term
permitting arrangements, including reviewing the development and
implementation
of Sampling and Analysis Plans, Long Term Management Plans and research and
monitoring programs
• review ongoing management of dredging and dumping activities in
accordance with these Guidelines and permitting arrangements,
• make recommendations to the proponent and the determining authority
as necessary or appropriate.
A TACC may also convene subordinate advisory groups, as necessary, to address
particular technical issues or to facilitate prompt
resolution of a particular
Appendix D:
Sampling methods and design of sampling programs
Sampling methods
For maintenance dredging, where the full depth of sediment could be
contaminated, material must be sampled throughout. For capital
dredging, samples
are needed from the full depth of contaminated as well as potentially
contaminated
sediment. Full depth
is taken to mean at least the top 1 metre of sediment, and more if contamination
could be found deeper. It is
not normally necessary to sample (for chemical
analysis) consolidated natural geological materials underlying these surface
although physical testing of such consolidated materials would still
be required to assess turbidity movement and behaviours of the
dredged material,
post-disposal.
Sampling is normally carried out by coring. Suitable coring devices may
include piston corers, vibracorers and, in certain situations,
hand coring by
diver or grab sampling. Piston corers and gravity corers are restricted to
relatively short cores and soft sediments,
and may not be practicable in oceanic
environments or high currents.
Gravity corers, although widely used, are not recommended because, unless
they are used carefully, the sediment can become disturbed
or mixed. Loss of
surface fines can be a serious problem when coring fine silts and muds because
the impact of the corer with the
bottom can push this material out of the way.
Gravity corers can also enter the sediment at an angle resulting in a core that
to have sampled the depth of the sediment but, in fact, represents only
the surface layers.
Piston coring, in which the core tube contains an internal piston that rides
up as the tube fills with sediment, is a widely used
method that can produce
good quality cores when used carefully. The trigger mechanism is set off when a
weight suspended below the
corer reaches the bottom, allowing the corer to
free-fall a short distance and penetrate the sediment. The method can recover
up to 3 metre length in firm, fine sediments under ideal conditions, and
less in coarse or consolidated material. The sampling team
should be satisfied
that the corer has penetrated the sediment vertically otherwise the core would
need to be retaken.
An alternate method of piston coring uses a corer with a drill string that
can be extended by screwing additional lengths to the top
of the string. The
corer is then pushed or driven into the sediment from the sampling vessel.
Because the initial entry speed can
be carefully controlled the method should
result in vertical entry and minimal disturbance of the loose surface material.
is suitable only for relatively shallow (<20 m) and calm
For coarse or firm sediment, or for sampling in the 3 to 6 metre depth range,
vibracoring is recommended. Vibracoring of fine unconsolidated
sediments is not
recommended due to the risk of disturbance and mixing, although sometimes these
materials can be cored without vibration,
or minimal vibration, by using the
weight of the corer. For sampling beyond the 6 m depth range, drilling will
generally be needed,
as is the case for stiff clays or consolidated
Hand coring by scuba diver can produce acceptable cores and has the advantage
that the bottom conditions are observed and sampling
site optimised, although
the diver needs to treat the core with care during recovery to avoid disturbing
or mixing the sample. In
practical terms the method is limited to water depths
of 20 m or less, unconsolidated sediments, low currents and an absence of
marine creatures, and a sediment depth of no more than 2 m. Because of
the numbers of divers required under work safety regulations
diver coring is
unlikely to be cost effective on large projects. Diver contact with contaminated
sediments during sampling should
also be considered and appropriate precautions
For all coring methods, core tubing of at least 50 mm diameter should be used
to provide sufficient sample for analysis and replication.
If a large variety of
analyses are required, 50 mm cores may not provide sufficient material and
either a larger diameter core or
replicate cores should be taken. Core liners
should be of polycarbonate which are rinsed with dilute acid, deionised water
suitable solvent. Cores should be examined after splitting to determine of
material has been lost or greatly disturbed (e.g. deformation
of sediment
In some circumstances, grab samplers may be used, i.e., for maintenance
dredging surveys in frequently dredged areas with substantial
ship traffic.
Here, because the sediments are mixed continually, samples taken with a grab
sampler can be representative as long
as the grab is designed to retain the
entire sample. The proponent would need to provide sound reasoning that the
samples are representative
of the entire dredging depth, e.g. by comparison to
previous core data. Grab samples should be examined for integrity, i.e., that
grab has remained closed after sample, and fines have not been winnowed out.
Grabs may also be used for collection of reference and control sediments for
toxicity testing (USEPA, 1991). Large grab samplers are
preferable to smaller
ones and should have a minimum gape size of 0.02 m
. In some cases it
may be appropriate to improve the representativeness of the samples by
compositing a number of grab samples taken
from the one location.
The sampler should be stainless steel, free of grease or corrosion,
appropriately pre-cleaned and washed clean between samples. The
applicant should
initially demonstrate that the grab sampler retains the entire sample.
Sub-sampling of Grab Samples and Cores
Prior to use, the survey vessel must be thoroughly inspected and washed down.
Any evident sources of contamination (such as copper
or brass, or galvanised or
oily surfaces) should be cleaned, covered in plastic and taped down to avoid
accidentally contaminating
any sample. Lead diving weights should be stowed
away. Work surfaces should be covered with clean plastic sheeting.
When sampling (especially water sampling for trace metals), contact with zinc
anodes, surfaces coated with antifouling paint, metal-containing
or engine exhausts must be rigorously avoided.
Disposable, powder-free gloves should be used and changed after each
Specific QA/QC procedures include:
• prior to sampling – laboratory pre-cleaning of sample
containers, and cleaning of sample equipment (appropriate to the
analyses required)
• sampling and sub-sampling that avoids cross-contamination, and
• appropriate decontamination of equipment between samples and
sub-samples.
Grab samples are to be sub-sampled directly from the grab, taking care to
avoid sediment in contact with the sides. For composite
samples, the material
not in contact with the sides should be carefully removed and thoroughly mixed
in non-contaminating bowls before
sub-sampling.
Cores are to be split on recovery and sub-sampled on one split only. The
other split is to be stored in appropriate conditions (typically
for further testing, if required. Alternatively, additional samples may be
collected and appropriately stored for later
analysis if it is more convenient
to do so at the initial time of sampling, e.g. in remote or logistically
difficult areas,
or in locations where sampling requires large vessels or heavy drilling
The thinnest layer that can be dredged reliably and handled selectively using
equipment routinely available is approximately 50 cm,
so sub-sampling at smaller
intervals down the core is redundant.
In core sampling, the top 50 cm of the core (or to the depth of dredging if
less than 50 cm) is to be used as a single sample for
analysis. In many cases
this material will contain the highest levels of contaminants. A second sample
is to be taken from the 50
– 100 cm interval. Below 1m, if contamination
is known or suspected to be present, the core should also be sub-sampled at
cm intervals to determine the extent and maximum depth of contamination.
If there is no suspicion of contamination below 1 m depth in the core, the
remainder of the core may be composited as a single sample.
If contamination is
subsequently found in this sample, the stored samples would need to be
sub-sampled at 50 cm intervals to determine
the extent and maximum depth of
contamination.
The individual core lengths may either be mixed thoroughly before supply to
the lab, or supplied in an unmixed state with instructions
that the samples are
to be thoroughly homogenised before analysis. Mixing may be done by any method
that ensures the sample is thoroughly
mixed, for example, by homogenisation in a
bowl until the sample is uniform in colour and texture. Samples for analysis of
compounds, or for chemical speciation (e.g. AVS:SEM) may not be mixed
and should be taken in appropriate containers with no headspace,
at the midpoint
of each core section.
If the sediment shows distinct and thick strata (for example, mud overlying
sand) it may be appropriate to sample these strata separately.
This would only
apply to layers of 50 cm or greater. Appropriate decontamination procedures are
required when sub-sampling and homogenising
samples to avoid cross contamination
of samples.
Sample Volume
The approximate mass of material necessary for particular analyses is listed
below (Table 5). These masses allow for analysis for
a large variety of
different contaminants as well as replicates and check samples. Sampling design
should ensure that sufficient
material is collected at each sampling site to
meet testing requirements.
Large amounts of sediment are required for bioavailability and toxicity
testing. This may necessitate collection of additional cores
or grab samples.
Two to three kilograms of sediment would generally be sufficient for all
possible analyses, including toxicity and
bioavailability testing.
TABLE 5: Amount of sediment required for various analyses*
Analytical Parameter
Amount required (g, wet weight)**
Organic compounds
Miscellaneous analyses
Total organic carbon
Toxicity testing
Elutriate testing (metals)
Elutriate testing, organics (contact lab)
up to 2,000
Porewater analysis
Moisture content
Source: USEPA, 1991 (upper values) and Batley, 1994 (lower values) (pers.
comm.), LC/SG 2001.
* In some cases, smaller amounts may be appropriate.
** Laboratory analysis of sediment is generally undertaken on the material
less than 2 mm. If sediments contain a high proportion
of gravel, the sample
size should be increased appropriately.
# Up to 1 litre of sediment may be required, plus four times the volume of
seawater, from the disposal site.
Water Sampling
Water samples may be required for a variety of purposes, such as elutriate
tests, and collection requires methods that eliminate contamination
vessel or from sample-handling (that is the use of a non-contaminating pump or a
discrete water sampler of the close/open/close
water sample comes in contact with the inside of the water sampler). Sample
handling surfaces should
be clean and covered with clean sheeting.
Trace metal analysis – Seals should, preferably, be Teflon-coated and
water sampling devices should be acid rinsed (10 per cent
nitric acid) before
sample collection.
Organic analysis – Devices should be solvent-rinsed before sample
collection (USEPA, 1998).
Sample Handling, Storage, Preservation and Labelling
Where samples are to be sub-sampled or homogenised in a preparation
laboratory, they should be stored at 4°C in the dark and
transported
to the laboratory within 72 hours (preferably 24 hours) of collection. Where in
doubt as to procedures, always consult
the laboratory which will be carrying out
the tests as to their requirements.
For sediment samples containing TBT, mercury and other volatiles for chemical
analysis, freezing to below –10°C within
12 hours of collection, and
before their dispatch in a well-insulated cooler, improves laboratory storage
life to eight weeks.
Sample handling techniques need to ensure that changes in the composition of
the samples as a result of chemical, physical or biological
minimised, that cross-contamination of samples does not occur during
sub-sampling and subsequent handling, and that samples
are not lost or mixed up
between sampling and receipt by the analysing laboratories.
Australian guidelines for sample handling and analysis of contaminated land
sites are described in the National Environment Protection
Assessment of Site Contamination Measure, NEPC 1999, Schedules B(2) and B(3),
all available on the http://www.ephc.gov.au/
website. Some sample handling and
preservation procedures for marine sediments have been drawn from USEPA
Generally, samples to be analysed for trace metals should not come in contact
with metals, and samples to be analysed for organic
compounds should not come in
Pre-cleaned sample containers of an appropriate type and volume, plus lids,
should be sourced directly from the NATA-registered laboratory
which is to carry
out the tests.
The containers should be completely filled with sample or, if there is
insufficient sample, topped up with water from the site where
the sample was
taken, unless the sample is to be frozen, in which case the jar should only be
filled to two-thirds of its volume
and frozen immediately.
Samples for toxicity testing should have all macro-invertebrates removed
using a 0.5 mm sieve.
Waterproof labels and pens should be used and preferably labels fixed with
clear waterproof tape as well.
Details of sample collection, handling, preservation and storage for
different kinds of tests are listed in
Bulk sediment samples for toxicity testing are to be stored in sealed
containers with zero headspace. They must be protected from
oxidation, which is
likely to alter the toxicity of the sample.
Samples are to be kept cool (4
C) in the dark until ready for use,
but must not be frozen.
Special sampling, sub-sampling and handling procedures are required for
specialised bioavailability tests such as pore water analysis.
If such tests are
required, the analysing laboratory should be consulted for their specific
requirements. See also Simpson
Design of sampling programs
Samples must be:
• representative
• collected using appropriate techniques
• properly transported and stored, so as to minimise chemical and
physical changes, until testing takes place, and
• tested by acceptable procedures.
In remote or logistically difficult areas, or in locations where sampling
requires large vessels or heavy drilling equipment, it may
be more efficient and
economical to collect additional representative samples, for bioavailability and
toxicity testing, at the time
of initial sampling rather than returning to
sample on a second occasion. Such samples need to be stored appropriately until
are analysed.
Phase II Investigation
The SAP sets out the number of sampling
locations required for the
Phase II investigation, based on the volume of known contaminated and
potentially contaminated material
to be dredged. For an existing port or
harbour, the berth areas and inner harbour are more likely to contain
contaminants, although
they may also be present in outer harbour and channel
Contaminants may extend throughout the seabed layer of recent marine silts or
sands, although they will rarely penetrate far into
the underlying, undisturbed
geological materials, especially if these are clay or rock (except in rare
cases, such as where contamination
has been carried there via groundwater from
an adjacent contaminated land site). The sampling program must, therefore, aim
the full thickness of potentially contaminated sediment to be
In most cases, samples should be collected at random locations within each
sampling site. In certain situations, however, e.g. where
sampling of long,
narrow channels or the tops of submarine dunes is required, sample locations
should be selected to be representative
of the bulk of material to be
sets out a sampling design decision-tree. At each sampling
location, one or more core samples (or in certain cases, grab samples)
be collected. Cores longer than 0.5 m are to be sub-sampled at a range of depths
which will depend on the depth of dredging
for maintenance dredging, and the
depth of contaminated and potentially contaminated material for capital
Maintenance Dredging
Sampling is required to the full depth of dredging.
(1) Small projects (less than 50 000 cubic metres of dredged material)
The entire dredge area should be treated as a single site and sampling should
take place at randomly selected locations within it.
The sampling locations
number would depend on the volume of contaminated and potentially contaminated
dredged material, as set out
Based on available data, the dredge site should be classified as either
‘probably contaminated’
. Where good
quality data for the site are already available to support the classification,
the number of sample locations in the
‘probably contaminated’ and
‘probably clean’ categories may be
. Good quality data means
current data (from the last five years) that has met QA/QC requirements
comparable to those set out in these
Guidelines (
) and where
there are no new pollution sources.
(2) Medium-sized projects (50 000-500 000 cubic metres of dredged
If the distribution of contaminants is known (based on good quality data) to
be relatively uniform, the whole dredge area may be treated
as a single
site and the approach set out in (1) above used.
Where the pattern of contamination may vary considerably over the dredge
area, it should be stratified, i.e., divided into distinct
sites based on their
chemical characteristics. A common example occurs in maintenance dredging where
the sediments of inner harbour
or berth areas are known to be contaminated, the
outer harbour sediments are suspect, and the shipping channel sediments are
The number of sampling locations within each site would depend on the
contaminated and potentially contaminated dredged material volume
of that site
and are set out in
If the dredge area has been stratified, each site should be classified as
either ‘probably contaminated’, ‘suspect’
‘probably clean’ as described in (1) above. Where good quality data
for a site is available to support this classification,
the number of sample
locations in the ‘probably contaminated’ and ‘probably
clean’ categories may be halved.
Random sampling would then take place
within each site. Note that a site so classified can be made up of a number of
discontinuous
areas. For example, if a number of discrete berth pockets are
classified as ‘probably contaminated’, they can be considered
site for the purpose of sampling, with the proviso that at least two
sampling locations would be required from each area making
up the overall
TABLE 6: Minimum number of sampling locations*
Volume of Potentially Contaminated Material to be Dredged
(cubic metres)**
Sampling Locations
10 000–17 000
17 000–23 000
23 000–30 000
30 000–37 000
37 000–43 000
43 000–50 000
50 000–58 000
58 000–67 000
67 000–75 000
75 000–83 000
83 000–92 000
92 000–100 000
100 000–141 000
141 000–182 000
182 000–223 000
223 000–264 000
264 000–305 000
305 000–346 000
346 000–386 000
386 000–427 000
427 000–468 000
468 000–509 000
Source: Environment Canada, 1995
* For ‘probably contaminated’ and ‘probably clean’
categories, where there is good quality current data (from
the last five years)
on sediment chemistry for the area or site, and the pollution status of the site
has not changed, the number
of sampling locations may be halved. After halving,
fractions are to be rounded up.
** All three categories are considered potentially contaminated for the
purposes of calculating the maintenance dredge volume. The
sampling and testing
required for large, complex projects would generally be determined on a
case-by-case basis in discussions with
the Determining Authority.
More sample locations may be desirable where the dredge area is
geographically complex, where the sediments are very variable, or
contamination has a complex distribution.
(3) Large projects (greater than 500 000 cubic metres of dredged
For large projects it would normally be appropriate to divide the dredge area
into a number of distinct sites based on their suspected
contamination status.
The number of sampling locations taken in each site would depend on the
contaminated and potentially contaminated
dredged material volume of that site,
as set out in
Each site should be classified as either ‘probably contaminated’,
‘suspect’ or ‘probably clean’.
Where good quality,
current data for the site is already available to support this classification,
the number of sample locations
in the ‘probably contaminated’ and
‘probably clean’ categories may be halved. Note that a site so
can be made up of a number of discontinuous areas. For example, if a
number of discrete berth pockets are classified as ‘probably
contaminated’, they can be considered as one site for the purpose of
sampling, with the proviso that a minimum of two sampling
locations would be
required from each area making up the overall site.
Sample locations for each site would be selected as described above. Where
the volume of dredged material in any site exceeds 500
number of sample locations may be determined in either of two ways:
A. The following equation may be used to linearly extend
y = 0.025x + 15.547
where: y is the number of sampling stations and
x in the volume of dredge material (x 1000 cubic metres)
B. In consultation with the Determining Authority, the number of sample
locations may be determined by appropriate statistical means,
such as power
The latter approach is likely to result in fewer samples, especially where
the variance in the data is low, but requires pre-existing
data on the chemistry
of the sediments. Further information on such methods can be found in
ANZECC/ARMCANZ (2000a,b), Monitoring
Guidelines, Section A5.1.10.
Capital Dredging
Where a project involves capital dredging in a port or locality with existing
contamination (e.g. one metre of contaminated or potentially
contaminated
sediment overlying 5 m of natural geological materials), rather than the total
dredge volume, the number of sample locations
(Table 6) should be based on the
volume of contaminated and potentially contaminated dredged material (which
includes the three categories
of ‘probably contaminated’,
‘suspect’ and ‘probably clean’).
That is, the number of sample locations is based on the volume of the layer
of recent sediments which
be contaminated, but does not include the
volume of underlying natural geological materials which are, except for a thin
layer, expected to be uncontaminated.
In calculating the volume of contaminated and potentially contaminated
material, proponents should use conservative assumptions to
avoid the need for
subsequent resampling.
The procedures set out in (1), (2) or (3) above, as appropriate, should be
followed to determine the number of sampling locations.
Data will also be required on the physical properties of the full depth of
sediment, including the natural geological materials, in
order to assess
turbidity impacts and the behaviour of the dredged material, post-disposal. This
data could generally be obtained
from the geotechnical samples taken for
dredging planning.
Sample Location Selection
Sample locations should be selected by:
(a) laying a square grid over the dredge site, sized so that there are at
least five times the number of grid squares as the number
of sampling locations
required. If the dredge site consists of a number of distinct locations, such as
individual berth pockets,
grid squares would be laid over each location
to their proportion of the total dredging volume.
For example, for a project involving 50 000 m
of dredging, the
number of sample locations required is 12 (
) and the number of
grid squares at least 60. If good quality, current data was available to support
the initial classification, the
number of sample locations could be reduced to
(b) the grid squares would be numbered and random numbers used to select the
required number of sample locations.
(c) samples would be collected at the centre of each of the selected grid
If a different method is proposed, the rationale will need to be included in
Phase III and IV Investigations
For elutriate, bioavailability and toxicity testing, lesser numbers of sample
locations are required, as described below, however
replication at each location
is desirable to ensure that the samples collected are representative. For each
location, samples should
be representative of the full depth of contaminated
sediment (as identified in Phase II) to be dredged, except where a discrete
spot’ layer has been identified, in which case it should be
sampled separately.
Elutriate/bioavailability testing – sampling numbers
should be used to determine the minimum number of sample
locations for elutriate or bioavailability testing. Samples must be
representative
dredged material composition in the dredge
area(s) which require these tests. Alternatively, if a defined sub-area of the
area has been selected for testing on the basis of elevated contamination
levels, samples must be representative of this sub-area,
including the most
contaminated locations, and the sample selection process must be fully
documented.
Where reliance is to be placed on previously collected elutriate data (within
the 5-year data currency period) the proponent needs
to demonstrate that this
data is representative of the sediments from the area proposed to be dredged,
i.e. that the previous data
is from the same area and depth range, and that
there are no new contamination sources for the dredging area.
Unrepresentative samples would invalidate the elutriate test data and require
re-sampling and testing. Judgemental sampling may therefore
be more appropriate
than random sampling. Consideration should be given to a stratified sampling
design based on the total contaminant
concentration data for each sampling area
to ensure that the samples are representative of all levels of
contamination.
Ideally, a minimum of three replicate samples would be collected at each
location for bioavailability analysis. Compositing of cores
for this purpose is
not recommended as exposure to air may affect the integrity of samples for
certain bioavailability tests. If
the dredging program contains a number of
areas with distinctly different contaminants or levels, the numbers in the table
apply to each such area.
TABLE 7: Minimum number of elutriate, bioavailability, toxicity or
bioaccumulation test sample locations for dredging projects of
specified size,
based on the volume of contaminated sediment involved
Volume of Potentially Contaminated Sediment to be Dredged (cubic
Minimum Number of Sample Locations*
50 000–100 000
100 000–200 000
200 000–350 000
350 000–500 000
2 per additional 250 000 cubic metres
If the dredging program contains a number of areas with
distinctly different contaminants or levels, the numbers in the table would
apply to each such area.
* Plus replicates, 20 per cent of the total, and a minimum of 1
Toxicity/bioaccumulation test sampling requirements
The minimum numbers of sediment sample locations previously set out (
) should be used in the suite of toxicity tests. Samples must be
representative of the
dredged material composition in the dredge
area(s) which require these tests. Alternatively, if a defined sub-area of the
area has been selected for testing on the basis of elevated contamination
levels, samples must be representative of this sub-area,
including the most
contaminated locations, and the sample selection process must be fully
documented.
Unrepresentative samples would invalidate the elutriate test data and require
re-sampling and testing. Judgemental sampling may therefore
be more appropriate
than random sampling. Consideration should be given to a stratified sampling
design based on the total contaminant
concentration data for each sampling area
to ensure that the samples are representative of all levels of
contamination.
As the bioaccumulation results must be compared statistically to controls, a
minimum of three test locations and three reference locations
is recommended.
The same minimum numbers would apply in the case of field-collected and
caged/transplanted organisms. The number
of organisms used (e.g. caged oysters,
filter-feeding bivalves) will depend on the specific bioaccumulation method
(characteristics
of the species, tissue mass, target analytes, analysis
technique etc).
Further information can be found in the ASTM guide E1688 (2007),
Guide for Determination of the Bioaccumulation of Sediment-Associated
Contaminants by Benthic Invertebrates
Ideally, each individual sample sent for analysis would be a composite sample
mixed from a minimum of three cores taken from the one
location. If the dredging
program contains a number of areas with distinctly different contaminants or
contaminant concentrations,
the numbers in the table would apply to each such
The following procedures for toxicity testing should be followed:
• The laboratory would need to be consulted on their sampling, sample
handling and preservation requirements.
• Samples should be stored in the dark at 4˚C and sent for testing
as soon as possible, ideally within days.
• Sediments should not be frozen, as this may alter the bioavailability
of some toxicants.
• Fresh sediment samples should always be collected for toxicity
testing. These sediments may be stored in the dark under a
nitrogen atmosphere
for a maximum of eight weeks.
• The holding time must be reported along with the study results.
• Test sediments will also need to be analysed for their grain size,
and other relevant parameters (e.g. natural toxicants such
as ammonia and
hydrogen sulphide). The testing laboratory will normally do this.
• These sediments must also be analysed for the
Contaminants of
Potential Concern
if these are not included in the toxicity testing
laboratory’s program.
• Where sediment pore waters or elutriates are used instead of whole
sediments, they should be centrifuged to remove particulates,
rather than
filtered, since filtered samples generally show lower toxicity, probably due to
the removal of fine and colloidal fractions.
The extracts should be cooled to
4˚C immediately and used as soon as possible.
• On each sample, a minimum of three different toxicity tests should be
done, and preferably more. Ideally these would be whole-sediment
tests (i.e.
where the organism is exposed to the test sediment directly). These are more
ecologically relevant than pore water or
elutriate tests because organisms are
exposed to the whole sediment, however because there are so few whole-sediment
tests available,
pore water or elutriate tests are often used instead. Acute
tests are generally cheaper, quicker and more robust than chronic tests.
acute tests should therefore be done, but some chronic tests should also be
Detailed procedures for bioaccumulation testing can be found in Simpson et
al., 2005 and 2008.
Introduced marine pests
Introduced marine pests can impact a range of activities including fisheries
and aquaculture production, human health, shipping and
ports, tourism, coastal
amenity, and species and ecosystem health and diversity.
Major introduced marine pest species with established populations in
Australia include:
Asterias amurensis
(northern Pacific seastar)
Carcinus maenus
(European shore or green crab)
Musculista senhousia
(Asian bag or date mussel)
Sabella spallanzanii
(European or Mediterranean fan worm)
Undaria pinnatifida
(Japanese seaweed)
Varicorbula gibba
(European clam)
Hydroides sanctaecrucis
(Caribbean tubeworm)
Maoricolpus roseus
(New Zealand screw shell)
The main emphasis to date at the national level has been on the management of
ballast water in international commercial shipping.
Recent scientific evidence
suggests that other vectors, such as hull fouling and recreational boating are
also important and should
be given a similar priority. Relocation of dredge
material is also a potential vector for marine pests.
For most pest species it is not known to what extent they can survive the
dredging process or disposal site environments. Species
of particular concern
include cyst-forming dinoflagellates, which may affect human health, and
infaunal and benthic invertebrates,
some of which can have major impacts on
marine food chains.
Dredges can move rapidly between different areas of the world and may
translocate species between geographic regions. While the risks
from this source
of exotic species does not appear to have been thoroughly assessed separately
from international shipping, it is
likely to be an area of significant concern
due to the potential presence of sediment dwelling exotic species that could be
translocated and potentially introduced into new locations with the
movement of dredged material. Preliminary research indicates
that the amount of
unwanted sediment that trailer suction hopper dredgers (TSHDs) transport is
likely to be greater than in most
ballast tanks. There is a risk of introducing
a different suite of exotic species from those carried in ballast water and
biofouling.
There is also the risk that a marine pest could be translocated not
only in the debris that is collected in the dredge material but
also within the
water. The seriousness of this issue should not be underestimated, as
introducing a single pest could have much more
serious and long lasting impacts
than the dredging itself.
Exotic species that have the potential to be spread by dredging, and that may
have some ecosystem impacts, have already been identified
for those ports where
an introduced species survey has been undertaken. The report to the relevant
port authority will have recommended
appropriate sampling of current and past
spoil grounds and adjacent areas, to assess the distribution and survival of
target or indicator
Where established populations of exotic species at a dredge or dump site have
been detected, the assessment will need to address the
potential impacts of
translocating these species. Unsurveyed ports should be treated as containing
established populations of any
exotic species found in similar environments
until a survey demonstrates otherwise. The scope of any subsequent monitoring or
surveillance
programs will depend, at least in part, on the ‘pest’
or other prescribed status (under current or future state and Commonwealth
legislation) of the exotic species detected (or potentially present) in the
port. To help facilitate this work, a marine pest monitoring
manual has been
prepared along with some related templates and tools that provide assistance in
designing effective marine pest monitoring
For species that have well documented human health implications, or that have
been shown to be highly environmentally damaging, an
immediate re-evaluation of
dumping options may be appropriate, unless the pest is already of widespread
distribution in the marine
environment. Specific methodologies are not specified
here as these are set out by the responsible agencies.
Management of introduced marine pests is being undertaken through the
National System for the Prevention and Management of Marine
Pest Incursions (the
National System). The
Australian Ballast Water Management Requirements
have been developed under the National System and are available at
www.daff.gov.au/aqis. Many ports have been surveyed for introduced
marine pests
or are in the process of doing so. If introduced marine pests have been
identified or the port has yet to be surveyed,
management measures to avoid
spreading pests with a currently limited distribution would need to be
considered.
Regardless of the pest-status of a port, all operators of vessels entering
Australia need to manage ballast water according to current
Australia’s
Ballast Water Requirements and comply with any Commonwealth or state biofouling
requirements.
In Australia, operators should manage biofouling on their vessels according
to the most current Biofouling management guidance for
non-trading vessels which
can be accessed at www.marinepests.gov.au.
To reduce the likelihood of translocating a marine pest through dredging
activities, it is important when selecting a site to dispose
of dredged material
to consider:
• proximity of the loading site to the disposal site (increased
proximity between the disposal site and loading site is likely
to minimise
the risk of transfer of an exotic species, given that the marine pest
collected within the dredge material is likely
to be already present at the
disposal site)
• the similarity of the environment of the loading and disposal sites
(including water depth and temperature)
• the suitability of the habitat at the disposal site for the survival
of marine pests transferred from the loading site
• proximity of the disposal site to sensitive areas
• marine pests present at the loading site (if known)
• marine pests present at the disposal site (if known)
All states and territories have expertise in marine pest issues, and should
be the first point of contact.
Field and laboratory quality assurance and quality control
The guidelines for laboratory quality assurance and quality control (QA/QC)
follow current Australian best practice. General guidelines
are described in
NEPC, (1999), the National Environment Protection Council’s Assessment of
Site Contamination Measure, NEPC
1999. More specific procedures are described in
USEPA (1986, 1991, 1994 b, 1998) and available on-line. Procedures from these
are specified here.
Quality Assurance and Quality Control
Quality assurance and quality control (QA/QC) procedures are essential to
ensure that samples and data collected provide for a rigorous
assessment.
Quality scientific work is assured by having standard operating procedures.
Quality control is assured by having documentation
which shows that all
procedures were followed successfully.
QA/QC procedures for field work and laboratory analysis and data management
are set out in this Appendix.
Field Procedures
Prior to use, the survey vessel must be thoroughly inspected and washed down.
Any evident sources of contamination (such as copper
or brass, or galvanised or
oily surfaces) should be cleaned, covered in plastic and taped down to avoid
accidentally contaminating
any sample.
Lead diving weights should be stowed away.
When sampling (especially water sampling for trace metals), contact with zinc
anodes, surfaces coated with antifouling paint, metal-containing
sunscreens or
engine exhausts must be rigorously avoided.
Disposable, powder-free gloves should be used and changed after each
Specific QA/QC procedures include:
• prior to sampling – laboratory pre-cleaning of sample
containers, and cleaning of sample equipment (appropriate to the
analyses required),sampling and sub-sampling that avoids cross-contamination,
• decontamination of equipment between samples.
All field procedures are to be documented. Standard procedures should
• written standard operating procedures (SOPs) in the Sampling and
Analysis Plan, with variations from SOPs and the reasons
• noting field conditions (weather, tides, currents), station
locations, sampling methods and handling and storage methods,
field numbers,
date, time, and identity of sampler, in the field log
• field description of sediments as collected, including but not
limited to physical appearance (for example, silty sand), colour,
presence of
foreign material, presence of shell fragments and/or biota (for example,
seagrass). Where multiple samples are collected
at a site, notes should be made
on the variability between samples
• keeping a sample inventory log, a sample tracking log and a record of
instrument maintenance and calibration, and
• chain-of-custody forms that list all sample numbers and locations,
and the analyses and Practical Quantitation Limits required,
to accompany each
sample to the lab. At each stage of handling, samples are to be checked against
the chain-of-custody forms. After
receipt by the lab, a checked form is to be
faxed or emailed immediately to the sampling organisation
for rechecking.
Field quality control samples should include (per batch of 20 or fewer) the
• in cases where volatile substances e.g. some chlorinated organics,
are being determined, one container (trip) blank filled
with inert material such
as chromatographic sand,
• on 10 per cent of locations, one field triplicate (that is, three
separate samples taken at the same location) to determine
the variability of the
sediment physical and chemical characteristics
• on five per cent of locations, samples should be thoroughly mixed
then split into three containers to assess laboratory variation,
with one of the
three samples sent to a second (reference) laboratory for analysis, and
• one sample that has been analysed in a previous batch (if more than
one batch is sent) to determine the analytical variation
between batches.
Laboratory Quality Assurance/Quality Control
The laboratory quality assurance program should include the following quality
control samples to be analysed in each batch (10-20
samples) or part batch. This
is in addition to its own internal procedures to ensure analytical procedures
are conducted properly
and produce reliable results:
• one laboratory blank sample
• for metals, one Standard Reference Material (SRM), that is, a sample
of certified composition such as MESS-1 or BCSS-1, or
BEST-1 (for mercury), or a
suitable internal laboratory standard calibrated against an SRM. The laboratory
standard should be a ground
sediment sample, not a liquid sample, to test both
the recovery of the extraction procedure and the analysis
• for organics, one sample spiked with the parameters being determined
(or a surrogate spike for certain organics) at a concentration
within the linear
range of the method being employed – this will determine whether the
recovery rate of the analytical method
is adequate or not (that is, that all the
chemicals present in the sample are actually being found in the analysis),
• one replicate sample to determine the precision of the analysis; the
standard deviation and coefficient of variation should
be documented.
Recoveries of surrogate spikes are to be documented and daily calibration
data reviewed. The laboratory must review the quality control
data and quality
assurance documentation and a statement made in their report that the data meets
the quality objectives specified
by the method for that analysis (these are to
be presented in the lab report, that is, the acceptable recovery range for
SRMs, and the acceptable range of relative percent differences on
duplicates). All of the quality assurance data (blanks, laboratory
duplicates,
spikes and SRMs) are to be reported for each batch of samples analysed with the
analytical data. As soon as the analyses
are completed the results should be
emailed to the proponent’s consultant for review so that any unusual
values can be queried
and, if necessary, reanalysis carried out before the
holding time for the samples has expired.
The laboratory QA/QC procedures need to be appropriate for the low
concentrations expected in marine sediments, which are frequently
those required for contaminated site investigations.
Examples of impact hypotheses and associated monitoring programs
Example: Protection of Sensitive Areas (Coral Reef Ecosystems etc) and
Human Use Areas such as Shipping Lanes
The disposal site was selected for its retentive characteristics in an area
with a broad continental shelf and offshore coral reef
ecosystems. Sensitive
areas nearby included a Marine Park for the protection of coral reef ecosystems,
a thriving tourism industry
and areas of cultural as well as scientific
significance. The Marine Park boundary was within 2 km of the site though the
sensitive areas were more than 5 km away. A shipping line was located
near to the disposal site and there were other human uses of
the area including
submarine cables.
The spoil was essentially the same grainsize as the sea bed sediments but
contained elevated levels of some contaminants, chiefly
heavy metals. Further
testing revealed that these were largely in biologically unavailable forms,
hence the spoil was classified
as acceptable for sea dumping (rewritten after
Environment Canada, 1998).
Impact Hypotheses
Associated Monitoring Programs
During initial deposition, the spoil will not be carried through the water
column to any sensitive area in amounts that would be harmful
to the value or
amenity of such areas.
Map initial area of deposition; determine if a sensitive area was reached
by such deposition.
If so, determine if scale of deposition is of concern in relation to
physical impacts on valued components of the impacted area.
The deposited spoil will not subsequently reach any sensitive area (through
resuspension and sediment transport) in amounts that would
be harmful to the
value or amenity of such areas.
Determine if transport is occurring in the direction of a sensitive
If so, determine if the scale of transport is of concern in relation to
physical impacts on valued components of the impacted area.
Disposal of spoil will not result in transport of contaminated material to
any sensitive area, contaminant increases in the sediments
of such areas,
contaminant uptake by biota in such areas or ensuing effects on such
If transport or deposition has reached any sensitive areas (above), study
contaminant concentrations in the sediments of areas and,
if elevated
concentrations are found, assess the potential for effects on biota.
If such potential is identified, investigate effects on relevant
The deposited spoil will not subsequently reach any sensitive area (through
erosion, resuspension and sediment transport) in amounts
that would cause
unacceptable shoaling in shipping lanes or affect other human uses.
Determine whether or not transport is occurring in the direction of human
If so, determine whether or not the scale of transport is of concern in
relation to physical impacts on these areas.
Guide to recommended procedures for sample collection, preservation
and storage
(Notes: 1. some other procedures may also be suitable. 2. Holding times for
some substances may be considerably longer than this,
e.g. USEPA 2005)
A. Sediment
Collection method
Typical volume required (less may be needed in some cases)
(Suitably pre-cleaned, must be supplied by analysing laboratory)
Preservation technique
Storage conditions
(Some procedures can extend duration, e.g. freezing for total chemical
analysis. Consult lab where necessary)
Storage duration
(Some procedures can extend duration, e.g. freezing for total chemical
analysis. Consult lab where necessary)
Particle size
Total solids/
specific gravity
Whirlpac bag
Refrigerate
Undetermined
Pre-cleaned pre‑weighed polyethylene* jar
Dry ice or freezer for extended storage, otherwise refrigerate
Hg-28 days unless frozen.
Others-6 months
Organics (e.g. PCBs, pesticides, PAHs, TBT)
Solvent rinsed glass jar with Teflon lid
Dry ice or freezer for extended storage, otherwise refrigerate
≤4°C, in the dark
14 days if refrigerated
Total organic carbon
Heat-treated glass vial with Teflon-lined lid
Dry ice or freezer for extended storage, otherwise refrigerate
Undetermined
Sediment for elutriate testing
Depends on actual tests
Glass with Teflon‑lined lid
Completely fill and refrigerate
Biological (that is, toxicity testing)
Dredged material
12–15 l per sample
Plastic bag or container
Completely fill and refrigerate; sieve
14 days. Up to 8 weeks if stored under nitrogen.
Reference sediment
45–50 l per test
Plastic bag or container
Completely fill and refrigerate; sieve
14 days. Up to 8 weeks if stored under nitrogen.
Control sediment
21–25 l per test
Plastic bag or container
Completely fill and refrigerate; sieve
14 days. Up to 8 weeks if stored under nitrogen.
B. Water and elutriate
Chemical/Physical Analyses
Particulate Analysis
Discrete sampler or pump
500–2000 ml
Plastic or glass
Lugol’s solution and refrigerate
Undetermined
Discrete sampler or pump
Acid-rinsed polyethylene or glass jar
pH < 2 with HNO3, refrigerate
Hg — 14 days; others, 6 months
Total Kjeldahl nitrogen (TKN)
Discrete sampler or pump
Plastic or glass
H2SO4 to pH <2, refrigerate
Chemical oxygen demand (COD)
Discrete sampler or pump
Plastic or glass
H2SO4 to pH <2, refrigerate
Total organic carbon (TOC)
Discrete sampler or pump
Plastic or glass
H2SO4 to pH <2, refrigerate
Total inorganic carbon (TIC)
Discrete sampler or pump
Plastic or glass
Airtight seal, refrigerate
Phenolic compounds
Discrete sampler or pump
0.1-1 g CuSO4: H2SO4 to pH 2, refrigerate
Soluble reactive phosphates
Discrete sampler or pump
Plastic or glass
Filter; refrigerate
Extractable organic compounds (eg semi‑
Discrete sampler or pump
Amber glass bottle
pH <2, 6N HCl; airtight seal;
refrigerate
7 days for extraction; 40 days for extract analysis
Volatile organic analysis
Discrete sampler or pump
pH < 2 with 1:1 HCl, refrigerate in airtight, completely filled
14 days for sample analysis if preserved
Total phosphorus
Discrete sampler or pump
Plastic or glass
H2SO4 to pH <2; refrigerate
Total solids
Discrete sampler or pump
Plastic or glass
Refrigerate
Volatile solids
Discrete sampler or pump
Plastic or glass
Refrigerate
Discrete sampler or pump
Plastic or glass
Refrigerate
Biological Tests
Water sampler
Plastic carboy
Refrigerate
14 days, Dilution water. Water sampler, variable, Plastic carboy.
Refrigerate <4oC, 14days. BIOLOGICAL TISSUE Metals: Trawl/Teflon-coated
5-10 g; Double Ziploc bags; Handle with non-metallic forceps; plastic gloves;
dry ice ≤-20oC or freezer storage. Hg —
28 days; others — 6
Dilution Water
Water sampler
Plastic carboy
Refrigerate
C. Biological tissue
PCB’s and chlorinated pesticides
Trawl/Teflon-coated grab
Hexane-rinsed double aluminium foil and double Ziploc bags
Handle with hexane-rinsed stainless steel forceps; dry ice
≤-20°C or freezer storage
Volatile organic compounds
Trawl/Teflon-coated grab
Heat-cleaned aluminium foil and watertight plastic bag
Covered ice chest
≤-20°C or freezer storage
Semivolatile organic compounds (e.g. PAH)
Trawl/Teflon-coated grab
Hexane-rinsed double aluminium foil and double Ziploc bags
Handle with hexane-rinsed stainless steel forceps; dry ice
≤-20°C or freezer storage
Trawl/Teflon-coated grab
part of organic analyses
Hexane-rinsed aluminium foil
Handle with hexane-rinsed stainless steel forceps; quick freeze
≤-20°C or freezer storage
Source: Modified after USEPA, 1991, 1998
* or other appropriate material
Reference list
ANZECC/ARMCANZ 2000a,
Australian and New Zealand Guidelines for Fresh and
Marine Water Quality
, Australian and New Zealand Environment and
Conservation Council/Agriculture and Resource Management Council of Australia
Zealand, October 2000.
ANZECC/ARMCANZ 2000b,
Australian Guidelines for Water Quality Monitoring
and Reporting.
Australian and New Zealand Environment and Conservation
Council/Agriculture and Resource Management Council of Australia and New
Zealand, October 2000.
ANZECC/NHMRC 1992
Australian and New Zealand Guidelines for the Assessment
and Management of Contaminated Sites
. Australian & New Zealand
Environment & Conservation Council and National Health & Medical
Research Council.
ASTM, 2003.
Standard Guide for Designing Biological Tests with
. E 1367-03. American society for Testing and Materials, West
Conshohocken, USA.
Chapman P.M. and Anderson, J 2005. A Decision-Making Framework for Sediment
Contamination.
Integrated Environmental Assessment and Management, 1 (3)
Chapman P. M, McDonald B. G. and Lawrence G.S. (2002. Weight-of-Evidence
Issues and Frameworks for Sediment Quality (and other) Assessments.
Ecological Risk Assessment, 8 (7)
, pp 1489-1515.
Daskalakis KD and O’Connor TP (1995). Normalisation and elemental
sediment contamination in the coastal United States.
Environmental Science
and Technology 29
Edwards J. W., Van Alphen M. and Langley A. 1994,
Identification and
Assessment of Contaminated Land — Improving Site History Appraisal
Contaminated Sites Monograph Series No 3, South Australian Health Commission,
El Saadi O. and Langley A. 1991,
The Health Risk Assessment and Management
of Contaminated Sites
, Proceedings of a National Workshop, South Australian
Health Commission, November 1991.
Environment Canada, 1995.
User’s Guide to the Application Form for
Ocean Disposal
. Report EPS 1/MA/1, December 1995.
Environment Canada, 1998.
National Guidelines for Monitoring Dredged and
Excavated Material at Ocean Disposal Sites
. Environment Canada Disposal at
Sea Program, September 1998.
EPA NSW, 1995.
Contaminated Sites, Sampling Design Guidelines
September 1995.
Langley A. and El Saadi O. 1991,
Protocol for the Health Risk Assessment
and Management of Contaminated Sites
, Summary of a National Workshop, South
Australian Health Commission, November 1991.
London Convention 1992,
Waste Assessment Framework for the London
Convention 1972
, London Convention document 15/16, Annex 4.
LC/SG, 2001.
Sampling Guidelines for Dredged Material
Characterisation
, Report of the Correspondence group. Submitted by Canada
and the United States. London Convention Scientific Group, LC/SG 24/2/1,
February 2001.
Long E. R., MacDonald D. D., Smith S. L. and Calder F. D. 1995,
‘Incidence of Adverse Biological Effects Within Ranges of Chemical
Concentrations in Marine and Estuarine Sediments’, in
Environmental
Management, 19 (1)
Loring DH & Rantula RRT 1992. Manual for the geochemical analysis of
marine sediments and suspended particulate matter.
Earth-Science Reviews
Mudroch A. and MacKnight S. D. 1994,
Handbook of Techniques for Aquatic
Sediments Sampling
, 2nd Ed. CRC Press, Boca Raton.
National Environment Protection Council (NEPC, 1999). National Environment
Protection Council’s Assessment of Site Contamination
Measure, NEPM 1999,
and its individual Schedules B(1) – (10), all available on the
http://www.ephc.gov.au/ website.
NEPC 1999, Schedule B3 – Guideline on Laboratory Analysis of
Potentially Contaminated Soils. NEPC, 1999.
Shineldecker C. L. 1992,
Handbook of Environmental Contaminants: A Guide
for Site Assessment
, Lewis Publishers, Boca Raton.
Simpson, SL, Batley, GE, Chariton AA, Stauber JL, King CK, Chapman JC, Hyne
RV, Gale SA, Roach AC and Maher WA (2005).
Handbook for Sediment Quality
. CSIRO, Bangor NSW.
Simpson, SL, Batley, GE and Chariton, AA. (2008).
Revision of the
ANZECC/ARMCANZ sediment quality guidelines
. Draft, CSIRO Land and Water
Report No. 8/07, August 2008. Prepared for the Commonwealth Department of the
Environment, Heritage,
Water and the Arts. These guidelines are currently under
development. Reference to this report is also taken to refer to the final
version of the sediment quality guidelines which, as part of revisions to the
ANZECC/ARMCANZ (2000a, b) guidelines, under the National
Water Quality
Management Strategy (NWQMS), will be made available, as revision supplements,
through the NWQMS website.
USEPA 1986,
Test Methods for Evaluating Solid Waste, SW-846
Office of Solid Waste and Emergency Response, Washington DC.
USEPA 1991,
Evaluation of Dredged Material Proposed for Ocean Disposal
— Testing Guide
, EPA-503/8-91/001, USEPA and US Army Corps of
USEPA 1992a,
Guidance for Data Useability in Risk Assessment, Part A,
, Office of Emergency and Remedial Response, Superfund, Publ.
9285.7-09A, PB 92 — 963356, April 1992. (Note: Part B solely concerned
with radioanalytical data.)
USEPA 1992b,
Sediment Classification Methods Compendium
, USEPA Office
of Water, Report EPA-823-R-92-006, September 1992.
USEPA 1992c,
Proceedings of the EPA’s Contaminated Sediment Strategy
, Office of Water, EPA 823-R-92-007.
USEPA 1992d.
Evaluating Environmental Effects of Dredged Material
Management Alternatives — A Technical Framework
. EPA/USACE.
EPA842-B-92-008, November 1992.
USEPA 1993,
Selecting Remediation Techniques for Contaminated
, EPA-823-B93-001, June 1993.
USEPA 1994a,
QA/QC Guidance for Sampling and Analysis of Water, Sediments
and Tissues for Dredged Material Evaluations, Phase I — Chemical
Evaluations
, EPA Office of Water.
USEPA, 1997.
The Lognormal Distribution in Environmental Applications
Technology Support Centre Issue, EPA/600/S-97/006, December 1997.
USEPA 1998,
Evaluation of Dredged Material Proposed for Discharge in
Waters of the US (Final),
(Inland Testing Guide), USEPA and US Army Corps of
Engineers, EPA-823-B-94-002, June 1994.
USEPA, 2005.
Sample Holding Time Re-evaluation
. EPA/600/R-05/124,
October 2005.
USEPA Region 10 1989,
Management Plan Report, Unconfined Open-water
Disposal of Dredged Material, Phase II (North and South Puget Sound)
Sound Dredged Disposal Analysis Reports, EPA, USACE, Washington State Department
of Natural Resources.
Wenning R. W., Batley G. E., Ingersoll C. W. and Moore D. W. (2005).
of Sediment Quality Guidelines and Related Tools for the Assessment of
Contaminated Sediments
. Setac Press, Pensacola.
Ambient Baseline Levels
Levels of chemicals or substances near a dump site prior to any disposal
taking place. These are not necessarily the same as natural
levels (see natural
level) because the disposal site could have been contaminated by long-range
transport and deposition of contaminants,
e.g. via the atmosphere. Ideally,
these sediments should be of comparable grainsize as the sediments to be
dredged, to facilitate
the comparison.
Australian Waters
. Australian Waters are defined in
Environment Protection (Sea Dumping) Act 1981
it is also a term in general usage. Australian Waters include:
• The Coastal Waters of a State are described in Schedule 2 to the
Petroleum (Submerged Lands) Act 1967
and constitute the first three
nautical miles seaward of the (Commonwealth) territorial sea from the baseline;
and any waters landward
of the (Commonwealth) territorial sea from the baseline
(that is, inside the baseline) and not within the limits of the State
• The Territorial Sea of Australia – a belt of water not
exceeding 12 nm in width measured from the territorial sea baseline.
territorial sea around certain islands in the Torres Strait is 3 nm
• The Contiguous Zone – a belt of water contiguous to the
territorial sea, the outer limit of which does not exceed 24
nm from the
territorial sea baseline (12 nautical miles), and
• The Exclusive Economic Zone – an area beyond and adjacent to
the territorial sea (12 nm) the outer limit of which does
not exceed 200 nm from
the territorial sea baseline, except in areas of agreed or potential
delimitation with other countries: Indonesia
Papua New Guinea, the Solomon
Islands, France (New Caledonia and Kergulelen Islands) and New Zealand. The
Australian EEZ is defined
Sea and Submerged Lands Act 1973
(‘the SSL Act’ – including the amendments to that Act made
Maritime Legislation Amendment Act 1994
, and the outer limit of
the Australian EEZ is set out in the Proclamation under the SSL Act.
The term Baseline refers to the line from which the seaward limits of
Australia’s Maritime Zones are measured. The territorial
sea baseline may
be of various types depending upon the shape of the coastline in any given
• The Normal baseline corresponds with the low water line along the
coast, including the coasts of islands. The normal baseline
corresponds to the
level of Lowest Astronomical Tide (LAT). The baseline is drawn around low tide
elevations which are defined as
naturally formed areas of land surrounded by and
above water at low tide but submerged at high tide, provided they are wholly or
partly within 12 nm of the coast:
• Straight baselines are a system of straight lines joining specified
or discrete points on the low-water line, usually known
as straight baseline end
points. These may be used in localities where the coastline is deeply indented
and cut into, or where there
is a fringe of islands along the coast in its
immediate vicinity: and
• Bay or river closing lines are straight lines drawn between the
respective low-water marks of the natural entrance points
of bays or rivers,
subject to some limitations governed by the width of such indentations. Waters
on the landward side of the baseline
are referred to as the internal waters of
the State or Territory.
Bioaccumulation
The retention and concentration of a substance by an organism.
Bioavailable
A substance in a chemical and physical form that allows it to affect
organisms or be accumulated by them.
Biological Monitoring
Measurement of biological parameter/s (e.g, level of contamination of tissues
or population abundance) through time, to determine
if impacts have
Capital Dredging
Dredging for navigation, to enlarge or deepen existing channel and port areas
or to create new ones. Dredging for engineering purposes,
to create trenches for
pipes, cables, immersed tube tunnels, to remove material unsuitable for
foundations and to remove overburden
for aggregate extraction, etc.
Clean Material
Clean material is material from locations distant from appreciable pollution
sources (i.e. in pristine locations) as well as material
composed largely
(>95 per cent) of gravel, sand or rock, but only where this material is found
in areas of high current or wave
energy, where the seabed consists of shifting
gravel and sandbars.
Confined Disposal at Sea
Disposal of material in a location where transport away from the disposal
site is minimised; and contaminated material is covered
with a layer of dredged
material that is of acceptable quality for unconfined ocean disposal and of an
appropriate thickness such
that burrowing organisms would be unable to reach the
contaminated material.
Contaminant
A substance, either inorganic or organic, present in the sediment at or near
levels that could be toxic to some organisms.
Contaminated
Spoil is defined as contaminated if it contains contaminants of concern.
Dredge sites will be classified as one of the following contamination
‘probably contaminated’; ‘suspect’, or ‘probably
Contaminants List
This is the list of contaminants which could be present at elevated levels in
the sediments of the dredge area, and therefore require
analysis. The list
includes those chemical substances for which sources are known or suspected in
the dredge area or its catchment,
based on the historical survey. Where good
chemical data are available on the sediments, the list includes those toxic
known, from previous investigations, to occur at levels greater than
background concentrations or one tenth of the Screening Levels
(Table 2) when
the background data is below detection or, for substances which do not have
Screening Levels, present at elevated
Contaminants of Concern (COC) and Potential Concern (COPC)
The degree of contamination is split into contaminants of potential concern
(COPCs) and contaminants of concern (COCs).
COPCs are those contaminants that exceed the background concentrations and
the Screening Level (or elevated concentrations of contaminants
guidelines do not exist).
COCs are those contaminants which exceed the background concentrations and
the Screening Level and for which the bioavailability,
bioaccumulation or
toxicity assessments indicate that significant effects from the contaminants are
likely. For COCs, definite actions
are required. For COPCs, no immediate action
may be required.
The contaminants are COPCs through Phase 1 and Phase 2 (Figure 3), and become
COCs if they are ‘above’ at Phase III or
Continental Shelf
The Continental Shelf is the area of the seabed and subsoil which extends
beyond the territorial sea to a distance of 200 nm from
the territorial sea
baseline and beyond that distance to the outer edge of the continental margin as
defined in Article 76 of the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
1982 (UNCLOS). The continental shelf is largely coextensive with the exclusive
zone within 200 nm from the territorial sea baselines. There are
certain areas between Australia and Indonesia and Australia and
Papua New Guinea
where they are not coextensive, and there are eight areas in which it is likely
that the continental shelf extends
beyond the boundary of the EEZ. Australia has
also declared a continental shelf off the Australian Antarctic Territory and
some preliminary
work has indicated that this is likely to extend beyond the 200
nm boundary in many places.
Determining Authority
The organization to which authority has been delegated to evaluate sea
disposal applications and issue permits. At the time of publication,
this is the
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority for disposal within the Great Barrier
Reef Marine Park or Department of the
Environment, Water, Heritage and the Arts
for all other proposals.
Under the London Protocol, dumping means:
• any deliberate disposal into the sea of wastes or other matter from
vessels, aircraft, platforms or other man-made structures
• any deliberate disposal into the sea of vessels, aircraft, platforms
or other man-made structures at sea
• any storage of wastes or other matter in the sea-bed and the subsoil
thereof from vessels, aircraft, platforms or other man-made
structures at sea,
• any abandonment or toppling at site of platforms or other man-made
structures at sea, for the sole purpose of deliberate disposal.
Dumping does not include the disposal into the sea of wastes or other matter
derived from the normal operations of vessels, aircraft,
platforms or other
man-made structures at sea. It also does not include placement of matter for a
purpose other than the mere disposal
thereof, provided that such placement is
not contrary to the aims of the London Protocol.
Elutriate test
A test, which involves mixing sediment with four times its volume of seawater
under specified conditions, to estimate the amounts
of contaminants that will be
released during dredging and during sea disposal.
Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)
The Exclusive Economic Zone is an area beyond and adjacent to the territorial
sea. See Figure 2.
In place or ‘on site’.
Initial dilution
That mixing which occurs within four hours of dumping of a load of spoil.
Interstitial Water
Water contained within the pore spaces of the sediment, also called pore
Loading for the Purpose of Dumping (Loading)
Where material or substances of any kind are loaded on any vessel, platform
or aircraft for the purpose of being dumped into the sea.
Maintenance Dredging
Dredging to ensure that channels, berths or other port areas are maintained
at their designed dimensions.
Maritime Zones
For legal purposes, the sea is divided into zones extending from the
mainland. The different zones are defined mainly in the
Seas and Submerged
Lands Act 1973
and other legislation.
Natural Level
Levels of naturally occurring chemical substances (e.g. metals, hydrocarbons,
PAHs) in the sediments of an area prior to any anthropogenic
contamination.
Offshore Area
A marine area distant from land-based influences.
The introduction, directly or indirectly, by human activity, of wastes or
other matter into the sea which results or is likely to
result in such
deleterious effects as harm to living resources and marine ecosystems, hazards
to human health, hindrance to marine
activities, including fishing and other
legitimate uses of the sea, impairment of quality for use of seawater and
reduction of amenities.
Port Waters
Port waters are not defined under the Commonwealth Sea Dumping Act. Port
waters are defined under State and Territory legislation
and this legislation
differs from state to state.
Potentially Contaminated Sediment
Sediment that is contiguous with an area of known sediment contamination, or
sediment exposed to known contamination sources.
Practical Quantitation Limit, PQL
The lowest chemical analysis level that can be reliably achieved within
specified limits of precision and accuracy during routine
conditions.
Precautionary Approach
Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full
scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing
measures to
prevent environmental degradation.
Pristine Site
A location which is distant from, and unaffected by, anthropogenic
contaminants.
Quality assurance and quality control.
Reference Area
An area with similar sediment grainsize and oceanographic characteristics as
the disposal site, and nearby but outside the area whose
sediment chemistry
could be affected by disposal at the site. Used for determining the ambient
baseline concentrations.
Remediation
The cleanup or mitigation of pollution or contamination in sediments by
various methods.
The probability that an adverse outcome will occur in a person, a group, or
an ecological system that is exposed to a particular dose
or concentration of a
hazardous agent and dependant on both the level of toxicity and the level of
Screening Level
Level of a substance in the sediment below which toxic effects on organisms
are not expected (Table 2).
Territorial Sea
The territorial sea of Australia extends 12 nm seaward from the territorial
sea baseline. Under international law, Australia has sovereignty
territorial sea except for the innocent passage of foreign vessels through it.
The quality or degree of being poisonous, or harmful, to plant, animal or
human life.
Toxicity Testing, Sediment Bioassay
Procedures that evaluate the toxic effects of sediments on organisms.
Uncontaminated
Spoil is defined as being uncontaminated for the purposes of sea disposal if
it comes from a pristine environment, or if, after assessment,
it contains no
Contaminants of Concern.
Waters within the Limits of a State
Waters within the limits of a State are those waters that lie within the
constitutional limits of the State as determined by Letters
Patent issued to the
Governors of each of the States at Federation. They can include features such as
bays, gulfs, estuaries, rivers,
creeks, inlets, ports or harbours. Generally,
the limits of the States are low water along the coastline together with bay
lines (usually of no more than 6 nm in length) and also river closing
lines. In some areas of the coastline, locating the limits
of the State may be
difficult. This can occur particularly where islands lie very close to the
coastline and in relation to certain
bays. In such cases there are detailed
legal principles that must be applied to determine the exact location of the
State limits.
The 1996 Protocol to the
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other
Matter, 1972.
Environment Protection
(Sea Dumping) Regulations 1983
Great Barrier Reef Marine Park
Authority, Environment and Assessment Section, Phone: (07) 4750 0700,
Email: info@gbrmpa.gov.au
http://www.environment.gov.au/about/policies.html
With the exception of
tributyltin (TBT). Standard toxicity testing does not apply as the values for
TBT in Table 2 are based on
chronic effects.
It can be affected by other
substances that decompose at 550oC
The Australian and New Zealand
water quality guidelines for marine and estuarine waters are largely based on US
toxicity data.
Sediment contiguous with areas of known sediment contamination, or sediment
in areas of known contamination input, e.g. inner harbours,
berth pockets, and
other locations affected by solid, liquid or airborne waste inputs.
All three categories are
considered potentially contaminated for the purposes of calculating the
maintenance dredge volume.
When sample numbers are
halved, fractions are rounded up.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.23 MB)
PDF format (479 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter