SSP Assets Pty Ltd v Bluebonnet Capital Pty Ltd [2025] ATMO 206 (1 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by SSP Assets
Pty Ltd to registration of trade mark application numbers 2451571 (classes 12
and 42) and 2451575 (classes
12, 39, 40 and 42) both for the trade mark
; 2451574 (classes 6, 12, 14, 39, 40, 41 and 42) for the trade mark
Elfin head device
and 2475920
ELFIN SPORTS CARS
- in the name of
Bluebonnet Capital Pty Ltd
Anne Makrigiorgos
REPRESENTATION:
Kalus Kenny Intelex
Self represented
2025 ATMO 206
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) – opposition under
pursued – ground of opposition
established under
– applications refused registration
decision concerns oppositions under
Trade Marks Act 1995
by SSP Assets Pty Ltd
’) to registration of the following trade mark
applications filed in the name of Bluebonnet Capital Pty Ltd
Goods and services
Priority date
Class 12: motor racing cars
Class 41: arranging and conducting of motor car racing events; organisation
and conducting of motor car racing events; organising
and conducting of motor
car racing events; organization and conducting of motor car racing events;
organizing and conducting of motor
car racing events; arranging of motor car
racing events; organisation of motor car racing events; organising of motor car
events; organization of motor car racing events; organizing of motor car
racing events; motor car racing
Class 39: rental of motor racing cars; rental of motor cars
Class 40: factory production of motor cars on assembly lines; in-plant
production of motor cars on assembly lines; custom manufacture
of motor cars;
custom manufacturing of motor cars; custom manufacture of motor cars for others;
custom manufacturing of motor cars
for others; mass production of motor
Class 42: design of motor cars
Class 6: model cars [ornaments] of common metal
Class 12: motor racing cars; motor cars
Class 14: model cars [ornaments] made of precious metal; scale model cars
[ornaments] of precious metal
Class 39: rental of motor racing cars
Class 40: custom manufacturing of cars; factory production of cars on
assembly lines; mass production of cars; mass production of
motor cars; custom
manufacturing of cars for others; factory production of motor cars on assembly
lines; custom manufacture of cars
Class 41: arranging and conducting of motor car racing events; organisation
and conducting of motor car racing events; arranging of
motor car racing events;
organizing and conducting of motor car racing events; organization and
conducting of motor car racing events;
organising and conducting of motor car
racing events; organisation of motor car racing events; organising of motor car
racing events;
organization of motor car racing events; organizing of motor car
racing events; motor car racing
Class 42: automotive design; industrial design of cars; design of motor
cars; design of cars
ELFIN SPORTS CARS
Class 6: model cars [ornaments] of common metal
Class 12: vehicles; land vehicles; sports cars; motor cars; motor racing
cars; engines for land vehicles; propulsion mechanisms for
land vehicles;
vehicle chassis; motorized cars [land vehicles]; electric motors for cars;
electric vehicles
Class 14: model cars [ornaments] made of precious metal; scale model cars
[ornaments] of precious metal
Class 25: clothing; headwear; footwear
Class 35: marketing; retail services or wholesale services for clothing;
retail services or wholesale services for footwear; business
management;
provision of foreign trade information; advertising; providing sales and lease
leads for others in the field of new cars;
negotiation of sales contracts for
others relating to automobiles and two-wheeled motor vehicles, and provision of
information thereof;
distributorship services in the field of automobile parts;
sales agency services featuring automobiles; retail services or wholesale
services for automobiles; retail services provided by automobile parts and
accessories stores; retail services relating to vehicles;
retail services for
vehicles; retail services relating to automobile accessories; provision of an
on-line marketplace for buyers
and sellers of goods and services
Class 37: automobile restoration; maintenance and repair of engines; tuning
of engines; overhaul of vehicles; painting of vehicles;
reconditioning services; refurbishment of vehicles; repair of vehicles; custom
installation of exterior, interior and
mechanical parts of vehicles [tuning];
maintenance and repair of vehicles; maintenance, servicing and repair of
vehicles; provision
of information relating to the repair or maintenance of
automobiles; rust removal; repair services; anti-rust treatment of vehicles;
vehicle detailing
Class 39: rental of motor racing cars; rental of sports cars; rental of
Class 40: custom manufacture of vehicles for others; custom manufacture of
motor cars; custom assembling of motors and engines; custom
manufacture of
vehicle graphics and wraps; custom manufacturing services for others in the
field of propulsion systems for motors
and engines
Class 41: motor car racing; organisation and conducting of motor car racing
events; organisation and conducting of vehicle races;
racing driver training;
entertainment in the nature of automobile races
Class 42: design of motor cars; design of vehicles; development of
vehicles; vehicle design services; vehicle engine design services;
engineering
services; industrial design
(collectively ‘
Applications
the advertisement of acceptance for possible registration of the Applications,
the Opponent filed Notices of Intention to
Oppose registration of the 571 and
575 Marks on 24 October 2024, the 574 Mark on 28 October 2024 and the 920 Mark
on 6 February 2025,
followed by its Statements of Grounds and Particulars
’) on 20 November 2024 on the 571, 574 and 575 Marks
and 13 February 2025 on the 920 Mark. The Applicant filed Notices of Intention
to Defend the Oppositions on 13 January 2025 for the 571, 574 and 575 Marks and
20 March 2025 for the 920 Mark.
Opponent filed identical Evidence in Support (‘
connection with all four oppositions. The Applicant did not file any Evidence in
parties were given the opportunity to request to be heard by written or oral
submissions. While neither party elected to be heard,
the Opponent requested a
decision without a hearing on each Application. I am a delegate of the Registrar
of Trade Marks and these
matters have been allocated to me to determine. I have
decided these matters based on the particulars set out in the SGPs and the
Grounds and onus
SGPs nominate grounds of opposition under
The Opponent carries the burden of establishing at least one ground of
on the balance of
probabilities.
The date at which
the rights of the parties are to be determined is the priority date of the
Applications.
Opponent filed the following
Declarant and Position
Declaration of Stephen Luke Baker, Director of the Opponent
SB1 to SB11
Summary of EIS
provides a history of Elfin Sports Cars (‘
manufacturer which was founded in 1959 by Garrie Cooper and has a significant
reputation in Australian motor racing.
ESC manufactured 36 different model
variants between 1959 and 2006, some road vehicles and others motor racing
vehicles. At its peak,
EFC was the world’s second largest producer and
manufacturer of racing cars winning Grands Prix between 1968 and 1974. The
recent Elfin vehicle was manufactured in 2008 by the Walkinshaw Group, a
subsequent owner of ESC.
states that the trade marks ELFIN, ELFIN SPORTS CARS and
Elfin Trade Marks
’) were used by ESC. The name, brand and
cars are celebrated at the Elfin Heritage Centre, a museum dedicated to ELFIN
located in Moorabbin, Victoria.
claims that the Elfin Trade Marks remain internationally recognised, with cars
raced and sold in the Australian motorsport industry.
Baker annexes three
undated photographs of ELFIN sports cars still raced today. While none of the
Elfin Trade Marks are visible on
the cars in these photographs, Baker also
annexes a timing sheet from a race event at the 36
Phillip Island
Classic Festival of Motorsport on 7 March 2025, showing that four ELFIN cars
were in the race.
claims that by an Asset Sale & Purchase Agreement
’), the Opponent purchased the ‘Elfin
brand’, vehicles, inventory and intellectual property from Elfin Sports
Pty Ltd, a member of the Walkinshaw Group on 10 May 2023. Baker annexes a
redacted copy of the Agreement. I note that the Agreement
refers to the sale of
Assets. Other than the ‘Elfin Trade Mark’ any further Assets have
been redacted. The ‘Elfin
Trade Mark’ is defined as trade mark
registration 767061 for the trade mark
Registration
declares that on 20 May 2024, the Applicant filed a successful non use removal
application against the Registration as the Opponent
did not file a Notice of
Intention to Oppose the removal application (‘
failed to obtain an extension of time to file a NIO. The Registration was
removed on 30 July 2024. Baker annexes copies
of correspondence with IP
Australia concerning the extension of time to file the NIO.
states that ‘since purchasing the trade mark Elfin brand and associated
intellectual property and assets, SSP Assets has
continuously used
‘ELFIN’, ‘ELFIN SPORTS CARS’, a logo containing an elf
head and variations of those trade
marks in respect of motor vehicles, motor
racing and related services’.
provides the following examples of use of the Elfin Trade Marks:
Updating and
making live the Elfin website at www.elfin.com.au annexing the following undated
screenshot from the homepage of the
Screenshots
dated between May 2023 and March 2024 from the Young Timers Garage
’) Instagram account, an example of which appears below.
Many of the posts are in respect of restored Elfin Type 5 cars and
Cooper’s induction into the Australian Motorsport Hall of Fame. Baker
claims YTG is an associated company of the Opponent.
To this end, I note from
the copies of correspondence with IP Australia concerning the extension of time
to file the NIO, that Baker’s
email address is listed as
steve@ytg.co.
Undated press
release from YTG claimed to be dated 18 June 2023 which states ‘Young
Timers Garage (YTG) purchases Elfin Sports
Cars from Walkinshaw Automotive
Group’ and a press release dated 23 October 2023 which
On 17 June 2023,
YTG releases S1 E21 of the YTG Podcast titled ‘Elfin is Back! YTG Buys
Historic Racing Manufacturer, Here is
the Inside Scoop’ on Spotify, Apple
and YouTube providing screenshots of the episode, examples of which appear
Mailchimp EDMs
with screenshots titled ‘Calling All Elfin Owners!’ and ‘2023
year in review’ covering acquisition
of the Elfin brand. Details of the
latter screenshot appear below:
An Instagram
invitation dated 18 October 2023 to a gathering of owners of Elfin cars produced
over the years to be held on 4 November
LinkedIn posts
concerning the Elfin Type 5 and Garrie Cooper’s Hall of Fame induction
dated January and March 2024; and
YTG sponsorship
of Phillip Island Classic in March 2024 which states:
attests that the Opponent has engaged in discussions with various parties over
the last 12 months in relation to a potential
sale of the Elfin brand, including
the Applicant. Baker annexes a copy of a Confidentiality Agreement dated 12
April 2024 between
the Applicant and the Opponent in connection with potential
sale discussions. The Agreement is signed by Aaron Hickmann
’) as an authorised representative of the
states that on 15 April 2024, the Opponent rejected an offer from the
Applicant’s director Hickmann to purchase the Elfin
brand and its assets.
Baker annexes WhatsApp messages between Baker and Hickmann. The message with an
offer to Baker from Hickmann
begins with:
and the message rejecting the offer
attests that sometime between 20 May 2024 and 27 May 2024, the sole director of
the Applicant registered the following companies:
Elfin Motorsport
Pty Ltd ACN 677 484 267;
Elfin Racing Pty
Ltd ACN 677 537 969;
Elfin Sports
Cars Pty Ltd ACN 677 699 508;
Elfin Racing
Cars Pty Ltd ACN 677 509 625; and
Team Elfin Pty
Ltd ACN 677 546 664.
claims that via a WhatsApp message dated 25 October 2024, a director of the
Applicant acknowledged that the Opponent continues
to be the owner of the Elfin
brand and all of its associated assets and intellectual property (whether
registered or not). Baker
annexes a screenshot of the message which
annexes copies of letters sent by the Opponent’s lawyers to the Applicant
dated 28 October and 1 November 2024 which make
a number of allegations and
demands regarding actions of the Applicant and the Applicant’s director
Aaron Hickmann, including
breach of the Confidentiality
Discussion and reasons
Section 62A
62A provides
Application made in bad faith
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground that the
application was made in bad faith
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Trade Marks Amendment Bill 2006
some non-exhaustive examples of applications made in bad faith:
persons who
monitor new property developments, register the names of new developments as
trade marks for a number of services and
then threaten the property developers
with trade mark infringement proceedings unless the developers licence or buy
the trade marks;
persons who have
a history of applying for trade marks that are deliberate misspellings of other
registered trade marks;
persons who
identify trade marks used overseas but with no Australian use as yet who then
apply to register the trade marks in Australia
for the express purpose of
selling them to the overseas owners.
Federal Court has substantively considered the issue of bad faith in
Consulting Pty Ltd v Sports Warehouse Inc (No
DC Comics v Cheqout
The following
propositions emerge from these decisions which are relevant to the present
opposition:
Bad faith for
the purposes of s 62A must be [as at the
Relevant Date
] and must relate
to the making of the subject of that
application.
Bad faith is a
serious allegation that ‘impugns the character of an individual or
collective character of a business’
and requires correspondingly cogent
evidence. The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities, rather than
that of beyond reasonable
Conduct that
falls short of the standards of acceptable commercial behaviour observed by
reasonable and experienced persons in the
particular area is sufficient. Bad
faith does not require
dishonesty.
As stated by
Dodds-Streeton J in
Fry Consulting
Further, in my view, mere
negligence, incompetence or a lack of prudence to reasonable and experienced
standards would not, in themselves,
suffice, as the concept of bad faith imports
conduct which, irrespective of the form it takes, is of an unscrupulous,
underhand or
unconscientious
The registration
of a trade mark is designed to enable bona fide proprietors to protect their
proprietary rights without having to
prove unfair
circumstances surrounding the application to register the mark are
A prior business
connection with and knowledge of the opponent by the applicant such that a
person standing in the shoes of the applicant
should have known that he should
not have applied for a trade mark deceptively similar to that used by the
opponent is sufficient
for a finding of bad
The examples of
bad faith applications in the Explanatory Memorandum are predominantly, but not
exclusively, manifestations of blocking
or holding to ransom the party which is,
at least in conscience, entitled to a mark, but the illustrations in the
Explanatory Memorandum
are merely inclusive and do not limit the breadth of the
concept of bad
Bad faith, in
the context of s 62A, does not require, although it includes, dishonesty or
fraud. It is a wider notion, potentially
applicable to diverse species of
decided cases have established that assessing whether an application was filed
in bad faith is a two-step test with a subjective
and an objective element. The
subjective element requires findings as to what the Applicant knew at the filing
date. The objective
element then asks: armed with that knowledge, would a person
adopting proper standards of commercial behaviour consider the act of
trade mark to be in bad faith?
Opponent bears the onus of establishing that the filing of the Applications was
in bad faith and it will not be easily established
given the serious nature of
the allegation.
summary the SGP claims that the Opponent has invested significant time,
resources and funds to promote the Elfin brand to re-build
its profile in the
motor racing industry. In April 2024, the Applicant commenced discussions with
the Opponent with respect to the
Opponent potentially purchasing the Elfin brand
and its associated intellectual property. On 12 April 2024 the Applicant and
entered into a Confidentiality Agreement. On 15 April 2024, Hickmann,
as a representative of the Applicant, made a written offer
to Baker, as a
representative of the Opponent, to purchase the Elfin brand and its assets which
was rejected. Following the rejection,
the Applicant filed a successful non-use
application against the Registration, applied for the Applications and
registered a number
of companies using the Elfin name. The Applicant’s
actions in filing the Applications are made in bad faith, with full knowledge
that the Applicant does not, and has not ever, owned the Elfin brand or the
right to register any trade marks associated with it.
the purpose of considering the s 62A ground of opposition and determining the
Applicant’s subjective intention, it is necessary
to look at the
circumstances surrounding the filing of the Applications which includes the
relevant actions of each party.
the present opposition, I am satisfied that the Applicant’s knowledge was
such that the decision to apply for registration
of all of the Applications
would be regarded as in bad faith by persons adopting proper standards.
finding against the opponent in
Fry Consulting
, her Honour expressly
noted that she considered it relevant that the applicant had not learned of the
opponent’s claimed conflicting
rights ‘through a licence agreement
or a prior relationship which imposed obligations of a fiduciary or
quasi-fiduciary
character’.
Honour’s comments are relevant here. This is not a case of mere knowledge
before the priority date of another person’s
trade marks. This is a case
which involves a prior relationship between the Applicant and the Opponent.
That relationship involved
the parties discussing a possible sale of the
Opponent’s Registration and assets which led to the execution of a
confidentiality
agreement, which in turn led to an offer to purchase and a
rejection of that offer. Once the offer was rejected, the Applicant sought
removal of the Registration and filed the Applications.
am also satisfied that by offering to purchase the Elfin brand and its assets,
the Applicant acknowledged that the Opponent owned
the Elfin business and the
name Elfin. To then file the Applications just after the Applicant had dealings
with the Opponent which
did not go the Applicant’s way, and knowing that
the Elfin Trade Marks were the property of the Opponent, is the very essence
also add that, despite being on notice of the ground of bad faith in the SGP for
each Application, followed by the evidence in support
being served on it, the
Applicant has chosen not to challenge or dispute the evidence in any way. Such
silence and failure to address
the issue of bad faith simply strengthens the
Opponent’s case and supports the claim of bad
Opponent has established this ground of opposition.
found the s 62A ground of opposition established, it is unnecessary that the
remaining grounds be considered.
55 relevantly provides:
(1) Unless subsection (3) applies to the proceedings, the Registrar
must, at the end, decide:
(a) to refuse to register the trade mark; or
(b) to register the trade mark (with or without conditions or limitations)
in respect of the goods and/or services then specified
in the application;
having regard to the extent (if any) to which any ground on which the
application was opposed has been established.
limitations
see section 6.
Opponent has established on the balance of probabilities, the ground of
opposition under 62A. I accordingly refuse to register
the Applications. If the
Registrar is served with a notice of appeal within one month from the date of
this decision, I direct that
the disposition of the Applications be in
accordance with the court’s direction or
Opponent has sought costs. I see no reason to depart from the general rule that
costs follow the event. Accordingly, with respect
to the opposition to the 571
Mark, I award costs against the Applicant in accordance with the amounts in
Schedule 8 of the Regulations
and for the oppositions to the 574, 575 and 920
Marks, I award reduced costs against the Applicant under s 221 in the same
Hume Industries (Malaysia) Berhad v James Hardie & Coy Pty
Anne Makrigiorgos
Hearing Officer
Delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks
Unless otherwise stated, each
reference to a section is a reference to a section of the
Trade Marks Act
’) and each reference to a regulation
below is a reference to a regulation in the
Trade Marks Regulations 1995
Regulations
Food Channel Network Pty Ltd
v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
, [32] (Keane CJ, Stone and
Telstra Corporation Limited
v Phone Directories Company Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot
and Edelmann JJ).
Southern Cross Refrigerating
Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 82
, [4] (Kitto J).
Baker Annexure SB7.
[2012] FCA 81 (Dodds-Streeton
Fry Consulting
[2013] FCA 478 (Bennett
Fry Consulting
Ibid [147]-[148] and
Ibid [166].
Fry Consulting
Ibid [163].
Ibid [164].
Hard Coffee Pty Ltd v
Hard Coffee Main Beach Pty Ltd
[2009] ATMO 26
, [12] (Hearing Officer
Nancarrow) (‘
Hard Coffee
Fry Consulting
Hard Coffee
[2001] ATMO 78 (Hearing
Officer Williams).
RTF format (28.1 MB)
Signed PDF/A format