Farrugia v The King [2025] HCATrans 64 (16 September 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 064
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Sydney No S57 of 2025
B e t w e e n
FRANK SAMUEL FARRUGIA
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
SYDNEY ON TUESDAY, 16 SEPTEMBER 2025, AT 9.30 AM
High Court of Australia
MR P.R. BOULTEN, SC
Court pleases, I appear with
MR T.F. WOODS
for the applicant. (instructed by Gregory J
Goold Solicitors)
MS M.T. ENGLAND, SC
May it please
the Court, I appear for the respondent (instructed by Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth))
HER HONOUR:
Thank you, Ms England.
Mr Boulten, I think you have received a letter from the Registry. Although
there has already been a grant
of special leave, there are just a couple of
matters that I wanted to raise to ensure that the issues are clearly joined for
appeal. So, the proposed ground of appeal raises three issues, effectively:
conflict of interest, material irregularity and adverse
thing I wanted to hear about was where the issue – if
any – about waiver of conflict will fit in, particularly in
the concession that appears to have been made at paragraph 57 of the
CCA’s judgment, that the client was fully informed,
if I have correctly
expressed it.
MR BOULTEN:
Well, I think the issue of waiver of
privilege falls ‑ ‑ ‑
HER HONOUR:
Perhaps I should interrupt you at that point, because the language of
“waiver” may not be very happy in this context.
What I am talking
MR BOULTEN:
Yes. I can see it is quite different than
legal professional privilege being waived. It is connected to it, in one
respect, in
order for the Court to determine whether or not there was such a
waiver of conflict, if there is such a thing as waiver of conflict.
comes within (b) of the ground. We can address it specifically.
position will be, essentially, that there is a threshold issue about whether or
not an accused person coming for sentence can
waive a barrister’s
conflict, and then there is an issue about whether or not there needs to be
evidence which informs an appeal
court about whether there has been an effective
decision to proceed, knowing that there was such a conflict.
And your client’s position is that waiver is not possible.
Is that right?
MR BOULTEN:
We say that it is against public
interest, that is not just the accused’s interest, that there is a
significant public interest
in there being ethical representation in criminal
proceedings, and that you cannot waive that as the accused.
All right. Is it an agreed fact that the client was fully
MR BOULTEN:
HER HONOUR:
MR BOULTEN:
What was said, we say, is that the court could
draw inferences that they were informed about the fact of the
conflict – the
particular conflict – but not fully
informed in the sense that the consequences were fully explained. What is more,
event, we say that there is a problem, in that there needs to be
informed – fully informed – explanation, and that cannot
come from the person with the conflict.
HER HONOUR:
Thank you. The second issue is touched on at paragraph 51 of the
CCA’s judgment. Is that an issue that you
will need to deal with on the
MR BOULTEN:
Well, the issue of remittal in sentencing
appeals has not been fully determined in this Court, although it is not uncommon
Court of Criminal Appeal for sentence matters to be remitted,
purportedly, under section 12(2). We are happy to address it, because
are submitting that the appropriate remedy is remittal to the District
HER HONOUR:
All right. Thank you. Then the final thing
that I wanted to ask was whether or not counsel who is the subject of the
that there was a breach of rule 119 is aware of the issue in
this Court.
MR BOULTEN:
Yes, your Honour. I know for sure
HER HONOUR:
All right. Thank you, Mr Boulten.
Ms England, in light of that, are there any particular directions that you
think are required
to advance the matter to a hearing?
MS ENGLAND:
Yes, your Honour, there are. The Crown intends to address the question of
waiver, including with regard to the transcripts of arguments
in both courts and
the written submissions in both courts. Accordingly, with the agreement of my
learned friend, the Crown seeks
a direction that that material be included in
the joint appeal book. That is, again your Honour, the transcripts of
argument from
the District Court, the transcript of argument from the Court of
Criminal Appeal and the written submissions before each of those
HER HONOUR:
Thank you. Is there anything
MS ENGLAND:
No, your Honour.
I have some draft directions here. What I propose to do is to
adjourn the Court, but I will hand down these directions for counsel
consider. Presumably, you have no difficulty with that supplementation of the
appeal book, Mr Boulten?
MR BOULTEN:
No. That’s by
HER HONOUR:
All right. Add a suitable direction to
cover that issue and then directions will be made accordingly to prepare the
an appeal in next February or March. Is that
appropriate?
MR BOULTEN:
Yes, it is.
HER HONOUR:
Thank you. Could you please adjourn the Court.
AT 9.39 AM THE
MATTER WAS ADJOURNED
RTF format (1.26 MB)
Signed PDF/A format