URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/SSATACSA/2011/13.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:05
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ryan v Ryan [2011] SSATACSA 13 (10 August 2011)
SECOND PARTY
Steven RYAN
Child Support Agency
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
A decision made by an objections officer of the Child Support Agency dated 11
May 2011, disallowing an objection to a decision made
by an officer of the Child
Support Agency on 22 February 2011, to accept Mr Ryan’s estimate of income
of $19,032 per annum
for the period 22 February 2011 to 30 June 2011.
HEARING BY TRIBUNAL
The application was heard on 10 August 2011.
The members of the Tribunal were XXXXXXXX. Presiding Member
Applicant – Mrs Ryan spoke to the Tribunal by conference telephone.
Second party – Mr Ryan spoke to the Tribunal by conference telephone.
He was represented at the hearing by Mr Michael Williams,
solicitor, Williams
Lawyers who also spoke to the Tribunal by conference telephone.
Respondent – A representative of the Child Support Agency did not
attend the hearing.
DECISION OF THE TRIBUNAL
On 10 August 2011 the Tribunal decided to affirm the decision under review.
This means that the application is not successful.
DATE OF DESPATCH
16 August 2011
REASONS FOR DECISION
Ryan and Mr Ryan are the separated parents of Hannah (born 2006) and Jennifer
(born 2007). The case has been registered with the
Child Support Agency (the
Agency) from 9 February 2011, with child support being registered for collection
by the Agency since this
22 February 2011, Mr Ryan contacted the Agency to advise of a reduction in his
work hours. On the same date, an officer of the
Agency made a decision to accept
Mr Ryan’s estimate of income of $19,032 per annum for the period 22
February 2011 to 30 June
Ryan objected to this decision. On 11 May 2011, an objections officer of the
Agency disallowed Mrs Ryan’s objection to the
decision to accept Mr
Ryan’s estimate of income.
24 May 2011, Mrs Ryan made application to this Tribunal for an independent
review of the Agency’s decision.
issue to be determined by the Tribunal is whether it was correct for the Agency
to accept Mr Ryan’s estimate of income.
INFORMATION BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal had access to the paper and electronic documents which comprise the
Agency’s file for Mrs Ryan and Mr Ryan, numbered
1 to 68. Copies of the
relevant documents were provided to the parties prior to the hearing and they
confirmed receipt of these
documents at the hearing on 10 August 2011.
Ryan provided further documents to the Tribunal numbered A1 to A42. A copy of
these documents was provided to the second party.
Oral evidence of Mrs Ryan
the hearing, Mrs Ryan stated to the Tribunal that she had advised the Agency
that Mr Ryan works six days per week, and that his
income is not $300 per week.
The Tribunal took Mrs Ryan to the letter prepared by Mr Ryan’s employer,
dated 1 February 2011,
stating that he was in receipt of income of $300 per
week. In respect of this letter, Mrs Ryan stated that Mr Bowen is a family
and was present at both children’s baptisms. She referred to the
surveillance material she had provided the Tribunal, dated
4 June 2011, which
refers to two unknown males in a vehicle. She stated that these males are Mr
Bowen and his son. There is a friendship
between Mr Bowen and Mr Ryan and Mr
Bowen has to cover himself as he is not paying tax on additional amounts paid to
Mr Ryan. Mr
Ryan said it was $300 per week and is now saying it is $400 per
week. She doesn’t understand why he would be working from 8:30am
for $300 per week.
response to further questions by the Tribunal, Mrs Ryan stated that she is not
presenting any further evidence of Mr Ryan’s
income as of February 2011,
because the surveillance was not conducted until June. She stated that he goes
to the business at 8:30am
and leaves at 4:30pm.
Ryan queried why, if Mr Ryan was attending work only to have coffee with
friends, he would attend in work clothes. She noted that
he was supposed to see
a specialist as of August 2010, and that this did not start until March 2011.
She stated he is probably suffering
from a medical condition.
Oral evidence of Mr Ryan
Ryan was asked by the Tribunal about his reasons for reducing his work hours in
February 2011. He stated that he reduced the hours
because he didn’t see
his children for several months. The applicant and her family were harassing him
and he was scared.
In response to further questions by the Tribunal regarding
his decision to reduce his work hours, Mr Ryan gave evidence that he has
medical condition. He started seeing a specialist in March 2011, and has been
undertaking a course related to his medical
condition since 14 June 2011. His
medical condition started back in August 2010 and he reduced his work hours
because of this. The
health issues referred to by his solicitor are the medical
condition. He noted that his hours have increased again as of July 2011.
now seeing a specialist, and is not on medication for his medical condition.
Tribunal noted the surveillance indicated that, as of 31 May 2011, Mr Ryan was
attending his workplace on a regular basis which
suggested he was working full
time. He stated that he was working full time as of May. He would undertake a
couple of hours and would
then sit with friends at work. The Tribunal noted
that the regular hours he was arriving and leaving might suggest he was working
rather than spending time with friends. The Tribunal asked what Mr Ryan was
unable to do because of his medical condition. He stated
he could not complete
his duties. He agreed that, if he were not sick, he would work full time. He
stated he is now working casually,
five days on average as of July 2011.
Ryan’s legal representative submitted that discussions with his client
indicated that Mr Ryan was attending his employer
to be available to work.
DISCUSSION OF THE EVIDENCE and FINDINGS OF FACT
Ryan and Mrs Ryan are the parents of Hannah (born 2006) and Jennifer (born
2007). As of 21 February 2011, Mr Ryan’s adjusted
taxable income for
child support purposes was $29,961, being his 2009/2010 taxable income.
is not disputed that, on 22 February 2011, Mr Ryan contacted the Agency to
advise he had reduced his hours of work. Records maintained
by the Agency note
the following:
Accepted estimate – initial contact
Customer name Steven Ryan
Effective date (if in the future) 22/02/2011
YTD supplied Y/N YTD is $18,711.42
If N date to be supplied Not required
Satisfied with YTD accuracy YES
All information correctly supplied Yes
Estimate accepted Yes
Act reference s60 CS (Assessment) Act 1989
reduced his hours and is now only working 2 days per week.
income or deductions
Obligations discussed
PP aware of
reconciliation and this process
PP aware this estimate will now remain
in place until the end of the financial year
on this information, the Agency estimated that Mr Ryan would be in receipt of
income of $6,726 in the period 22 February 2011
to 30 June 2011, calculated to
be $19,032 per annum. No issue was taken by either party with these
calculations.
Ryan asserted that Mr Ryan is in receipt of income in excess of $300 per week.
No evidence was presented by Mrs Ryan which would
substantiate that, as of
February 2011, he was working full time. Evidence was presented that, after
this time (that is, by the
end of May 2011) Mr Ryan had returned to full time
work. This was generally consistent with the evidence given by Mr Ryan himself
(although the Tribunal notes that he gave evidence that he returned to a full
time work pattern, variously, in May 2011 and July
Ryan’s evidence to the Tribunal was that he reduced his work hours in
February 2011 due to health issues, for which he has
sought treatment since
March 2011. Mrs Ryan conceded that Mr Ryan likely has a medical condition. The
Tribunal accepts that, as
of February 2011, Mr Ryan reduced his employment to
two days per week for health reasons.
on the information before it, the Tribunal made the following findings of
(i) Mrs Ryan and Mr Ryan are the parents of Hannah (born
2006) and Jennifer (born 2007).
(ii) As of 21 February 2011, Mr Ryan’s adjusted taxable income was
based on his 2009/2010 financial year taxable income of
(iii) Mr Ryan contacted the Agency on 22 February 2011 to advise that he had
reduced his hours of work and was only working two days
(iv) Mr Ryan reduced his hours of work in February 2011 due to health
APPLICATION OF THE LAW
law relevant to this case is contained in the
Child Support (Assessment) Act
(the Assessment Act) and the
Child Support (Registration and
Collection) Act 1988
Subdivision
C of Division 7 of the Assessment Act provides for calculating the adjusted
taxable income of a party to a child support
case. Section 60 of the Assessment
Act provides that a parent may estimate their adjusted taxable income. This
section states:
Parent may elect to estimate his or her adjusted
taxable income for a year of income
(1) A parent may, before a year of income starts or during a year of
income, elect that applies under subsection (2) or (3) if:
(a) the parent is to be assessed in respect of the costs of a child of
(b) the amount that would apply under that subsection is not more than
(i) the total of the parent's adjusted taxable income determined in
accordance with section 43 for the last relevant year of income
for the child
support period; or
(ii) an amount that the parent declares is the total of the parent's child
support period, and the Registrar is satisfied that the
declared amount is
Estimate for a whole year of income
(2) If the parent makes the election under subsection (1) before the year
of income starts or on the first day of the year of income,
the amount is the
total of the following amounts(the
income component amounts
estimated by the parent:
(a) the parent's taxable income for the year;
(b) the parent's reportable fringe benefits total for the year;
(c) the parent's target foreign income for the year;
(d) the parent's total net investment loss (within the meaning of the
IncomeTax Assessment Act 1997 ) for the year;
(e) the total of the tax free pensions or benefits received by the parent
inthe year;
(f) the parent's reportable superannuation contributions (within
themeaning of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997
) for the year.
(3) If the parent makes the election under subsection (1) during the year
of income but not on the first day of the year of income:
(a) the parent is to use the method in subsection (4) to work out the amount;
(b) the parent is to estimate each income component amount for the parent for
the period that:
(i) started
on the first day of the year of income; and
at the end of the day before the start day for the election.
(4) For the purposes of paragraph (3)(a), the
method is as follows:
Method statement
Step 1. Estimate each income component amount for the parent for the
period (the remaining period ):
(a) starting on the start day for the election; and
(b) ending at the end of the last day of the year of income.
Step 2. Add up those amounts. The result is the partial year income
Step 3. Divide the partial year income amount by the number of days in
the remaining period.
Step 4. Multiply the quotient by 365.
Step 5 The start day for the election must be:
(a) the day on which the parent makes the election; or
(b) the first day of a child support period, so long as that day is not
before the day referred to in paragraph (a).
No election if an income amount order is in force
Step 6 Despite subsection (1), a parent may not make an election if an
income amount order is in force in relation to:
(a) the parent; and
(b) if the parent were to make such an election--any part of the period
that would be the application period for the election.
How election is made
Step 7 The parent makes the election under subsection (1) by giving notice
of it to the Registrar in the manner specified by the Registrar.
Step 8 The notice must specify:
(a) the amount that applies under subsection (2) or (3); and
(b) if subsection (2) applies--each of the income component amounts
estimated by the parent under that subsection; or
(c) if subsection (3) applies:
(i) the day that is the start day for the election; and
(ii) each of the income component amounts estimated by the parent under
paragraph (3)(b) and under step 1 of the method statement
in subsection
60(1) of the Assessment Act provides that a parent may, during a year of income,
elect to estimate their taxable income for
the income year, if they are to be
assessed in respect of the costs of the child for a day in a child support
period. The Tribunal
is satisfied that this requirement is established in this
case. The section also provides that the estimated income is not more
of the parent’s adjusted taxable income determined for the last relevant
year of income for the child support period.
In this case, the last relevant
year of income is the 2009/2010 financial year, in which Mr Ryan’s income
was $29,961. The
estimate provided by Mr Ryan is $19,032 (annualised) which is
not more than 85% of $29,961.
60(3) of the Assessment Act provides, in these circumstances, for an estimate to
be made for part of a year of income. This
section requires that the method
outlined in subsection (4) is used to work out the amount. The Agency has used
subsection (4) to
calculate an annual amount of $19,032. No issue was taken
with these calculations by the parties and the Tribunal accepts this as
60(5) of the Assessment Act provides that the start date of the election is 22
February 2011, being the date on which Mr Ryan
made the election.
63AA of the Assessment Act provides that the Registrar may refuse to accept a
parent’s election of income in certain
circumstances. This section states
Registrar may refuse to accept an income election
(a) a parent makes an income election to which subsection 60(2) applies;
(b) the Registrar is satisfied that the amount worked out under that
subsection is less than the amount that the Registrar considers
is likely to be
the parent's actual adjusted taxable income for the year of income to which the
income election relates;
the Registrar may refuse to accept the income election.
(2) The Registrar may refuse to accept a parent's income election to
which subsection 60(3) applies if the Registrar is satisfied
(a) the partial year income amount for the income election is less than
the amount that the Registrar considers is likely to be the
parent's actual
adjusted taxable income for the remaining period in relation to the income
election; or
(b) the total of the income component amounts estimated by the parent
under paragraph 60(3)(b) for the period referred to in that
paragraph is more
than the amount that the Registrar considers is likely to be the total of the
actual income component amounts for
the parent for that period.
(a) a parent makes an election under subsection 62A(1); and
(b) the Registrar is satisfied that the partial year income amount for
the income election is less than the amount that the Registrar
considers is
likely to be the parent's actual adjusted taxable income for the remaining
period in relation to the income election;
the Registrar may refuse to accept the income election.
(4) In making the decision as to whether to refuse to accept the income
election, the Registrar:
(a) may act on the basis of information that the Registrar has received
or obtained as to the financial circumstances of the parent;
(b) may, but is not required to, conduct an inquiry into the
(5) Except for the purposes of Parts VII, VIIA and VIII of the
Registration and Collection Act (dealing with objections and appeals),
Registrar refuses to accept the income election, the election is taken never to
have been made.
Tribunal is satisfied that none of the conditions set out in subsections
63AA(1), (2) or (3) apply to the facts of this case.
The Tribunal is satisfied
that, as of February 2011, the election made by Mr Ryan was the amount likely to
be his adjusted taxable
income for the remaining period in relation to his
income election. The Tribunal has concluded that the election made by Mr Ryan
was properly accepted by the Agency on 22 February 2011.
the reasons stated above, the Tribunal affirms the decision under review.
Presiding Member of the Tribunal
The publication of Social Security Appeals Tribunal child support
decisions is authorised under
subsections 16(2AB)
(2AC) of the
Support (Registration and Collection) Act
Personal particulars of parties to an appeal and their children are
removed to protect their privacy. Names used in all published
decisions are
pseudonyms. Reasons for decisions are published in full (with any information
which may identify involved individuals
to a member of the public removed) to
ensure that the full context and basis for the decision can be understood. The
Social Security
Appeal's Tribunal's decisions in relation to child support
matters demonstrate the application of the Child Support legislation to
individual circumstances of the case being decided. Different fact situations
or subsequent changes to legislation may result
in different outcomes.
The CSA reviews all SSAT decisions to identify opportunities to improve
its services and ensure its processes and policies are robust
and accurate. The
CSA publishes further information about SSAT decisions on their website
www.csa.gov.au/publications/1313.aspx#ssat
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (219 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter