Blann & Kenny [2021] FamCAFC 161 (25 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Blann & Kenny
[2021] FamCAFC
Appeal from:
Blann & Kenny
[2021] FamCA 322
Appeal number(s):
EAA 61 of 2021
File number(s):
SYC 8232 of 2018
Judgment of:
WATTS, AUSTIN & TREE JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – PARENTING
– Unacceptable risk – Appeal against parenting orders –
Allegations of sexual abuse
– Where the primary judge did not err in
finding the father did not pose an unacceptable risk of harm to the children
Procedural fairness – Where the primary judge was not obliged to
re-list the proceedings to inform the mother of a conclusion
which defeated her
expectations at trial – Where there is no principle of law that obliged
the primary judge to finally dispose
of the proceedings – Appeal dismissed
– No order as to costs.
Legislation:
Evidence Act 1995
Family Law Act 1975
(1), 94AA(1)
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) r 22.09(1)
Family Law Regulations 1984
(Cth) reg 15A
Cases cited:
Bondelmonte v Bondelmonte
(2017) 259 CLR 662
[2017] HCA 8
(1998) 197 CLR 172;
[1998] HCA 76
Deiter & Deiter
[2011] FamCAFC 82
Faulkes & Tomkins
(2018) FLC 93-854
[2018] FamCAFC 151
Fitzwater v Fitzwater
(2019) 60 Fam LR 212
[2019] FamCAFC 251
Gronow v Gronow
(1979) 144 CLR 513
[1979] HCA 63
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Johnson and Page
(2007) FLC 93-344
[2007] FamCA 1235
Lovell v Lovell
(1950) 81 CLR 513
[1950] HCA 52
(1988) 166 CLR 69
[1988] HCA 68
Malec v J.C. Hutton Pty Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR 638
[1990] HCA 20
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZGUR
(2011) 241 CLR 594
[2011] HCA 1
RCB v The Honourable Justice Forrest
(2012) 247 CLR 304
Re C and B (Children) (Care Order: Future Harm)
[2001] 1 FLR
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
Ex parte Lam
(2003) 214 CLR 1
[2003] HCA 6
Reid & Lynch
(2010) FLC 93-448
[2010] FamCAFC 184
Royal Guardian Mortgage Management Pty Ltd v Nguyen
(2016) 332 ALR
[2016] NSWCA 88
Stead v State Government Insurance Commission
(1986) 161 CLR 141
[1986] HCA 54
Stott & Holgar and Anor
[2017] FamCAFC 152
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Heard in Sydney (via video-link), delivered in
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr Coleman SC with Ms Bartley
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Uther Webster & Evans Solicitors
The Respondent:
Litigant in person
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Shedden & Associates
SYC 8232 of 2018
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
WATTS, AUSTIN & TREE JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The appeal is dismissed.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of
this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Blann & Kenny
been approved by the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
REASONS FOR
WATTS, AUSTIN & TREE JJ:
1 On 21 May 2021, a judge of the Family Court of
Australia made orders between the parties in respect of their two children under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”).
2 The orders made provision for the children to live with the mother and for
her to have sole parental responsibility for them, which
outcome was not
contentious at the trial and so those particular orders are not the subject of
this appeal.
3 Relevantly, however, the orders also made provision for the children to
spend time and communicate with the father (Orders 6, 7
and 8) and required the
parties to ensure the children’s consultation with a psychologist
appointed by the Independent Children’s
Lawyer (“the ICL”)
(Orders 9, 10, 11 and 12). Only those orders are the subject of the appeal.
4 The orders which require the children to spend time and communicate with
the father were intended to resolve those issues until
that discrete aspect of
the parties’ dispute was given further consideration about six months
ahead in December 2021 (Order
26). While the orders did not therefore finally
determine those issues, it is clear from the reasons for judgment that the
judge was only intending to contemplate the expansion, not constriction,
of the children’s interaction with the father after
December 2021.
5 The central challenge in this appeal is that the primary judge erred at law
when assessing the risk of harm posed to the elder child
and to the younger child as “even less [than low]” as a consequence
of their prospective sexual
abuse by the father or a member of his family and,
further, by finding the children would not be exposed to an unacceptable risk
harm by spending unsupervised time with the father.
6 The mother’s appeal was supported by the ICL, but resisted by the
7 For the reasons which follow, the appeal should be dismissed.
8 The parties commenced their relationship in 2010
and separated on a final basis in December 2018.
9 The children were born in January 2014 and August 2017 and were aged seven
and three years respectively when the appealed orders
10 Upon the parties’ separation, the mother and children vacated the
family home in regional New South Wales and moved to Sydney
to live with the
maternal grandmother and her partner (at [3] and [74]).
11 Shortly after separation, the mother took the elder child to consult a
doctor about his infected toenail but, during the consultation,
allegations about the father’s physical (but not sexual) abuse of the
elder child, causing the doctor to make a mandatory
report of her allegations to
the New South Wales child welfare authority. As a consequence, the elder child
was then referred to
a psychologist (Ms M) for counselling (at [74]).
12 In late December 2018, the mother commenced proceedings under
the Act in the Federal Circuit Court of Australia. She made an application for
interim orders, confining the children’s
interaction with the father to
only supervised time at a commercial contact centre. Then, in early January
2019, before her interim
application had been heard, the mother withheld the
children from the father altogether, ending the arrangement she initially
implemented
for the children to spend time with the father if supervised by the
maternal grandfather (at [77]).
13 The parties’ competing interim applications were heard in early
March 2019, at which point consent orders were made for the
children to live
with the mother and to spend professionally supervised time with the father (at
14 After those interim orders were made, in the period between March and May
2019, relying upon statements made by the elder child
to the mother and the
maternal grandmother, they concluded he had been sexually abused by the father.
Consequently, the mother brought
an urgent application to immediately suspend
the existing interim orders and stop the children from spending supervised time
him. Those orders were suspended in May 2019 (at [6]). Neither child saw
the father after that (at [1]).
15 Later, in July 2019, the proceedings were transferred to the Family Court
of Australia (at [7]). Given the nature of the mother’s
allegations
against the father, an ICL was appointed and the Court sought from the State
child welfare authority a report cataloguing
all of the “risk of
harm” reports made to the authority about the children and the results of
the investigations into
those allegations (at [9]).
16 The trial was heard by the primary judge over five days in August 2020,
with the pre-eminent issue being whether the father posed
an unacceptable risk
of harm to the children.
17 The mother’s case was that the father posed an unacceptable risk of
harm to the children because, historically, he had physically
and sexually
abused the elder child (at [1], [136] and [141]). She sought an order mandating
that the children spend “no time”
with the father because, as she
contended, it was more important to protect them from the risk of harm he posed
than to ensure they
derive benefit from their relationships with him.
18 The father’s case was that he had not physically or sexually abused
either child, he had always enjoyed close and loving
relationships with both
children, and their interests were best served by immediate re-introduction to
him to avert any detriment
to their emotional welfare, which would otherwise
occur if their estrangement was allowed to continue. Realising the children had
been withheld from him for well over a year by the time of trial, the father
proposed their staged re-introduction to him, beginning
with supervision so as
to abate any anxiety which may be experienced by either them or the mother (at
[1] and [138]). He also suggested,
as an alternative option, that the orders be
reviewed some six to twelve months ahead, after the family therapy proposed by
had begun (at [139]–[140]).
19 The appealed orders were pronounced and the reasons for judgment were
delivered about nine months later on 21 May 2021. The orders
reflected the
primary judge’s acceptance of the father’s case and rejection of the
mother’s case. Specifically,
the primary judge rejected the proposition
that the father posed an unacceptable risk of harm to the children.
20 The appealed orders were stayed on 29 June 2021, pending determination of
this appeal.
LEAVE TO APPEAL
21 The mother applied for leave to bring the appeal,
but it was unnecessary.
22 The appealed orders dictating when and how the children will spend time
and communicate with the father are not prescribed decrees
and do not require
leave to appeal. The orders concerning the children’s consultation with
the psychologist are not interlocutory
orders. The mother enjoys an
unconditional right to appeal from each of the subject orders (s 94AA(1) of the
Act; reg 15A of the
Family Law Regulations 1984
23 The mother sought to move on her Amended Notice
of Appeal filed on 13 July 2021. Had she filed it the day before, she would have
been entitled to rely upon it (r 22.09(1) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
and so, given the absence of any tangible prejudice to the father, leave was
granted to rely upon the amended grounds.
24 The amended grounds of appeal were all directed to the orders which make
provision for the children to spend time and communicate
with the father (Orders
6, 7 and 8). Even though the appeal encompassed the other orders requiring the
children to be counselled
(Orders 9, 10, 11 and 12), nothing was said of
25 We will deal with the grounds in a different order to that in which they
were addressed by the mother.
Ground 3 – denial of procedural fairness
26 It was contended the mother was denied procedural
fairness because the primary judge made “interim” orders for the
children to spend time and communicate with the father, when only final orders
had been sought by both parties and the ICL and exchanges
with the primary judge
during the trial suggested interim orders were “not seriously in
contemplation”.
27 The paradox of this ground of appeal should be immediately exposed.
28 Supposing the ground succeeds, the mother acknowledges that remitter of
the proceedings is the only option if this Court cannot
or will not simply set
aside the appealed orders and dismiss all outstanding applications in the
re-exercise of discretion. However,
we could not merely re-exercise discretion
in the manner the mother hopes for two reasons: first, this ground only attacks
the interlocutory
nature of the orders and not the substance of the orders
themselves, so the underlying validity of the orders remains contested;
secondly, if this complaint of procedural unfairness is made good, the
remedy is remitter for re-hearing (
Royal Guardian Mortgage
Management Pty Ltd v Nguyen
(2016) 332 ALR 128 at [9]–[10]). On the
other hand, supposing the appeal fails, the first-instance proceedings are
listed before the primary judge for further consideration of the final
orders which will regulate the children’s future interaction
father (Order 26).
29 Therefore, nothing is gained by the mother, regardless of this
ground’s success or failure. In either case, the final form
regulating the future time spent by the children with the father will certainly
be re-considered – either by the
primary judge, commencing from when the
matter is next re-listed for mention in December 2021 pursuant to Order 26, or
judge who re-hears the dispute upon remitter, perhaps even later than
30 Despite the apparent futility of this ground, we shall explain its lack of
31 The essence of the mother’s complaint of procedural unfairness is
the alleged denial of any reasonable opportunity to make
submissions in rebuttal
of the idea to abstain from making orders to finally resolve the dispute over
the children’s future
interaction with the father. However, the contention
collides violently with the facts in this case since, as the mother concedes,
the prospect of this aspect of the parenting dispute not being finally resolved
was raised during final submissions, to which idea
her senior counsel was able
to respond.
32 Although the parties and the ICL formally sought final orders, the issue
of whether orders should
be finally made arose when submissions were
made by the father’s counsel. The primary judge’s acknowledgement
father submitted for future re-consideration of the orders, at least as
an option (at [139]), sprang from this exchange:
HER HONOUR: Does it follow from that that I make –
don’t make final orders?
[COUNSEL FOR THE FATHER]: Notwithstanding your Honour’s – perhaps
your Honour’s reluctance to leave this matter
in the docket, in one
respect, there’s – there’s some benefit of that, coming back
in six or 12 months, “Where
are we at with family therapy and supervised
time?” It’s certainly – it’s certainly, in my
submission, an
avenue available to your Honour. ...
(Transcript 21 August 2020, p.26 lines 4–10)
33 Once squarely raised, the mother was afforded the chance to make
submissions on the issue because the primary judge then engaged
counsel in debate about it. Their exchange is set out in the transcript as
HER HONOUR: ... [I]f, for argument’s sake –
if I were against you on no time and was going to introduce the time, then
you say it would be not final orders?
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: No, I would say it should be final, your
Honour. Your Honour should make a decision about this case
based on the
evidence...
HER HONOUR: I guess what I’m saying to you is in the alternative, though.
If I’m not with you on no time as a hypothetical,
would you then say that
it should be – and I decide some time, do I make final orders as to some
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: Your Honour make final orders.
HER HONOUR: Okay.
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: There are a whole myriad of reasons, one of
which is that there has been no finality, obviously,
to the proceeding.
HER HONOUR: No.
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: The parties could very well think, well, we
haven’t finished this fight yet. Just –
it wouldn’t be
conducive to the settling down of the matter.
HER HONOUR: It does open up an invitation to –
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: Yes. And the court is, with great respect, here
to make decisions based upon the evidence that –
HER HONOUR: That it has. Yes. Okay. And I hope – as I say, there’s
so many – I have – there’s so much
in the mix here in terms of
the decision, and obviously it will take me some time to analyse it all. But
– yes. Okay, thank
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: Thank your Honour.
(Transcript 21 August 2020, p.27 line 33 to p.28 line
34 That being so, there was no denial of the mother’s opportunity to
address the issue, in which case the argument could only
be as to the
sufficiency of the opportunity.
35 In the appeal, the mother submitted:
... The submissions of Senior Counsel for the [mother]
left no room for doubt that the [mother] opposed the making of any but final
orders. The statements by the primary judge...comfortably establish that her
Honour accepted the submissions of Senior Counsel for
the [mother], and that
Senior Counsel did not need to address further on that issue.
(Mother’s Summary of Argument filed 13 July 2021, paragraph
36 The mother’s contention in the appeal that her submissions were so
clear there was no room for the primary judge to doubt
her opposition to
anything other than final orders must mean she implicitly accepts she was given
sufficient chance to explain the
merit of her position on the point. That her
senior counsel believed he had successfully persuaded the primary judge and so
voluntarily
desisted from making further submissions does not advance her cause
under this ground of appeal. Counsel was not shut down by the
primary judge, but
rather was given (and used) the opportunity to make the submissions considered
adequate to cover the matter.
37 This situation is quite unlike the one which arose in
[2018] FamCAFC 151
(2018) FLC 93-854
, where the appellant altered the way in which she
conducted the hearing because of an expectation created by the primary
assurance that a particular issue would be decided in a certain
way. No such assurance was given by the primary judge here. The mother
primary judge tentatively harboured an inclination to make only interim orders
and was given the fair chance to persuade
her Honour not to do so. The primary
judge said nothing which could fairly be construed as a representation that her
Honour would
make interim orders, thereby creating an expectation
that only final orders would be made and inducing the mother to say nothing more
when there was still more to say.
38 Even if the mother and her senior counsel were left with the impression
that the primary judge had acceded to the argument and
the point was won, it is
not dispositive because the test of unfairness is objective, not subjective. The
defeat of a litigant’s
expectation is not, of itself, demonstrative of
procedural unfairness (
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
Ex parte Lam
[2003] HCA 6
(2003) 214 CLR 1
and, in any event, not every departure from the rules of natural justice
entitles the aggrieved party to a new trial
Stead v State Government
Insurance Commission
[1986] HCA 54
(1986) 161 CLR 141
at 145). Here, at the very most, the
mother only lost the chance to make more submissions than she already had about
an entirely
legal issue. Supposing further opportunity for submissions had been
given, the mother accepted nothing more than what had already
been submitted to
the primary judge could really have been said. As she contended in the appeal,
her position was quite clear, as
were her reasons for adopting that
39 Even if the primary judge was persuaded by the mother’s submissions
at the time (which the mother assumes, but which may
not be correct because her
Honour did not say so), her Honour was not precluded from changing her mind
after quiet reflection. Upon
further deliberation while judgment was reserved,
the primary judge decided not to finalise all aspects of the parties’
applications.
Her Honour was not then obliged to re-list the proceedings to
inform the mother of the adverse provisional view and give the mother
chance to convince her Honour otherwise before conclusively deciding the issue
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZGUR
[2011] HCA 1
(2011) 241 CLR 594
Grounds 4 and 5 – interim in lieu of final orders
40 These two grounds of appeal are extensions of
Ground 3. They assert the primary judge erred in principle by making only
orders instead of final orders (Ground 5) and by failing to provide
adequate reasons for why only interim orders were made (Ground
41 Order 6(a) requires the children’s time with the father to be
supervised at a contact centre for the first 12 visits. Order
6(d) then requires
the children’s time with the father each alternate Saturday to be
supervised by a “responsible third
person” (the appointment of whom
was prescribed) for a further three calendar months. Then, under Order 6(e), the
requirement
for supervision lapses from that point onwards. The date of
commencement of operation of Order 6(e) was not stated, but the timing
designed to start shortly before the primary judge intends to begin the process
of considering the expansion of the orders in
December 2021 (at [195] and
42 In reference to those orders and in support of these grounds of appeal,
the mother submitted in her Summary of Argument:
... [T]he making of order 6(e) for unsupervised time was
erroneous in principle and not reasonably open where a risk of child sexual
abuse has been found.
The primary judge’s reasons thus inadequately reveal the process of
reasoning which led her Honour to conclude that the supervision
of time, which
was necessary to protect against the risk of abuse which was found, would cease
to be necessary for that purpose after
some months.
(Mother’s Summary of Argument filed 13 July 2021, paragraph
43 The flaw in the argument is her Honour did not find the imposition of
supervision was necessary to protect against the risk of
44 The primary judge expressly found:
175. ...I am satisfied that making orders that the
children spend time with the father would not expose [the elder child] and/or
younger child] to an unacceptable risk of abuse.
45 That finding was made
the issue of supervision was broached
in the reasons for judgment. The primary judge did not find the imposition of
supervision was
required to reduce the risk of harm posed by the father from an
unacceptable level to an acceptable level. The purpose of the temporary
supervision was not to ameliorate risk, though that is an incidental consequence
while it is in place. Rather, its purpose was to
provide some reassurance to the
mother, to support the children’s re-introduction to the father, and to
avoid the possibility
of more unsubstantiated allegations (at [193]). The
approximate period of initial supervision was contained to six months because,
if it was any longer, it might lead the children to falsely believe they are not
safe with the father (at [195]).
46 The primary judge’s reasons for not making orders to regulate the
manner in which the children would spend time with the
father on a final basis
were expressed this way:
192. In my view whether or not there are further
proceedings will depend to a significant extent upon the mother’s ability
support the orders the Court makes and the children’s relationship with
the father. Given the strongly held views of the mother
and the maternal
grandmother that [the elder child] has been sexually abused by the father and
other members of his family I am concerned
that if the Court were to make
interim orders this could lead to ongoing litigation in relation to how the
children and [the elder
child] in particular are coping with spending time with
the father and invite if not encourage further litigation. I am satisfied
this should be avoided to the extent it is possible to do so.
197. However, although I am satisfied that it is in the children’s best
interests to spend time including unsupervised time
with the father and there
seems to be no reason why this should not in due course include overnight time,
the risk of the children
being abused by the father was not the only the risk in
this case. There is also the question of how the children might be coping
their reintroduction to the father after so long particularly given that the
mother may be unable to accept any other possibility
other than that [the elder
child] has been sexually abused by the father. In circumstances where there was
also some uncertainty
Sydney and given his concession that there might be some benefit in the
relisting the matter in 6 to 12 months I propose to adjourn the question of the
children spending overnight time to a date
after the commencement of
unsupervised time. Although it is to be hoped that this family will be able to
move forward and the father
and mother reach agreement as to the way forward if
they cannot there will be an opportunity for the father to pursue his
application
for overnight time putting forward his proposals based upon the
circumstances at the time and for there to be a further assessment
at that time
if the Court considers it necessary.
210. The ICL also proposed that the mother should facilitate the children making
as their birthdays and
Christmas Day. Although the father agreed with this proposal as a minimum it was
his case that if the children
were to be spending time with him provision should
be made for the children to spend time with him on these special occasions.
there is some force in the father’s submission none of the
parties addressed me directly in relation to this issue. In any
satisfied that I should make the order proposed by the ICL and that this matter
can be further considered after the children
have been reintroduced to the
212. The ICL also sought orders restraining the father from attending the
children’s schools or day care, extracurricular activities
mother’s home and place of employment. Although I propose to adopt the
ICL’s proposal and make the orders I will
do so until further order.
Although I am satisfied that these orders are appropriate during the
children’s initial reintroduction
to the father in my view they will need
to be reconsidered as that relationship develops.
47 As can be seen, her Honour was expressly conscious of the desirability of
avoiding further litigation, but was persuaded it was
necessary to keep options
open. We regard those reasons as quite sufficient to explain why the primary
judge decided not to finalise
the orders concerning the children’s future
interaction with the father, in which case Ground 4 fails.
48 Contrary to the mother’s submission, no principle of law obliged the
primary judge to finally dispose of the proceedings.
While the Act exhorts the
finality of child-related proceedings as a desirable objective (s 60CC(3)(l)),
it does not mandate such
an outcome. The circumstances affecting
children’s best interests are multifarious and liable to change quickly,
meaning relevant
issues may need to be determined sequentially in the litigation
(ss 69ZQ(1) and 69ZR), or certain aspects of the litigation may even
re-visited (ss 64B(2)(g) and 65D(2)), or more evidence may be required because
the available evidence at trial is manifestly
inadequate to enable a proper
Reid & Lynch
[2010] FamCAFC 184
(2010) FLC 93-448
). Such clear
statutory provisions governing the ambit of procedural and substantive power
override the force of any generalised quotes
which may be cherry-picked from an
authoritative common law case lauding the finality of litigation. Ground 5 also
Grounds 1 and 2 – errors of law
49 Albeit expressed in a variety of different ways,
these grounds relate to the findings made about the alleged risk of harm posed
to the children by the father and assert the primary judge erred by finding the
risk of harm was “low” and the children
could consequently spend
unsupervised time with the father without being exposed to an unacceptable risk
50 More specifically, the grounds contend the primary judge:
(a) failed to take into account as a material
consideration that the elder child made disclosures of his sexual abuse by the
(Ground 1);
(b) wrongly found that the mother failed to establish, on the balance of
probabilities, the elder child had been sexually abused
by the father or by some
other member of the paternal family (Ground 1);
(c) erred at law by not correctly applying the test of risk set out by the High
Court of Australia in
(1988) 166 CLR 69
, and in particular
(i) finding that the magnitude of the risk
of harm posed by the father to the elder child was “low” (Ground
(ii) making any order at all for the children to spend time with the father,
even if supervised, having found he posed some risk
of harm to them (Ground
(iii) failing to give adequate reasons for making orders for the children to
spend any time with the father, even if supervised (Ground
51 Before analysing these grounds, it is instructive to understand the
findings made by the primary judge and the reasons given for
such findings.
52 The findings ultimately made by the primary judge were expressed in these
I am not satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that [the elder child] has been sexually abused by the father or
other members
of his family
. However, although I have reservations about
whether [the elder child] has been sexually abused at all
I equally cannot
find on the balance of probabilities that the allegations made by the mother
have no foundation or that there is
that [the elder child] will be
sexually abused by the father or some other member of his family in the event
that the Court accedes
to his application for the children [sic] spend time with
him. Having carefully considered all of the evidence
I am however satisfied
that the magnitude of that risk is low
. I am also satisfied that whatever
risk there is to [the elder child] given the evidence or perhaps more correctly
the lack of any
evidence with respect to [the younger child] the risk if any to
[the younger child] is even less. That being the case
I am satisfied that
making orders that the children spend time with the father would not expose [the
elder child] and/or [the younger
child] to an unacceptable risk of
(Emphasis added)
53 The elder child repeatedly represented to the mother, the maternal
grandmother and Ms M (in language which was commensurate with
his young age)
that he had been treated in certain physical ways by four adult members of the
paternal family, which could only rationally
be construed as reports of his
sexual abuse. There could really be no benign explanation for his descriptions
of their physical interaction.
54 The mother’s case at trial hinged upon the acceptance of the elder
child’s statements as being truthful, which contention
continues to
underpin her grounds of appeal and her submission in the appeal that, in the
face of such allegations, her Honour had
no option but to find the father posed
a risk of harm to the children. As her Honour recognised in the reasons for
judgment (at [141]),
the mother’s case was conducted upon the
foundation of this rhetorical question:
Why would [the elder child] have made these statements
“unless what he said was true”?
55 The intrinsic premise of the question is that the elder child is always
truthful, when such an assumption could scarcely be made
alone a child so young. Tritely stated, the elder child’s allegations were
not true simply because they
were made. Here, the truth of the allegations was
plainly in issue because cogent evidence called them into doubt. In the upshot,
the primary judge found the elder child’s statements were not credible and
should not be accepted at face value. In reliance
upon expert evidence given by
the Family Consultant, as was open, her Honour found the mother, the maternal
grandmother and Ms M
all impulsively embraced the veracity of the elder
child’s statements without hesitating to contemplate their
implausibility.
56 The primary judge’s reasons exposed how many aspects of the elder
child’s representations were so bizarre as to inherently
compromise their
credibility. For example:
(a) the elder child made the allegations when he was
barely five years of age, asserting that his sexual abuse extended back to when
he was only three years of age (at [149] and [176]) – which was almost two
years before the parties separated in December 2018
and well before, it might be
thought, he was of sufficient cognitive maturity to possibly enable his clear
recollection of the events
he described;
(b) he implicated not only the father in his sexual abuse, but also three other
adult members of the paternal family: the elderly
paternal grandmother, a
paternal aunt, and a paternal uncle (at [43], [91], [126]);
(c) he said he had been abused “100’s of times” (at [43] and
(d) he alleged he was abused by the father in a public park during a supervised
visit in April 2019, even though under the observation
of an independent
supervisor who was making contemporaneous notes about the visit and who said
nothing of it (at [104] and [110]);
(e) he alleged the sexual abuse took these different
(i) the paternal grandmother placed
bottom (at [50] and [126]);
(ii) the paternal aunt placed
bottom (at [50] and
(iii) the father placed the child’s penis in the father’s bottom (at
(iv) the father placed the child’s hand
the father’s bum
(at [121]–[122]);
(v) the father and the paternal uncle both sodomised him, apparently in
succession and in one another’s presence (at [109],
[111], [114] and
(vi) while the father and the paternal uncle were both naked in his presence, he
was induced to lick the father’s penis and
the paternal uncle’s back
(at [85], [88] and [91]);
(vii) the father urinated on his head, causing his eyes to burn (at [127]);
(viii) the father “put some poo” on his head (at [127]); and
(ix) the father touched the younger child’s vagina (at
57 Allowing for uniformity in the child’s descriptors of
the bottom” and “
the bum”, he must
have been alleging penetration of the relevant person’s anus.
58 The mother explicitly acknowledged that some of the elder child’s
allegations could not possibly be true, but sought to imply
his more outlandish
statements could be conveniently disregarded. The mother’s senior counsel
submitted this to the primary
In these cases, your Honour, children say things that
may not literally be true ...
... so it’s not our case that you can take absolutely literally what this
child has said ...
(Transcript 21 August 2020, p.8 lines 22–27)
59 The submission found no favour with the primary judge. Nor need it have.
The mother’s case depended upon acceptance of the
truth of what the elder
child said was done to him, so she could not pick and choose between the
allegations which suited her case
and those which did not. The almost
inescapable conclusion was the child’s preposterous and generally
unreliable statements
tended to undermine the veracity of all his
allegations.
60 Apparently, the mother did not pause to reflect upon how an aged
grandmother could insert the flaccid penis of her three to four-year
grandson into her anus, or why a child of such tender age had no sign of rectal
injury despite his alleged anal penetration by
two erect adult penises, or why
the father might be inclined to urinate or deposit excrement on the
child’s head, or how she
could really have been blind for so long to such
rampant sexual deviance within the paternal family, or how the child could
have been abused so many times during the parties’ marriage
without her having the slightest inkling, or how the child could
possibly have
been abused while under the observation of a professional supervisor in a public
61 Besides the inherent incredulity of many of the elder child’s
allegations, there were other aspects of the evidence which
derogated from the
strength of the case presented by the mother.
62 First, the timing and circumstances under which the allegations were made
evoked doubt about their reliability. No allegations
were made by the elder
child before March 2019, some three months after the parties separated, by which
time the parties were locked
in this tense litigation. From January 2019, the
mother had been withholding the children from the father because she contended
posed a risk of harm to them – though not because he might sexually
abuse them. The mother told the Family Consultant she did
not suspect
sexual abuse before the elder child’s first allegation was made in
March 2019 (at [38]), which coincidentally happened to be
only six days after
the interim orders were made requiring the children to spend supervised time
with the father.
63 The verbal allegations made by the elder child in March, April and May
2019 were certainly startling, but the Family Consultant
offered expert opinion
evidence of other explanations for why such statements might be fabricated by a
young child such as this,
which evidence the primary judge accepted as correct.
Her Honour extracted such evidence in the reasons for judgment to this
144. In the Magellan Family Report the family consultant
said as follows:
[The elder child] has reportedly
made a number of statements since March 2019, which suggest that he has been
sexually abused by [the
father]. When a young child makes a disclosure
indicative of sexual abuse
, it is always important to consider what the child
has said, and the context for the child making such a disclosure
important as children do not have a mastery of language, and a simplistic view
of the world, and they may thus not be able
to provide and accurate description
of events, and this may give way to misinformation. Furthermore,
children can
also be vulnerable to suggestion, and they may also be inclined to try to please
adults, and this means that children
can sometimes agree with false statements,
or make false statements they have been lead to believe an adult wishes to
. For example, if an adult asks a child whether a particular person has
touched them inappropriately, a child may be vulnerable to
answering in the
affirmative, even if the event has not taken place, particularly if they have
been asked this question a number
of times and the adult asking has not appeared
contented by their pervious responses.
There is also the possibility that a
child can come to believe that something has occurred if they are repeatedly
questioned about
certain events
, or repeatedly asked to say that certain
events occurred.
While it is sometimes difficult to determine whether child sexual abuse has
occurred because a child has provided an inadequate description
occurred, the statements reportedly made by [the elder child] seem to be very
clear disclosures that sexual abuse
has occurred. Notably, [the elder child] has
reportedly clearly stated, amongst other things, that his father and his [the
uncle], put their penises in his bottom and, on a separate occasion,
that his father put [the elder child’s] hand on his [the
penis and in his [the father’s] bottom.
From the information provided by [various witnesses] in affidavit material, [the
elder child’s] statements regarding sexual
abuse were unprompted. It does
not appear that [the elder child] was ever asked directly by any of them whether
[the father] engaged
in sexual acts. From what is detailed in affidavit
material, it does not appear that [the elder child] was subjected to any probing
utterances that might have lead him to make a false statement about sexual
abuse. If it is accepted that [the elder child] has disclosed
information in the
manner stated, there would be little concern that [the elder child] has
inadvertently been influenced to make
these statements. It is, however noted
that it might very well have been difficult for [the witnesses], to recall
exactly what [the
elder child] said at the time of [the elder child] allegedly
disclosing such information.
It is also noted that in the Project Magellan
report that [the maternal grandmother] acknowledged some of her questions to
child] were leading and. In one discussion with [the elder child],
fantasy was used in an attempt to support [the elder child] to
disclosures. If this has occurred, there may be some question about whether [the
elder child] has accurately stated what
has occurred, or whether he may have
been inadvertently led to make a false disclosure
Consideration about
whether [the elder child] might have inadvertently been led to make a false
disclosure of sexual may need to account
for what leading questions and fantasy
scenario [the maternal grandmother] might have put to [the elder child], and
when this occurred
. Unfortunately, the Family consultant was unable to find
any further information about this in what was able to be viewed of the
file. The multitude and variety of statements made by [the elder child] to
various people, however, might ward against believing
that [the elder child] has
been inadvertently caused to affirm that sexual abuse has occurred.
(Emphasis added)(As per the
64 Ms M, in whom the mother seemed to repose so much faith, could not and did
not contradict such expert evidence when she was cross-examined.
She admitted
there could be other reasons for the elder child’s behaviour aside from
his sexual abuse by the father (at [47]
and [161]).
65 The primary judge permissibly inferred the elder child was encouraged,
even if only inadvertently, to make the allegations (at
[155]–[156] and
[159]). That conclusion flowed, in part, from evidence that the mother and
maternal grandmother took him back
to investigating officers for successive
supplementary interviews because he omitted to give complete versions beforehand
[102], [106] and [125]). In one of the interviews, the elder child
said it was the mother who knew what to say, not him (at [106]).
By the time of
the last interview, the elder child declared to the officers “I’m
here to tell you that [the father] hurts
me” but, when pressed, he
reverted to saying the mother could answer their questions and he denied
anything happened between
him and the father and he denied feeling unsafe when
with the father (at [125]). It also seems the elder child’s
revelations
to Ms M were mostly not spontaneously made, but rather tended to be
endorsements of allegations made in his presence by either the
maternal grandmother or recitations at their bidding (at [91], [94]–[95],
[104]–[105], [119], [124], [126]
and [128]–[129]). Despite then
still only being six years of age, the elder child told Ms M in March and May
2020 that the
father needed “consequences” for what he had done,
which he elaborated to mean being “thrown in prison” (at
[129]–[130]), which concepts and language hardly seemed to correlate with
his relative immaturity.
66 Passive encouragement, by words or conduct, given by adults to children to
make statements which are favourable to one party but
adverse to another is not
a novel concept. Albeit in different circumstances to these, the High Court of
Australia has explicitly
recognised that children’s statements are liable
to be influenced by adult carers and some caution needs to be applied
Bondelmonte v Bondelmonte
[2017] HCA 8
(2017) 259 CLR 662
RCB v The Honourable Justice Forrest
[2012] HCA 47
(2012) 247 CLR 304
67 Secondly, the versions of events related by the mother and the maternal
grandmother revealed inconsistencies. For example: the
maternal grandmother gave
“much lengthier and more detailed” accounts of her conversations
with the elder child to investigating
officers than she did in her affidavit (at
[85], [89]–[90] and [148]–[149]); the maternal grandmother gave
inconsistent
accounts of the location where the elder child had supposedly been
abused (at [110]); the maternal grandmother admitted she thought
the elder child
regarded his sexual abuse as “a game”, which is difficult to
reconcile with the evidence given by both
her and the mother of the child being
occasionally “distressed” and complaining of being
“hurt” by his abuse,
which warranted him being soothed by their
“hugging”, “rocking” and “wrapping him in a
(at [85], [96], [100], [114], [121]–[122],
[150]–[151] and [156]); and the maternal grandmother’s evidence was
contradicted by official records in respect of when the allegations were first
reported to the authorities for investigation (at
[89] and [147]).
68 Thirdly, although the elder child made allegations separately to the
mother, the maternal grandmother, the maternal step-grandfather
and Ms M, he
made no allegations at all to implicate the father or any other member of the
paternal family in any sexual impropriety
during his multiple formal interviews
with skilled investigating officers, even when they intentionally asked him
leading questions
on the topic. The child was not merely mute – he
positively denied his sexual molestation when probed by the officers (at
[102], [106]–[107], [125], and [132]). In all, the child
participated in five separate formal interviews between 20 March 2019
2019 (at [132]). Significantly, the elder child’s allegations were
unsubstantiated by the investigating officers
following their thorough
investigation (at [132]–[133]), so the primary judge’s eventual
findings were consistent with
the conclusions reached by the authorities.
69 Lastly, the father denied the elder child’s allegations. He
willingly participated in an interview with child welfare officers
in June 2019
to deny the allegations (at [131]), despite being entitled to decline the
interview and maintain his privilege against
self-incrimination. He denied his
molestation of the children and submitted to cross-examination in the
proceedings, with the primary
judge finding his evidence credible and persuasive
70 Turning then to these grounds of appeal, although couched in language
evocative of appealable errors in discretionary judgments
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
at 504–505), their flavour was more redolent of
complaints about the primary judge’s failure to repose more weight in
evidence the mother emphasised as being important, even though she sought to
disavow that proposition in oral submissions. It
is worthwhile acknowledging at
this point that appeals based on challenges to the primary judge’s
attribution of weight to
particular portions of the evidence face obstacles
which are difficult to surmount (
Lovell v Lovell
[1950] HCA 52
(1950) 81 CLR 513
Gronow v Gronow
[1979] HCA 63
(1979) 144 CLR 513
at 518 at 519–520;
(1998) 197 CLR 172 at 231–232).
71 The mother asserted the primary judge failed to take into account, as a
material consideration, that the elder child actually made
disclosures of his
sexual abuse by the father (Ground 1), which contention must be rejected. It was
taken into account, but just
not given the probative weight the mother
72 It is true the primary judge speculated about whether the elder
child’s initial allegations were misconstrued by the mother
and maternal
grandmother (at [31], [33], [143], [145] and [160]), but only in the context of
discussing their propensity to impulsively
jump to conclusions about the meaning
and truth of the elder child’s disclosures (at [38], [42]–[46],
[143], [146] and
[152]). Despite such rumination, her Honour did not repudiate
the representations made by the elder child or their effective interpretation
allegations of his sexual abuse. As her Honour recognised (at [142]), the father
was not in any position to challenge what was
said by the elder child, but he
was able to and did deny the truth of the elder child’s allegations. The
focal point of the
dispute was the truth of the allegations; not whether they
were made or their meaning.
73 Her Honour still entertained some doubt about the exact terms in which the
allegations were made (at [145]–[146] and [160]),
but that was because the
mother and the maternal grandmother delayed recording their memories of
conversations with the elder child
and there were some other inconsistencies
within the evidence. Neither the mother nor maternal grandmother swore
affidavits for more
than a month after the elder child’s first disclosure
(at [32]) and the maternal grandmother at least conceded she could not
the conversations word-for-word (at [33]–[36]). The elder child’s
first disclosure was made to the maternal
grandmother and related by her to the
mother, yet there were differences between the versions given by them (at [31]
and [37]). The
maternal grandmother gave different versions of her conversations
with the elder child to the investigating authorities and in her
affidavit for
the trial (at [85], [89]–[90] and [148]–[149]). There was also an
inconsistency about the date upon which
a report was made by the maternal family
to the investigating authorities about the elder child’s first disclosure
and [147]).
74 It follows that, in determining the pivotal issue, the elder child’s
disclosures were a material consideration and were factored
deliberations. The primary judge found the disclosures were made, but were
likely encouraged (at [155]–[156] and [160]).
It could not have been found
the disclosures were invited or encouraged unless her Honour first accepted the
disclosures were actually
made. In the appeal hearing, the mother agreed the
primary judge had indeed accepted the disclosures were made.
75 The mother next contended the primary judge erred by finding she had not
established, on the balance of probabilities, that the
elder child was sexually
abused by the father or by some other member of the paternal family (Ground 1),
which should also be rejected.
76 It was doubly difficult for the mother to make good on this contention
because, first, she had to demonstrate how the evidence
would admit of no other
finding than that the elder child was sexually abused and then, secondly,
explain why the primary judge was
obliged by law to make the positive finding.
The mother could not make good on the first argument because the finding that
the evidence
was insufficiently strong to prove the elder child’s past
sexual abuse was undoubtedly open on the evidence we have summarised.
Regardless, the mother could not make good on the second argument because
binding authority establishes that a court should refrain
from making a positive
finding of past sexual abuse unless impelled to do so (
76–77). There was no ostensible need to make a positive finding in this
instance because, aside from one brief exchange in
final submissions when the
mother invited a positive finding, she conducted the case as one in which only a
finding about the unacceptable
risk of harm posed to the children was
77 In the amended Case Outline document filed by the mother for the trial,
she did not identify the need for a positive finding as
being one of the salient
issues. Rather, she contended the primary judge only had to determine whether or
not there was an unacceptable
risk of harm to the children, which issue she
defined as follows:
Whether there is an unacceptable risk of harm were the
children to spend any time with the non-residential
And she stated her position on that issue in this way:
...there is an unacceptable risk of harm were the
[elder] child to have any contact with the Father. This risk of harm extends to
the [younger child].
78 After the evidence was closed, the mother’s senior counsel opened
his final submissions to the primary judge in this way:
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: ... [T]he
for us and – and for your Honour to determine is
not there’s an unacceptable risk
. Consistent with the submissions that
we have identified as to the risk of harm, we would contend, and it seems to be
the ICL as well, that
there should be a finding of unacceptable
(Transcript 21 August 2020 p.8 lines 18–21) (Emphasis
79 Later, during the discourse, this further exchange occurred between the
primary judge and the mother’s senior counsel:
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: ...We would invite your
Honour therefore to find in the circumstances that the interference .....
child and as found by ..... occurred.
HER HONOUR: You seek a positive finding.
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: I say there’s a positive – all the
material there is for a positive finding. And if
your Honour concludes
positively on balance and in accordance with the test, you would find that there
is an unacceptable risk. Having
adopted that finding, should you do that, you -
HER HONOUR: Okay. So you say I should find that the father has - - -
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: Yes, I do.
HER HONOUR: Has sexually abused this child.
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: Yes, I do.
HER HONOUR: Okay.
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: And one – another reason - - -
HER HONOUR: Because I don’t have to – I can find an unacceptable
risk, obviously.
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: Your Honour, of course.
HER HONOUR: Without that positive finding.
[SENIOR COUNSEL FOR THE MOTHER]: Yes. Your Honour, I agree with that completely.
Of course you can...
(Transcript 21 August 2021, p.15 lines 13–42)
80 The mother advanced her case on the basis that the father posed an
unacceptable risk of harm to the children, which the primary
judge did not
accept. The mother’s senior counsel readily accepted her Honour was not
obliged to make a positive finding, but
her Honour found the evidence was not
strong enough to prove the alleged past sexual abuse to the requisite civil
standard (at [175]).
In any event, the absence of any such positive finding was
not dispositive of the ultimate issue about whether or not the children
unacceptable risk of abuse, which her Honour correctly observed to be a quite
different question (at [172]–[173]).
81 Ground 2 complains the primary judge erred at law by not correctly
applying the test for risks of harm set out in
but, at the outset,
it should be observed her Honour recited the principles established by
and thereafter purported to apply them.
82 In the reasons for judgment (at [19]–[23] and [172]–[174]),
the primary judge demonstrated an understanding of the
test contained in the
propositions set out in
83 On the question of how the existence and magnitude of a risk of future
sexual abuse is assessed, the primary judge (at [22]) adopted
the discussion by
Austin J as the dissentient in
Fitzwater v Fitzwater
[2019] FamCAFC 251
(2019) 60 Fam
84 The conduct of this appeal necessitates some limited consideration of
because, not only did the primary judge cite and apply Austin
J’s dissenting judgment (at [22] and [172]), the mother also
relied upon
the dissenting judgment in aid of her appeal. So, in effect, the primary judge
and both parties sought to use the legal
principles described in the dissenting
judgment, though the parties were at odds over the result dictated by the
synthesis of those
principles with the evidence.
85 We acknowledge the majority in
(as did the Full Court in
Johnson and Page
[2007] FamCA 1235
(2007) FLC 93-344
and [71]) seem to assert the
question of whether or not an unacceptable risk of harm is posed to a child is
determined by application
of the civil standard of proof under
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) but, since that particular issue occupied no
attention in the appeal, now is not the occasion to do anything other than
our doubts about the correctness of the proposition. That is because we
doubt an asserted risk of harm is capable of characterisation
in issue – as distinct from merely an
in dispute – and
the civil onus of proof only applies to the determination of facts; not
forecasts or hypotheses. As the High
Court of Australia has said, the approach
is different in the case of possible eventualities, as predictions and
assumptions about
the future are not susceptible of scientific demonstration or
Malec v J.C. Hutton Pty Ltd
(1990) 169 CLR 638
86 Without purporting to reach any concluded view uninformed by argument on
the point in the appeal, given the absence of any dispute
over the primary
judge’s reliance upon Austin J’s analysis in
shall proceed on the basis there was no error in that regard.
87 The first manifestation of error for which the mother contended was the
primary judge erring by finding the magnitude of the risk
of harm posed by the
father to the elder child was “low” (Ground 2(a)), which should be
88 It is difficult to see how that is an error in the application of the test
when there is a requirement to determine the magnitude
of the risk. On the
continuum identified by the primary judge (at [172]), ranging between highly
probable and remotely possible,
the primary judge identified the risk as
89 The mother could not persuasively contend it was not open for the primary
judge to find there was a low risk of harm to the children
on the available
evidence. The aspects of the evidence we have already canvassed above enabled
the risk to be so quantified. That
another judge might have concluded, in the
exercise of discretion on the same body of evidence, that the risk of harm was
higher up the scale of severity does not demonstrate error and justify
appellate intervention (
at 231–232).
90 In oral submissions, senior counsel for the mother focused heavily upon
the notion that the assessment of the magnitude of a risk
of harm and indeed the
assessment of risk in parenting cases more generally involves, first, the
prediction of the likelihood an
event will happen, and secondly, consideration
of the severity of the impact of that event if it does happen (
[2011] FamCAFC 82
91 In the reasons for judgment (at [22]), the primary judge specifically
acknowledged the reference by Austin J (at [142] of
comments made by Hale LJ (as her Ladyship then was) in
(Children) (Care Order: Future Harm)
[2001] 1 FLR 611 at [28] to the effect
that, in child-related proceedings, a comparatively small risk of really serious
justify action while even the virtual certainty of slight harm might
92 There was no question before the primary judge about the severity of the
impact which future sexual abuse would have upon the children.
In acknowledging
the severity of the risk, the primary judge said:
24. The consequences of the Court’s decision in a
case such as this one are momentous and will likely have a long lasting impact
on the lives of both of these young children. However the risk is not limited to
the risk that one or both of them might be sexually
or physically abused by
their father or other members of his family. There is also the risk to these
children of not having any relationship
with the father and his extended family
and the impact upon [the elder child] in particular of identifying himself as a
sexual abuse, whether or not there is any substance to the
allegations...
93 Earlier in the reasons, the primary judge correctly acknowledged the
statutory direction contained within s 60CC(2A) of the Act,
15. ... In determining what orders will be in a child's
best interests the Court must consider the matters in s 60CC(2) and (3) of
Act. When considering the matters in s 60CC(2) the Court is required to place
greater weight on the need to protect a child from
physical or psychological
harm, and from being subjected or exposed to abuse, neglect or family
violence....
94 Given the primary judge’s extensive discussion and consideration of
the allegations relating to sexual abuse, we are satisfied
appreciated the profound and lifelong effect of sexual abuse upon a child.
95 The assessment of the magnitude of the risk of harm as being
“low” axiomatically involved the primary judge reaching
a conclusion
96 Senior counsel for the mother submitted the primary judge
“regrettably” omitted to refer to what was, for this case,
the most important paragraph in
(at 78), which is in the following
In the present case Gun J. was not satisfied that the
husband had not sexually abused the child. We take that to mean that his Honour
was not so satisfied according to the civil onus. On this footing his Honour was
unable to exclude the possibility that the husband
had so abused the child. His
Honour obviously concluded that there existed an unacceptable risk that the
child would be exposed to
sexual abuse if the husband were awarded custody or
97 Senior counsel for the mother argued that
“precisely this case”, given the primary judge was not satisfied the
sexually abused the elder child and was therefore unable
to exclude the possibility the father had so abused the child. The corollary
the submission was that the primary judge had no alternative in this case but to
eliminate the father from the children’s
98 We do not agree, as the submission mistakenly relies upon an assumption of
analogous facts as distinct from the extrapolation of
general principle. Every
case turns on its unique facts. As the High Court explain in
75), the primary judge there found on the evidence that “as a matter of
practical reality”, the risk the subject
child might be sexually abused
and her welfare endangered was judged to be of sufficient strength to warrant an
order precluding
her from spending time with the father. By contrast, on the
evidence presented in the present case, the primary judge had strong
reservations about whether the elder child had been sexually abused at all (at
[175]). The evidence did not establish the negative
proposition that the elder
been sexually abused – so it remained at least a bare
possibility. However, the level of risk was assessed as being “low”
– in fact, so low the children did not need to be supervised to protect
them against the risk when spending time with the father.
Supervision was needed
to reassure the mother, to support the children’s re-introduction to the
father, and to obviate the
chance of further unsubstantiated allegations (at
[193]), though it had a concomitant benefit of guarding against any risk. The
of supervision was not lengthy, for otherwise it might falsely cause the
children to believe they are not safe with the father when
it was found he did
not pose an unacceptable risk of harm to them (at [195]–[196]).
99 The mother next contended the primary judge erred by making an order for
the children to spend any time at all with the father
– even if supervised
– once it was found he posed some risk of harm to them (Ground 2(b)),
which should also be rejected.
100 The corollary of acceptance of this ground of appeal would mean that, in
cases where it is alleged a person has abused children
and therefore poses a
risk of harm to them, unless the alleged risk of harm is found to be nil, the
residual risk (no matter how
slight) would still be too potent to tolerate and
could not be satisfactorily attenuated by anything short of complete elimination
of the alleged abuser from the lives of the children. Such a proposition cannot
be accepted because “unacceptable risk”
is quantitatively different
from “risk”
simpliciter
, which two concepts the
mother’s submissions tended to conflate. If it were otherwise, the
adjective “unacceptable”
would be superfluous. The mother’s
submission in the appeal that “any” risk of child abuse is
unacceptable, was
challenged by us, but ultimately the mother did not deviate
from it. That submission should be rejected.
101 As the Full Court observed in
Stott & Holgar and Anor
FamCAFC 152:
37. As an eminent former judge of this Court has said
(emphasis added):
... unacceptable risk in the
High Court’s formulation requires two separate steps. Is there a risk, and
is it unacceptable?
The concentration by the High Court is upon both the nature
and the degree of risk in the particular case.
Its formulation is all about
balance. In some cases a risk is ‘acceptable’ when balanced against
other factors and other
The object of safeguards is to convert an
unacceptable situation to an acceptable one where that is feasible and is of
to the child’ ...
(Footnote omitted) (Emphasis in
102 The primary judge here could not entirely rule out
harm posed by the father, but found the risk was low (at [175]–[176]). The
level of risk did not require the father’s
elimination from the
children’s lives, as the mother posited (at [1] and [136]).
103 Lastly, the mother contended the primary judge failed to give adequate
reasons for making orders for the children to spend any
time with the father,
even if supervised (Ground 2(c)), which should also be rejected.
104 The reasons given by the primary judge for making the appealed orders
were summarised in a comprehensive, clear and eminently
satisfactory way (at
[168]). Her Honour was not satisfied the father poses an unacceptable risk of
harm to the children because,
in essence, the elder child’s allegations
were unreliable. In summary, that was because many were inherently incredulous;
was encouraged, even if only unintentionally, to make them; he did not make
the allegations to anyone aside from the mother, maternal
grandmother, maternal
step-grandfather and Ms M, even though afforded repeated opportunities to do so
in formal interviews conducted
by investigating authorities; and his allegation
of being abused by the father during a supervised visit was irreconcilable with
contemporaneous records made by the supervisor. The evidence given by Ms M was
separately found to have such little probative weight
as to not be corroborative
(at [161]–[167]). All of those underlying findings were the subject of
extensive evaluation earlier
in the reasons for judgment and none was discretely
challenged in the appeal.
105 Once determined the father did not pose an unacceptable risk of harm to
the children, there was no reason to thwart the restoration
relationships with him, from which restoration they would benefit (at
[177]–[180]). The countervailing risks of emotional
harm to the children
were the loss of their relationships with the father and the prospect of the
elder child identifying himself
as a victim of sexual abuse even if he was not
(at [24] and [180]–[181]). There was no evidence to support any conclusion
mother’s parenting capacity would be impaired if orders were made for
the children to spend time with the father because of
her honest belief in the
risk posed to them by him (at [182]).
106 Since the children had not seen the father for about two years preceding
the pronouncement of the appealed orders, the primary
judge was satisfied the
children should be initially supervised with the father to reassure the mother,
to support their re-introduction
to him (which would also be facilitated by
family therapy with a psychologist (at [201])), and to restrict the chance of
allegations being made against him (at [193]–[196]).
107 The reasons for judgment confront the parties’ arguments at trial
and adequately explain why the mother failed to establish
her case that the
father poses an unacceptable risk of harm to the children.
CONCLUSION AND COSTS
108 The appeal will be dismissed.
109 The father, who was unrepresented in the appeal, had no costs to recoup
and made no application for costs.
110 The ICL supported the appeal and made no application for costs in the
event of its dismissal.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
ten (110) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Justices Watts, Austin &
Dated: 25 August 2021
RTF format (654 KB)
Signed PDF/A format