Thorpe and Secretary, Department of Social Services (Social services second review) [2024] AATA 3623 (11 October 2024)
Thorpe and Secretary, Department of Social Services (Social services
second review) [2024] AATA 3623 (11 October 2024)
Division: GENERAL DIVISION
File Number(s):
Scott Thorpe
Secretary, Department of Social Services
The AAT1 decision of 17 October 2023 is set
aside and remitted to the Respondent for reconsideration in accordance with a
that the Applicant’s JobSeeker Payment be recalculated with a
commencement date of 27 March 2022.
....................................[
]....................................
Member D Stevens
SOCIAL SECURITY
JobSeeker payment – cancellation of JobSeeker payments – backdating
JobSeeker payments – mutual
obligation requirements – decision set
aside and remitted
LEGISLATION
Transactions Act 1999
Social Security Act 1991
Social Security (Administration) Act 1991
Social Security (Administration) (Class of Persons – Intent to
Claim) Determination 2018
REASONS FOR DECISION
REVIEWABLE DECISION
Applicant, Mr Scott Thorpe, seeks
of a decision of the Social
Services and Child Support Division of this Tribunal (“AAT1”) which
on 17 October 2023 affirmed
a decision of the Respondent made on 14 February
2023 to pay JobSeeker Payment (“JSP”) to the Applicant from 29 March
2022 and not from any earlier date (“First
for this matter, Mr Thorpe commenced receiving JSP on 20 March 2020, having
until then been in receipt of other social
security payments. At all relevant
times for the current matter, he was engaged in an employment pathway plan with
his employment
services provider
He was advised
by a letter dated 10 February 2022 from the Respondent through Centrelink that
the Respondent’s “records
show that you did not correctly complete
and return your job search on 07 February 2022”, and that as a result, his
stopped from 27 January
the heading “What you need to do”, the letter stated, “if you
have not already done so, you need to call your
] as soon as possible
...”. Under the heading “If you do not do this”, the letter
also stated “if you do not
call your provider and meet the requirement
they have given you, your payment may be cancelled. If this happens, you will
make a new claim if you wish to receive a payment again”.
Thorpe was subsequently
advised by a letter dated 18
March 2022 from the Respondent that his JSP “has been cancelled from 27
January 2022 because you
Applicant applied for JSP again on 30 March
The Respondent advised him by
a letter dated 14 April 2022 that a “decision has been made that you will
be paid [JSP] from
Thorpe disagreed with this decision. His view was that his payment of JSP should
have been backdated to the date of cancellation
of his previous payments, 27
January 2022. On 20 April 2022, he sought a formal internal review of that
decision by an Authorised
Review Officer (“ARO”) of the
Respondent.
The ARO advised him by
letter dated 28 February 2023 that they had not changed the decision of 14 April
Applicant subsequently lodged an application for review with this Tribunal,
which led to the First Review, which affirmed the
Respondent’s decision of
14 April 2022.
ISSUES TO BE DECIDED
the Respondent’s Amended Statement of Facts and Contentions submitted on
the evening of 26 September 2024, the day before
hearing, the Respondent
conceded that JSP should have been paid from the marginally earlier date of 27
March 2022, as opposed to
29 March 2022.
Applicant’s position is that the payment of JSP should be backdated to the
date the original JSP was cancelled, 27 January
2022, for reasons including that
he had not been aware that the original payment was going to be cancelled, and
in his view, that
it was wrongly cancelled.
Accordingly,
I am to decide the date on which the payment of JSP to Mr Thorpe arising from
his claim on 30 March 2022 should commence.
THE APPLICABLE LAW
Qualification for payment of JSP
general terms, section 11 of the
Social Security (Administration) Act
(“the Administration Act”) provides that a person who wants
to be granted a social security payment must make a claim
for the payment, with
section 16 providing that that is to be done by lodging a written claim, or by
claiming in an approved manner.
(There is also a deeming provision which I shall
payment of JSP is dealt with in
Social Security Act 1991
(“the Act”). Pursuant to section 593 of the Act, a person is
qualified for JSP for a period if among other things they
are unemployed for
that period; they satisfy the employment pathway plan requirements; and they
satisfy the Secretary that they are
willing to actively seek and to accept and
undertake paid work.
Cancellation of JSP
definitions within Schedule 1 of the Administration Act provide that JSP is a
“participation payment”.
42AC(1) of the Administration Act sets out a number of “mutual obligations
failures” in respect of persons
receiving a participation payment, which
relevantly include:
(c) the person fails to attend, or to be punctual for, an appointment
that the person is required to attend by:
(i) a notice under subsection 63(2); or
(ii) an employment pathway plan that is in force in relation to the
(e) an employment pathway plan is in force in relation to the person and
the person fails to satisfy the Secretary that the person
has undertaken
adequate job search efforts in relation to a period worked out in accordance
with the plan ...
“a person commits a mutual obligation failure,” the Secretary may
pursuant to subsection 42AF(1) of the Administration
Act determine that a
person’s participation payment is not payable for a period. If this
occurs, section 42AM requires that
the Secretary impose a reconnection
requirement on the person. If the person fails to comply with the reconnection
requirement within
4 weeks, the participation payment is cancelled: subsections
42AM(3) and (4) of the Administration Act.
Resumption of JSP and the question of backdating
such a cancellation occurs, subsection 42AP(5) of the Administration Act
provides relevantly:
A participation payment (whether or not the same as the participation payment
that was cancelled) is not payable to the person for
the period (the
post‑cancellation non‑payment period) of:
(a) 4 weeks beginning on the cancellation day
the Act nor the Administration Act refer to restarting or reclaiming a payment.
Following cancellation, a person must reapply
for a payment, consistent with
sections 11 and 16 of the Administration
41(1) of the Administration Act provides that a social security payment becomes
payable on a person’s start date,
which pursuant to section 42 is worked
out in accordance with Schedule 2. This in turn provides:
3 Start day—general rule
(a) a person makes a claim for a social security payment; and
the person is qualified for the payment on the day on which the claim is
the person’s start day in relation to the payment is the day on which
the claim is made.
is a deeming provision which allows in certain circumstances for a claim for a
payment to have been made on the date on which
a person contacts the Department
of Social Services (“the Department”), rather than the date they
lodge their written
application. The circumstances are set out in subsection
13(1) of the Administration Act and include that the person:
aa. is included in a class of persons determined in an instrument under
section 14A.
b. is qualified for the social security payment.
c. lodges a claim for the social security payment within 14 days after the
Department is contacted.
relevant legislative instrument pursuant to section 14A includes “a person
whose principal place of residence was lost or
sustained major damage during the
relevant period as a result of an extreme circumstance,” which includes a
HEARING AND EVIDENCE
application was heard before me on 27 September 2024. Mr Thorpe represented
himself and gave oral evidence. He attended by telephone.
Ms Donaghy appeared
for the Respondent and appeared via video. I also had available to me the
Tribunal hearing documents (“T-documents”),
including materials held
by the Department in relation to the Applicant.
Previous statement by Applicant
pre-hearing directions in this matter included that the Applicant was to
“to give to the Tribunal and the Respondent a Statement
in Reply or
written notice of no further evidence to file by 28 August 2024”. The
Tribunal reminded the Applicant of this by
email on 19 September 2024. The
Applicant responded by email that day:
I have been trying for months and months to dry and get the information that
[a named AAT Conference Registrar] asked me to get and
But so far I continue to be jerked around by DESE and sent to different
departments to get the information you require and prove my
Now I rang them only last week and they told me that we're going to
investigate as to, why they are telling me they provided the information
when they didn't and I asking me to drop my formal request for those
But DESE has not got back to me yet so I don't know what you want me to
Until I hear from them I can't provide you with any further
information.
the hearing, Mr Thorpe clarified that the information he sought was in fact a
note taken by an officer of the Department of Education,
Skills and Employment
(“DESE”) when Mr Thorpe called them and complained about his ESP. In
other words, this was a note
written by someone else but based entirely on
information provided by Mr Thorpe and was not information from other persons.
that Mr Thorpe said he would be giving oral evidence at hearing, that he
said he could proceed in the absence of that document, and
that the document was
a note written by someone else based on Mr Thorpe’s recollections, I
formed the view that there would
be no prejudice to Mr Thorpe in commencing the
hearing in the absence of a copy of this statement.
The Applicant’s failure to report and cancellation of
Thorpe gave oral evidence that he had been wrongly suspended by an employee of
the ESP for not attending an appointment, when in
fact there had been no
appointment for him to attend. He told the Tribunal that the person’s
employer subsequently agreed with
is obviously a point of some grievance for Mr Thorpe, and it was a matter he
returned to several times. It is consistent with
his conversation with
Centrelink staff where he stated that he “was repeatedly suspended ...
from job provider for not attending
a phone call appointment that he believes he
never received”.
stated to the Tribunal that two days after being suspended in relation to the
telephone appointment, he was suspended for not turning
in his job seeker
its letter dated 10 February 2022, the Respondent advised Mr Thorpe that
“you did not correctly complete and return your
job search on 07 February
2022. As a result, your JobSeeker Payment has been stopped from 27 January
its letter dated 18 March 2022, the Respondent advised Mr Thorpe that
“your JobSeeker Payment has been cancelled from 27
January 2022 because
you have not
a letter from the ARO dated 28 February 2023, the ARO wrote “On 18 March
2022, your JobSeeker payment was cancelled from
27 January 2022 as you did not
report your fortnightly income from this
Donaghy put these matters to Mr Thorpe. He insisted that everything started with
his being suspended for failing to attend an appointment
and returned to this
several times. However, at one point he responded, “I am well aware that I
was cancelled for not reporting”.
cross-examination by Ms Donaghy, Mr Thorpe agreed that he was “well
aware” of the requirement to regularly report
his job seeking efforts, and
that this was part of his mutual obligation requirements. He stated that he had
done so many times,
and that he did so by recording his efforts on paper and
submitting them in face-to-face meetings.
agreed that he had not reported his job seeking efforts for the period 26
January 2022 to 20 April 2022. In his evidence, he stated
that he had been
suspended by his job provider, and “as far as I know, if I am suspended, I
can’t report”.
cross-examination, Ms Donaghy took Mr Thorpe to a Centrelink report showing that
he had previously failed to report on 11 January
2022 resulting in
suspension.
Mr Thorpe said that
he did not recall that, but that if it had been sent to the Centrelink App
(“the App”), he would
not have looked at it. She then took him to
another document which showed that he had contacted the ESP on 12 January 2022,
a suspension notice was sent to
Mr Thorpe said that he did
not recall. Ms Donaghy put to Mr Thorpe that he complied with that notice, even
if he said he did not
receive it. He responded with a complaint that his ESP
“kept flipping providers around”, but when pressed as to whether
his evidence, Mr Thorpe stated that he knew there were two ways in which he
could report his job seeking efforts. He said that
it could be done online, but
that he did not do things online, and that he did not know how to report his
efforts online as he had
never been shown how. He said that he could not report
his job seeking efforts face-to-face in January and February 2022 because
face-to-face meetings were suspended due to local flooding.
Flood event and face-to-face meetings
Donaghy showed Mr Thorpe a NSW government document headed “One year on
from the February – March 2022 severe weather
and floods” dated
February 2023.
The document
stated that “an extreme weather event took place in late-February and
early March 2022, which delivered unprecedented
multi-day rainfall and flooding
to eastern New South
A timeline stated
“27 February 2022 Multiple severe weather warnings and flood watch issued
by Bureau of
Meteorology”.
Donaghy also put to Mr Thorpe that he submitted a claim for Disaster Recovery
Payment in respect of NSW floods, in which he stated
that the date “he was
impacted by this event” was 24 February
Mr Thorpe responded that
the flood went on for ages, and that he was up all-night sandbagging.
Donaghy suggested to Mr Thorpe that as the floods occurred in late February, he
could have attended a face-to-face meeting before
they occurred. Mr Thorpe
responded that that was wrong, that he had been suspended in relation to the
telephone appointment and that
suspension covered the future from then. Ms
Donaghy said the suspension notice was issued on 10 February before the floods,
Thorpe responded that he did not remember the dates.
Notice of suspension and cancellation, and contact with
Thorpe gave evidence that he had not previously seen either the suspension
letter of 10 February 2022, or the cancellation letter
of 18 March 2022, because
the letters were sent to the App that he had on his phone, and he never looked
at the App. He said that
he did not do things online and that everyone he dealt
with knew that. He said that he later received assistance to change the settings
on the App so that correspondence was not sent there. Under cross-examination he
admitted that he “knew something was there,”
but that he did not go
on to the App to read letters.
Applicant gave evidence that he contacted Centrelink after he received text
messages from the ESP notifying him that he was suspended.
He agreed that he
knew about the suspension because of the multiple messages from the ESP, but not
because of any notification from
Centrelink. He also said that he contacted
Centrelink when he saw payments were not going into his bank account. He said
first he knew of his cancellation was when he was told by his ESP. He
said that although he was in telephone contact with Centrelink,
that they never
told him his JSP was suspended and then cancelled.
his evidence to the Tribunal, the Applicant said that he received “two
weeks of constant messages” about his suspension
at a time when he was
“stressed out about the floods”, including “8 – 12
messages in one week”. He
said that he thought, “I can’t deal
with this,” and called Centrelink. In an oral submission to me, he said
he “didn’t reach out [to the ESP] because they kept sending
suspension notices”. Under cross-examination, Mr Thorpe
said there may
have been a delay of two weeks in contacting Centrelink. He then said that may
have been one week, and that he could
not recall as “this happened years
ago”. Ms Donaghy referred Mr Thorpe to Departmental records showing that
activity on his file in the relevant period on 11 January 2022, 9
February 2022 and 27 March 2022 only, and that there were no calls
from him to
Centrelink in this period.
Thorpe said that was not true, he contacted Centrelink before that. He said that
he also contacted DESE. He said he made numerous
calls, and noted it was
difficult to get through to people when calling. He said there may have been two
weeks before he called Centrelink,
because he had the floods to deal
Thorpe gave evidence that when he found out that his JSP was cancelled, he was
told by Centrelink staff that he would need to apply
for JSP again. He said that
he was told that he would have to do that online. He said that he did not know
how to do that and so
made an appointment to attend Centrelink to receive
assistance. When he applied for JSP again on 30 March 2022, he said that he was
told by “half a dozen” Centrelink staff to make sure he backdated
Review process
his evidence, Mr Thorpe complained about the internal review process within
Centrelink. He said that he had thought the review
process would take months but
took over a year. He said that he was contacted without notice by the ARO who he
said would not listen
to him. He said that when he tried to give his version of
events, he was told that he was being contacted to be told the result of
review, not for the ARO to hear his side.
CONSIDERATION
“Backdating” and the decision to cancel JSP
is no basis in either the Act or the Administration Act for backdating the start
of JSP to a date before a written claim is
lodged, other than pursuant to the
deeming provision. For me to effectively “backdate” the payment of
JSP to Mr Thorpe
to 27 January 2022, I would have to decide that the decision to
cancel the payment of JSP from that date was wrong.
is common ground between the parties that the Applicant’s mutual
obligation requirements included regular reporting of his
job search activities.
There is no dispute that Mr Thorpe failed to provide his job search activity
report on 27 January 2022 and
for weeks thereafter.
Applicant contends that he did not do so because he was not able to do so.
First, he states that he could not do so because he
had been suspended for not
attending an interview, and that he thought that once suspended, he could not
report. However, this is
inconsistent with his actions following previous
suspensions, including suspensions for failure to comply with job search
requirement
as close to the matter before me as 7 December 2021 and 7 January
In any event, in his
evidence, Mr Thorpe has not provided any satisfactory reason why he could not
have responded to the numerous
text messages that he received from his ESP in
order to deal with his suspension, so that he could then report.
he stated often and strongly that while he was aware that he could have reported
online, he did not know how to. I accept
that this is a difficulty for Mr
Thorpe. That does not mean that it is impossible. In his evidence, Mr Thorpe
stated that he was
able to gain assistance from his daughter in claiming
Australian Government Disaster Recovery Payment online on 27 March
I accept that Mr
Thorpe’s daughter does not live with him and cannot always assist him in
this way. In his evidence he also
states that around 29 March 2022 he had to
claim JSP online and sought assistance from Centrelink to do so.
there was another reporting option available to him.
Mr Thorpe states that his usual means of reporting, providing a written document
at a face-to-face meeting, was not available
because these meetings had been
suspended due to flooding. I accept that there were severe floods in Mr
Thorpe’s area in 2022.
However, on the basis of the NSW government
and the date Mr Thorpe
claimed that his own residence was affected by
I am of the view that
the effect of the floods (including the suspension of face to face meetings) was
not felt as early as Mr Thorpe
has submitted, and that there was a period of at
least several weeks after 27 January 2022 in which Mr Thorpe could have reported
his job search activities in his usual way.
was this failure to report that led to the cancellation of JSP to Mr Thorpe. I
appreciate that his suspension for his alleged failure
to attend an appointment
is a source of grievance for Mr Thorpe. However, this is not the reason that his
JSP was suspended and later
Thorpe gave evidence that he did not know of either the suspension or the
cancellation of his JSP, as he did not receive the letters
of 10 February 2022
and March 2022 because they were sent to a Centrelink App on his phone. He gave
evidence that knew “something
was on” the App, but that he did not
read letters on the App. He also gave evidence that he knew he had been
suspended because
of multiple messages he had received from the ESP. In any
event, by virtue of the operation of section 237 of the Administration
sections 14
Electronic Transactions Act 1999
Thorpe is deemed to have received notice of the suspension and cancellation
decisions on the days that they were electronically
sent to him. As the
Respondent submitted, Mr Thorpe’s choice not to use the App is
irrelevant.
his own evidence, Mr Thorpe knew that JSP had been suspended. He knew that he
had not reported his job searching activities,
and that this was one of his
mutual obligation requirements. He knew that he was supposed to contact his ESP
in response to the numerous
text messages he was receiving from them but chose
not to. He knew there could be consequences.
Thorpe’s evidence is that he made Centrelink and others aware of his
situation via telephone calls. He submitted to the Tribunal
that Centrelink
officers could have told him of the suspension and cancellation of JSP during
these calls. This is an apparent source
of grievance to Mr Thorpe. A response to
that might be, why would they notify him further? Centrelink had issued written
and cancellation notices to him. The ESP had sent him numerous text
messages regarding suspension of his JSP.
contrary to Mr Thorpe’s evidence, Departmental records show there was no
2022 to 27 March 2022, and so no
opportunity for Centrelink staff to advise
do not believe that Mr Thorpe was lying in his evidence when he said that he
However, on balance, I am
persuaded by the evidence of the Departmental records showing that there was in
fact no contact. Mr Thorpe
is a long-term recipient of benefits and has no doubt
made many calls to Centrelink over the years. He is seeking to recall
conversations
from several years ago. In his evidence he said he attempted to
call a number of times and could not get through. His evidence also
varied as to
whether there may have been a one week or a two-week gap in his efforts to
is not clear, and he may be conflating
various events. If Mr Thorpe had spoken to Centrelink numerous times in the
relevant period,
I do not consider that the Department would have no record of
importantly, Mr Thorpe agrees that regardless of who he may or may not have
have: he did not provide
anyone with the required report of his job seeking activities, and he did not
respond to any of what he
described as numerous text messages from his ESP. He
has not provided a satisfactory reason why he would decide to contact Centrelink
rather than contact his ESP, as he had in the past. I accept that Mr Thorpe was
very unhappy with the employee of his ESP that he
dealt with, and that he
strongly disputed that he missed a particular appointment. This may mean that he
did not want to deal with
his ESP at that time. His choices and actions are of
course a matter for him. However, given the multiple text notifications to him
from his ESP; the suspension letter from Centrelink; Mr Thorpe’s
experience as a long-term recipient of benefits; and his acknowledgement
evidence of his awareness of his mutual obligation requirements, I consider that
Mr Thorpe was very aware that his JSP had
been suspended. He knew that he had to
take action to avoid the consequences of that, as he had done in the past. I do
not believe
that it was impossible for Mr Thorpe to either contact his ESP, or
report his job search activities, despite the obstacles that he
said he faced.
He failed to do things that were required of him, and he knew there would be
consequences, including the possibility
that JSP would be cancelled.
the evidence before me and the application of the relevant law, the decision to
suspend JSP to Mr Thorpe on 10 February 2022 and
the subsequent decision to
cancel JSP to Mr Thorpe from 27 January 2022, made on 18 March 2022, both of
which were made because of
Mr Thorpe’s failure to meet his mutual
obligation requirements, were correct.
Applicant’s JSP having been cancelled, for him to receive it again, he
needed to make a fresh application, which he did
on 30 March 2022. Pursuant to
section 42AP of the Administration Act, JSP could not be paid until 4 weeks
after cancellation, that
is, 4 weeks after 27 January 2022, which is 24 February
2022. The Applicant applied for JSP on 30 March 2022, that is, after 24 February
2022. The law regarding the start date of payments means that he could expect
the starting date for the payment of JSP to be 30 March
Thorpe’s belief that payments could be backdated appears to arise from
statements made to him by “half a dozen”
Centrelink staff that he
should backdate his claim. The Applicant’s account was not challenged by
the Respondent in cross-examination.
I accept that the Applicant sought to
backdate his claim on the basis of his understanding of such statements. That
does not mean
that the Centrelink staff were correct if they asserted that
backdating was an available or appropriate option. It is unfortunate
Thorpe was encouraged by such statements. The payment of benefits is covered by
law, and (other than the deeming provision)
there is no basis in either the Act
or the Administration Act for backdating the start of JSP to a date before a
written claim is
I am of the view that the decision to cancel the payment of JSP from 27 January
2022 was correct, the only possible mechanism for
backdating the payment of JSP
is the deeming provision.
Operation of the deeming provision
13 of the Administration Act allows payment to commence from the time a person
than from the time they lodge a
written application for payment, in certain circumstances. I do not accept Mr
Thorpe’s evidence
that he contacted Centrelink between 11 January and 26
March 2022. The first relevant date on which he contacted Centrelink was 27
March 2022, and so this is the earliest date on which the payment of JSP for
which he lodged a written claim on 30 March 2022, could
the Respondent’s Amended Statement of Facts and Contentions provided on 26
September 2024, and at the hearing the next day,
Ms Donaghy advised that the
Secretary accepted that Mr Thorpe’s contact on 27 March 2024 in relation
to an Australian Government
Disaster Relief Payment satisfied paragraph 13(1)(a)
of the Administration Act in relation to JSP. Further, the Respondent accepted
that Mr Thorpe is in a ‘class of persons’ as determined by the
Social Security (Administration) (Class of Person – Intent to Claim)
Determination 2018
(“the Determination). Accordingly, the Secretary
accepts that an available earlier starting date for the Applicant’s JSP
claim of 30 March 2022, was 27 March 2022
is the only basis on which payment of JSP can commence earlier than 30 March
2022. Given the Respondent’s position on this
issue, I will remit the
matter to the Respondent to recalculate the Applicant’s JSP on the basis
of a start date of 27 March
AAT1 decision of 17 October 2023 is set aside and remitted to the Respondent for
reconsideration in accordance with a direction
that the Applicant’s
JobSeeker Payment be recalculated with a commencement date of 27 March
I certify that the preceding 63 (sixty -three) paragraphs are a true
copy of the reasons for the decision herein of Member D Stevens
....................................[sgd]....................................
Dated: 11 October 2024
Date(s) of hearing:
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Ms N Donaghy, Services Australia
T-documents: T1, 3.
Email from Applicant to
Tribunal, 19 September 2024.
–ST1, 120-122.
T9, 89, 94; ST1, 120.
Also see ST2 127
T8, 60; ST1, 120-122.
RTF format (1.61 MB)
Signed PDF/A format