URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1975/32.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:03:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ruby v Marsh [1975] HCA 32; (1975) 132 CLR 642 (21 August 1975)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
RUBY v. MARSH
[1975] HCA 32
; (1975) 132 CLR 642
Practice (Vict.)
High Court of Australia
Barwick C.J.(1), McTiernan(2), Gibbs(3), Stephen(4) and Jacobs(5) JJ.
Practice (Vict.) - Supreme Court - Interest on judgments for debt or damages
from commencement of action until entry of judgment
- Interest not allowed on
amount representing compensation for loss or damage to be incurred or suffered
after the date of the award
- Lord Campbell's Act - Quality of damages -
Whether award of damages under Pt III of
Wrongs Act 1958
(Vict.) includes any
amount in respect of compensation for loss or damage to be incurred or
suffered after date of award -
Court Act 1958
(Vict.), s. 79A.*
* Section 79A of the
Supreme Court Act 1958
(Vict.) provides, so far as
material, as follows:
"(1) The Judge upon application shall in all actions for the recovery of
debt or damages give damages in the nature of interest
at such rate not
exceeding eight per centum as he thinks fit from the commencement of the
action until the entry of the judgment
unless good cause is shown to the
contrary over and above the debt or damages awarded by the court or jury. .
(3) Where the damages awarded by the court or jury include or where the
Judge in his absolute discretion determines that the damages
include any amount for -
. . . (b) compensation for loss or damage to be incurred or suffered after
the date of the award . . . the Judge shall not allow
interest in respect of
any amount so awarded or in respect of so much of the award as in his opinion
represents any such damages
Sydney, 1975, February 18, August 21. 21:8:1975
APPEAL from the Supreme Court of Victoria.
The following written judgments were delivered :-
BARWICK C.J. Section 79A of the
Supreme Court Act 1958
(Vict.) (as amended)
"(1) The Judge upon application shall in all actions for the
recovery of debt or damages give damages in the nature of
interest at such rate not exceeding eight per centum as he thinks
fit from the commencement of the action until the entry of the
judgment unless good cause is shown to the contrary over and
above the debt or damages awarded by the court or jury.
(2) Nothing in this section shall -
(a) authorize the granting of interest upon interest;
(b) apply in relation to any sum upon which interest is
recoverable as of right by virtue of any agreement or
(c) affect the damages recoverable for the dishonour of a
negotiable instrument;
(d) authorize the allowance of any interest otherwise than by
consent upon any sum for which judgment is pronounced
or entered by consent;
(e) apply in relation to any sum on which interest might be
awarded by virtue of section seventy-eight or section
seventy-nine of this Act; or
(f) limit the operation of any enactment or rule of law which
apart from this section provides for the award of interest.
(3) Where the damages awarded by the court or jury include
or where the Judge in his absolute discretion determines that the
damages so awarded include any amount for -
(a) compensation in respect of liabilities incurred which do not
carry interest as against the person claiming interest;
(b) compensation for loss or damage to be incurred or suffered
after the date of the award; or
(c) exemplary or punitive damages -
the Judge shall not allow interest in respect of any amount so
awarded or in respect of so much of the award as in his opinion
represents any such damages.
(4) The Judge may if he thinks fit request a jury to specify in
its verdict any amount included in the verdict in respect of the
matters referred to in sub-section (3) of this section." (at p644)
2. Features of this legislative provision which should be observed for the
purposes of resolving this appeal and of considering
the proper basis upon
which it should be decided are as follows: (1) the section applies to a
verdict in an action for damages,
irrespective of the cause of action upon
which the verdict is founded; (2) the trial judge, if asked, is bound to
award interest
unless good cause is shown to the contrary: the section does
not in terms provide that the interest is to be upon the whole of the
but, in my opinion, upon the proper construction of the section as a whole, it
makes it mandatory to grant interest upon
the full amount of the verdict,
subject to the limitations of sub-ss. (2) and (3) and of course to good cause
being shown. The assessment
of the interest is to be "over and above the
. . . damages awarded by the court or jury": also the presence of the
limitations in sub-ss. (2) and (3) strongly suggests that
the interest prima
facie is to be upon the whole verdict; (3) the rate of interest is within the
judge's discretion up to eight
per cent; (4) the period for which the
interest is to be calculated is fixed, i.e. from the commencement of the
action until the
entry of judgment, again subject to good cause being shown to
the contrary; (5) interest shall not be allowed upon any amount included,
which the judge deems to be included, in the damages awarded by the court or
jury as compensation for loss or damage to be incurred
or suffered after the
date of the award, which I take to mean after the date of the verdict; that is
to say, interest is not to be
given upon an amount of compensation for a loss
or damage which has not already been incurred or suffered at the date of the
but which will or may be incurred or suffered thereafter in the
future. (at p644)
3. The respondent, Florence Ivy Marsh, sued the appellant in the Supreme
Court of Victoria under
Wrongs Act 1958
(Vict.) for damages by
way of compensation for the loss sustained by herself and her infant daughter,
Susan Marsh, by reason of the
death of the husband and father, Reginald Thomas
Marsh, and under
Administration and Probate Act 1958
(Vict.) for
the damage suffered by his estate by reason of his death. The action was tried
with a jury which returned a verdict against
the appellant for the total sum
of $29,000 for the benefit of the widow and daughter, and for the sum of $266
for the benefit of
the estate of the deceased. The learned trial judge,
pursuant to s. 79A and relying on the decision of the Full Court of the
Court of Victoria in East v. Breen
[1975] VicRp 2
; (1975) VR 19 , included in the
amount for which judgment was entered upon such verdicts, sums
interest calculated at six
per cent upon the whole amount of the verdicts.
These sums were $10,418 and $1,667 in respect
of the verdict for $29,000 and
in respect of the verdict for $266. Judgment was therefore entered for
$41,085 for the benefit
of the widow and daughter and for
$377 for the
deceased estate. (at p645)
4. The appellant, before the trial judge had directed the entry of judgment,
objected to the inclusion of interest upon the whole
of the sum awarded as
damages in the action brought for the benefit of the dependants, and
submitted, in substance, that interest
should be allowed only upon so much of
the verdict for them as represented the financial support which the deceased,
had he lived,
would have provided for the widow and daughter between the date
of his death and the date of the verdict. (at p645)
5. In his appeal to this Court from the judgment of the Supreme Court (Gowans
[1975] VicRp 20
; (1975) VR 191 , the appellant has repeated the
submissions which are
reported to have been made on behalf of the respondent in the
case of East v.
[1975] VicRp 2
; (1975) VR 19 . It is said
that, at the date of the verdict, the widow
and daughter had not suffered, but would in the future suffer,
the loss of
that support
by the deceased which he would have provided after the date of
the verdict had he lived. It was said that
in estimating the financial
suffered by the respondents by the death of the husband and father, the jury
must have included
in their total award a sum or
sums as compensation for the
support of the family which the deceased might reasonably have been expected
to have given after the
date of the verdict; that support was a loss which the
respondents should be regarded as suffering after
that date. Thus it was said
that the amount of the verdict ($29,000) included an amount of compensation
for loss or damage to be
incurred or suffered after the
date of the award
within the meaning of s. 79A (3) (b). (at p645)
6. The principles upon which damages should be assessed in actions under
, a derivative of Lord Campbell's
Act, are well
established and call for no citation of authority. They are properly expressed
Pape J. in East v. Breen (1975) VR,
at p 33 where he said: " . . . damages
under Lord Campbell's Act are for the loss of a reasonable
expectation of
pecuniary benefits
consequent upon death". That expectation of pecuniary
benefit, in this case the financial support
of the deceased, was destroyed
death and at the moment of death. In my opinion, nothing further of financial
benefit than this
expectation was lost in this case
by the widow and daughter
by the passage of time or at any point of time subsequent to the moment
death. This must generally be
the case in claims under
. (at p646)
7. But, of course, in attempting to fix a sum to compensate for the loss of
that expectation, there will be included, amongst the
facts and circumstances
to be weighed, an estimation of what the deceased might have contributed for
that future during which it
is decided he would have continued to contribute
financially to or for the dependants. That estimation, however, is no more
a factor in evaluating in financial terms the loss which has been
suffered: it is not in any sense a present determination of damages
yet to be suffered. Consequently, in my opinion, it cannot properly be said
that because regard is thus had to the possibilities
of the future,
particularly as to the sums of money which the deceased might reasonably be
expected to have contributed had he lived,
there is any amount included in the
relevant award of damages as compensation for loss or damage to be incurred or
suffered after
the date of the award. For that reason, I agree with the
conclusion at which the Full Court of the Supreme Court of Victoria arrived
East v. Breen
[1975] VicRp 2
; (1975) VR 19 . (at p646)
8. Pape J. rightly said (1975) VR, at p 22 that "in a claim under
Wrongs Act 1958
the whole of the loss suffered
by the claimant dependants
of the deceased must be treated as having occurred at the moment of death":
and "the damages are restricted
to compensation for loss of material benefits
or of the reasonable prospect of material benefits
which depended upon the
continuance
of the" deceased's "life. . . . Since the benefits, or the
reasonable prospect thereof, were
dependant upon the 'deceased's life,
were destroyed by 'his' death, and the loss must be treated as having been
incurred at
that time". (at p646)
9. However, as, with due respect, I am not able to agree with all that was
said in the Full Court's reasons for judgment in East
[1975] VicRp 2
; (1975) VR 19 ,
and as there is legislation in other States, though not in each case in the
same terms, providing courts
authority to add interest to a verdict or
some part of it before entering judgment, it will be proper and convenient to
reasons and briefly to discuss some of the decisions touching the
award of interest on verdicts as distinct from interest on
10. Emphasis is placed in the reasons for judgment in East v. Breen
[1975] VicRp 2
; (1975) VR
19 upon the circumstance that damages under Lord
Campbell's Act and its
derivatives are to be determined as at the date
of death, whereas it is said
that damages in the case of personal
injuries are to be assessed at the date
of the assessment, i.e.
as at the date of the verdict. This circumstance is
said to warrant
a different practice when awarding interest on damages in a
under Lord Campbell's Act, to that which is appropriate when awarding
interest on a verdict for personal injuries which have caused
earning capacity. With every respect to those who have relied
upon it, I find
this apparent distinction irrelevant to the
problem which the Court faced:
but, further, in my opinion, the suggested
distinction does not exist. (at
11. It has been said that in the case of a claim under Lord Campbell's Act,
death is the cause of action. This, in my opinion, is
but a partial statement
of the elements of the cause of action: death is an indispensable element: but
the presence of circumstances
which, had the deceased lived, would have
provided him with a cause of action, is also an indispensable part of the
cause of action
of the representatives or of the dependants of the deceased.
But, quite clearly, the damages, the right to which the statute gives,
compensate for the loss by death of the financial support reasonably expected
to have been given by the deceased, had he continued
to live. Thus the
situation in relation to that financial support, or to its expectation as at
the date of death, will be definitive
of the loss which has been suffered. It
is the financial potential of the continued life and support of the deceased
which must be
assessed. In this assessment facts actually known at the time
when the assessment is made which bear on that potential will be used
assessment rather than the speculations which might have been made had the
assessment taken place on the date of death. Thus,
whilst the assessment of
damages must be referable to the date of death, the court is bound to use such
facts as have come to light
since the date of death which are relevant to the
assessment, rather than speculations to which recourse would have had to be
had the court been confined to such facts as were known at the date of
death. Further, the court will award damages in money of the
day of the award,
not being deterred therefrom by the fact that in the interval since the date
of death the value of money may have
changed. See O'Brien v. McKean
[1968] HCA 58
; (1968) 118
CLR 540, at pp 544-545 . (at p647)
12. I have expressed what I consider to be the reason why it cannot properly
be said that a sum awarded to dependants as compensation
for the death of the
person on whose continuing life they depended for material support includes an
amount for compensation for a
loss yet to be suffered. It is, of course,
inevitable that that sum must be assessed as at the date of death: but that is
the loss was then suffered. But the legal requirement that the
assessment should be made as of that date does not itself, in my opinion,
afford a reason for the conclusion I have expressed nor, in my opinion, does
it afford any relevant discrimen in relation to the
award of interest between
an award of damages under provisions derived from Lord Campbell's Act and an
award of damages for personal
injuries which have resulted in "economic loss".
13. Having regard to what is said in East v. Breen
[1975] VicRp 2
; (1975) VR 19 it is
necessary that I should say something about the assessment
of damages in a
personal injury claim where "economic
loss" has been caused by the injuries
received. (at p648)
14. In my opinion, it would be incorrect to say that damages for personal
injuries are to be awarded as at a date other than the
date of the receipt of
the injury. But the assessment will be made at the time the verdict is
returned. In O'Brien v. McKean, in
considering whether the verdict should be
expressed in the money of the day of its pronouncement, or in the money of
some other day,
I said (1968) 118 CLR, at p 545 that "the date of the verdict
is, in my opinion, the proper date as at which to make the assessment".
concluded that "the assessment will therefore in general be made in relation
to the purchasing power of the currency at the date
of the assessment of the
damages". (at p648)
15. The question, however, with which I am presently concerned is of a
different kind. What the plaintiff in an action for personal
physically suffers, he suffers at the date of the receipt of the injury,
although the full extent and consequence of that
injury may not be manifest at
that time. In so far as the plaintiff then lost his capacity to earn the money
he formerly earned or
was capable of yet earning, the loss was complete at the
time the injuries were received. The extinction or diminution of his capacity
to earn, commonly embraced in the description "economic loss" occurs at the
time he is injured. Perhaps, along with other consequences
of the injury
received, the full extent of the impact of the injury on his earning capacity
may not be apparent at the date of the
receipt of the injury. But its full
manifestation in due course when known is wholly attributable to the time the
injury was received
and the loss of capacity suffered: that is the time when
the cause of action of which damage is the gist arose. The valuation of
lost capacity is quite a separate matter from its loss: the one should not be
confused with the other. The money in which that
estimation should be
expressed is as I have indicated a different question again. (at p648)
16. It may be possible, though I should think unusual and in general
unlikely, that where the injured person loses his then earning
capacity at the
time of the injury, he may at some later time, but by reason of the injuries
received, lose some different earning
capacity. However, I would point out
immediately a distinction relevant to the present discussion. It seems to me
that there is a
difference between the present loss of earning capacity which,
due to the injury, will become increasingly greater with the passage
and the possibility, or for that matter the probability, that at some time in
the future the recipient of the injury will
suffer some supervening loss of
capacity to earn, a loss which though due to the injury is unrelated to and
not a mere further manifestation
of a loss of earning capacity which occurred
at the time of the receipt of the injury. The former is not, in my opinion, a
loss suffered
after verdict, whereas the latter might possibly be. I am not
presently concerned with a loss of the latter kind. In this connexion
agree with the remarks of Bray C.J. in Sager v. Morten (1973) 5 SASR 143, at p
156 , if he is referring to the latter kind
of situation: otherwise, with due
respect I could not. (at p649)
17. I have expressed myself elsewhere as to what I regard to be the proper
principle to be followed in the assessment of "economic
loss" consequent upon
personal injury. I have no need to repeat it. See Arthur Robinson (Grafton)
Pty. Ltd. v. Carter
; (1968) 122
CLR 649, at p 658 . I may say here that I have
reconsidered what I then wrote in the light of what subsequently has
in England and said in Australia. I would confirm the view which
formerly I have expressed. (at p649)
18. It seems that it has been and still is the practice in claims for damages
for personal injury to treat the amount of salary
or wages which, but for the
receipt of the injury, would have been earned between the date of that receipt
and the date of the verdict,
as special damages recoverable as such. Indeed,
rules of court in some jurisdictions require particulars of such emoluments to
furnished by a plaintiff. The "economic loss" by reason of the loss or
diminished capacity to earn salary or wages referable to the
received, is thus treated as subdivided; part treated as an accrued loss, and
part as a loss yet to be suffered. It is a
circumstance favouring an injured
plaintiff that the total amount of the wages which he has been unable to earn
because of the injury
between its receipt and the date of the verdict is
awarded him as a separate sum. But this practice, convenient and beneficial to
a plaintiff as it might seem to be, is not in accord, in my opinion, with
principle. In my opinion, it is incorrect to treat the
salary or wages which
might otherwise have been earned between injury and verdict as a separate item
of loss. The loss of earning
capacity suffered at the date of the receipt of
the injury resulted in an inability wholly or partially to earn from that time
what had been earned in the past and what might yet have been earned in the
future. Neither the practice of requiring particulars
nor the fact that they
are given and specific amounts awarded for wages or salary, lost between
receipt of injury and verdict, should
be allowed to obscure what it is that
the court is asked to assess when it is to award an amount which will cover
the economic loss
resulting from the loss of earning capacity and the loss of
earning capacity is immediate upon the receipt of the injury: that is
loss. Damages to compensate for it are not what is lost but simply a financial
evaluation of the worth of what is then lost.
I have already expressed myself
as to the propriety of taking a weekly sum and using some multiplier in order
to get a total, which
will be discounted to cover contingencies, and be
reduced to represent the present value of the discounted total sum which the
calculation
provides: Arthur Robinson (Grafton) Pty. Ltd. v. Carter
[1968] HCA 9
; (1968) 122
CLR 649 . Of course it cannot be gainsaid that
anyone attempting
to estimate
what total sum should be awarded by way
of damages when loss of earning
capacity is one of the elements
of the loss,
will make some conspectus of what
the future might reasonably
have brought to the injured person by way of
gain by the
exercise of the lost earning capacity. But I am unable
that in any sense at all the award is to include a calculation
wages as such which might in fact have been earned by the injured
during the remainder of his working life, or that
the court by its award is
replacing, as such, the wages which might have
been earned but for the receipt
of injury. (at p650)
19. It seems to me therefore that no relevant distinction can be drawn
between the case of an assessment of damages under Pt III
and that of the assessment of damages for personal injury where economic loss
by reason of the destruction by the
injury wholly or
partially of the capacity
to earn is an element. In each case the loss is wholly suffered at the one
time; in the
first case at the
date of the death, and in the second at the
date of the receipt of the injury. Gillard J. would have been right,
opinion, to
have said in Murphy v. Murphy
[1963] VicRp 83
; (1963) VR 610 , that "the relevant
loss or damage", not "might well be" but, was
"incurred or suffered once and
for all when the
plaintiff was injured": see East v. Breen (1975) VR, at p 38
. In each case the possibilities
of the future are to be considered.
case relevant facts known at the date of the assessment, which may be regarded
as inherent
in the situation created by the
death or the receipt of the
injury, are to be regarded. In each case the possibilities of the future
examined as part of the
process of estimating what sum should be paid now for
the loss which has already been sustained. Of course,
in the case of a
injuries claim, there is the possibility to which I have referred of
a new loss of earning capacity in
the future, whereas in the
case of a claim
there can be no further loss beyond that suffered by
death. (at p651)
20. Pape J. refers (1975) VR, at p 26 to my judgment in Philpott v. Glen
(1973) 47 ALJR 555, at p 557 . He quite rightly points
out the damages to be
awarded under the
are not given for the loss of earning capacity
which has been destroyed by death,
but for the loss of the expectation of
support by the deceased. That case had been largely concerned with
the earning capacity
of the deceased as an element in determining
of the likely support of the dependants by him. His Honour's remarks, however,
in reference to the expression of my reasons
are correct. (at p651)
21. With due deference to the distinguished members of the English judiciary,
the course of decision and of practice in Great Britain
in the assessment of
damages for personal injuries does not accord with what I conceive to be
correct principle. The amounts of salary
or wages not earned between the date
of the receipt of the injury and the date of verdict are as a rule regarded in
Great Britain
as special damages, and the general damages include a sum to
represent the salary or wages which but for that injury would have been
in the working life-time of the injured plaintiff. (at p651)
22. In Jefford v. Gee (1970) 2 QB 130 the Court of Appeal offered directions
to the English courts to the application of a statutory
discretion to award
interest upon a verdict for damages for personal injuries. The relevant
statutory provisions were the Law Reform
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act 1934
s. 3 (U.K.), and s. 22 of the Administration of Justice Act 1969 (U.K.).
Recognition of the English
course of decision and practice led the Master of
the Rolls to treat the amount included in the general damages to represent the
present value of the salary or wages which might have been earned in the
future less a discount for the hazards of life, as an amount
of compensation
for loss to be suffered in the future (1970) 2 QB, at pp 146-147 .
Consequently, though the statute did not in terms
require that course, his
Lordship regarded that part of the general damages as compensation for a loss
yet to be suffered. (at p651)
23. The statutory provisions there in discussion differed radically from
those of s. 79A. As I have indicated, the latter is mandatory
as to the whole
of the amount of the verdict, subject to the specific limitation and
exceptions contained in sub-ss. (2) and (3)
. Further, the exception in sub-s.
(3) is express. But I would respectfully differ from the relevant directions
contained in the
Court of Appeal's decision, not because of the statutory
differences, important as they are, but because I am unable to accept the
that the economic loss represented by the loss of earning capacity is suffered
at any time other than the time of the receipt
of the disabling injuries.
There is, in my respectful opinion, no basis for dividing that loss so that
part of it is suffered between
the receipt of those injuries and the date of
the assessment of damages, and the other part at some time or times
thereafter. (at
24. It is said in Jefford v. Gee (1970) 2 QB, at p 147 , "where the loss or
damage to the plaintiff is future pecuniary loss, e.g.
loss of future
earnings, there should in principle be no interest . . . because the plaintiff
will not have been kept out of any
money. On the contrary, he will have
received it in advance." In my respectful opinion, this statement is
unacceptable. Though perhaps
not technically accurate, it is just to say that
the verdict has established that at the date of the writ the plaintiff ought
have been paid its amount. Where it is shown that part of that amount is in
the nature of a provision for future loss or expense,
which if it occurs or is
made will have been occasioned by the injuries received, it may be necessary
where there is a provision
in the terms of s. 79A (3) to exclude the amount of
that provision from the sum on which interest is awarded, although logically
the plaintiff has been kept out of the whole amount of the verdict since the
date of the writ. But I am unable to agree that any
part of the sum awarded
for loss at the time of receipt of the injury of earning capacity can be
regarded as a prepayment for a loss
yet to be incurred. The damages for the
loss of that capacity are not, in my opinion, damages for future pecuniary
loss. (at p652)
25. This Court has long since ceased to regard itself as bound by the
decisions of the Court of Appeal. In this instance, however,
I do not merely
feel that we are not bound by the directions in Jefford v. Gee but I am not
convinced by the reasoning which led
to the conclusion that interest ought not
to be allowed upon so much of the award as was attributable to wages which
might have been
earned in the future but for the injury sustained. (at p652)
26. The purpose of giving courts the power to award interest on damages is to
my mind twofold, and neither aspect of the purpose
should be lost sight of. In
the first place, the successful plaintiff, who by the verdict has been turned
into an investor by the
award of a capital sum, and whose claim in the writ
has been justified to the extent of the verdict returned, ought in justice to
be placed in the position in which he would have been had the amount of the
verdict been paid to him at the date of the commencement
of the action. In the
second place, the power to award interest on the verdict from the date of the
writ is to provide a discouragement
to defendants, who in the greater number
of actions for damages for personal injuries are insured, from delaying
settlement of the
claim or an early conclusion of proceedings so as to have
over a longer period of time the profitable use of the money which ultimately
the defendant agrees or is called upon by judgment to pay. Each of these
reasons, incidentally, in my opinion, calls for the judge
to award a rate of
interest related to the market place subject to the limit allowed by the
legislature. There can be no basis for
the award of some nominal rate of
interest, unless of course there is good cause for so doing in the special
circumstances of the
particular case. (at p653)
27. Each of these reasons for the presence of s. 79A and its various
counterparts in the relevant legislation will require an award
of interest
upon the whole of the amount which represented the loss sustained by the
receipt of injuries, again subject to good cause
being shown warranting a
departure in the particular circumstances from the norm. To take the course
suggested in Jefford v. Gee
(1970) 2 QB 130 or in the group of cases in the
Supreme Court of Victoria, namely, De Nitis v. Seekts
[1962] VicRp 60
; (1962) VR 417 ,
v. Sides and Son Pty. Ltd.
[1963] VicRp 58
; (1963) VR 415 and Murphy v. Murphy
[1963] VicRp 83
; (1963) VR 610 , is, in my opinion, to fail to implement the evident
the legislation. To deny the successful plaintiff
interest on the whole of the
damages to which he is found to have been
entitled as at the date of the writ
is, in my opinion, and
subject of course to the showing of cause, to do an
injustice to him:
but also it diminishes the effect of the section in its
to make it unprofitable for defendants to delay settlement of or
adjudication upon the claim made upon them. (at p653)
28. I should observe at this point that each State of Australia does not have
statutory provisions in the terms of s. 79A. (at p653)
29. Section 94 of the
Supreme Court Act 1970
(N.S.W.) gives the Court a
discretion to order interest on the whole or any part of a verdict, including
a verdict for damages, for
the whole or any part of the period between the
date when the cause of action arose and the date when the judgment in the
takes effect. The exceptions in s. 94 (2) do not include any provision
comparable to s. 79A (3) of the Victorian statute. (at p653)
30. Sub-sections (1) and (2) of s. 30C of the Supreme Court Act, 1935-1972
(S.A.), as amended by the
Supreme Court Act
Act, 1972, provide that,
unless good cause is shown to the contrary, the court shall, if asked, award
interest at seven
or such lower rate as the court may fix, upon the
whole or part of the verdict in the case of an unliquidated claim from
of commencement of proceedings until judgment, or for such other period
as the court may fix. But s. 30C (3), somewhat akin
79A (3) , provides
that there shall be no award of interest in respect of "damages or
compensation in respect of loss or injury
be incurred or suffered after the
date of the judgment". (at p654)
31. Section 72 of the Common Law Practice Act 1867 to 1972 (Q.) gives the
Court a discretion to award interest on the whole or part
of a verdict for
damages at such rate as the court may fix for the whole or any part of the
period between the date when the cause
of action arose and the date of
judgment. There is no provision comparable to s. 79A (3). Neither the State of
Tasmania nor the State
of Western Australia authorizes the award of interest
upon a verdict for damages. (at p654)
32. There are sums which, where a provision such as s. 79A (3) is present in
the relevant legislation, are to be treated as compensation
for loss or damage
to be incurred or suffered in the future. An amount included in the verdict to
cover the cost of an operation
which may have to be undergone in the future
due to the injuries received can be regarded as compensation for damage yet to
be suffered.
Likewise, medical and pharmacological expenses to be incurred in
the future. These and comparable expenditures yet to be made by
reason of the
injuries received can be held to fall within the terms of s. 79A (3). It is to
such expenditures that provisions such
as s. 79A (3) are directed and not, in
my opinion, to some part of the compensation for loss of earning capacity.
Particularly, the
section is not, in my opinion, founded upon or referable to
the practice to which I have referred of treating part of the damages
of earning capacity as special damages and part as general damages. (at p654)
33. I do not see a logical basis for the exclusion of the items which, in my
opinion, fall within s. 79A or its counterparts from
the amount to bear
interest in the exercise of a discretionary power to grant interest on a
verdict. The verdict decides what the
plaintiff is presently entitled to be
paid and, in substance, what he ought to have been paid at the date of the
writ. He has been
kept out of the whole of this sum since the commencement of
the proceedings. It is interest on that sum which prima facie he should
This is true whatever the nature of the items of compensation which go to make
up the total sum of the verdict. The reason
for the inclusion of those items
of compensation has no relevance or relation to the purposes of the enactment
of the provision to
award interest on the verdict from the date of the writ.
34. Thus, I should like to add that I agree with the remarks of Bray C.J. in
Sager v. Morten (1973) 5 SASR, at p 158 that there
is really no logical
justification for the exception made by such a provision as s. 79A (3) from
the amount on which interest should
be granted. They really do not conform to
the purposes which I conceive the legislation intends to achieve. As well,
they do introduce
complications much better avoided in the administration of
the law. As a minor matter, it would seem both wrong and impractical to
jury to indicate what part of a global award of damages they include to
represent future economic loss in respect of the loss
of earning capacity: see
s. 79A (4); and a judge really in general has no firm basis on which to treat
and place a money value upon
a part of a total undifferentiated verdict as
having been given for "future loss". (at p655)
35. For these reasons, I would dismiss this appeal. (at p655)
McTIERNAN J. In this matter I agree with the Chief Justice and, in the main,
in the reasons which he has prepared. I would therefore
agree that the appeal
should be dismissed. (at p655)
GIBBS J. The question for decision in this appeal is whether interest may be
awarded under s. 79A of the
Supreme Court Act 1958
(Vict.), as amended, on the
whole amount of the damages awarded by a jury in an action brought under
Wrongs Act 1958
(Vict.) which re-enacts in Victoria, with some
alterations, the provisions of Lord Campbell's Act. (at p655)
2. The material provisions of s. 79A are as follows:
"(1) The Judge upon application shall in all actions for the
recovery of debt or damages give damages in the nature of
interest at such rate not exceeding eight per centum as he thinks
fit from the commencement of the action until the entry of the
judgment unless good cause is shown to the contrary over and
above the debt or damages awarded by the court or jury.
(3) Where the damages awarded by the court or jury include
or where the Judge in his absolute discretion determines that the
damages so awarded include any amount for -
(a) compensation in respect of liabilities incurred which do not
carry interest as against the person claiming interest;
(b) compensation for loss or damage to be incurred or suffered
after the date of the award; or
(c) exemplary or punitive damages -
the Judge shall not allow interest in respect of any amount so
awarded or in respect of so much of the award as in his opinion
represents any such damages.
(4) The Judge may if he thinks fit request a jury to specify in
its verdict any amount included in the verdict in respect of the
matters referred to in sub-s. (3) of this section." (at p655)
3. Sub-section (1) makes it mandatory for a trial judge to award interest
when a judgment is given for debt or damages "unless good
cause is shown to
the contrary". No question arises on this appeal as to the nature of the
discretion given by the words last quoted.
However, sub-s. (3) creates an
exception to the general rule and forbids the judge to allow interest on
amounts within the purview
of that subsection. (at p656)
4. Sub-section (3) draws an important distinction between damages which
include any amount in respect of the matters mentioned in
pars (a), (b) and
(c) and damages which the judge in his absolute discretion determines include
any such amount. If the damages fall
within either of these two descriptions
the prohibition against an award of interest applies. However, upon the proper
construction
of the subsection, the damages awarded will "include . . . any
amount" in respect of the matters specified in pars (a), (b) and (c)
the findings, judgment or verdict of the judge or jury expressly fix a
particular amount to be awarded as compensation in
respect of one or other of
those specified matters. To take an example, if in an action for damages for
personal injury the judge
or jury awards a specified sum as damages in respect
of medical expenses to be incurred in the future, interest cannot be allowed
in respect of such sum. However, where the verdict or judgment is for a global
sum the case is not one in which "the damages awarded
. . . include . . . any
amount" of the kind mentioned, unless, perhaps, the award is made solely in
respect of one of the matters
specified in pars (a), (b) and (c). A global
award in respect of loss incurred both before and after the date of the award
must necessarily
include something in respect of loss incurred after that date
but it does not indicate that any particular sum is included in respect
latter loss. In such a case the judge may proceed to determine whether the
global sum includes any amount of the kind specified
in pars (a), (b) and (c)
or sub-s. (3); if he determines that it does include an amount of that kind,
interest may not be allowed
upon the amount which in the opinion of the judge
represents any such damages, but if he does not make a determination the case
not within the subsection and the award of interest is not forbidden. Any
other construction of the subsection would give no weight
to the words "where
the Judge in his absolute discretion determines that the damages so awarded
include any amount". The words "Where
the damages . . . include . . . any
amount" cannot have the same meaning as "where the Judge . . . determines that
the damages .
. . include any amount", for that would make the latter words
surplusage. (at p656)
5. Section 79A is purely adjectival - it neither creates a new cause of
action nor requires a judge or jury to assess damages in
any different manner
from that which was previously adopted. Subsection (3) proceeds on the
well-founded assumption that in some
cases it would be appropriate to make a
separate assessment in respect of some of the components of the total award of
damages whereas
in other cases only a global sum might be awarded; where an
itemized assessment is made, and it is seen on the face of the award
damages include a particular amount in respect of one of the specified
matters, no interest may be awarded on that amount,
but where a global sum is
awarded interest will then be allowable in respect of the whole amount of the
award unless the judge determines
that the global sum includes an amount in
respect of one of the specified matters. (at p657)
6. What I have said might be enough to determine this appeal. In the present
case damages were awarded in two global sums (for the
benefit of the widow and
daughter of the deceased respectively) and the judge did not determine that
the damages so awarded included
any amount for compensation for loss or damage
to be incurred or suffered after the date of the award. Subsection (3) did not
and interest was properly awarded on the whole of the damages. However,
having regard to the grounds upon which the learned judges
of the Full Court
of the Supreme Court rested their decision in East v. Breen
[1975] VicRp 2
; (1975) VR 19 , and
to the arguments submitted to us
on this appeal, it seems desirable that I
should deal with some wider aspects
of the matter. (at p657)
7. In my opinion an award of damages made under Lord Campbell's Act does not
include any amount in respect of compensation for loss
or damage to be
incurred or suffered after the date of the award within s. 79A (3) (b) and a
judge who purported to determine that
such an award did include any such
amount would be in error. It is unnecessary for me to repeat the citation of
authority as to the
measure of damages in actions under Lord Campbell's Act
which was made in the judgments in East v. Breen. The basic rule, which has
been reaffirmed in many authoritative pronouncements, is that the damages are
to be "calculated in reference to a reasonable expectation
of pecuniary
benefit, as of right or otherwise, from the continuance of the life" Franklin
v. South Eastern Railway Co. (1858) 3
H & N 211, at p 214
[1858] EngR 669
; (157 ER 448, at p
449) . To assess the damages, it is necessary to value the expectation,
prospect or chance
of pecuniary benefit
of which the dependant has been
deprived: see Davies v. Taylor (1974) AC 207, at pp 212-213, 214, 223 . The
manner in which the assessment
is to be made is well settled; it is sufficient
to refer to the following passage from the judgment
of Fullagar and Kitto JJ.
Lincoln v. Gravil where it was said
[1954] HCA 24
; (1954) 94 CLR 430, at p 441 :
". . . the measure of the damages which the plaintiff is to recover
for her own benefit is the amount of her net pecuniary loss,
ascertained on a balance of the losses and gains accruing to her
by reason of the death. 'The damages are to be based on the
reasonable expectation of pecuniary benefit or benefit reducible
to money value. In assessing the damages all circumstances
which may be legitimately pleaded in diminution of the
damages must be considered: Grand Trunk Railway Co. of
Canada v. Jennings (1888) 13 App Cas 800, at p 804. The actual
loss of each individual entitled to sue can only be ascertained by
balancing, on the one hand, the loss to him of the future pecuniary
benefit, and, on the other, any pecuniary advantage which from
whatever source comes to him by reason of the death': Davies v.
Powell Duffryn Associated Collieries Ltd. (1942) AC 601,
at pp 611, 612." (at p658)
8. In my opinion it is involved in these statements of principle that the
damages awarded under Lord Campbell's Act are awarded
as compensation for a
loss that occurred at the moment of death. What was then lost was a prospect
of pecuniary benefit in the future.
The expectation of future benefit was
destroyed by the death and no subsequent event can increase or diminish the
extent of the pecuniary
loss then suffered, although it is true that
subsequent events may be relevant to the assessment of damages in so far as
they render
it unnecessary for the court to speculate about possibilities that
may have existed at the date of death when the facts themselves
have become
known. No doubt the effects of such a loss may continue to be felt over a very
long period but the loss itself - the
loss for which compensation is given -
is incurred at the death. (at p658)
9. Viewed solely from the point of view of pecuniary loss, the position of a
widow or child whose husband or father has been killed
is analogous to that of
the owner of a profitable business which has been forced to close; such an
owner suffers a loss when the
business ceases, and not at some later time when
he might have received income from the business if it had continued to remain
existence. Similarly a person entitled to receive income during the life of
another suffers a loss when that other dies, and not
throughout the period
during which he would have continued to receive the income if the other had
lived. (at p658)
10. I have not overlooked that in many authorities there are to be found
statements which may at first sight suggest that the dependants
who succeed in
an action under Lord Campbell's Act are entitled to receive damages that will
compensate them for loss that they will
incur in the future. It is natural to
say, as Lord Reid said in Taylor v. O'Connor (1971) AC 115, at p 127 , that
they "are entitled
to such a sum as will make good to them the financial loss
which they have suffered and will suffer as a result of the death". In
dealing with the measure of damages in cases of fatal accident, there
repeatedly appear such phrases as "pecuniary loss, actual
or expected"
(Franklin v. South Eastern Railway Co. (1858) 3 H & N, at p 214 (157 ER, at p
449) ), "prospective pecuniary loss"
Commissioner for Railways and
Tramways (N.S.W.) v. Boylson
[1915] HCA 24
; (1915) 19 CLR 505, at p 509 ), and "prospective
injury" (Willis v. The
Commonwealth
[1946] HCA 22
; (1946) 73 CLR 105, at p 109 ). Sometimes
expressions of this kind were intended
to convey no more than that in
the damages
it is necessary to consider whether the dependant had a
reasonable expectation
of deriving a pecuniary benefit in the
future if the
deceased had lived; sometimes they were used to indicate that a dependant who
had in fact received no benefits from
the deceased
during his lifetime is not
for that reason disentitled to recover. However, in
no case that I have seen
did any judge
use language
of this kind in a context that would suggest that
he intended to decide that
the damages are awarded in part as compensation
a loss to be incurred in the future as a result of the death, rather than in
respect of the loss of an expectation, prospect
destroyed by the
death. (at p659)
11. The view that I have formed is, I think, supported by the circumstance,
which I have already mentioned, that it is "the net
loss on balance which
constitutes the measure of damages" (Davies v. Powell Duffryn Associated
Collieries Ltd. (1942) AC, at p 609
). It seems to me difficult, if not
impossible, to say that any particular part of an award represents a loss to
be incurred in the
future when the amount awarded represents a net loss
ascertained by comparing the material benefits dependant upon the life of the
deceased with any material gains accruing from his death (cf. Public Trustee
v. Zoanetti
[1945] HCA 26
; (1945) 70 CLR 266, at p
279 ). At least
it would require a
fundamental departure from established practice to assess separately
dependency up to
and after the date
of judgment and s. 79A contains no warrant
to alter the methods by which damages are
assessed. (at p659)
12. On behalf of the appellant it was contended before us that if damages
under Lord Campbell's Act do not include any amount for
compensation for loss
or damage to be incurred or suffered after the date of the award the same
should be said of damages for personal
injury, with the result that there
would be no room in practice for the operation of s. 79A (3) (b). This
submission cannot be accepted.
The principle on which damages are awarded
under Lord Campbell's Act is quite different from that governing the award of
for personal injury. The nature of the distinction between damages of
the two kinds was indicated by Windeyer J. in National Insurance
Zealand Ltd. v. Espagne
[1961] HCA 15
; (1961) 105 CLR 569, at p 588 . As I have already said,
an award under Lord Campbell's
Act represents
the expectation of pecuniary
benefit which depended upon the continuance of a life and which is lost once
all upon the death.
Damages for personal injury,
on the other hand,
represent compensation for all the consequences of the injury;
consequences
may include loss incurred or
damage suffered in the future. For
example, it may be seen that as a consequence
of the injury it will
necessary to incur medical
and hospital expenses after the date of the award
and an amount awarded in respect
of those expenses
will be compensation for a
to be incurred after the date of the award. It is further my opinion that
for economic loss
that will probably be incurred
in the future as a
result of the injury come within s. 79A (3) (b). It is true that
it is often
that what the incapacitated
plaintiff has lost is his earning capacity, a
loss which is suffered when the injury
occurs, but the
position is stated more
in Graham v. Baker
[1961] HCA 48
; (1961) 106 CLR 340, at p 347 , where it was
that "an injured plaintiff
recovers not merely because his earning capacity
been diminished but because the diminution of
his earning capacity is or
be productive of financial loss". When an award includes
intended to compensate the plaintiff
for the financial loss that
is likely to
be produced in the future as a result of
the diminution of his earning
capacity, the words
of subs. (3) (b) would appear
to me to be satisfied if
such amount is specified
in the findings, judgment or verdict. If no
amount is indicated as representing
the damages for economic loss
to be incurred
in the future, I can see reason why a judge should
not be able
to form an opinion as
to what part of the award represents such damages.
deciding such a question the judge is entitled
to deal with the matter "in
quite a broad way", as Smith J. said in De Nitis v.
[1962] VicRp 60
; (1962) VR 417 . (at
13. I have read, with much advantage, the judgments of the Supreme Court of
South Australia in Sager v. Morten (1973) 5 SASR 143
, and Honey v. Keyhoe
(1973) 6 SASR 466 , but since the statutory provisions upon which those cases
were decided are distinguishable
in material respects from s. 79 (3) (b) I
would not express any view upon the correctness of the conclusions there
reached. (at p660)
14. For the reasons I have given I consider that East v. Breen
[1975] VicRp 2
; (1975) VR 19
was correctly decided and that interest should be allowed
on the full amount
of a judgment for damages under Lord Campbell's
Act, unless of course "good
cause is shown to the contrary". I
would only add that the exceptions
introduced by sub-s. (3) to the
general rule enacted by s. 79A (1) seem to me
to be illogical
and productive of considerable difficulty. However, I consider
the learned trial judge properly awarded interest in the present
would accordingly dismiss the appeal. (at p660)
STEPHEN J. Reginald Thomas Marsh was killed in a motor car collision and in
the particular circumstances of the case his widow and
his infant daughter
Susan became entitled, pursuant to Pt III of the
Wrongs Act 1958
(Vict.), to
compensation for the injury to them resulting from the death of the deceased.
2. These damages the jury assessed at $25,000 for the widow and $4,000 for
the daughter. To these sums the learned trial judge added
amounts of $10,418
and $1,667 respectively as damages in the nature of interest pursuant to s.
Supreme Court Act 1958
(Vict.). He did so in conformity with the
decision of the Full Court of the Victorian Supreme Court in East v. Breen
[1975] VicRp 2
; (1975) VR 19
, the correctness of which the appellant defendant seeks to
challenge on this appeal. (at p661)
3. In East v. Breen it was held that awards of damages in actions brought
pursuant to
contained no component
answering the
description, found in par. (3) (b) of s. 79A of the
Supreme Court Act
amount for "(b) compensation for loss
or damage to be incurred or suffered
after the date of the award". Accordingly in the
present case the learned
trial judge held that
the injunction in sub-s. (3) (b) against the allowance
of interest on amounts of the
character there described was inapplicable.
general direction in sub-s.(1) of s. 79A, that in all actions for the recovery
debt or damages, absent good cause to the contrary,
damages in the nature
of interest should be given from the commencement of the
action until the
entry of judgment, thus applied to
the whole award of damages and, no good
cause to the contrary existing, interest
at six per cent was given upon the
whole of the
damages awarded. Because almost seven years had elapsed between
commencement of the
action and entry of judgment the amounts of interest
question were unusually large. (at p661)
4. The appellant contends that, contrary to East v. Breen, portion of the
damages assessed by the jury did consist of "compensation
for loss or damage
to be incurred or suffered after the date of the award" within sub-s. (3) (b)
of s. 79A, and that in exercise
of his discretion the learned trial judge
should have so determined and should not have allowed interest upon that
portion. (at p661)
5. In my view the first part of the appellant's contention is correct; there
must have been, in each of the two amounts of damages
which were awarded, a
component answering the description contained in par. (b). The consequence
which the appellant urges does not,
however, follow. In the particular
circumstances of this case the learned trial judge, bound as he was by East v.
Breen, did not
have occasion to consider any exercise of the absolute
discretion conferred upon him by sub-s. (3). However had proper consideration
been given to its exercise that could not, in my view, have led to any
determination that any particular amount comprised in either
of the two lump
sums awarded represented an amount answering the description in par. (b). The
obstacles lying in the path of any
such determination and the reason for them,
arising from the way in which quantification of damages was approached, are
in the reasons for judgment of my brother Jacobs. They are such
that the exception, created by sub-s. (3), to the general rule as
to interest
established by sub-s. (1) of s. 79A was rendered inapplicable. Accordingly the
judgment sums awarded should not now be
disturbed. (at p662)
6. Although I would, therefore, dismiss this appeal it will be apparent from
what I have said that I cannot agree with the proposition
for which East v.
Breen is an authority. I regard awards of damages in Lord Campbell's Act
claims as in no relevant respect different
from awards in personal injuries
claims; in each there will usually be an element which can properly be
described by the words in
subs. (3) (b) and if an amount is either specified
pursuant to sub-s. (4) or is determined by the trial judge in his absolute
discretion,
as contemplated in sub-s. (3), it will be excluded from allowance
of interest. (at p662)
7. Two steps are involved in this conclusion. The first concerns the meaning
of the words used in sub-s. (3) (b), the second involves
the relevant
character of an award of damages under Lord Campbell's Act legislation. As to
each of these matters I have had the advantage
of reading the reasons for
judgment of Jacobs J. and agree with all that he has said concerning them. I
accordingly need do no more
than state quite shortly certain additional
reasons of my own for arriving at a like conclusion. (at p662)
8. First, as to the construction of sub-s. (3) (b); that it is concerned not
with the juristic concept of damages but with the practical
concept explained
by Jacobs J. is, in my view, supported by a variety of considerations. The
subsection looks to damages which have
been awarded and asks of them whether
any part compensates for a particular type of loss or damage, categorized by
reference to a
temporal factor, namely whether it was incurred or suffered
before or after the date of the award. It thus presupposes that awards
damages may be so dissected that parts may be attributed to particular
detriments for which the injured party is being compensated,
some already
suffered and some which may only be suffered in the future. With it may be
compared sub-s. (3) (a) which also applies
a temporal test, this time to
liabilities, but couples it with another criterion, whether the liability,
which must have been incurred
before judgment, is interest bearing. Each
contemplates the dissection of an award of damages into component amounts,
by reference to those various detrimental consequences to the
plaintiff for which they respectively provide compensation. Subsection
thus employs the same language as do those reasons for judgment and those
charges to juries which, in referring to items
calling for compensation by an
award of damages, viewed as at the date of the trial, describe them either as
having been suffered
in the past or as being prospective in character. (at
9. The context in which par. (b) appears bears this out. Interest being the
price paid for the use of another's money, pars (a)
and (c) of sub-s. (3)
disclose the working out of a clear legislative intent to exclude from any
award of interest those sums of
which it cannot be said, as a practical
matter, that a successful plaintiff has been kept out of his money during the
time elapsed
between institution of proceedings and trial. Paragraph (a),
concerned as it is with compensation in respect of non-interest bearing
liabilities incurred by a plaintiff, conforms to this pattern and the nature
of exemplary or punitive damages, dealt with in par.
(c), exhibits the like
conformity. So too will par. (b) if given the meaning which I think it bears.
It describes a class of loss
or damage which is experienced, which manifests
itself in a practical way, after date of award. It is not at all concerned
area of controversy as to whether in personal injuries cases economic
loss should be treated conceptually as concerned with loss
of earning capacity
rather than with loss of earnings. Loss of earning capacity is only
compensated for to the extent to which it
may be shown to have been or to be
likely to be productive of economic loss to the plaintiff - Graham v. Baker
(1961) 106 CLR, at
p 347 - and it is for actual economic loss already
produced and for actual non-economic detriment already suffered that in my
interest should be awarded when for the first time, after verdict, the
plaintiff receives his compensation for that past loss or
detriment. (at
10. Damages recoverable will provide compensation for all detriments flowing
from the wrongful act so long as the law does not treat
them as too remote;
but in the process of quantifying damages regard must be had, at the date of
the trial, to the past and to the
future. Past detriments, whether economic,
such as earnings, lost or liabilities incurred, or non-economic, as in the
case of mental
or physical suffering, disability or deprivation, must be
evaluated. When their worth as matters for compensation has been assessed
fact that the plaintiff has been kept out of receipt of that worth for some
period prior to trial makes it just that they should
carry interest; not so
with detriments not yet actually suffered, the impact of which has not yet
been made manifest. For example,
in the ordinary case a loss of earning
capacity will not, by the time of trial, have yet involved the plaintiff in
financial detriment
equal to the total damages required to compensate for that
loss of earning capacity; much of his financial detriment will lie in
future and is yet to be experienced and in no real sense has there been any
keeping of the plaintiff out of the moneys required
to compensate for it. The
same may be said of non-economic detriments. In a Lord Campbell's Act action
the detriment to the dependants
will only be made manifest, so as to be
materially sensible to them, by the recurrent deprivation of those benefits,
in cash, in
kind or in services rendered, which the deceased would have been
expected to have provided had he survived. Few if any of these manifestations
of loss will occur at the date of death; they will, instead, increasingly
manifest themselves in the future and it is to such of
these items of loss as
may occur after verdict that in my view s. 79A (3) (b) refers. (at p664)
11. That s. 79A is concerned to compensate a plaintiff for being kept out of
moneys to which he has become entitled is apparent
from the long history lying
behind the awarding of interest upon damages, reviewed by Lord Denning M.R. in
Jefford v. Gee (1970)
2 QB 130 . Where there has been no such element an award
of interest is not called for and each paragraph of sub-s. (3) recognizes
seeks to give effect to this. The fact that damages are awarded as a lump sum
once and for all should not obscure the fact that
a part of those damages may
compensate for detriments not yet actually encountered or come across and
should for that reason carry
no interest with it. (at p664)
12. Unless sub-s. (3) (b) be given the meaning which I would adopt it will
have little, if any, work to do; at the hearing of this
appeal counsel were
unable to suggest heads of loss or damage which, although proper for
compensation by an award of damages, had
not been incurred or suffered, in
accordance with general juristic concepts, at the time of accrual of the cause
of action. Only
if the happening of actual detriment which is to be
compensated for, for example the actual accident-caused failure to earn or
accident-caused
incurring of expense, is had regard to will it be possible to
apply the temporal test which sub-s. (3) (b) calls for. (at p664)
13. So far as concerns the character of an award of damages under Pt III of
I would add little to what has been said
by Jacobs J. The
legislation, in common with its counterparts in other jurisdictions, contains
no suggestion that the particular
measure of damages which it calls for should
be assessed by some approach different from that applicable
to other cases. To
such damages that they are to be assessed at date of death is not to
distinguish them from personal injuries
claims; it is only because
practice of not examining economic loss to date as an item in any way distinct
from future economic
loss that there have arisen
curious distinctions
associated with the assessment process in Lord Campbell's Act claims. These
more apparent the greater
be the interval of time between death and
verdict. An instance is provided by the practice of discounting
the damages
of death despite the fact that the damages may not in fact be
received until years later, in this instance
eight years later. If
sum of damages is to be computed it clearly must cover the whole period from
date of death onwards
and if it is to bear
some relationship to the sum of
lost pecuniary benefits, including those which would have been received in the
future, there must
clearly be some element of discounting and because only one
sum is available for discounting a discount is applied
which assumes,
to the fact, that receipt occurred at death and not later, after verdict. (at
14. To seek to compensate a dependant for this excessive measure of
discounting by awarding interest from date of commencement of
the action until
entry of judgment and upon the whole award of damages is only to introduce a
further illogicality into the process
of compensation. At least in those cases
in which a substantial delay has occurred between death and trial a more
satisfactory course,
in times of changing money values, would seem to be to
compute damages in two stages, looking first to the past loss of benefits
secondly to those which lie in the future, discounting only as to the latter.
Two further advantages would flow from such a course;
first there would then
be no reason necessarily to apply to the future any rate of periodical loss,
whether weekly or annual, derived
from some average benefit, calculated over
the period from death to trial, as was done in the present case. If, as was
the case in
this trial, the evidence shows a progressive increase in the rate
of earnings over many years between death and trial, due not to
promotion or
the like but apparently largely attributable to changes in money values, then,
even if no regard should be had to the
effects of future inflation, the
dependant is nevertheless disadvantaged if future loss of benefits from the
deceased are calculated
at such an average rate rather than at the higher rate
which the evidence suggests would have been attained at the date of the trial.
Secondly, if damages are to be awarded in the money of the day of verdict, the
past effects of inflation being allowed for in the
amount of the award, this
may be done by suitably adjusting the monetary amounts of past periodic losses
when calculating what present
sum should be awarded as compensation for those
past losses. (at p665)
15. Although these considerations formed no part of the grounds of appeal I
refer to them because they are aspects of the assessment
of damages in Lord
Campbell's Act claims which appear to owe their origin to the practice of
assessing those damages as one single
sum instead of viewing them as composed
of elements, some relating to the past and some to the future. It is this same
practice which
would in this case have effectively prevented the learned trial
judge from exercising the discretionary power conferred upon him
by sub-s. (3)
of s. 79A, a discretion which I consider he should have been free to exercise
since, contrary to East v. Breen
[1975] VicRp 2
VR 19 , the award of damages did in my
view comprise elements falling within the description contained in sub-s. (3)
16. For the reasons which I have given, adopting as they do those of Jacobs
J., I would dismiss this appeal. (at p666)
JACOBS J. The Supreme Court of Victoria has held that in an award of
compensation under Pt III of the
Wrongs Act 1958
(Vict.) no part of the award
in respect of loss of pecuniary benefit is an amount awarded as compensation
for loss or damage to be
incurred or suffered after the date of the award and
that therefore interest is payable on the whole of the award pursuant to s.
Supreme Court Act 1958
(Vict.). The question on this appeal is
whether that view is correct or at least open within the
absolute discretion
conferred on
the judge by s. 79A (3). That subsection envisages two different
cases - that where the court or
the jury makes an award which in
distinguishes any amount within pars (a), (b) and (c) and the case where the
jury brings
in a general award of damages
and the judge has an absolute
discretion to determine whether that general award includes any amount
pars (a), (b) or (c).
The award in the present case did not include any amount
within the former class of case. It therefore
fell to the trial judge in
absolute discretion to determine whether any such amount was included and, if
he determined that it
was, to reach an opinion
on the amount which represented
such damages. (at p666)
2. The amount of compensation under
is a sum proper
to compensate the dependant or dependants of a deceased
person for the
pecuniary benefits lost to them by the death.
The problem in this appeal
arises from the fact that in the assessment
of this compensation to the
dependants of the deceased person
the common practice in Victoria and in other
there is similar legislation has been to have regard to
that the compensation will be presently received as a lump sum but
not to have particular regard to that portion of the lump sum
attributable to the loss of pecuniary benefit between the
date of death and
the date of the award of compensation. The assessment
proceeds as if the
compensation were received immediately
on death. In this respect the practice
differs from that commonly adopted
in actions for damages for personal
injuries, where pecuniary
loss from extinction or impairment of earning
capacity is examined
separately from prospective loss after the date of the
In the latter case it is comparatively simple as a result of this
separate examination to award interest under s. 79A (3) (b) on
loss or damage
incurred or suffered before trial and to exclude any
amount awarded by way of
compensation for loss or damage incurred
or suffered after the date of the
award. But where there is no
separate examination of past and future loss and
particularly where
the assessment of compensation proceeds on the assumption
the compensation is received immediately on death, the question is
simple. In both cases, of course, the theory of the law
is that the right to
damages accrues when the act is done or event
occurs which occasions
liability. A plaintiff recovers on verdict
damages in respect of the whole of
the loss or damage incurred
or suffered by him as a result of the event which
occasions liability
in the defendant and in theory it makes no difference
the assessment is made immediately or is delayed. In theory also
damages are an indivisible lump sum to which the plaintiff
to have become entitled on the happening of the event which
liability in the defendant. It does not matter that
the physical or material
consequence of the injury has not been felt
at the time of the injury or of
assessment. Thus it may be said
in some, indeed most, contexts that a
plaintiff (or a dependant in
an action for compensation under
the happening of the event occasioning liability incurs the
loss or suffers the damage which is the subject of his or her claim
what happens thereafter is but the consequence of the loss or damage which he
has suffered. Subsequent events only assist
the ascertainment of the amount
of those damages. This is the basis of the rules that only one action may be
brought in respect
the one cause of action, that consequently damages are
assessed once and for all and that the Statutes of Limitation run from
time of the act or event which occasions liability. There is no occasion here
to refer to the special cases of continuing causes
of action, or to those
where a single act may give rise to multiple causes of action or to such a
special case as Darley Main Colliery
Co. v. Mitchell (1886) 11 App Cas 127 . I
refer to the general rules, those applicable to such cases as that with which
dealing. (at p667)
3. But it is clear to me that this concept of loss or damage is not that
referred to in s. 79A (3) (b). The paragraph refers not
to the juristic
concept of damages but to the practical concept that a plaintiff receives
damages by way of compensation in respect
of loss or damage incurred or
suffered up to the date of trial and verdict and in respect of loss or damage
(if any) which he will
incur or suffer in the future. When the consequence of
the compensable infringement of his legal rights is actually felt by him
or physically he incurs or suffers the loss or damage to which the
paragraph refers. As I have said, in relation to a claim for damages
personal injuries, the distinction is not a difficult one to apply. Pain and
suffering before verdict can be separated from pain
and suffering likely to
exist after verdict, however difficult the actual qualification may be. Though
earning capacity in whole
or in part may be lost uno ictu at the time of
injury, the consequential pecuniary loss or damage before verdict may be
from that likely to exist after verdict. (at p668)
4. The real question in this case, as I see it, is whether in the application
of s. 79A (3) (b) a claim for compensation under
Wrongs Act 1958
(Vict.) is necessarily different or to be treated differently from a claim for
damages in other actions, particularly actions for
personal injuries. I do not
think that the differences in the nature of the actions can supply an answer
to the question. Damages
in these cases have to be assessed as at the moment
of the death of the person whose dependant claims compensation. Many of the
to this effect are stated in the judgments in the Full Court in the
present case. But since, strictly, damages must always be assessed
moment of the act or event which occasions liability in the offending party,
this feature does not provide a satisfactory
basis for distinguishing the
cause of action under
from other causes of action.
The distinction between the causes of action which has been made, for
instance, by
Windeyer J. in National
Insurance Co. of New Zealand Ltd. v.
Espagne (1961) 105 CLR, at pp 587-588 does not touch on the question
date as at which
damages are to be assessed. (at p668)
5. The difference in treatment of the two classes of case is no more than a
distinction which has been adopted in common practice.
If in a particular case
the practice were not followed it would not vitiate the result because in both
classes of case the final
result is the total sum appropriate to the
circumstances disclosed in the evidence. It is not easy to see why it has been
that the compensation is received immediately on the deceased's death.
I venture to think that, as the loss of pecuniary benefit
could more easily be
predicated than loss of earnings in the case of injury, it was a way of
ensuring that compensation awarded under
the Act did not become
disproportionate to the compensation awarded in personal injury cases. It is
an anomaly but it must be borne
in mind that absolute precision in award is
unattainable and it is a fair sum which must be found in order to compensate
the dependants
of the deceased for the loss of the pecuniary benefits which
they might have expected to receive. Nevertheless, it is strange that
arithmetical or other calculation should in any case be made on the hypothesis
that the money is received at a date when in fact
the money is not so
received. (at p669)
6. Although no juristic distinction by itself permits the cause of action
under Pt III of the
to be treated differently
from the cause of
action for personal injuries, it does not follow that for the purposes of the
application
of s. 79A (3) (b) regard
should not be had to the fact that it has
commonly been treated differently. The common method of calculation
compensation in
actions under
and its equivalents
elsewhere does not lend itself readily to the application of s. 79A (3)
since allowance must in such a case
be made for the fact that although the
compensation is not received and does not earn interest
until the verdict is
given the sum
of compensation is calculated not only in theory but in practice
from the moment of death. Where
the common practice is followed
distinction is not drawn between compensation up to the date of trial and
compensation thereafter
and where allowance is
made either by arithmetical
calculation or by application of general principle for the fact that the
are received in a lump
sum instead of being received over an extended
period and where it is further assumed that that lump sum is
received at the
of the death of the deceased it would be unfair to make any simple
apportionment. (at p669)
7. If the jury be invited or the trial judge determines to calculate a sum
based on the amount required at the date of death to
bring in a regular
periodical money sum which would have been the pecuniary benefit received by
the dependants over the years, before
any part of that sum can be regarded as
compensation for loss or damage to be incurred or suffered after the date of
the award, calculations
would need to be made which would follow the lines of
those commonly made in personal injury cases. Pecuniary benefits, usually and
mainly earnings, would have to be calculated up to the date of trial with any
appropriate deductions for contingencies and for benefits
received as a result
of the death of the deceased, so far as that benefit has accrued and exhausted
itself as at the date of the
award. However, unless such calculations are able
in terms of the award to be made in a realistic way it is not likely that the
in his absolute discretion would be able to determine that the damages
include any amount for compensation for loss or damage to
be incurred or
suffered after the date of the award. (at p669)
8. In the present case the jury was invited if they saw fit to calculate the
damages on the amount required at the date of death
to bring in the
appropriate sum per week for the appropriate period. It would not then have
been correct for the trial judge simply
to apportion the total award between
the number of years between death and trial and the number of years of life
expectancy after
trial. If damages had been awarded on the basis of loss to
the date of award and loss thereafter the total would have been considerably
greater. Take the case of the widow. The evidence was that it would take a sum
of $450 to bring in a sum of one dollar per week during
the joint life
expectancy of the widow and the deceased from the date of death. The jury
awarded the sum of $25,000 to the widow.
The assumption being that the jury
adopted as a basis the arithmetical method of calculation, it would therefore
appear that the
jury concluded that the average pecuniary benefit to the widow
from the date of death during the joint life expectancy would be $55
The period between the commencement of the action and the date of the award
was close on seven years so that the amount
of the award attributable to the
period before the award would be approximately $20,000 and interest would be
payable on that amount.
But even the limitation of interest to that on such a
sum would hardly do justice to the widow. The realization that actual loss
pecuniary benefit to the date of the award amounts to $20,000 makes it clear
that the total award of $25,000 does not represent
a sum which can be divided
into past loss and future loss. When the particular method is adopted of
calculating the amount required
to bring in a certain sum per week and of
assuming that the sum is received and begins to bear interest from the date of
may become unrealistic, as it has become in the present case, to
attempt to divide the award into a sum for past and a sum for future
It lay well within the wide discretion given to the trial judge under s. 79A
(3) to determine that the damages awarded by
the jury could not realistically
be divided between past and future loss. As a result of following the decision
of the Full Court
in East v. Breen
[1975] VicRp 2
; (1975) VR 19 , the trial judge did not
recognize the occasion for exercise of his discretion. It therefore falls
this Court on
this appeal to consider the manner in which the discretion
should be exercised. For the reasons which I have stated
I am of the opinion
that it was not practicable fairly to identify within the award the sum
awarded as compensation for loss or damage
to be incurred
or suffered after
the date of the award. I would therefore dismiss the appeal. (at p670)
Appeal dismissed with costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter