Brar (Migration) [2024] AATA 4014 (11 October 2024)
Brar (Migration) [2024] AATA 4014 (11 October 2024)
DECISION RECORD
Migration & Refugee Division
Mr Kulbeer Singh Brar
REPRESENTATIVE:
Ms Thara Sujithkumar
CASE NUMBER:
BCC2020/1796784
Rachel Westaway
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision to cancel the
Statement made on 11 October 2024 at
MIGRATION – cancellation –
Partner (Provisional) (Class UF) visa – Subclass 309 (Spouse
(Provisional)) – sponsor
wife’s visa cancelled and decision affirmed
by tribunal, with application for judicial review in progress – applicant
unaware of incorrect information and bogus documents provided by wife –
relationship ceased and claim of domestic violence
by wife – length of
residence, social and community ties and care responsibilities for Australian
citizen child – decision
under review
LEGISLATION
Migration Act 1958
(2), 359(2)
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR
This is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the
Minister for Home Affairs to cancel the applicant’s
Subclass 309 (Spouse
(Provisional)) visa under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) (the Act).
The delegate cancelled the visa consequentially on the basis that the
applicant’s wife, who had sponsored him for the Subclass
309, subsequently
had her Regional Sponsored Migration Scheme (Subclass 119) visa cancelled. The
issue in the present case is whether
that ground for cancellation is made out,
and if so, whether the visa should be cancelled.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 8 August 2023 to give
evidence and present arguments. The Tribunal also received oral evidence
Amrib Singh: The Tribunal hearing was conducted with the assistance of an
interpreter in the Punjabi and English languages.
The applicant was represented in relation to the review.
For the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded that the decision to
cancel the applicant’s visa should be affirmed.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
The issue in this case is whether the consequential cancellation of the
applicant’s visa due to the cancellation of his sponsor’s
should be affirmed.
The applicant is a citizen of India who is 32 years old. The applicant’s
wife, Ranveer Kaur, was granted a Regional Sponsored
Migration Scheme (RSMS)
(subclass 119) visa on 20 May 2013.
The applicant applied for a Subclass 309 (Spouse (Provisional)) visa on 31
December 2014 on the basis of his spousal relationship
with his wife. The
Subclass 309 visa was granted on 6 January 2017 and the applicant arrived in
Australia on 28 January 2017.
On 6 May 2022 a delegate of the Minister made a decision to cancel the
applicant’s wife’s RSMS visa pursuant to
of the Act on the
basis that she provided incorrect information and bogus documents in her RSMS
visa application. As the applicant
was granted a visa only because his wife had
been granted a RSMS visa and his wife’s visa was subsequently cancelled,
determined that there were grounds for cancellation of the
applicant’s partner visa under
of the Act.
Tribunal Application
The applicant lodged his application for review on 16 May 2022.
The applicant provided a copy of the Department of Home Affairs Notification of
Cancellation letter and Decision Record with their
application for review.
Invitation to provide further information under s. 359(2) of
On 6 July 2023 the Tribunal wrote to the applicant under s. 359(2) of the Act
inviting the applicant to provide further information
in regard to his visa
cancellation. Specifically, the applicant was invited to provide information
circumstances in which the ground for your visa cancellation arose
The purpose of
your travel to and stay in Australia
The degree of
hardship that may be caused to you, your family members or anyone else connected
to your visa
Whether there
are any extenuating or compassionate circumstances that outweigh the grounds for
cancelling your visa
The links you
may have to the Australian community, your family or social or business
contributions
Whether you have
any other compelling needs to remain in Australia
Your past and
present behaviour towards the Department of Home Affairs including your
compliance with visas and visa conditions
whether there
are any mandatory legal consequences that would arise because of your visa
cancellation
Australia would be breaching any obligations it has under any relevant
international agreements because of your visa cancellation
any other matter
you consider relevant
The letter provided the applicant with 14 days to provide the requested
information or request an extension of time to respond.
The letter also stated
that if the information was not received within the period allowed or as
extended, the Tribunal may make a
decision on the review without taking any
further action to obtain the information, and that the applicant would lose any
entitlement
they might otherwise have had under the Act to appear before the
Tribunal to give evidence and present arguments.
On 18 July 2023, the applicant’s representative requested additional time
to provide submissions. This request was granted
by the Tribunal on 19 July
2023, with the requested information now due by 31 July 2023.
On 30 July 2023, the representative provided the following material by way of
online submissions:
Family Violence
Safety Notice [VP Form 423] issued 3 July 2022 with the applicant listed as the
Protected Person and his wife listed
as the Respondent
Photographs of
injuries sustained by the applicant following a claimed domestic violence
incident on 3 July 2022
Applicant’s
statement to Victoria Police dated 2 February 2023 regarding an incident between
himself and his ex-wife which occurred
on 1 February 2023
On 31 July 2023, the representative provided additional submissions responding
to the matters listed at paragraph 12 above.
On 4 August 2023 the applicant’s authorised representative made further
submissions, these included:
A Federal Family
court order naming the applicant and his former partner and in relation to their
child dated 24 May 2023.
Payment made to
a GKR karate dated 2 August 2023.
Statement of
entitlement from St Mary’s Youth Leadership dated 20 June 2023.
Statement from
the applicant’s representative in relation to the cancellation of the
On 7 August 2023 applicant submitted a tax invoice from St Marys School dated 7
August 2023.
Consequential Cancellation under
If a person’s visa is cancelled under
and another person holds a visa only because the person whose visa is
cancelled held a visa, and the other person did not hold the
visa because of
being a member of the family unit of the person whose visa was cancelled, the
Minister may cancel the other person’s
Section 140
of the Act states the following:
Section 140
Cancellation of visa results in other cancellation
If a person's visa is cancelled under
section 109
information), 116 (general power to cancel), 128 (when holder outside
Australia), 133A (Minister's personal powers to
cancel visas on
section 109
grounds), 133C (Minister's personal powers to cancel visas on
section 116
grounds) or 137J (student visas), a visa held by another person because of being
a member of the family unit of the person is also
(a) a person's visa is cancelled under
section 109
information), 116 (general power to cancel), 128 (when holder outside
Australia), 133A (Minister's personal powers to
cancel visas on
section 109
grounds), 133C (Minister's personal powers to cancel visas on
section 116
grounds) or 137J (student visas); and
(b) another person to whom subsection (1) does not apply holds a visa only
because the person whose visa is cancelled held a visa;
the Minister may, without notice to the other person, cancel the other
person's visa.
On 16 February 2023, in a separate case, the Tribunal affirmed the decision to
cancel the applicant’s wife’s RSMS visa
(AAT case number
In this case I am satisfied that the applicant held a Subclass 309 partner visa
only because his wife held a subclass 119 visa.
The delegate’s decision
records that the applicant’s partner visa was cancelled under
because his wife’s visa was cancelled on 6 May 2022. The applicant’s
wife was the sponsor of the applicant for the Subclass
309 visa. The matter was
appealed to the AAT and affirmed on 16 February 2023. The applicant confirmed at
hearing that he is aware
that the visa was cancelled and explained that it was
on the basis of her providing a bogus document. He stated that this occurred
before he has entered into the relationship with her, and he was unaware.
For these reasons, the Tribunal is satisfied that the ground for cancellation
exists under
Should the visa be cancelled?
As the Tribunal has decided that
of the Act applies to the applicant,
it is necessary to consider whether the visa should be cancelled. There are no
matters specified
in the Act or Regulations that must be considered in the
exercise of this discretion. The Tribunal has had regard to the circumstances
this case, including matters raised by the applicant, and matters in the
Department’s guidelines.
circumstances in which the ground for your visa cancellation
The ground for visa cancellation arose when the visa holder’s then wife
provided incorrect information in her Regional Sponsored
Migration Scheme (RSMS)
(Subclass 119) visa application and submitted bogus documents in support of her
RSMS visa application and
her visa was subsequently cancelled. Her visa was
revoked on May 6, 2022, therefore she is no longer in possession of the one that
allowed the grant of his Partner (Provisional) (subclass 309) visa. Due to this,
the visa holder is liable for consequential cancellation
(Provisional) (subclass 309) visa under
of the Act.
The applicant stated that his ex-wife’s visa was cancelled, and she had
applied for her visa and was already in receipt of
her visa when he met her and
he had no idea what she had provided. He claimed he was unaware of the
fraudulent documents that she
was found to have submitted. He also claimed that
he is not proficient in English is not good and he has limited English and is
a rural family. It was his understanding that there were fraudulent
documents provided regarding her identity. He is not aware of
where the review
is at or whether judicial review has been sought as there is currently an
interim intervention order in place and
he has no contact with her. He stated
that he feels he is being punished for something outside of his awareness and
control. The
Tribunal undertook its own enquiry and has been informed the matter
is still before the court for review and has not yet been decided.
The Tribunal accepts that the applicant may not have been aware of the issues
pertaining to his then wife’s visa application.
Notwithstanding this, the
applicant must be sponsored by and Australia Citizen or permanent resident and
at the time of decision
the applicant’s former wife has had her permanent
visa cancelled.
He stated that his former wife is in a new relationship, and he confirmed that
he sees her at school pickups and drop offs. They
do not talk to each other.
There is an interim intervention order in place.
The Tribunal has considered the circumstances in which the grounds for
cancellation occurred and finds them unfortunate for the
applicant but accurate
and whilst the decision has been appealed these grounds remain.
The Tribunal gives this consideration significant weight in favour of
cancelling the visa.
the purpose
of the visa holder’s travel to and stay in Australia
The visa holder was granted the partner (Provisional) (subclass 309) visa on
January 2017 on the basis of his spousal relationship with his
ex-wife. They married in 2014 and applied for a partner visa on the
his ex-wife held a Regional Sponsored Migration Scheme visa. The purpose of the
visa was to reside in Australia as the
spouse of his former wife. He explained
that they have a child now who is eight years of age. His son is an Australian
citizen whom
he states he has the major share of custody of. In 2017, he was
granted the Subclass 309 partner visa to enter Australia again.
His submission
stated that initially the relationship was good however problems started to
arise. He claims that family violence
occurred directed at him and his son. They
are legally separated and there is an interim intervention order in place and
The Tribunal has considered the reasons why the applicant came to Australia and
notes the relationship is no longer alive. Notwithstanding
this the applicant
does have custodial arrangements with his son. However, the sponsor’s visa
is no longer alive to enable
her to remain permanently in Australia and other
options may be considered by the applicant to arrange shared custody of their
The Tribunal has considered the reasons why the applicant travelled to
Australia and whilst the relationship has ceased, there remains
issues about how the applicant and his former wife will share the custody of
their child.
The Tribunal gives this consideration a little weight in favour of the
applicant and not cancelling the visa.
of hardship that may be caused to the visa holder and any family
The applicant claims that the cancellation of the visa will cause significant
hardship and disruption to the visa holder and his
child. He stated he has
resided in Australia for approximately for seven years. He has established a
range of ties and relationships,
including with friends, colleagues, and members
of his community. The cancellation of visa would not only harm his personal life
and emotional wellbeing but would also have significant implications for his
livelihood and future prospects. It would affect him
leaving behind everything
he has built over the past seven years.
He outlined in detail his care responsibilities for his son. He states that his
ex-wife lives in close proximity to him. His son
resides with him five nights
per week and over the weekend and his ex-wife has his son two nights a week. He
explained his son is
at school and he assists him with his homework and prepares
all meals for him.
He stated that the school provides a psychologist for his son who meets with
him monthly and liaises with him on his son’s
The applicant provided a submission regarding his child and stated that his son
is an Australian citizen who has lived his entire
life in Australia and if the
visa is cancelled, he is the main carer of his child. He explained that his
ex-wife was recently removed
from the interim intervention order however she has
allegedly abused the child. She has two evening a week with the child however
has been given the primary care of him. A court order was provided to confirm
this. Further, the Tribunal notes that at the time
of this decision, the
child’s mother is now separated from the applicant and still living in
Australia whilst her application
for review of the visa cancellation is before
the courts. The applicant claims that his visa cancellation will impact both the
educational prospects and his mental well-being. It will also disrupt
his learning, force him to leave behind friends and familiar
environments, and
create a sense of uncertainty about his future. It was argued that it is a
harrowing experience for a visa holder
to be face with such situation which
occurred not of his own doing and his child will either need to relocate to
India and be separated
from his mother or remain in Australia and be separated
from his father.
The applicant stated that his ex-wife is in a new relationship but he is
unaware of the details of this and whether the new partner
is an Australian
citizen or if there is an intention for his wife to apply for a partner visa at
some point. He stated there is no
communication and he does not ask his son. He
explained that as far as he is aware his ex-wife lives with her brother and in
same area as him.
The applicant stated that even if his ex-wife to return back to India she comes
from a region which is 100kms away from where he
comes from.
The Tribunal gives this consideration some weight in favour of not cancelling
holder’s past and present behaviour towards the department (for example,
whether they have been truthful in statements
or applications made to the
department or have previously complied with visa conditions)
There is nothing before the Tribunal to indicate any breaches of conditions and
the applicant has complied with all requests from
the Department and the
The Tribunal gives this consideration a little weight in favour of not
cancelling the visa.
in the case of a permanent visa, the links
that the person may have made to the community, for example, the strength of
family, social,
business and other ties in Australia
The applicant’s paternal cousin is like family and lives in Newcastle and
often and when he burnt his leg
they stayed and looked after him and he had no Centrelink support.
The applicant outlined his routine with his son and how he supports him with
his daily routine for school. There is no doubt in
the Tribunal’s mind
that the applicant is involved in his son’s care and life.
He has outlined the many friends he has and the birthday party which he
arranged for his son. He stated that his ex-wife did not
The Tribunal acknowledges that the applicant has formed social and family ties
in Australia and gives this consideration a little
weight in favour of not
cancelling the visa.
whether Australia has obligations under
relevant international agreements that would be breached as a result of the visa
cancellation
The Tribunal has considered the policy guidelines including the obligations in
relation to non-refoulement pursuant to the 1951
Convention relating to the
Status of Refugees (the Refugee Convention) and its 1967 Protocol (the
Protocol); the International Covenant
on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR); the
Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or
(CAT); and the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC).
As the applicant’s wife’s visa has been cancelled and consequently
the applicant’s visa has been cancelled, the
applicant’s child is
unlikely to be separated from his parents and the child’s citizenship
would not be affected. His
parents are citizens of India and he could reside
with both of them in India.
Whilst the Tribunal acknowledges the custodial arrangements of the parents and
the care that the applicant provides his child, this
could still occur if they
returned to India.
The applicant has not raised any protection claims and there is nothing before
the Tribunal to suggest it would be in breach of
any other international
obligations.
The Tribunal has considered the circumstances and finds that it would not be a
breach of Australia’s international obligations
under the CRC as the
family could maintain their custodial arrangements in India. The Tribunal also
finds that it would not be in
breach of any other international agreements.
The Tribunal gives this consideration a little weight in favour of not
cancelling the visa.
the impact of cancellation on any victims of
family violence, if family violence is a factor
The applicant has confirmed that his ex-wife was recently removed from the
interim intervention order but claims that she has abused
the child. The
Tribunal notes that there was not a final intervention order granted and the
interim one has expired.
The Tribunal gives this consideration no weight in its
considerations.
any other relevant matters
The applicant explained that the cancellation of his wife’s permanent
visa was out of his control and he is separate from
the whole situation. He
stated that it has ruined 9 years of his life and he was 25 when it occurred. He
explained that if they lived
in India her family and where she may live is 100km
away from where he would live and his son is an Australian Citizen and in a
school environment and this would cause significant disruption to him.
They currently live only 2km apart in Australia.
Whilst the Tribunal has empathy for the situation facing the applicant, the
requirement of his visa is that he is sponsored by his
wife who held a permanent
visa and now longer does. Further, whilst the applicant claims she would live
with her family in India
which is much further away from his residence, they are
currently living in a different country and have chosen to live close to
other and could emulate this situation in India. No reasons were put forward as
to why they could not.
The Tribunal has considered the other factors raised by the applicant and an
give them no weight either in favour or against cancelling
Considering the circumstances as a whole, the Tribunal concludes that the visa
be cancelled.
The Tribunal affirms the decision to cancel the visa.
Rachel Westaway
Senior Member
ATTACHMENT –
Migration Act 1958
Interpretation
(1) In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears:
bogus document
, in relation to a person, means a document that
the Minister reasonably suspects is a document that:
(a) purports to have been, but was not, issued in respect of the person; or
(b) is counterfeit or has been altered by a person who does not have authority
to do so; or
(c) was obtained because of a false or misleading statement, whether or not made
Interpretation
this Subdivision:
application form
, in relation to a non‑citizen, means a
form on which a non‑citizen applies for a visa, being a form that
regulations
made for the purposes of
allow to be used for making
the application.
passenger card
has the meaning given by
subsection 506(2)
and, for the purposes of
section 115
, includes any document provided for by
regulations under paragraph 504(1)(c).
Bogus document
is defined in
subsection 5(1).
of visa application
A non‑citizen who does not fill in his
or her application form or passenger card is taken to do so if he or she causes
be filled in or if it is otherwise filled in on his or her behalf.
Information
Any information that a non‑citizen gives or
provides, causes to be given or provided, or that is given or provided on his or
her behalf, to the Minister, an officer, an authorised system, a person or the
Tribunal, or the Immigration Assessment authority,
reviewing a decision under
this Act in relation to the non‑citizen’s application for a visa is
taken for the purposes
section 100
, paragraphs 101(b) and 102(b) and
sections 104
to be an answer to a question in the
non‑citizen’s application form, whether the information is given or
provided orally
or in writing and whether at an interview or otherwise.
For the purposes of this Subdivision, an answer to a
question is incorrect even though the person who gave or provided the answer,
caused the answer to be given or provided, did not know that it was
applications to be correct
A non‑citizen must fill in or
complete his or her application form in such a way that:
(a) all questions on it are answered; and
(b) no incorrect answers are given or provided.
cards to be correct
A non‑citizen must fill in his or her
passenger card in such a way that:
(a) all questions on it are answered; and
(b) no incorrect answers are given.
documents not to be given etc.
A non‑citizen must not
give, present, [produce]
to an officer, an authorised system, the Minister, the Immigration Assessment
Authority, or the Tribunal performing a
function or purpose under this Act, a
bogus document or cause such a document to be so given, presented,
or provided.
of incorrect applications
(1) If the Minister considers that the holder of a visa who has been immigration
cleared (whether or not because of that visa) did
not comply with
section 101
or with subsection (2) in a response
to a notice under this section, the Minister may give the holder a notice:
(a) giving particulars of the possible non‑compliance; and
(b) stating that, within a period stated in the notice as mentioned in
subsection (1A), the holder may give the Minister a written
response to the
notice that:
(i) if the holder disputes that there was non‑compliance:
(A) shows that there was compliance; and
(B) in case the Minister decides under
section 108
that, in spite of the
statement under sub‑subparagraph (A), there was
non‑compliance—shows cause why the visa should
not be cancelled;
(ii) if the holder accepts that there was non‑compliance:
(A) give reasons for the non‑compliance; and
(B) shows cause why the visa should not be cancelled; and
(c) stating that the Minister will consider cancelling the visa:
(i) if the holder gives the Minister oral or written notice, within the period
stated as mentioned in subsection (1A), that he or
she will not give a
written response—when that notice is given; or
(ii) if the holder gives the Minister a written response within that
period—when the response is given; or
(iii) otherwise—at the end of that period; and
(d) setting out the effect of
sections 108
(e) informing the holder that the holder’s obligations under
section 104
are not affected by the notice under this section;
(f) requiring the holder:
(i) to tell the Minister the address at which the holder is living; and
(ii) if the holder changes that address before the Minister notifies the holder
of the Minister’s decision on whether there
was non‑compliance by
the holder—to tell the Minister the changed address.
(1A) The period to be stated in the notice under subsection (1) must
(a) in respect of the holder of a temporary visa—the period prescribed by
the regulations or, if no period is prescribed, a
reasonable period; or
(b) otherwise—14 days.
(1B) Regulations prescribing a period for the purposes of
paragraph (1A)(a) may prescribe different periods and state when a
period is to apply, which, without limiting the generality of the
power, may be to:
(a) visas of a stated class; or
(b) visa holders in stated circumstances; or
(c) visa holders in a stated class of people (who may be visa holders in a
particular place); or
(d) visa holders in a stated class of people (who may be visa holders in a
particular place) in stated circumstances.
(2) If the visa holder responds to the notice, he or she must do so without
making any incorrect statement.
The Minister is to:
(a) consider any response given by a visa holder in the way required by
paragraph 107(1)(b); and
(b) decide whether there was non‑compliance by the visa holder in the way
described in the notice.
Cancellation
of visa if information incorrect
(1) The Minister, after:
(a) deciding under
section 108
that there was non‑compliance by the holder
of a visa; and
(b) considering any response to the notice about the non‑compliance given
in a way required by paragraph 107(1)(b); and
(c) having regard to any prescribed circumstances;
may cancel the visa.
(2) If the Minister may cancel a visa under subsection (1), the Minister must
do so if there exist circumstances declared by the regulations
circumstances in which a visa must be cancelled.
This wording applies to
documents given, presented, produced or provided on or after 4 November 2014:
Schedule 7 to
Counter Terrorism Legislation Amendment (Foreign Fighters) Act
(No.116, 2014).
RTF format (418 KB)
Signed PDF/A format