URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1966/1.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:44:00
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Peate v Federal Commissioner of Taxation [1966] UKPCHCA 1; (1966) 116 CLR 38 (17 May 1966)
PRIVY COUNCIL
PEATE v. FEDERAL COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
[1966] UKPCHCA 1
(1966) 116 CLR 38
Income Tax (Cth)
Privy Council
Viscount Dilhorne(1), Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest(1), Lord Pearce(1), Lord
Donovan(2), Lord Pearson(1)
Income Tax (Cth) - Arrangement entered into having purpose or effect of
avoiding liability imposed by taxing Act - Avoidance of
arrangement - Company
formed by doctors formerly practising in partnership - Doctors employed by
company - Fees for treatment paid
directly to company - Assessment to tax on
basis that doctors practising in partnership - Proportion of income derived by
treated as having been derived by individual doctors - Income Tax and
Social Services Contribution Assessment Act 1936-1960 (Cth),
ss. 17, 19, 260.
1966, January 24, 26, 27; May 17. 17:5:1966
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
The judgment of VISCOUNT DILHORNE, LORD MORRIS OF BORTH-Y-GEST, LORD PEARCE
and LORD PEARSON was delivered by VISCOUNT DILHORNE:-
The appellant, Dr. Peate, was for a time employed by a number of doctors in
partnership at Cessnock in New South Wales. He received
a salary and any fees
he earned through the practice of his profession were handed over to the
partnership. In 1954 he became a partner
and in 1956 he was entitled to 14 per
cent of the profits of the partnership after the deduction of expenses. (at
2. On 29th June 1956 a company called A. E. Westbank Pty. Limited was formed
and on 18th August 1956 the eight doctors who were
then in partnership were
appointed directors of the company. Two days later the appellant was appointed
chairman. (at p40)
3. One of the objects of the company was to carry on "the business of
chemists, druggists and providers of medicinal" (sic) "surgical
and hospital
facilities of all kinds whether alone or in conjunction with any other person,
firm or corporation." (at p40)
4. On 28th August it was agreed that the partnership should be dissolved and
on 31st August 1956 it was dissolved. The same day
eight companies were
formed, each of which was conveniently described by Menzies J. as the "family"
company of one of the eight doctors.
5. The "family" company of the appellant was called W. Raleigh Pty. Limited.
Two solicitors who were members of the firm advising
the doctors were the
original directors. One of the objects of this company was "to carry on the
business of . . . providers of medical
surgical and hospital services and
facilities of all kinds". (at p40)
6. The next day, 1st September, this company purchased the appellant's
practice, his library, plant, motor cars, etc. for a sum
which was eventually
fixed at 9,542 pounds and entered into a service agreement with him. (at p40)
7. By this agreement the appellant agreed to serve the company "as Medical
Practitioner in the business carried on by the company"
at a salary. He
covenanted that he would act as agent for the company or its nominee to ensure
that any person whom he treated, contracted
with the company or its nominee
that payment for the treatment "is due to the company or its nominee directly
and even although the
account for such services may be rendered by the company
or its nominee in the name of the doctor". He also by this agreement
the company or its nominee to render in his name accounts for all
treatment given by him and he undertook when required by the Board
Directors to serve any company carrying on a similar business to the company
as a medical practitioner. (at p40)
8. Each of the other seven doctors who had been members of the partnership
entered into a similar agreement with his "family" company.
9. At a second meeting of the directors of Raleigh on 1st September 1956, the
appellant and his wife were appointed directors in
place of the original
directors. (at p40)
10. The same day Westbank entered into separate agreements with each of the
"family" companies and each of the eight doctors. By
the agreement with
Raleigh and the appellant it was agreed that Raleigh would for a fee arrange
for the appellant to serve Westbank
as a medical practitioner and that the fee
would be 14 per cent of the balance of the gross income of Westbank after
deduction of
the expenses of that company including the salaries of doctors
who were not directors of the company but employed by it. (at p41)
11. The other agreements with the "family" companies and the other former
partners were of a similar character. In 1959 consequent
upon the withdrawal
of one of the eight doctors, his "family" company received only 4.235 per cent
instead of 12.5 per cent of the
profits of Westbank with the result that
Raleigh's share was increased to 14.993 per cent. In 1960 in consequence of
other changes
it was increased to 15.815 per cent. (at p41)
12. Not only were the fees paid for the services of each doctor by Westbank
to each "family" company the same percentage of the
profits that each doctor
in the partnership had been receiving but the shares in Westbank were allotted
to each of the "family" companies
in similar proportion. Raleigh held 28 out
of the 200 shares. (at p41)
13. As these arrangements meant that all the net profits of Westbank would be
distributed to the "family" companies in service fees
and that no dividends
would be paid by that company, it was later agreed that Westbank should each
year keep 5,000 pounds for the
payment of taxes and dividends and that the
service fees would be paid out of the balance remaining after the deduction of
and the expenses of the company. (at p41)
14. The shares in Raleigh were held by the trustees of settlements for the
children of the appellant and his wife. (at p41)
15. The result of this somewhat complicated series of transactions can be
summed up as follows:- Westbank replaced the partnership.
The doctors who had
been partners became directors of that company. The fees earned as a result of
their carrying on the practice
of medicine were to be paid into that company's
account instead of into the partnership account ; and after deduction of
including the cost of employment of the other doctors and the 5,000
pounds referred to, were to be paid to each of the "family" companies
service fees. Each "family" company would get the same percentage of the net
income less 5,000 pounds of Westbank as each doctor
got of the profits of the
partnership. Each "family" company would get the same percentage share of any
dividends declared by Westbank
out of the 5,000 pounds retained ; and each of
the eight doctors would get a salary from his family company. (at p41)
16. Raleigh in addition to paying the appellant his salary under the
agreement between that company and him, also paid his wife
a salary of 1,200
pounds later increased to 1,300 pounds per annum for her services as secretary
of the company. Dividends declared
by Raleigh went to the trustees of the two
settlements for the benefit of their children. (at p42)
17. Dr. Peate stated in evidence that there were a number of reasons for the
replacement of the partnership by Westbank and the
creation of the "family"
companies. He said that he knew that there were certain tax benefits which
could be gained. (at p42)
18. In 1958 in his return of income the appellant stated that his only
professional income was the salary of 1,560 pounds paid to
him by Raleigh.
This was not accepted by the respondent who assessed his taxable income for
this year at 4,298 pounds. This sum was
arrived at in the following way. The
net income of Westbank in that year as returned by that company was 5,013
pounds. To that the
Commissioner added the service fees paid by the company of
41,574 pounds and superannuation payments of 1,200 pounds, making a total
47,787 pounds. He then treated 14 per cent of this sum, namely 6,690 pounds as
the appellant's income and treated some of the
expenses claimed as deductions
by A. E. Westbank Pty. Limited and W. Raleigh Pty. Limited as allowable
deductions from the appellant's
income. He disregarded the salary paid to the
appellant by W. Raleigh Pty. Limited entirely. Similar returns were made by
the appellant
for the years 1959 and 1960 and similar assessments by the
Commissioner for those years. In 1959 his taxable income was assessed
pounds and he had returned his income as 1,399 pounds and in 1960 he was
assessed at 3,574 pounds when his income as returned
was 1,731 pounds. (at
19. In justification of his assessments, the respondent relied on s. 260 of
the Income Tax and Social Services Contribution Assessment
Act 1936-1960 (Cth)
which, so far as material, reads as follows:-
"Every contract, agreement or arrangement made or entered
into, orally or in writing, . . . shall, so far as it has or purports
to have the purpose or effect of in any way, directly or
indirectly -
(a) altering the incidence of any income tax ;
(b) relieving any person from liability to pay any income tax
or make any return ;
(c) defeating, evading, or avoiding any duty or liability
imposed on any person by this Act ; or
(d) preventing the operation of this Act in any respect,
be absolutely void, as against the Commissioner, or in regard
to any proceeding under this Act, but without prejudice to
such validity as it may have in any other respect or for any
other purpose." (at p43)
20. The first question therefore to be determined is did the contracts,
agreements and arrangements made in 1956 or any part of
them have one of the
purposes or effects stated in this section. In the opinion of their Lordships
the answer is in the affirmative.
Before these arrangements were made in 1956
the appellant received 14 per cent of the net profits of the partnership and
was assessed
accordingly. After they were made, the doctors who had been
partners treated patients in the same way as they had before but as a
of these arrangments, their incomes from the practice of their profession were
reduced to the salaries received from the "family"
companies who received
either by way of service fees or dividends the same percentage of the net
profits of Westbank as the doctors
had been entitled to under the partnership
agreement. (at p43)
21. In their Lordships' opinion these arrangements have the purpose and
effect of avoiding a liability imposed on each doctor by
the Income Tax and
Social Services Contribution Assessment Act. (at p43)
22. It follows from this conclusion that the respondent was right to treat as
void as against him or in regard to any proceedings
under the Act the whole or
any part of any contract, agreement or arrangement which directly or
indirectly had this effect. (at p43)
23. Section 166 of the Act places on the respondent the duty of assessing the
taxable income of the taxpayer. Section 17 provides
that income tax shall be
levied upon the taxable income derived during the financial year by the
taxpayer and s. 19 provides that
the income shall be deemed to have been
derived by a person although it is not actually paid over to him but is
reinvested, accumulated,
capitalized, carried to any reserve, sinking fund or
insurance fund however designated or otherwise dealt with on his behalf or as
he directs. (at p43)
24. What then was the taxable income of the appellant in each of the three
years in question? The arrangements made in 1956 divested
him of income which
he would have received if they had not been made. Tax was avoided on the
difference between the salary he and
his wife as directors of W. Raleigh Pty.
Limited agreed that he should receive and the amount received each year by
Raleigh Limited
from A. E. Westbank Pty. Limited in service fees and
dividends. (at p43)
25. Now, as Kitto J. said in the course of his judgment in this case, s. 260
"operates only to destroy ; it supplies nothing" (1964)
111 CLR, at p 470 . It
only operates notionally to destroy, for the validity of the transactions is
only affected so far as the Commissioner
and proceedings under the Act are
concerned. He cannot treat some of the arrangements which come within s. 260
as void and others
not. He is given no option. (at p44)
26. The difficulty in this case lies in determining the taxable income
derived by the appellant or deemed by virtue of s. 19 to
have been derived by
him with such of the contracts, agreements and arrangements as come within s.
260 being treated as void. If
the Act provided that the Commissioner had power
to make an assessment to counteract the tax advantage sought to be obtained by
arrangements coming within s. 260 this difficulty would not arise. Such a
provision is contained in s. 28 (3) of the Finance Act,
1960 of the United
Kingdom. (at p44)
27. Section 260 has to be construed with ss. 17 and 19. It can only have
practical effect in preventing tax avoidance if the Commissioner
is entitled
to make an assessment on the basis that the contracts, agreements and
arrangements rendered void by it, had never been
made. This necessarily
involves treating the taxpayer as having derived income in excess of that
derived by him pursuant to the arrangements.
In their Lordships' opinion,
reading these three sections together, the Commissioner was entitled to assess
the appellant on the
income he would have received in each of the three years
if the arrangements coming within s. 260 had not been made in 1956. (at
28. The agreement to dissolve the partnership, its dissolution, the formation
of the two companies, Westbank and Raleigh and the
agreements between the
appellant and Raleigh and between the appellant, Raleigh and Westbank were all
part of the scheme and directly
or indirectly had the purpose and effect of
avoiding liability to tax and so came within s. 260. The Commissioner was
therefore entitled
to proceed on the basis that these arrangements had not
been made. (at p44)
29. He was therefore entitled to treat the partnership as continuing until,
if in fact it had been in existence it would have been
dissolved by operation
of law. Until then he was entitled to treat the income in fact received by A.
E. Westbank Pty. Limited as
if it had been received by the partnership, and to
treat as the appellant's share the same percentage of the net income of that
as he was entitled to of the income of the partnership ; that is, the
same percentage as that provided in the service agreement between
appellant, Raleigh and Westbank. (at p44)
30. In 1959 one of the doctors who had been partners withdrew. He ceased to
be a director of Westbank and such fees as he earned
ceased to be received by
the company. If in fact the partnership had continued until his withdrawal, it
would then have ceased by
operation of law. The Commissioner cannot therefore
treat the original partnership as existing after that date. To do so would be
not to destroy but to supply. (at p45)
31. Section 6 of the Act defines a partnership for the purposes of the Act as
inter alia "an association of persons . . . in receipt
of income jointly". (at
32. Disregarding, as the Commissioner was required by s. 260 to do, the
formation and so the existence of A. E. Westbank Pty. Limited,
formation was part of the arrangement to avoid tax, there was after the
withdrawal of this doctor an association of persons
in receipt of income
jointly ; and so, for the purposes of the Act the Commissioner was entitled to
treat the income received by
Westbank as the income of a partnership.
Following upon this withdrawal, the proportion of the net income of Westbank
paid to Raleigh
was increased to 14.993 per cent although the agreement
between the appellant, Raleigh and Westbank only provided for payment of
per cent. The doctors must have agreed to this increase and the Commissioner
is entitled to treat the appellant's income during
the period when Raleigh was
paid 14.993 per cent as that percentage of the net income of Westbank. (at
33. Further changes were made in 1960 as a result of which Raleigh's share
increased to 15.815 per cent. After these changes and
disregarding the
existence of Westbank, there was still an association of persons in receipt of
income jointly and similarly the
Commissioner is entitled to treat the
appellant's income as 15.815 per cent of the net income of Westbank for the
period during which
that percentage was paid to Raleigh. (at p45)
34. On behalf of the appellant it was argued that the contracts made by the
patients with Westbank to pay Westbank for the treatment
they received from
the doctors could not be regarded as replaced by contracts with the doctors
either jointly or individually. That,
it was argued rightly, would not be just
to treat the original contracts as void but to substitute others in their
place and s. 260
gives no power to do that. (at p45)
35. Whether patients in fact contracted to any substantial extent with
Westbank is open to doubt. Taylor J. in his judgment in this
case pointed out
that "the evidence disclosed 'that all governmental and institutional fees
were paid by cheques payable to the doctors
concerned and that most of the
private fees that were paid by cheque were paid by cheques in which the doctor
and not the company
(Westbank) was named as the payee' and that where
necessary the doctors endorsed cheques to enable them to be paid into
bank account" (1964) 111 CLR, at p 476 . In these circumstances the
bulk of the income earned found its way in the first instance
into the hands
of one or other of the doctors concerned. (at p46)
36. In so far as patients did in fact contract to pay Westbank for the
treatment they received, treating the income of Westbank
as that of the
doctors does not in their Lordships' opinion require any substitution of any
contract for that made by the patient.
The sums received by Westbank from such
patients were, as were the fees earned by the doctors employed by Westbank at
a salary, part
of the income of the doctors who were, if the existence of
Westbank is disregarded, in receipt of income jointly. (at p46)
37. In their Lordships' opinion the conclusion arrived at by the High Court
of Australia and by Menzies J. was correct and for the
reasons stated their
Lordships will humbly advise Her Majesty that the appeal should be dismissed.
38. The appellant must pay the costs of the appeal. (at p46)
LORD DONOVAN:-
Immediately before 31st August 1956, Dr. Peate was practising his profession
as a doctor in New South Wales in partnership with seven other doctors. Their
relations were governed by a partnership deed under
which their respective
shares in the capital and in the profits were defined. Dr. Peate's share was
14 per cent. (at p46)
2. On 31st August 1956 this partnership was by agreement dissolved. The
dissolution was consequent upon the decision of the partners
to rearrange
their affairs so that, among other things, a lighter burden of income tax
would be attracted. (at p46)
3. In broad outline the plan adopted achieved these results:
(1) fees received from patients no longer belonged to the doctors
themselves but to a limited company ;
(2) the limited company after paying certain expenses made
payments to its shareholders ;
(3) these shareholders were other limited companies - eight in
all, one for each doctor ;
(4) each of these eight companies used its receipts, partly to
pay a salary for his medical services to the doctor concerned,
and partly to make provision for his family ;
(5) each doctor then returned for income tax purposes as
professional earnings only his salary. This was considerably
less than his previous share of the partnership profits. (at p47)
4. Naturally enough, this result was not welcome to the Commonwealth
Commissioner of Taxation, whom I will hereafter call "the Commissioner".
Nevertheless for the first fiscal year in which it took effect, he accepted
it. This was the year ended 30th June 1957. In that year,
from 1st July 1956
up to 31st August 1956 Dr. Peate had been a member of the partnership. This
having been dissolved on 31st August
1956 he was, for the rest of the year, a
salaried employee of the company. He included in his tax return for the year
his share of
partnership profits up to 31st August, and his salary thereafter.
The income tax assessment was computed on the income so returned.
5. For the following fiscal year, i.e. the year ending 30th June 1958, the
Commissioner took a different view. He treated Dr. Peate
as still carrying on
a medical practice in partnership with his former colleagues and still
entitled directly to a share of the income
so produced. The fact that this
income had gone to a limited company in pursuance of the new arrangements
mattered not. In the Deputy
Commissioner's words: ". . . it is considered that
the gross income shewn in the company's return was, in fact and in law,
by the partnership. Correspondingly, the expenditure claimed in the
company's returns . . . is considered to have been incurred by
the partnership
and you through the agency of the companies." (at p47)
6. The basis for this view was that medical services had been personally
rendered to the patients by Dr. Peate and his colleagues,
and that the receipt
of fees by the company was simply an application of income after it had been
earned by the doctors. The view
was buttressed by a reference to the New South
Wales Medical Practitioners Act, 1938 providing, inter alia, that only a
medical practitioner can treat certain diseases, and sue for fees.
The limited companies were not registered medical practitioners
and could not
therefore legally derive the income in question. (at p47)
7. For the following two fiscal years, namely the year ending 30th June 1959
and 30th June 1960, the Commissioner repeated these
views and assessed Dr.
Peate in accordance with them. (at p47)
8. Dr. Peate having appealed against the foregoing three assessments, the
matter eventually came before the High Court of Australia
in September 1962
and was heard by Menzies J. Before him, the Commissioner, while apparently
maintaining the argument that what the
patients paid was the doctors' income
supported the assessment on a new ground which he put in the forefront of his
case. This was
that the assessments were justified by s. 260 of the Income Tax
and Social Services Contribution Assessment Act 1936- 1960. This
upheld by Menzies J. and subsequently, on appeal, by the Full Court ; and it
is this claim upon which your Lordships have
now to pronounce. (at p48)
9. I do not find it surprising that a contention which so far has commanded
universal judicial assent was not put forward by the
Commissioner when he made
the assessments. Section 260 is limited in its scope, for while it operates to
destroy a taxpayer's defences
in certain cases, it authorizes no new
construction in their place. In particular it does not deem some situation to
exist which
will support assessments to income tax designed to counter the
avoidance. Those assessments must still be based on facts, namely
remaining after s. 260 has done its work. This limitation of the section's
scope may produce much difficulty in particular
cases. In order to ascertain
its precise effect in the present case, it is necessary now to describe in a
little more detail how
Dr. Peate and his colleagues rearranged their affairs.
10. The partnership had commenced on 1st October 1954 and was regulated by a
deed dated 30th November 1954. Originally it consisted
of nine doctors, one of
whom retired on 1st July 1956. In the new partnership which resulted from this
retirement, and which consisted
of the remaining eight doctors, Dr. Peate's
share in the capital, profits and losses was 14 per cent. (at p48)
11. As a result of discussion with their legal and their accountancy
advisers, the partners caused the following steps to be taken:
A. E. Westbank
Pty. Limited (whom I will call "Westbank") was incorporated under the
Companies Act (N.S.W.) on 29th June 1956. One
of its objects was to carry on
the business of providing medicinal and surgical services. Its nominal capital
was 25,000 pounds divided
into 25,000 shares of 1 pound each. By September
1956, 200 of these shares had been issued, 28 of them to a company called W.
Pty. Limited (whom I will call "Raleigh"). Dr. Peate and his seven
partners were appointed the directors of Westbank. (at p48)
12. Raleigh was incorporated under the Companies Act (N.S.W.) on 31st August
1956, as a proprietary company. One of its objects
was to purchase the
business of any person or partnership, and another was to carry on the
business of providing medical services.
Its nominal capital was 25,000 pounds
divided into 25,000 shares of 1 pound each. These were divided into various
classes. A number
of "C" class shares were held in trust for Dr. Peate's
infant son John: and a number of "D" class shares were held in trust for Dr.
Peate's infant daughter Carolyn. Dr. Peate and his wife were directors of
Raleigh and Dr. Peate the governing director. It was, in
fact, his "family
company". On 31st August 1956 the partnership between the eight doctors was
dissolved. (at p49)
13. On 1st September 1956 Raleigh agreed to purchase the goodwill and assets
of Dr. Peate's practice, for a price which was settled
at 9,542 pounds, of
which goodwill accounted for 7,500 pounds. (at p49)
14. On the same day Dr. Peate agreed to serve Raleigh as a medical
practitioner at a salary of 1,000 pounds p.a., or such other
sum as might be
agreed upon from time to time. He further agreed to serve any other company
carrying on a similar business to that
of Raleigh if the directors of Raleigh
should so direct. (at p49)
15. On the same day another agreement was entered into between Westbank,
Raleigh and Dr. Peate. Under this agreement:
1. Raleigh arranged for Dr. Peate to serve Westbank as a
medical practitioner.
2. In consideration, Westbank was to pay Raleigh 14 per cent
of the net income of Westbank.
3. Dr. Peate agreed that all fees due from patients he treated
were to be due to, and belong to, Westbank and authorized
Westbank to render accounts for such services in his name.
On 3rd September 1956 Dr. Peate rented to Raleigh the surgery at 230 Main
Street, Cessnock, New South Wales (which had apparently
been one of the
surgeries used by the recent partnership) with the right to sublet the same.
16. On the same day Dr. Peate's wife was appointed secretary of Raleigh. (at
17. Each of the other doctors, the former partners of Dr. Peate, made similar
arrangements. In particular, each had his own family
company corresponding to
Raleigh holding shares in Westbank, and each doctor agreed to serve his family
company, or its nominee,
as a medical practitioner in return for a salary.
Each doctor was asked by his family company so to serve Westbank and each
18. The practice carried on by the partnership up to 31st August 1956 was,
pursuant to the foregoing arrangements, carried on thereafter
as follows. The
same surgeries were used, and the eight doctors rendered medical services
there in the same manner as before. Notices
were however exhibited at Dr.
Peate's surgery indicating that the doctors were the employees of Westbank to
whom fees were due. Most
of the patients, however, perhaps not unnaturally,
paid their accounts by cheques payable to the doctor personally. All fees were
duly accounted for to Westbank and Westbank paid all necessary outgoings, save
some which were paid by Raleigh. (at p49)
19. The first fiscal year during which these arrangements were effective i.e.
the year ending 30th June 1957 passed, as I have said,
without challenge from
the Commissioner. For the next year however he raised the contention already
indicated that the income remained
that of the doctors and that Westbank paid
the expenses as their agent. So far as Dr. Peate was concerned the
Commissioner worked
out that on this basis his assessable income for the year
ended 30th June 1958 was 4,298 pounds as opposed to the 1,232 pounds which
doctor had returned. (at p50)
20. It is important, having regard to the present reliance of the
Commissioner upon s. 260, which he says requires him to pay no
regard to the
formation of Westbank and the various agreements which followed, to see
exactly how the Commissioner arrived at the
figure of 4,298 pounds. (at p50)
21. He began with the profit and loss account of Westbank for the year ended
30th June 1958. From that he discovered that the gross
fees paid or payable to
Westbank in respect of the medical services it had caused to be rendered
through the medium of the doctors
was 56,245 pounds (I ignore shillings and
pence throughout). Westbank's total expenditure for the year was 51,245
pounds. The net
profit was thus 5,000 pounds. (at p50)
22. The expenses of 51,245 pounds included service fees payable to Raleigh
and the other family companies pursuant to the agreements
whereby these
companies made the services of the doctors available to Westbank. The total
sum so paid to the family companies by
Westbank in this year was 41,574
pounds. In the case of Raleigh the fee so paid for Dr. Peate's services was
5,820 pounds, i.e. 14
per cent of 41,574 pounds. (at p50)
23. The Commissioner proceeded to recalculate Westbank's income. In its
return that company had shewn a taxable income of 5,013
pounds. The
Commissioner added to it the foregoing service fees totalling 41,574 pounds,
plus a disbursement of 1,200 pounds for
superannuation contributions which he
regarded as an inadmissible deduction. He thus arrived at a net income for
Westbank of 47,787
pounds. He took 14 per cent of this as the income of Dr.
Peate, the 14 per cent being Dr. Peate's share of the profits of the previous
partnership, dissolved in August 1956. This gave a figure of 6,690 pounds. (at
24. From this figure the Commissioner then allowed certain deductions. The
salary of Dr. Peate from Raleigh was, consistently with
the Commissioner's
contentions, one of them. This amounted to 1,560 pounds. The expenditure
incurred by Raleigh during the year,
namely 4,767 pounds, was also allowed,
less however the salary of 1,560 pounds and less certain other expenses deemed
to be inadmissible
in whole or in part. The net amount of Raleigh's
expenditure then allowed to Dr. Peate was 2,066 pounds. This, plus the salary
1,560 pounds, now to be excluded from Dr. Peate's income, gives a total
deduction of 3,626 pounds. (at p51)
25. Dr. Peate had returned as his taxable income the sum of 1,232 pounds. The
Commissioner added to this the above sum of 6,690
pounds, plus a 2 pounds
subscription regarded by him as an inadmissible deduction. This gave a total
of 7,924 pounds. The Commissioner
then deducted the foregoing 3,626 pounds,
leaving a net income for Dr. Peate on this basis of 4,298 pounds. (at p51)
26. The calculation is perfectly intelligible on the hypothesis, for which
the Commissioner was contending at the time, that Westbank
and Raleigh were
simply Dr. Peate's agents. The calculation remained unchanged when the prime
contention was altered to reliance
on s. 260. How it squares with that
contention, which requires the Commissioner to proceed on the basis that
Westbank and Raleigh
are to be disregarded, is one of the serious difficulties
of the case. (at p51)
27. For the succeeding two fiscal years Dr. Peate's income was computed on
similar lines. (at p51)
28. I now turn to s. 260. It appears in Pt VIII of the Act, headed
"Miscellaneous" and so far as it is necessary to quote it in
this case, it
"Every contract, agreement or arrangement made or entered
into, orally or in writing, whether before or after the
commencement
of this Act, shall so far as it has or purports to have the
purpose or effect of in any way, directly or indirectly -
(a) altering the incidence of any income tax;
(b) relieving any person from liability to pay any income
tax . . . ;
(c) defeating, evading or avoiding any duty or liability
imposed on any person by this Act; or
(d) . . . ;
be absolutely void, as against the Commissioner, or in regard
to any proceeding under this Act, but without prejudice to
such validity as it may have in any other respect or for any
other purpose." (at p51)
29. In regard to any proceeding under the Income Tax and Social Services
Contribution Assessment Act, therefore, the section thus
sweeps away
contracts, agreements or arrangements of the kind described. The Commissioner
must proceed as though they did not exist.
Clearly, however, the section does
not authorize the Commissioner to put something new and fictitious in their
place. When Kitto
J. said in the present case that the section "operates only
to destroy; it supplies nothing" (1964) 111 CLR, at p 470 he was repeating
effect what has been said judicially many times. (at p52)
30. There is no doubt, in my opinion, that the conditions precedent
prescribed in s. 260 exist in Dr. Peate's case. The whole arrangement
designed to relieve him of some liability to tax, and it was, in fact
successful in doing so in the first year of its existence.
One need hardly
consider therefore the remaining content of s. 260, though I should have
thought it could also rightly be said that
the arrangement had the object of
altering the incidence of income tax on what would ordinarily have been the
doctor's professional
earnings. (at p52)
31. If then the purpose of each of the contracts, agreements or arrangements
was to secure relief from income tax, they are wholly
void as against the
Commissioner, or in regard to any proceeding under the Act. The Commissioner
in his case submits that this involves
treating as void - (1) the separate
corporate existence of Westbank
(2) the agreement between Dr. Peate and Raleigh
(3) the agreement between Westbank, Raleigh and Dr. Peate
(4) the agreements (if any) made between Westbank, the patients
and Dr. Peate, in so far as they provided that the fees should
be the property of Westbank.
With this I agree. I would add, however, that it involves also disregarding
the existence of Raleigh, the formation of which was also
part of the plan for
tax avoidance. (at p52)
32. The liability of Dr. Peate now depends on the facts left after the
foregoing transactions are treated as void and are therefore
disregarded. (at
33. What is so left as regards Dr. Peate? The situation, in my opinion, is
1. He is found giving medical services to patients.
2. In return the patients pay him money.
3. He cannot, for present purposes, be treated as accountable
to Westbank for this money. Thus he is accountable to no
one for it, and it may, again for present purposes, be treated
as his own.
4. This money therefore represents the gross, or "assessable"
income which he derives from treating patients. But the
Act does not tax gross income but "taxable income"
which means that all allowable deductions must be made.
5. The allowable deductions are defined by s. 51. They are "all
losses and outgoings to the extent to which they are incurred
in gaining or producing the assessable income . . . ".
6. The section does not in terms require that it must be the
taxpayer himself who disburses the outgoings, though
ordinarily, of course, this will be the fact. The deductions
which have been allowed to Dr. Peate in the present case
were made by Westbank and Raleigh and the amounts
have been extracted by the Commissioner from their
accounts. How, one may ask, does this square with s. 260
which requires the Commissioner to ignore the existence of
those companies? Once s. 260 is invoked he is not entitled
to recognize these companies for some purposes and
disregard them for others. In so far as the formation of these
companies were part of the arrangement which had the
purpose of relieving Dr. Peate and others from liability to
pay income tax, that formation is absolutely void as
against the Commissioner "or in regard to any proceeding
under this Act". They are, to use his own expression,
"annihilated". How, in the face of this, the companies
are nevertheless brought to life again for the purposes of
seeing what expenses they incurred and then allowing
those expenses to Dr. Peate, I do not understand.
7. What then follows? Is Dr. Peate to be taxed as though his
assessable income is the same as his taxable income? Or
is some liberty to be taken with the words of s. 260, so as
to accord him the benefit of expenditure by the two
companies? Or is the truth that s. 260 is inadequate to deal
with this sort of case, particularly when one still has to
face the problem - What part of the expenditure in question
related to Dr. Peate's own activities?
8. I return to this aspect of the matter presently; but
assuming for the moment that the difficulties about allowing
deductions are surmountable, then s. 260 permits the
taxation of Dr. Peate upon what he received for treating
the patients he himself attended less his necessary
outgoings. The facts which are left after s. 260 has done its
work entail nothing less and nothing more. It means
further, in my opinion, that he must be assessed on a cash
basis, for the facts which remain do not include any debt
to him from patients for unpaid fees. (at p53)
34. I come now to consider the very different basis of liability which has
been upheld. (at p53)
35. The Commissioner, as has been seen, began with the net income of Westbank
as disclosed by its accounts, made a number of additions
to it, and attributed
a particular portion to Dr. Peate. From this he allowed certain expenses
incurred by Raleigh. This was consistent
with the Commissioner's original
contention that Dr. Peate himself owned the fees paid for medical services
which he rendered; and
that in paying expenses Westbank and Raleigh were
simply his agents. But it is wholly, and obviously, inconsistent with s. 260
treats the arrangement which brought these companies into being as
wholly void against the Commissioner or in regard to any proceeding
Act. To persist in this basis of assessment as the Commissioner did when
relying upon s. 260 is not to apply that section
but to contradict it. (at
36. What has to be discovered is what is left after s. 260 has done its work,
and what liability to tax is thereby supported. By
way of introduction to this
problem, Menzies J. in the High Court said this: "The next question is how
much of the arrangement and
what was done to carry it out is void against the
Commissioner in assessing Dr. Peate and in these proceedings. It seems to me
it was the making of the agreements with Westbank and the making of Dr.
Peate's agreement with Raleigh which effectuated the tax
avoiding purpose with
regard to Dr. Peate. These agreements must, therefore, be disregarded" (1964)
111 CLR, at p 461 . (at p54)
37. Here, it will be seen, the arrangement is dissected and the two
agreements mentioned are isolated as the matters upon which
alone s. 260
operates since they "effectuated" the tax-avoiding purpose. (at p54)
38. I have the misfortune to disagree with this analysis. In the first place
the two agreements would not have effected the tax-avoiding
purposes without
the existence of Westbank and Raleigh. In the second place the test prescribed
by s. 260 is not merely whether some
contract agreement or arrangement
"effectuates" such a purpose, but whether the contract agreement or
arrangement "has or purports
to have the purpose or effect . . . in any way,
directly or indirectly". In the face of this language, I do not understand how
formation of Westbank can be treated as being outside it; and I agree with
the Commissioner who, in his case, adopts as his main
contention that the
existence of Westbank is also to be disregarded. I would repeat that in my
opinion the same must be said of the
formation of Raleigh. (at p54)
39. The treatment of the formation of Westbank as being unaffected by s. 260
facilitates, however, the conclusion of the learned
Judge, which he proceeds
to express as follows: "What is left then is a group of doctors practising
together but without any formal
agreement of partnership, using Westbank to
receive all fees paid, to provide services for the group, to pay group
expenses and to
make distributions of what remained in agreed proportions and
using their family companies to receive those distributions and to
individual expenses of practice. On this basis the assessable income of the
doctors as a group was the total of gross fees
earned" (1964) 111 CLR, at p
461 . (at p55)
40. For me, at least, this reasoning is vitiated by its reliance upon the
existence and the actions of Westbank and Raleigh notwithstanding
this context it is not without significance that the Commissioner and his
advisers take a different view of "what was
left". They say it was (a) the
appellant practising as before; (b) income being produced by that practice;
(c) that income being
paid with other income into a bank account; (d) the
payment thereout of the cost of production of the entire income; (e) the
with part of that income (after such payment) in accordance with the
appellant's directions. I respectfully think that this analysis
perfect is, at any rate, more in accordance with the effect of s. 260. (at
41. Other questions are provoked by the passage I have quoted from the
judgment of Menzies J. which was substantially adopted by
the Full Court.
First, what is the significance of the reference to "a group of doctors
practising together but without any formal
agreement of partnership"? (at p55)
42. The pre-existing partnership between the doctors was dissolved on 31st
August 1956. It was clearly part of the entire tax-avoiding
arrangement. The
Commissioner is at liberty therefore to treat the agreement for dissolution as
void as against him, or in relation
to any proceeding under the Act. But what
does this involve? (at p55)
43. In your Lordships' view the consequence is that the Commissioner was
entitled "to treat the partnership as continuing until,
if in fact it had been
in existence, it would have been dissolved by operation of law". (at p55)
44. I regret that I am unable to share in this conclusion which admittedly
substitutes fiction for fact, and is thus in conflict
with repeated judicial
pronouncements that s. 260 does not permit such inventions. If your Lordships'
view is correct, it would surely
have been shared and applied both by the
Commissioner and by the six judges in Australia who have considered this case.
also have made all the elaborate arguments to which both they and
your Lordships have listened largely unnecessary. And the Commissioner
presumably have called for a return of the partnership income pursuant to s.
91 of the Act which he has not done. (at p56)
45. It may well be asked, "What is the point of declaring the deed of
dissolution void, unless the result be to keep the partnership
alive"? The
answer is, I think, simply this: that in considering what liability flows from
the facts which are left after s. 260
has done its work, the Commissioner is
not to be affected by the circumstance that the doctors formally dissolved
partnership on
31st August 1956. He is to consider the facts which remain
after that date untrammelled by that fact. (at p56)
46. This is what the Commissioner and the High Court proceeded to do, and in
my respectful view, this was the right approach. It
is noteworthy, moreover,
how partnership, as a conclusion from the facts surviving the application of
s. 260, is carefully avoided.
The Commissioner speaks of "the appellant
carrying on his practice in association with a group of other medical
practitioners"; and
Menzies J. (see above) of "a group of doctors practising
together without any formal agreement of partnership etc.". (at p56)
47. In my opinion the "facts exposed" do not themselves support the
conclusion of partnership. The sharing of gross returns, if
Australian law be
the same as English law in this respect, would be no evidence of partnership.
The sharing of net profits, on the
contrary, is prima facie evidence of
partnership. But the crucial point is whether these eight medical practices
were carried on
in common pursuant to some agreement to that effect, express
or implied. The facts which remain include the fact that this is the
the doctors intended should not happen after 31st August 1956, which seems to
be highly relevant, though by itself not
conclusive. Moreover I can find a
sharing of net profits only by tracing the gross receipts through Westbank and
Raleigh taking into
account the payment of expenses by those companies, and
attributing to Dr. Peate moneys which he did not receive. The doctors, it
true, used the same surgeries as before, and may be said to have practised as
a "group", both of which features carry one hardly
any distance along the road
to partnership. What really stands out in this context is the absence of
evidence which points unequivocally
to the conclusion that despite the
doctors' intention to practise otherwise than in partnership, they
nevertheless in fact continued
to do so. (at p56)
48. But s. 6 of the Act contains an extended definition of partnership. It is
"an association of persons carrying on business as
partners or in receipt of
income jointly . . . ". As regards these last words Dr. Peate received no
moneys "jointly". What was paid
to him for his services was received by him
alone, not by the other doctors as well. Nor did he receive, jointly with
them, the fees
they received for services which they rendered. This result is
not reversed by the fact that all the money was paid into one account
the doctors' names. (at p57)
49. If no partnership is exposed when s. 260 has done its work, I do not know
what significance, in relation to Dr. Peate's income
tax liability, is to be
attached to the reference to "a group of persons practising together etc.".
The doctor and his colleagues
seem to have used the same surgeries as before,
and no doubt this had its conveniences, one doctor coming to the help of
in times of difficulty. In this sense they can be said to be
practising together as a group, as doctors do in some of our own towns.
of partnership, however, the circumstance is, in relation to tax liability,
irrelevant. (at p57)
50. Next, in the passage I am considering from the judgment of Menzies J.
comes the reference to the doctors "using Westbank to
receive all fees paid,
to provide services for the group, to pay group expenses and to make
distributions of what remained in agreed
proportions and using their family
companies to receive those distributions and pay the individual expenses of
practice" (1964) 111
CLR, at p 461 . I repeat that, after s. 260 has directed
that the whole taxavoiding arrangement be regarded for present purposes
absolutely void, this resurrection of the companies which were an essential
part of that arrangement, for the purpose of fixing
liability upon the
taxpayer, is, in my opinion, wholly inadmissible. (at p57)
51. The argument before your Lordships did not seek to support the opposite
proposition. On the contrary it was said, inter alia,
that the formation of
Westbank was avoided. It was added that so far as Raleigh was concerned it was
unnecessary to contend that
its formation was also avoided. I can understand
this view; but whether the contention were necessary or not, the formation of
clearly fell within the scope and effect of s. 260. (at p57)
52. The Commissioner, for his part, contends that the application of s. 260
exposes Dr. Peate carrying on practice, receiving moneys,
paying those moneys
into a bank account, and the other doctors doing the same. Then part of that
income, after payment of the expenses,
is dealt with in accordance with the
appellant's directions, and thus liability to tax on that part is brought home
to him. (at p57)
53. This, if I may say so, is the most attractive way in which the case for
the respondent can be put. But on analysis this, too,
is found to be
contravening s. 260. Thus the justification for the expression "after payment
of the expenses" is that Westbank paid
them. If, for example, the Commissioner
challenged the admissibility of any of the expenses, it is the accounts of
Westbank which
would have to be produced in support of the deduction sought,
and evidence from Westbank which would have to be produced if the purpose
any particular disbursement were challenged. Then as regards the "application
of part of that income in accordance with the appellant's
directions", the
appellant himself gave no personal directions on this matter. He joined in the
collective decision of the board
of directors of Westbank. If Westbank is to
disappear pursuant to s. 260, the board and its actions disappear with it. In
there is not left a decision by individuals acting on their own, and
to proceed on the basis that such a decision is one of the facts
left" is again to employ a fiction. (at p58)
54. Before stating my conclusions I should perhaps say a word about s. 19 of
the Act which enacts that "income shall be deemed to
have been derived by a
person although it is not actually paid over to him but is re-invested,
accumulated, capitalized . . . or
otherwise dealt with on his behalf or as he
directs". This section is not one which imposes liability in the present case
independently
of s. 260. It does not apply, for example, to make Westbank's
income the income of Dr. Peate and his colleagues whether s. 260 applies
not. Section 19 is not intended to override contracts which make a particular
piece of income legally and beneficially the income
of someone else. Otherwise
the income of a limited company might be treated as the income of the board of
directors who could direct
how it should be dealt with. The section deals
with, and defeats, any possible argument of a taxpayer that income which would
be "derived" by him is not to be so treated because it has been
accumulated re-invested or capitalized etc. It comes into play in
the present
case if s. 260 has the effect of making the fees received by Dr. Peate from
the patients he treated his own income. Then,
whatever other answer he might
have to s. 260, he could not be heard to say that in any event he had diverted
most of that income
elsewhere. (at p58)
55. In the end I reach these conclusions:
(1) The purpose of the whole arrangement was relief in some
measure from income tax.
(2) The application of s. 260 would involve treating the fees
paid to Dr. Peate for the services he rendered to patients
as his gross or "assessable" income.
(3) The deduction of expenses to arrive at his net or "taxable"
income involves looking at the accounts of Westbank and
Raleigh; and in as much as the formation of these two
companies is, under s. 260, to be regarded as absolutely
void "in regard to any proceedings under this Act" this
procedure is not permissible. The result is not to make
Dr. Peate taxable on his gross or "assessable" income, for
this would be contrary to the Act. It is, on the contrary,
to raise serious doubt as to the applicability of s. 260 to
such a case as the present.
(4) This doubt is increased when the amount of net income to
be attributed to Dr. Peate can be determined only by
attributing to him and his colleagues a decision which they
never took except as directors of Westbank.
(5) Section 260 does not, in truth, meet such a case as the
present with which its terms are inadequate to cope. It is
a section which dates back, it is said, to 1915 when tax
avoidance schemes were less sophisticated and complex.
If a charge is created on income so as to lessen the tax;
or property is transferred for that purpose; then s. 260
will work. The charge and the transfer can be ignored as
void, leaving the income as it was. But when a taxpayer
puts and end to one source of income and creates another
in its stead, the section does no more than destroy the new
arrangements so far as the Commissioner and the Act are
concerned. This is not enough. The old order is not revived
by thus annihilating the new. What is needed is authority
for the Commissioner to make such assessments to tax
as in his view are required to prevent the avoidance of
tax which would otherwise occur. Section 260 contains
no such authority; and without it, the attempt to impose
liability in accordance with "the facts that remain" leads
to difficulty and frustration. The section is obeyed at one
time and disobeyed at another. The Commissioner was
quite right in my opinion in his initial disregard of the
section and on better ground in his attempt to establish
liability by contending that Westbank and Raleigh were
mere agents of the doctors, and that the doctors themselves
owned the income that their efforts procured. This does
not mean that I think the contention right, for it involves
treating the agreements between the doctors and Westbank,
and between themselves and their family companies, as
shams. On the evidence I do not at present see how this
contention can be sustained. But if it fails then, unless and
until the legislature adds further and suitable provisions
to s. 260, the Commissioner must take the facts as he finds
them, and assess Dr. Peate on the basis of the doctor's
own return. (at p60)
56. I therefore respectfully dissent from your Lordships' conclusion, and
would humbly advise Her Majesty that the appeal should
be allowed. (at p60)
Appeal dismissed with costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter