BRKK and Commissioner of Taxation (Taxation) [2024] AATA 3607 (11 October 2024)
BRKK and Commissioner of Taxation (Taxation) [2024] AATA 3607 (11 October
Division: TAXATION AND COMMERCIAL DIVISION
File Number(s):
Commissioner of Taxation
Commissioner of Taxation
File Number(s):
Commissioner of Taxation
File Number(s):
Commissioner of Taxation
Senior Member D
request for a direction or a summons under subsection 37(2) and section 40A of
the AAT Act in relation to documents sought by
the applicant is refused.
to section 33, subsections 37(1) and 37(2) of the AAT Act documents marked T78,
T79, T81, T82, T83, be uplifted on the basis
that the documents lack relevance
and are not necessary for the determination of the dispute and that the
respondent file an amended
index pursuant to subsection 37(1) of the AAT Act
....................................[
]....................................
Senior Member D Benk
RELEVANCE –
subjective – objective – privilege – external legal advice
LEGISLATION
Administrative
Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Taxation Administration Act 1953
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd
and Commissioner of Taxation (Taxation)
[2018] AATA 2404
Bailey v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1977] HCA 11
(1977) 136 CLR 214
Comcare v Maganga
[2008] FCA 285
Commissioner of Taxation v ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (In Liq) (formerly EBS
and Associates Pty Ltd)
[2018] FCA 1140
Cosco Holdings Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
Dimitropoulos and Australian Securities and Investments Commission
[2019] AATA 1775
Douglass v Administrative Appeals Tribunal
[2017] FCA 1105
Expense Reduction Analysts Group Pty Ltd v Armstrong Strategic Management
and Marketing Pty Ltd
(2013) 250 CLR 30
FYMS and Commissioner of Taxation
[2022] AATA 3790
Hooke v Bux Global Management Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2018] FCA 836
KLGL QCYY and Australian Prudential Regulation Authority
[2008] AATA 452
QQRK and WHKY and Commissioner of Taxation
[2022] AATA 3399
REASONS FOR DECISION
Member D Benk
am tasked with determining two interlocutory applications. The Respondent seeks
uplift of various documents filed in these proceedings
pursuant to
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
) on the basis that the documents lack relevance, are unnecessary or
alternatively are privileged. The documents in issue are marked
T31, T48, T49,
T50, T51, T53, T57, T58, T59, T60, T61, T63, T64, T66, T67, T78, T79, T81, T82,
T83, T86, T96 and T97.
Applicants maintain these documents should not be uplifted but also seek the
provision of additional documents pursuant to subsection
37(2) of the AAT Act
and/or the issue of a summons pursuant to section 40A of the AAT Act,
petitioning for the production of eight
separate categories of documents
relevantly:
(i) the Respondent’s legal advice documents;
(ii) documents containing calculations referred to in a brief to counsel;
(iii) correspondence between the Commissioner and counsel;
(iv) correspondence between the Commissioner’s officers as to the family
trust election;
(v) all correspondence between the Commissioner’s officers as to the
completed copies of the family trust election;
(vi) all documents prepared by the Australian Tax Office (
) including
guidelines and practice notes as to the family trust election practices;
(vii) all correspondence regarding the consequences (or lack thereof) of
comments made by TRMB during a telephone conversation; and
(viii) production of the documents sought to be uplifted (those contested by the
Respondent to remain in the subsection 37(1) documents)
including legal advice
THE ISSUE IN THE CASE
primary issue here is whether the documents either sought to be obtained or
uplifted are
to the statutory function of the
substantive proceedings relate to the tax liabilities imposed upon the
Applicants by the Respondent, specifically tax liabilities
derived from capital
gains from the sale of shares in various entities; whether various family trust
elections had been properly
made under the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
the Assessment Act
) and whether any distributions were made
outside of the trust.
APPLICANTS’ CONTENTIONS
Submissions
were exhaustive but when summarised the Applicants maintain all documents are
relevant to the ultimate determination of
this matter and specifically
identifies/labels those documents as follows:
(i) T48 and T50 (the flow of fund documents);
(ii) T49 (the Dwyer Web document);
(iii) T51 and T53 (the Fidelity Trust Documents);
(iv) T57, T58, T59, T60 and T61 (RFI documents);
(v) T78, T78, T81 and 83 (the Claim Documents) (upon which privilege is claimed
by the respondent); and
(vi) T96 and T97 (the WP documents).
the Applicants contend:
(a) Paragraph 33(1)(c) of the AAT Act allows the Tribunal to inform itself on
any matter in such manner as it thinks appropriate,
reinforcing the
Tribunal’s ability to have access to the relevant material when exercising
its function.
(b) The removal or uplift of any document prevents the Tribunal from assessing
the relevance and ultimate probative value of any
such documents at review
hearing thereby possibly hampering its ability to make the correct and
preferable decision. It would also
result in significant unfairness to the
Applicants who have grounded their defence on the basis of the documents
currently before
the Tribunal.
(c) If the contested documents were not relevant to the determination their
inclusion in the section 37 documents should pose no
difficulty to the
Respondent.
(d) The Respondent cannot maintain its claim for privilege in regards to:
(a) T78 – Brief Materials
(b) T79 – Supplementary brief materials
(c) T81 - Briefing note post counsel’s advice
(d) T82 – Executive brief
(e) T83 – Fidelity Holdings Trust – Advice & Factual Context
because it has failed to establish privilege over each of the documents, or
alternatively such privilege has been waived either by
the express conduct of
the Commissioner or otherwise by operation of the law.
(e) All of the documents sought by the Applicants and to which uplift are
opposed are relevant to the review of the decision by the
Tribunal, thereby
satisfying paragraph 37(1)(b) of the AAT Act.
(f) As an alternative, the documents sought by the Applicant would be captured
under the summons provisions found in section 40 of
the AAT Act and authorities
establish that the Tribunal’s summons power is not expressly confined to
documents, but documents must only be ‘adjectivally
relevant’ to the issues in the proceedings, meaning the documents
likely to throw light on the issues in the main case or are connected with or
pertinent to the issues in the
RESPONDENT’S CONTENTIONS
regards the Applicants’ request for documents both with respect to
subsection 37(2) and section 40A of the AAT Act, the Respondent
submitted the
(a) documents can only be deemed relevant if they assist with a determination of
the taxable facts;
(b) it is the role of the Tribunal to form the opinion of what documents sought
are, or may be relevant;
(c) subsection 37(2) of the AAT Act is not a general discovery provision and
does not authorise a fishing
expedition;
(d) a summons under section 40A of the AAT Act cannot be issued in circumstances
where it can be seen to be a fishing expedition;
(e) the Tribunal must be positively satisfied that the documents sought have a
capacity to influence or assist the determination
of the matters to be
determined in the review. There must be a sufficient relationship with the
matters that are required to be
determined.
(f) generally speaking, the Applicants have failed to advance any argument why
the requested documents would be relevant to the Tribunal’s
statutory task
and hence have failed to establish ‘relevance’. Whilst the
Applicants have confirmed the documents may
have a connection or pertain to the
subject matter of the hearing, this does not satisfy potential relevance of the
documents sought
on the matters to be determined in the review proceedings;
(g) the requests are so broad that they are effectively unintelligible and to
the extent that they can be understood, fall within
the definition of a fishing
expedition.
regards the legal advice documents,
the Respondent asserts these cannot be said to rationally influence the proper
determination of the issues by the Tribunal at any
ultimate review hearing
because the opinions of counsel were given prior to the commencement of
proceedings and were expressed in
the context of an entirely different
evidentiary matrix. The determination of the proceedings must and will turn on
the Tribunal’s
application of the relevant facts to be found on its
assessment of the evidence and the law and not on any advice obtained prior
commencement of proceedings. Simply put, the argument advanced is that the legal
advice documents have no relevance to the Tribunal’s
statutory function
and on that basis should be deemed irrelevant and uplifted from the documents.
In the alternative the documents
should be classified as privileged as the
Applicants were notified privilege was being claimed and the Commissioner sought
of those documents shortly after the T-documents were filed. This is
especially so because the documents have been inadvertently
produced, a request
was made to recall them promptly and there is no inherent unfairness
demonstrated to the Applicant in returning
In short, the primary
contention was that there is no unfairness to the Applicant as the documents are
wholly irrelevant to the Tribunal’s
statutory function and no prejudice
has been or can be established.
37(2) of the AAT Act refers to documents which ‘may be relevant to the
review of the decision by the Tribunal’.
37(2) of the AAT Act is modified by subparagraph 1477F(1)(b)(ii) of the
Taxation Administration Act 1953
). The modified
obligation refers to:
...every other document that is in the
Commissioner
possession or under the
Commissioner
control and is considered by the
Commissioner
be necessary to the review of the
concerned... [Emphasis added]
concerns about the adequacy of the Commissioner’s disclosure can be
addressed through an application under subsection 37(2)
of the AAT Act (or, more
unusually, by requesting the issue of a summons). The power and discretion of
such provisions is to be exercised
against the statutory intention, and that the
Tribunal have regard to all matters that should be taken into account for the
of the review.
the Tribunal’s decision on a request for documents ultimately involves a
practical and logical assessment of the
utility of the
documents which is the core of ‘relevance’. In making that
assessment, I am generally dismissive of speculative
or poorly targeted
requests, that is, those requests that have not been reconciled to my statutory
function or where they are so
broad as to be derisory. My position is entirely
consistent with established authority on this issue.
now return to the issue of relevance and specifically whether the documents
sought by the Applicants and those subject to an application
for uplift by the
adjectively relevant
review, that is, can it be demonstrated positively that the documents may shed
light on any question or issue the Tribunal
must address in the course of its
review and specifically the statutory functions it is burdened in
discharging.
Application of the law, findings and reasons on the
Respondent’s interlocutory application
The legal advices/claims documents (T78 to T83)
have noted the submissions and claims of privilege on these documents.
Subsection 37(3) of the AAT Act which provides that section
37 “has effect
notwithstanding any rule of law relating to privilege or the public interest in
relation to the production of
documents.” There has been much discussion
not generally be invoked against the Tribunal in any
However, this is not the
primary issue here, overall, I must determine whether the documents, at first
instance, may be relevant
to the issues in the review.
Respondent emphasises that the above documents cannot shed light on or assist
the Tribunal’s task on review, where the Applicants
must establish the
taxable facts and the correct amount of tax it should pay on the assessments.
see s 14ZZK(b) of the TAA.
consider any opinions provided by counsel which may have informed the original
decision-maker are irrelevant and have no bearing
on my statutory function in
objective fact finding.
stands to reason that any legal advice, particularly sought in an environment
prior to litigation is subjective and irrelevant
to the Tribunal’s
ultimate task. There was no cogent argument raised by the Applicant about how
those legal advices may be
relevant to my enquiry or shed light on the issues
for determination. In short, the evidence and key issues in review need to be
evaluated by the Tribunal objectively. Legal opinions or advice have no bearing
on my any ultimate decision making. I would reach
the same conclusion about any
other aspect of my statutory obligations including the interpretation of the
law, assessment of credibility
of witnesses or any other matter where objective
analysis is required.
summary, I find that the subjective opinions of counsel at the initial stages of
the decision-making process have no relevance
to the questions that will
ultimately be resolved at hearing and nor has it been established that these
documents may suggest appropriate
lines of enquiry or throw light on the issues
in dispute. As I have determined these documents are irrelevant to discernment
the issues in dispute, they are to be excluded from the T-documents and I
direct they be uplifted (documents T78, T79, T81, T82,
find that the documents found at T31, T48, T49, T50, T51, T53, T57, T58, T59,
T60, T61, T63, T64, T66, T67, T86, T96 and T97 have
a sufficient relationship
with the matters that ultimately must be determined and find there is no cogent
basis upon which to exclude
those documents despite the Respondent’s
protests. The documents pertain generally to the structure, arrangements and
transactions
of the Applicants during the relevant period which ultimately, more
likely than not will assist in the ultimate issue to be determined.
Application of the law, findings and reasons on the
Applicants’ interlocutory application
Applicants’ request for documents both with reference to subsection 37(2)
and section 40A of the AAT Act have been documented
have determined in paragraph 18 above, that all but the legal advice documents
are relevant to the matter and are not to be uplifted.
Overall, as regards the
balance of the claims, I am not satisfied that the Applicants’ requests
fall within the definitions
of ‘relevance’ or ‘adjectival
relevance’ as defined by the authorities. This is because the Applicants
failed to advance any argument why the requested documents would be
relevant to the Tribunal’s statutory task. Whilst I accept
the documents
may have a connection or pertain to the subject matter of the hearing, this does
not satisfy the tests of potential
‘relevance’ of the documents
sought on the matters to be determined in the review
proceedings.
I find that the requests are broad and non-specific, likely to produce even
further delay and burden on both parties. The
delays have already been
significant. I direct that an amended index be filed by the Respondent within 14
days and that the matter
be returned to the Registry for appropriate case
management and listing.
these reasons, the Applicants’ request for a direction or a summons under
subsection 37(2) and section 40A of the AAT Act
is refused.
I certify that the preceding 22 (twenty-two) paragraphs are a true copy
of the reasons for the decision herein of Senior Member D
...................................[
].....................................
Dated: 11 October 2024
Date(s) of hearing:
for the Applicant:
Ms I Sethi, Counsel
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Mr Z Mason, Adero Law
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr M O'Meara SC, Counsel and Mr T Arnold, Counsel
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Ms H Phillips, Gaden Lawyers
KLGL QCYY and Australian Prudential Regulation
[2008] AATA 452
(2008) 104 ALD 433
, 438 [15] (Senior Member P W Taylor)
Bailey v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1977] HCA 11
(1977) 136 CLR 214
, 217 (Barwick CJ).
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd and
Commissioner of Taxation (Taxation)
[2018] AATA 2404
[16] (Deputy President
B J McCabe and Senior Member G Lazanas).
Douglass v Administrative
Appeals Tribunal
[2017] FCA 1105
[7] (Griffiths J).
(n 1) [17].
T78, T79, T81, T82, T83 of the
T-documents.
Expense Reduction Analysts Group Pty Ltd v
Armstrong Strategic Management and Marketing Pty Ltd
(2013) 250 CLR 30.
Dimitropoulos and Australian
Securities and Investments Commission
[2019] AATA 1775
[82] (Senior Member P
W Taylor) (
‘Dimitropoulos
Cosco Holdings Pty Ltd v
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1997] FCA 1504
Comcare v Maganga
[2008] FCA 285
QQRK and WHKY and Commissioner of Taxation
[2022] AATA 3399.
I also note Colvin J in
Hooke v Bux Global Management Pty
[2018] FCA 836.
FYMS and Commissioner of
[2022] AATA 3790 (Deputy
President B J McCabe).
Commissioner of Taxation
v ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (In Liq) (formerly EBS and Associates Pty Ltd)
[2018] FCA 1140.
Dimitropoulos
RTF format (1.57 MB)
Signed PDF/A format