URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/FCAFC/2011/128.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:19
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Merck Sharp & Dohme (Australia) Pty Ltd v Peterson [2011] FCAFC 128 (12 October 2011)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Merck Sharp & Dohme (Australia) Pty Ltd v Peterson
[2011] FCAFC 128
Merck Sharp & Dohme (Australia) Pty Ltd v Peterson [2011] FCAFC
Appeal from:
Peterson v Merck Sharpe & Dohme (Aust) Pty Ltd (No 5)
Application for leave to appeal: Peterson v Merck Sharpe & Dohme (Aust)
[2010] FCA 180
MERCK SHARP & DOHME (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD (ACN 000 173 508) v GRAEME
ROBERT PETERSON
MERCK SHARP & DOHME (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD (ACN 000 173 508) v GRAEME
ROBERT PETERSON AS REPRESENTATIVE OF PERSONS WHO ALLEGE THEY
ARE GROUP MEMBERS
BY REASON OF THE CIRCUMSTANCE IN PARAGRAPH 2(c)(i) OF THE FURTHER AMENDED
STATEMENT OF CLAIM IN VID 451 OF 2006
File numbers:
VID 570 of 2010
VID 571 of 2010
KEANE CJ, BENNETT AND GORDON JJ
Date of judgment:
12 October 2011
Catchwords:
– negligence – product
liability – prescription medicine for relief of inflammation –
side-effects –
whether medicine caused or contributed to cardiovascular
disease – content of duty of care – state of scientific uncertainty
as to side-effects of medicine – state of scientific uncertainty as to
plausibility of scientific hypothesis
– negligence – product liability – causation
– prescription medicine for relief of inflammation – side-effects
– whether medicine materially contributed to respondent’s heart
attack – whether respondent’s consumption
of medicine was a
necessary precondition for occurrence of heart attack – interpretation and
application of epidemiological
evidence as a strand in the cable of
circumstantial proof of causation – whether respondent established a
causative link between
cardiovascular events and the consumption of
– negligence – product liability –
prescription medicine for relief of inflammation – side-effects –
legislation establishing minimum safety standards for the availability and use
of regulated medicines – whether legislation
intended to abrogate the
common law rights of individual consumers
TRADE PRACTICES
– misleading or deceptive conduct –
prescription medicine for relief of inflammation associated with doubling of
of heart attack – side-effects – whether manufacturer knew or
ought to have known of increased risk – whether manufacturer
negligently
failed to warn of risk and represented safety of medicine – whether
manufacturer took reasonable steps to ensure
medical practitioners were
sufficiently informed of clinical trials presenting signal of cardiovascular
risk – whether doctors,
pharmacists, health care professionals and the
public were adequately warned of risk – whether amendment to
Information” sufficient – whether manufacturer
entitled to assume that a medical practitioner would rely on amended
Information” – whether respondent would have declined
to take medicine if appropriately warned of risk – whether
respondent’s doctor relied on conduct of corporation in prescribing
medicine to him – whether respondent’s doctor
would have chosen not
to prescribe medicine – whether respondent’s doctor would have
prescribed medicine in any event
TRADE PRACTICES
– unsuitable goods – prescription
medicine for relief of inflammation associated with doubling of risk of heart
– whether respondent made purpose of acquiring medicine known to
manufacturer – whether medicine not reasonably fit for
substantive and procedural issues – whether purpose made known by
respondent was a purpose properly to be identified
– whether demonstrating
an increase in risk alone proves unfitness for purpose
TRADE PRACTICES
– goods of unmerchantable quality –
prescription medicine for relief of inflammation associated with doubling of
of heart attack – whether respondent suffered loss by reason that
medicine was not of merchantable quality – whether
medicine not fit for
purpose for which goods of that kind commonly bought and as was reasonable to
TRADE PRACTICES
– defective goods – prescription
medicine for relief of inflammation associated with doubling of risk of heart
– whether medicine defective – whether safety of medicine not
such as persons generally entitled to expect – whether
respondent suffered
injury because of defect – state of the art defence – whether state
of scientific knowledge not such
as to enable defect to be discovered
Legislation:
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Therapeutic Goods
Trade Practices Act 1974
Trade Practices Amendment Bill 1992
Explanatory
Memorandum,
Trade Practices Amendment Bill 1992
Cases cited:
Amaca Pty Ltd v Ellis
[2010] HCA 5
(2010) 240 CLR 111
Knitting Mills Ltd v Grant
[1933] HCA 35
(1933) 50 CLR 387
Bendix Mintex Pty
Ltd v Barnes
(1997) 42 NSWLR 307
Butcher v Lachlan Elder Realty
[2004] HCA 60
(2004) 218 CLR 592
Carey-Hazell
v Getz Bros &
Co (Aust) Pty Ltd
(2004) ATPR 42-014
Carr v Baker
SR (NSW) 301
Chappel v Hart
(1998) 195 CLR 232
Evans v Queanbeyan City Council
[2011] NSWCA 230
Grant v Australian Knitting Mills Ltd
[1935] UKPCHCA 1
(1935) 54 CLR 49
Henville v Walker
[2001] HCA 52
(2001) 206 CLR 459
Securities Pty Ltd v HTW Valuers (Brisbane) Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 41
(2002) 210 CLR 109
Medway Oil and Storage Co v Silica Gel Corporation
(1928) 33 Com
Medtel Pty Ltd v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
(2003) 130 FCR 182
Naxakis v Western General Hospital
[1999] HCA 22
(1999) 197 CLR 269
Rasell v Cavalier Marketing (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1991] 2 Qd R
Seltsam Pty Ltd v McGuiness
[2000] NSWCA 29
(2000) 49 NSWLR 262
State Government Insurance Commission (South Australia) v
(1984) 37 SASR 31
Tabet v Gett
[2010] HCA 12
(2010) 240 CLR 537
Date of hearing:
15, 16, 17, 18 August 2011
GENERAL DIVISION
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr B Walker SC with Mr C Loveday
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr JWK Burnside QC with Mr G Dalton
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Slater & Gordon
IN THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
VICTORIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
GENERAL DIVISION
VID 570 of 2010
ON APPEAL FROM THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
MERCK SHARP & DOHME (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD
(ACN 000 173
Appellant/Cross Respondent
GRAEME ROBERT PETERSON
Respondent/Cross Appellant
KEANE CJ, BENNETT & GORDON JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
12 OCTOBER 2011
WHERE MADE:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appellant’s appeal be allowed.
judgment in favour of the respondent be set aside and the respondent’s
action be dismissed.
be extended to allow the respondent to file the notice of cross-appeal but that
the cross-appeal be dismissed.
parties confer and thereafter by 4:00pm on 26 October 2011 file minutes of
orders (including as to costs), and in the event of
disagreement file and serve
written submissions as to the contentions of the parties.
Note: Entry of orders is dealt with in Rule 39.32 of the
Court Rules 2011
IN THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
VICTORIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
GENERAL DIVISION
VID 571 of 2010
APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL FROM THE FEDERAL COURT OF
MERCK SHARP & DOHME (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD
(ACN 000 173
GRAEME ROBERT PETERSON AS REPRESENTATIVE OF PERSONS WHO ALLEGE THEY ARE
GROUP MEMBERS BY REASON OF THE CIRCUMSTANCE IN PARAGRAPH 2(c)(i)
OF THE FURTHER
AMENDED STATEMENT OF CLAIM IN VID 451 OF 2006
KEANE CJ, BENNETT & GORDON JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
12 OCTOBER 2011
WHERE MADE:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
respondent’s application for leave to appeal be granted.
appeal be allowed to the extent indicated in the reasons for judgment.
Note: Entry of orders is dealt with in Rule 39.32 of the
Court Rules 2011
IN THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
VICTORIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
GENERAL DIVISION
VID 570 of 2010
ON APPEAL FROM THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
MERCK SHARP & DOHME (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD
(ACN 000 173
Appellant/Cross Respondent
GRAEME ROBERT PETERSON
Respondent/Cross Appellant
IN THE FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
VICTORIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
GENERAL DIVISION
VID 571 of 2010
APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL FROM THE FEDERAL COURT OF
MERCK SHARP & DOHME (AUSTRALIA) PTY LTD
(ACN 000 173
GRAEME ROBERT PETERSON AS REPRESENTATIVE OF PERSONS WHO ALLEGE THEY ARE
GROUP MEMBERS BY REASON OF THE CIRCUMSTANCE IN PARAGRAPH 2(c)(i)
OF THE FURTHER
AMENDED STATEMENT OF CLAIM IN VID 451 OF 2006
KEANE CJ, BENNETT & GORDON JJ
12 OCTOBER 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
THE PROCEEDINGS
Graeme Peterson had suffered from arthritic back pain for many years when he was
first prescribed Vioxx by a medical practitioner,
Dr John Dickman, on 10 May
2001. Vioxx provided Mr Peterson with relief from arthritic pain without the
adverse gastrointestinal
side-effects which he had suffered when using other
drugs for his arthritis. Accordingly, he took it regularly pursuant to
prescriptions
provided by Dr Dickman over the next two and a half years.
early December 2003, Mr Peterson experienced episodes of chest pain associated
with atherosclerosis. Later, on 8 December 2003,
he suffered a serious heart
attack. The withdrawal of Vioxx from the market in September 2004 led
Mr Peterson to suppose that there
was a connection between his consumption
of Vioxx and the occurrence of his heart attack. Mr Peterson brought
proceedings in the
Supreme Court of Victoria alleging that his consumption of
Vioxx contributed to the heart attack.
first respondent to the proceedings was Merck Sharp & Dohme (Australia) Pty
). The second respondent was MSDA’s parent company, Merck
& Co., Inc (
), a corporation based in the United States of
America engaged in the development, manufacture, distribution and sale of
pharmaceutical
products which included Vioxx. The proceeding commenced by
Mr Peterson was transferred to the Federal Court of Australia on 10 April
Peterson’s pleaded case was that MSDA knew, or ought to have known,
before December 2003, that the consumption of Vioxx
increased the risk of
heart attack and should have warned him of that increased risk.
Mr Peterson alleged that MSDA was negligent
in this respect and was also
guilty of misleading or deceptive conduct in contravention of s 52 of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
Peterson also alleged that Vioxx was not fit for purpose and not of merchantable
quality within the meaning of those terms in
ss 74B and 74D respectively of
the TPA. Finally, Mr Peterson alleged that MSDA was liable to compensate him
pursuant to s 75AD of
the TPA for injury suffered by him because Vioxx was
a defective product.
proceedings in the Federal Court were constituted as representative proceedings
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
) in respect of group members who had consumed Vioxx on
prescription by a medical practitioner in the period after 30 June 1999 and
subsequently diagnosed as having suffered (within 30 weeks after last consuming
Vioxx) one or more of a number of conditions
including myocardial infarction
). The only condition now relevant is MI. It was alleged that the MI
suffered by each group member was caused by his or her consumption
THE PRIMARY JUDGE’S DECISION
the consumption of Vioxx caused or contributed to Mr Peterson’s MI was the
major issue at trial. It was important
in relation to all of
Mr Peterson’s causes of action.
case against Vioxx was circumstantial: there was no medical
“signature” for Vioxx which might indicate that Mr Peterson’s
heart attack was caused by Vioxx.
In finding the
circumstantial case against Vioxx proved, the primary judge relied upon a theory
as to a physiological mechanism which
might explain the operation of Vioxx in
the body to produce an occlusion of the vasculature, and upon statistical
evidence bearing
upon the extent of the risk of harm from Vioxx in the
population at large.
first principal strand in his Honour’s reasoning was based on evidence
supporting the theory by which it was proposed that
the consumption of Vioxx
disturbed the body’s balance of prostacyclin (a vaso-dilator that also
inhibits blood clot formation)
and thromboxane (a vaso-constrictor and
hypertensive factor that facilitates clot formation). This disturbance
might lead to the
formation of a thrombus or thrombi (clot or clots) from
platelets resulting from the rupture of plaque in the endothelium of
atherosclerotic
blood vessels. The thrombus or thrombi so formed were
large enough to cause an occlusion of a major vessel supplying blood to the
heart. The second principal strand in his Honour’s reasoning was based
upon epidemiological evidence which suggested that
the consumption of Vioxx
almost doubled the relative risk of heart attack in the population.
the basis of this circumstantial evidence, the primary judge drew the inference
that the consumption of Vioxx made a material
contribution to the occurrence of
Mr Peterson’s MI.
the other hand, his Honour did not accept a variation of the mechanism
hypothesised on Mr Peterson’s behalf whereby it was
proposed that the
consumption of Vioxx accelerated atherosclerosis by the absorption of thrombi
into endothelial plaque. This alternative
mechanism was essential to the
case that Vioxx might contribute to a consumer’s heart attack after
consumption had ceased.
to Mr Peterson’s claim in negligence, the primary judge rejected Mr
Peterson’s pleaded contention that MSDA knew,
or ought to have known, that
the consumption of Vioxx increased the risk of MI. His Honour held that it was
only in September 2004,
when the results of the APPROVe trial became available
and Vioxx was promptly withdrawn from the market, that MSDA knew or ought
have known of the increased relative risk resulting from the consumption of
Nevertheless,
his Honour held that MSDA failed to exercise reasonable care for the safety of
consumers because MSDA had failed to
warn consumers of “a worrisome and
important signal of potential cardiovascular risk associated with Vioxx”
judge’s reasons for judgment (
) at [594]). In this
regard, his Honour held that the November 2001 amendment to the Product
Information (
) should have been, but was not, communicated to Dr
Dickman by a “Dear Doctor” letter. His Honour held that MSDA
failed to exercise reasonable care for Mr Peterson’s safety.
His Honour’s resolution of this issue in the negligence
informed his Honour’s answer to a question posed for the purpose of the
representative proceedings under Pt IVA
of the Federal Court Act.
Nevertheless,
Mr Peterson’s claim in negligence failed. That was because
Dr Dickman gave evidence that the necessary information
was available to
him and that he would have continued to prescribe Vioxx for Mr Peterson, who
would have continued to take it, even
with knowledge of the potential
cardiovascular risk.
Peterson’s claim under s 52 of the TPA also failed. The primary
judge found that MSDA’s marketing of Vioxx was not
misleading or
deceptive. The primary judge concluded that the publication by MSDA of an
amended PI after November 2001 when the
Vioxx Gastrointestinal Outcomes Research
) results had been obtained meant that MSDA’s conduct in
marketing Vioxx was not misleading or deceptive. This conclusion had
consequences both for Mr Peterson and for the representative proceedings.
Further, his Honour found that Dr Dickman had
not been influenced by
MSDA’s marketing, in that he would have prescribed Vioxx for
Mr Peterson in any event. That finding
also has adverse consequences for
Mr Peterson’s claim but not for the representative proceedings.
Peterson’s claim under s 75AD of the TPA against MSDA also failed.
The primary judge held that Vioxx was defective within
the meaning of this
provision, but that MSDA was entitled to the “state of the art”
defence afforded by s 75AK(1)(c)
of the TPA. The primary judge held that
the state of scientific or technical knowledge at the time the drug was supplied
such as to enable the defect, namely the prothrombotic tendency of
Vioxx, to be discovered.
primary judge held that Mr Peterson was entitled to recover damages pursuant to
ss 74B and 74D of the TPA. As to s 74B, Vioxx
was not reasonably fit
for the purpose implicitly made known to MSDA, viz, the safe relief of arthritic
pain, in that an arthritic
pain medicine which involved a relative risk of MI of
2 was not reasonably fit for that purpose. As to s 74D, Vioxx was not of
merchantable
quality because it was reasonable for a consumer to expect that a
medication for the relief of arthritic pain would not involve a
relative risk of
the basis of the success of Mr Peterson’s claims under ss 74B and
74D, an award of damages was made in his favour in the
amount of $330,465.35.
18 June 2010
the primary judge determined questions relating to the
claims of other class members. Some of these questions raised issues common
those raised in Mr Peterson’s claim. The Schedule of the questions
and his Honour’s answers is attached as Annexure
A to these reasons.
decision has yet been made concerning the entitlements of other class
claims against Merck were dismissed. It is not a party to the appeal to this
Court by MSDA or the cross-appeal by
Mr Peterson.
THE APPEAL AND CROSS-APPEAL
appeals against the decision of the primary judge challenging his Honour’s
conclusions on the issues of causation, negligence
and contravention of
ss 74B and 74D of the TPA. MSDA also contends that his Honour erred in
holding that Vioxx was defective within
the meaning of s 75AD of the
also seeks leave to appeal from the Order by the primary judge on 18 June 2010,
seeking to argue that the primary judge erred
in his determinations of the
questions relating to group members. Leave to appeal is required because each
determination is an interlocutory
Peterson cross-appeals against the decision of the primary judge challenging his
Honour’s conclusions in relation to:
The availability
of the “state of the art” defence in s 75AK(1)(c) of the TPA;
The rejection of
the alternative mechanism by which Vioxx might have contributed to
Mr Peterson’s MI. The relevance of this
variant mechanism is for the
representative proceedings involving persons who had ceased to take Vioxx some
time before suffering
Honour’s findings of primary fact are not challenged in either the appeal
or the cross-appeal save in relation to his Honour’s
rejection of the
alternative mechanism by which the consumption of Vioxx might have contributed
to Mr Peterson’s MI by the
absorption of thrombi into endothelial plaque.
In the interests of accuracy, we propose to address the parties’ arguments
on the issues raised in the appeal and cross-appeal with close attention to the
specific findings of primary fact made by his Honour.
Before we turn to this
discussion, it is necessary in the interests of coherence of exposition to
summarise more broadly the primary
judge’s reasons relating to the
evidence of the development and investigation of Vioxx, and the suggested bases
for concluding
that the consumption of Vioxx caused Mr Peterson’s
heart attack. We acknowledge that this approach will result in a degree
repetition of his Honour’s findings and of the evidence on which they were
based, but that cannot be avoided having regard
to the complexity of the terms
and hypotheses with which his Honour was obliged to grapple.
THE PRIMARY JUDGE’S REASONS
primary judge set out some background material concerning cyclooxygenase
) in the Reasons at [6]-[7]. COX is an enzyme that is ubiquitous in
the body and, depending on its location in the body, the action
of COX may be
constitutive (that is, operating all the time) or inducible (that is, operating
only in response to particular stimuli).
In the vicinity of arthritic joints,
COX is induced by the pathological state of the joint but, in a situation
in which the condition
is chronic, the action of the enzyme is effectively
continuous. In the stomach and duodenum, COX operates constitutively as a
factor that helps the stomach and duodenum resist being digested by
their own corrosive acid juice. In the vasculature, COX is involved
production of thromboxane A
thromboxane
), a clotting
and vaso-constricting agent. In the endothelium of blood vessels it is involved
in the production of prostacyclin,
an anti-coagulant and vaso-dilating agent.
In 1990 it was discovered that there are in fact two isoforms of COX; one of
constitutive (COX-1) and the other inducible (COX-2). Vioxx
(containing the active ingredient rofecoxib) inhibits only COX-2. As
referred to as a COX-2 inhibitor or a coxib.
[477]-[478], his Honour set out the basic steps in the development of
cardio-vascular thrombotic (
) disease as
In terms with which the other cardiologists did not disagree, Prof Vaughan
laid out the basic steps in the development of CVT disease
1) injury to the arterial wall; 2) the adherence and migration into
the vessel wall of monocytes (a certain type of cell); 3)
oxidized LDL (low-density, or “bad” cholesterol) into the arterial
wall; 4) progression of lipid accumulation
within the atherosclerotic
plaque and development of a necrotic, lipid core; 5) destabilization and
thinning of the plaque’s
fibrous cap overlying the necrotic, lipid core;
6) rupture or erosion of the fibrous cap exposing the highly prothrombotic
of the plaque to the circulating blood; and 7) thrombosis and
resulting ischemia.
Prof Zipes explained that there were “roughly four ... main
stages” of atherosclerosis:
The first stage for the development of atherosclerosis is that of endothelial
injury, or damage to the inner cellular lining of the
blood vessel wall (by
hypertension, shear stress, toxins like nicotine, diabetes, etc.). The damaged
inner lining attracts the adherence
of white blood cells to its surface ...
The second stage is one of fatty streak formation. The LDL cholesterol
cholesterol) penetrates the endothelium ... and accumulates
in the vessel wall. When this LDL is oxidized as a result of its penetration
into the arterial wall ... it sets up an inflammatory reaction in the
endothelium, attracting more white blood cells that ingest
the oxidized LDL.
These white blood cells called monocytes become “foam cells” after
they ingest the LDL, and are the
hallmark of the fatty streak ... These cells
also elaborate a host of inflammatory mediators ... that promote inflammation in
fatty streak, regulate the direction, amplitude and duration of the immune
process, and contribute to the progression of the lesion
and formation of a
plaque. The third stage is one of fibrous cap formation, which is probably the
first step in the development
of a complex lesion that can cause an acute
thrombosis ... that can close off an artery. This fibrous cap prevents the
that has accumulated beneath it from contacting the blood pool. But
the cap is susceptible to damage from activated white blood
cells that secrete
enzymes which weaken the collagen in the cap. Inflammation, occurring for
reasons that are poorly understood,
appears to play an important role in the
activation of white blood cells that later undermine the fibrous cap. The final
the development of a complicated atheroma, which typically occurs when
rupture of the weakened fibrous cap causes the blood to come
into contact with
the lipid core, causing the formation of a thrombus. Physical disruption
of the atherosclerotic plaque, due to
fracture of the fibrous cap or superficial
erosion of the intima, commonly causes acute thrombosis. Thrombus formation
the blood vessel, interrupting blood flow to the perfused organ, in
this case the heart. If the thrombus dissolves spontaneously,
it may cause a
healing response that thickens the fibrous cap, making it bulge into the lumen
of the artery and further restricting
blood flow by the atheroma. If the
thrombus persists and completely occludes the vessel, the downstream myocardium
dies due to lack
of blood flow, which is the definition of
is uncontroversial that the production of thromboxane is the work of COX-1.
A question before the primary judge was the work
Mr Peterson contended that the production in the endothelium of
prostacyclin is the work of COX-2. Accordingly, he contended
blocks the production of endothelial prostacyclin in blood vessels.
The theory which became known as the “FitzGerald
hypothesis”
was that Vioxx inhibited the synthesis of prostacyclin.
The FitzGerald Hypothesis
FitzGerald hypothesis was named after Dr Garret FitzGerald, an author of a
publication in which the results of what was known
as Protocol 023 were
published. The authors concluded that the extrarenal (outside the kidney)
biosynthesis of prostacyclin was
mediated by COX-2 (Reasons at [46]). The
authors suggested several explanations as to how it might be that COX-2 mediated
the production
of vascular prostacyclin. His Honour noted at
However, it was the realisation that COX-2 may be responsible for the production
of endothelial prostacyclin that effectively initiated
the scientific debate
that lies at the heart of this proceeding. The authors of this article raised
the question whether the selective
inhibition of COX-2, by turning off the
production of prostacyclin in circumstances where it might otherwise be induced
while leaving
the production of thromboxane unaffected, might have a
prothrombotic tendency.
description of a possible mechanism appeared in the considerations of the Merck
Board of Scientific Advisers, as reported by the
primary judge at [53]. The
possibility was described as follows:
After the rupture of a coronary plaque, factors which regulate thrombus
formation and which regulate the occurrence of ischemic ventricular
fibrillation
are critical to the clinical outcome. The initial thrombus at the site of
plaque-rupture is platelet-rich and is labile.
Accordingly, it is susceptible
to any anti-aggregatory influences... Prostacyclin is the most potent endogenous
inhibitor of platelet-aggregation,
and studies in animal models indicate
that its participation in inhibiting platelet activation is substantial. ... Not
prostacyclin inhibit platelet activation, but it also potently
inhibits the development of ischemic ventricular fibrillation in the
model of [MI].
Board noted that it had been found that Vioxx reduces the urinary excretion of a
prostacyclin metabolite and concluded that while
the data were not obligatory to
any conclusion, they should be taken as a basis for a hypothesis that should be
“actively pursued”
in order to understand any possible influences of
a COX-2 inhibitor on coronary morbidity and mortality.
simply, the FitzGerald hypothesis, as it was advanced on behalf of Mr Peterson,
was as follows:
Vioxx did not
cause atherosclerosis or plaque rupture (Reasons at [771]).
Vioxx causes the
build-up of lipid material within the arteries.
Many people
suffer from atherosclerosis that does not result in any negative medical event.
This can be referred to as “silent
atherosclerosis”.
Vioxx did not
participate in or cause the rupture of an atherosclerotic plaque and caused it
to separate from the blood vessels.
Vioxx did not
cause the material to aggregate. Mr Peterson’s contention was that
the explanation for a MI was that Vioxx prevented
the synthesis of endothelial
prostacyclin in blood vessels, leaving the production of platelet thromboxane
unaffected. Prostacyclin
acts to prevent the aggregation of the platelets and
also acts as a vaso-dilator, to expand the lumen of the blood vessels. If this
action is successful, there is not sufficient aggregation to cause a thrombotic
event, or the blood vessel expands so that the aggregated
plaque does not
occlude the blood vessel.
While it can be accepted that a
free and uninhibited production of prostacyclin does not necessarily prevent
occlusion and MI, the
theory is that there is a range of cases where the
prostacyclin could succeed in breaking down the aggregation and/or dilating a
blood vessel, so that MI did not occur. Mr Peterson contended that he was
one of those cases. The absence of prostacyclin meant
that where there was
an aggregation of platelets and the consequent clotting of blood, the mitigating
effects of prostacyclin being
absent rendered it more likely that the
aggregation had thrombotic consequences. The consequences were cardiovascular
FitzGerald hypothesis is, in essence, that if the production of endothelial
prostacyclin is blocked but that of platelet thromboxane
is unaffected, an
imbalance will result with possible thrombotic outcomes. The thesis was
predicated upon the blockage of the production
of endothelial prostacyclin.
That is, the presence of COX-2 in the endothelium was a necessary precondition
to the validity of the
FitzGerald hypothesis (Reasons at [487]). On the balance
of probabilities, the primary judge was not satisfied (Reasons at [495]
[523]) that the presence of COX-2 in the endothelium was not
The VIGOR study
1998, Merck commenced the design of a major study into Vioxx,
the VIGOR trial. It was a prospective, double-blind
study of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (Reasons at [72]). The VIGOR trial
compared Vioxx with naproxen, a traditional non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug
that had been on the market for 30 years. The trial tested
the gastrointestinal effects. Four percent of the patients in the overall
cohort were indicated for the regular taking of low-dose aspirin for
cardioprotection. This meant, as the primary judge found at
[123], that these
patients had medical histories involving,
A disproportionate number of the adverse effects were experienced by these
patients. For example, some 38% of MIs were suffered
within this 4% of the
group. Patients in the Vioxx arm of the VIGOR trial had five times as many MIs
as patients in the naproxen
arm, with a disproportionate number of MIs occurring
in patients in the Vioxx sample already at risk of elevated heart attack, as
evidenced by their taking of aspirin. Four percent of the Vioxx cohort was
assessed as being at elevated risk of heart attack.
12 January 2001 Merck applied to amend the PI for Vioxx with respect to the
VIGOR data. The PI amendment was approved by the
Therapeutic Goods
Administration (
) and was amended to incorporate the results of the
VIGOR study on 16 November 2001. An amendment to the Vioxx PI was made on
January 2002 to add information about the VIGOR study for patients with
rheumatoid arthritis and the TGA approved a new indication
for Vioxx for
rheumatoid arthritis.
the Precautions section of the PI as approved on 16 November 2001, a new
subheading was introduced, “Aspirin”, under
which it was stated that
Vioxx was not a substitute for aspirin for cardiovascular prophylaxis because of
its lack of effect on platelets.
There was also a reference to cardiovascular
effects of Vioxx in the terms of the VIGOR study which included the statement
The difference in anti platelet activity between some COX-l inhibiting NSAIDs
and COX-2 selective inhibitors may be of clinical significance
in patients at
risk of thrombo-embolic events. Physicians should assess the importance of
these data for an individual patient at
risk for cardiovascular thrombo-embolic
events, if considering long term therapy with a COX-2 selective inhibitor.
Mr Peterson
argued that, at least after the VIGOR results were submitted by MSDA to the TGA
on 11 April 2000 or, at the very latest,
when the VIGOR study results were
published in the
New England Journal of Medicine
on 23 November
2000, MSDA knew that the use of Vioxx resulted in an increased risk of MI. At
trial, Mr Peterson relied on the fact
that MSDA knew the VIGOR results by
the end of March 2000, before the time when it began marketing Vioxx in
Australia in February
2001 (Reasons at [229]). He made no complaint about the
fact that MSDA began marketing Vioxx.
explained the results of the VIGOR trial as demonstrating not an increased risk
caused by Vioxx, which it said was not prothrombotic,
but rather as the effect
of the removal of the cardioprotective action of naproxen, which was said to
have an “aspirin-like
ability” to inhibit platelet aggregation.
Merck summarised the results of the VIGOR group trial, in part, as follows
In the VIGOR study population, therapy with naproxen was associated with a
reduction in the incidence of thrombotic cardiovascular
serious adverse
experiences. The difference between the treatment groups in the rates of
thrombotic cardiovascular events was due
primarily to a reduction in the
incidence of [MI] in patients treated with
analysis was not that Vioxx caused an increase in MI but that Vioxx did not
provide the cardioprotective effect of
some NSAIDs by reason of the effect of
those NSAIDs on COX-1 and, through that enzyme, on platelet aggregation by its
effect on the
production of thromboxane.
was also relevant, as noted at [127] of the Reasons, that no similar incidence
of increased MI was demonstrated in studies of
other populations, including
patients suffering from osteoarthritis and early Alzheimer’s disease. In
those studies the incidences
of serious thrombotic cardiovascular serious
adverse experiences were comparable between patients who received Vioxx, placebo
comparator non-selective NSAIDs.
Mr Peterson
attacks Merck’s conclusion as indicating some lack of bona fides on the
part of Merck and MSDA. However, it is
clear from his Honour’s analysis
of the results of the VIGOR trial and of Merck’s analysis that he found
that Merck analysed
the results and came to a reasoned conclusion that explained
the results in terms of naproxen protection rather than Vioxx causation.
is no challenge to that finding of the primary judge by Mr Peterson. The
primary judge set out in some detail the various
stages of the analysis of the
VIGOR results. This included not only the variables involved, but also the
theory as to the cardioprotective
effect of NSAIDs that were potent in
antiplatelet effects but which tended to be associated with clinical outcomes
involving bleeding,
compared to Vioxx, which did not have an antiplatelet
effect but had an improved gastrointestinal effect.
explanation for the different mechanisms of action that gave rise to the VIGOR
results concerned the effect on platelet aggregation,
as in the FitzGerald
hypothesis. As his Honour noted at [128], Merck’s analysis was that COX-2
selective compounds such as
Vioxx would not be expected to provide vascular
protective effect similar to those observed following chronic aspirin therapy.
considered whether:
The moderate reductions in the synthesis of prostacyclin without COX-1 mediated
inhibition of platelet aggregation ... observed with
COX-2 selective inhibitors
theoretically could have mildly proaggregatory platelet
However, it was considered that partial inhibition of prostacyclin synthesis
was a less likely explanation for the results of VIGOR
than the potent
anti-aggregatory effect of naproxen, a conclusion contrary to the
FitzGerald hypothesis.
the primary judge noted at [127], Mr Peterson was critical of Merck for
having expressed the VIGOR results as though the question
was whether naproxen
was cardioprotective. That criticism is also made in the appeal.
primary judge considered the evidence of the concerns expressed at the time of
the publication of the results of the VIGOR trial
and concluded, for example at
[156], that while the potential for Vioxx to be prothrombotic was
recognised as real, the consensus
seemed to be that the antiplatelet activity of
naproxen was, to an extent, responsible for the results of the VIGOR trial.
primary judge analysed in detail the various assertions, articles and
explanations offered for the results of the VIGOR study,
both within Merck and
in the literature. His Honour discussed various studies, including a
pooled analysis that was provided to
the Food and Drug Administration
) on 22 May 2002, the results of which MSDA noted (Reasons at [183])
were “most consistent with naproxen having provided a relative
cardioprotective benefit in these studies and argue against a prothrombotic
effect of [Vioxx]”. Some of the published material
contained a reference
to the FitzGerald hypothesis. However, even as at 22 March 2004,
Dr Reicin of Merck interpreted the results
of all relevant studies
including VIGOR as “most consistent with the conclusion that Vioxx was
cardioneutral, whereas naproxen
was cardioprotective” (Reasons at
Honour also dealt with a list of criteria proposed in 1965 by Sir Austin
Bradford Hill (the
Bradford Hill criteria
) by reference to which
questions of causation in epidemiology might conveniently be addressed (Reasons
at [321]). The purpose of
these criteria was to bridge the gap between
association and causation (Reasons at [322]).
results of the VIGOR trial yielded a relative risk of taking the Vioxx rather
than naproxen of 5.00 (1.72, 14.29) in the case
of MI (Reasons at [348]). His
Honour noted (Reasons at [348]) that Professor Celermajer said that the
strength of an association
was often expressed as a relative risk, such that the
higher the relative risk, the more likely the exposure is to be causally linked
to the effect. His Honour noted at [350] that the controversy surrounding the
VIGOR data related not to the apparent strength of
the association indicated by
them, but to one of the Bradford Hill criteria, the seventh criterion, namely
whether the circumstance
that naproxen was the comparator provided a convincing
alternative explanation. His Honour accepted, apparently, that Merck in fact
took the view that the results could and should be explained by the
cardioprotective effect of naproxen rather than by a cardiotoxic
difficulty in drawing definite conclusions from the VIGOR trial is apparent from
the primary judge’s reasons. After examining
the evidence in detail,
including evidence from Merck and from independent cardiologists and
statisticians, his Honour said (Reasons
at [381]) that he was not prepared to
find that it was not only possible but also likely that part of the observed
discrepancy in
the MI results in the VIGOR trial was due to the especially
pronounced beneficial work of naproxen in the context of patients with
systemically inflammatory condition. His Honour also referred to evidence in
which it was concluded that the cardioprotective
effect of naproxen was about 2%
and concluded (Reasons at [383]) that he was not satisfied that the
cardioprotective effect of naproxen
was sufficient to explain the MI data
yielded by the VIGOR trial. The primary judge also referred (Reasons at [385])
dimension of the problem, which was what was described as “the
fragility of the best estimate”, such that when a trial
is dealing with
very low numbers, very subtle shifts have major effects on the best point
estimate. Indeed, in a publication in
September 2004, the authors, who
included Dr FitzGerald, concluded that the combination of some
cardioprotective effect of naproxen
and “the play of chance”
seemed to offer a plausible explanation for the apparent excess risk of MI
in the VIGOR trial. They also said that “[w]hile
other mechanisms cannot
be discounted, there is currently little evidence in humans to support a
prothrombotic effect of coxibs”
(Reasons at [385]). It is pointed out by
MSDA that this is not supportive of the FitzGerald
hypothesis.
The APPROVe study
a study called APPROVe, which commenced in February 2000, a total of 2586
patients with a history of colorectal adenomas were
randomised to either Vioxx
or a placebo. The patients in the study were men with a mean age of 63.6 years.
This study was ongoing
in September 2004. On 23 September 2004 Merck
became aware that the APPROVe External Safety Monitoring Board had observed the
statistically
significant increased risk of CVT events in those taking Vioxx
compared to the placebo. Data from the study led the External Safety
Board for that trial to recommend that the trial be unblinded and that the trial
be discontinued. That recommendation
was accepted. On 30 September 2004
Vioxx was voluntarily withdrawn from the market.
results of that trial were published in 2005. The relative risk of encountering
a CVT event from taking Vioxx rather than a
placebo was 1.92 (1.19, 3.11)
(Reasons at [327]). For MI, the relative risk was 2.53 (1.11, 6.28). At [342]
the primary judge concluded,
after analysing the detailed evidence on the
conclusions that could be drawn from the APPROVe trial, that at the 95%
probability
level the trial established, at least for a population of persons
having the characteristics there studied, that the true relative
risk of a MI
from taking Vioxx in comparison with taking nothing at all, was 1.11 to 6.28.
His Honour also noted the difficulties
of extrapolating from the population of
the APPROVe study to the population at large. At [347] his Honour said that he
was prepared
to accept that the APPROVe results reflect, at the 95% probability
level, the true relative risk of taking Vioxx rather than placebo
persons in the broader population who have the characteristics of the patients
in the trial. However, his Honour also accepted
evidence that there was some
uncertainty as to the generalisability of those results to the population at
the APPROVe study the absolute event rates for MI were 21 events or 0.69 events
per 100 patient years for patients consuming Vioxx,
and nine events or 0.27
events per 100 patient years for patients consuming a
Other meta analyses
a publication in 2006 (
), there was a summary by way of meta
analysis of published and unpublished tabular data from any randomised trial
comparing COX-2
inhibitor use to placebo or traditional NSAIDs. In the placebo
comparison, the authors found a relative risk of 1.42 at the 95%
level (1.13 to 1.78) for serious vascular events for any coxib versus placebo.
They found no evidence of differences
in the relative risk associated with
different coxibs. The overall result was chiefly driven by a difference in the
relative risk
of acute MI at 1.86 (1.33 to 2.59). As his Honour noted (Reasons
at [424]), Mr Peterson relied on the relative risk figures of 1.42
serious vascular events and 1.86 for MI as providing support for his case on
risk. The authors stated the relative risk when
giving the composite results
for the five coxibs being studied. Using the data in Kearney,
Professor Woodward, a witness called
by Mr Peterson, calculated the
relative risk of MI from taking Vioxx. It was 1.74 (1.11, 2.72). At [428], his
Honour stated that:
It was implicit in the cases of both parties, however, that I should accept the
composite figure of 1.42 (1.13, 1.78) as broadly
applicable to
Conclusion on relative risk based on the studies
assess consistency across a broad range of studies, the primary judge set out a
summary of the relative risk figures referred
to in a table (Reasons at
APPROVe extend (Baron)
Kearney (all coxibs)
Kearney (Vioxx) per Woodward
Honour noted at [465] that save for VIGOR (where the comparator was naproxen)
the comparator in each of the other groups of data
was placebo. The point
estimate is between the lower and upper 95% confidence limits. This, as his
Honour said, emphasised that
the statistically correct statement conveyed
by a particular set of figures is that the true relative risk would lie, in 95%
cases, between those limits. As his Honour observed at [466], the higher
figure for the VIGOR results does support the Merck-asserted
[471] his Honour noted the difference in conclusions to be drawn from the
APPROVe results as between the experts. Professors
Zipes and Harper (for
Mr Peterson) were of the view that the risk of MI would be increased by a
factor of about 2.5. Professors
Celermajer and Vaughan (for Merck) did not
agree, with Professor Celermajer’s reading of the results taken as a whole
as yielding
a more typical relative risk figure of about 1.4 (for CVT
[473]-[476] the primary judge considered the appropriate figure to adopt for the
relevant risk for MI. His Honour was not persuaded
that the VIGOR results were
useful in the quantification of the risk. Taken as a whole, his Honour
concluded that the data referred
to in the evidence warranted the generalisation
that, over a population, the consumption of Vioxx increased the risk of MI
a factor of about 2”. His Honour also observed that the data
took no account of issues of mechanism and related to people
generally. As his
Honour said (Reasons at [476]):
The data may have a rather different utility when the circumstances of a
particular person, suffering a particular condition, are
required to be
considered.
The validity of the FitzGerald hypothesis
the primary judge noted at [302], Mr Peterson’s case was opened
substantially by reference to the FitzGerald hypothesis,
although in closing,
Counsel relied primarily on the results of the APPROVe trial for their
submission that the consumption of Vioxx
in fact contributed to the occurrence
of the pleaded cardiovascular conditions, which included MI. Even as at the
date of hearing,
the primary judge noted (Reasons at [304]) that there was no
scientific consensus with respect to the relevant mechanism of action
or as to whether the consumption of Vioxx caused, or involved an increase in
risk of, Mr Peterson’s MI.
FitzGerald hypothesis was important for Mr Peterson’s case on causation
because under the Bradford Hill criteria the third
criterion is the existence of
a plausible biological explanation. MSDA says that the validity of the
FitzGerald hypothesis was “the
essential plank to build Mr
Peterson’s case”, and that Vioxx made the difference between his
suffering MI or not. Mr
Peterson’s case was that the FitzGerald
hypothesis was biologically plausible and provided a reasonable explanation for
observed statistical association between the consumption of Vioxx and
adverse cardiovascular events incurred by the taking of the
COX-2 inhibitor
Vioxx (Reasons at [480]). Mr Peterson says that it was not necessary for him to
establish the FitzGerald hypothesis
as an accepted fact in order to
the primary judge stated at [479], it was the seventh step of Professor
Vaughan’s sequence or the fourth stage referred
to by Professor Zipes, as
set out at [478], where the imbalance induced by the selective inhibition of
COX-2 hypothesised by Dr FitzGerald
and his colleagues was said to have a
biological impact, favouring the development of thrombotic material in the
vasculature.
Celermajer and Vaughan said that they were “not convinced that the
FitzGerald hypothesis [was] biologically relevant
to an understanding of the
pathophysiology of plaque rupture and thrombosis” (Reasons at [480]). The
basic premise of the
FitzGerald hypothesis is that selective inhibition of
COX-2, while sparing COX-1, upsets the critical balance between prostacyclin
thromboxane, thereby increasing the likelihood of thrombosis (Reasons at
as stated earlier, the FitzGerald hypothesis is that Vioxx, as a selective
inhibitor of COX-2 enzyme, affected the balance
between the production of
thromboxane and the protective production of prostacyclin. Thromboxane is a
potent vaso-constricting compound
that is highly active in aggregating platelets
and acts to promote clot formation. Prostacyclin is a vaso-dilator which causes
of the blood vessels and directly antagonises the constricting and
procoagulant effect of thromboxane. The FitzGerald hypothesis
is that Vioxx
increases the risk of clot formation on an atherosclerotic plaque.
[482] and following, the primary judge noted the reservations on the acceptance
of the hypothesis as advanced by Professors Celermajer
and Vaughan. One of the
key assumptions necessary for the FitzGerald hypothesis to be operative is that
COX-2 would need to be present
in the endothelium. As the primary judge noted
at [487], all of the cardiologists agreed that that circumstance was a necessary
precondition to the validity of the hypothesis. His Honour considered the
various opinions and the inferences that the cardiologists
drew from the
available data and said (Reasons at [495]):
Ultimately, there was no satisfactory resolution of the disagreement between
Prof Zipes, on the one hand, and Profs Celermajer and
Vaughan, on the
other hand, with respect to the questions whether COX-2 is present in the
endothelium and, if so, whether it was
responsible for the synthesis of
prostacyclin in an atherosclerotic situation.
Honour said that it did not appear to have been scientifically established that
the prostacyclin has an endothelial source.
However, his Honour concluded
(Reasons at [495]) that:
If the FitzGerald hypothesis is otherwise to be regarded as providing a
plausible biological explanation for the results of the APPROVe
study, I am not
persuaded that it should be disqualified by the established fact that COX-2 is
not present in the atherosclerotic
endothelium.
This does not make it quite clear as to whether his Honour made a positive
finding as to whether the presence of the enzyme was or
was not established.
Honour then observed at [503] that no increase in the generation of platelet
thromboxane consequent upon the administration of
a COX-2 inhibitor had been
seen. His Honour said that such consideration does compromise to an extent
the utility of the FitzGerald
hypothesis, although he could not say that it must
be taken to have been disproven. His Honour concluded by saying (Reasons at
To the extent that the applicant relies on the [FitzGerald] hypothesis as part
of his legal case, however, I would have to say that
the issues discussed in
this part of my reasons justify the non-scientific conclusion that the validity
of the [FitzGerald] hypothesis
is a matter of vigorous controversy amongst the
experts, and that the rationale relied on by opponents of the hypothesis does
to be intelligible, coherent and
by the empirical evidence
to which they point.
[Emphasis added].
submits that, as this conclusion is expressed, the primary judge wrongly shifted
the onus to MSDA and, in any event, his Honour
found that the validity of the
hypothesis could not be accepted. Nevertheless, accepting the opinion of
Professor Harper (Reasons
at [516]), the primary judge then said in summary at
if an outcome
occurs such as a thrombus then clearly the compensatory system has not been
sufficient;
a plaque rupture
is a very strong stimulus to clot formation and therefore the compensatory
system has to be strong to overcome it;
in some plaque
ruptures the stimulus is so strong that nothing can overcome it and,
irrespective of whether a patient is or is not
on Vioxx some plaque ruptures
will clearly lead to a heart attack;
“possible” that some plaques are ruptures that would otherwise not
lead to an event;
Professor Harper: “Vioxx does increase the risk of thrombosis (I am not
convinced that it’s necessarily the FitzGerald
hypothesis) and that that
sometimes leads to an event that otherwise wouldn’t
primary judge repeated at [521] that the FitzGerald hypothesis had not been
scientifically validated. Professors Zipes and Harper
had contended that it was
a biologically plausible explanation for what was observed in APPROVe and
elsewhere. Professors Celermajer
and Vaughan had concluded that the burden
of the evidence was that the FitzGerald hypothesis, as an explanation of the
consequences
of the inhibition of COX-2 in the vasculature, was still no more
than a hypothesis.
assessing the plausibility of the FitzGerald hypothesis as an explanation for
what was observed, his Honour emphasised that it
sought to provide an
explanation for adverse events which occurred only in a small minority of
patients who took Vioxx. From the
study, it could not be said that taking Vioxx
“caused” the endpoints of a CVT event in the sense of giving rise to
as “a direct and inevitable consequence” (Reasons at [522]).
His Honour repeated the fact that there was no scientific
consensus as to the
presence of COX-2 in the endothelium or as to its activity in a situation of
atherosclerosis. As prostacyclin
acts only in the immediate vicinity of
its synthesis, if it were to have an effective anti-aggregatory role in the
platelets, it
would need to be synthesised in the endothelium at, or closely
adjacent to, the point of interest. His Honour repeated that
scientifically
whether this is so remains a matter of hypothesis (Reasons at
[523]). Further, while it was not conclusive, there was no report
increase in the production of platelet thromboxane in response to the inhibition
of COX-2 in the context of an inflamed vasculature
which, his Honour concluded
(Reasons at [524]), would have added to, rather than reduced, the uncertainty
associated with the consequences
in the vasculature of inhibiting COX-2 while
sparing COX-1.
[527] the primary judge emphasised that, whether or not the FitzGerald
hypothesis is valid, “we are not here talking about
absolutes”.
This is highlighted by his Honour’s observation that (Reasons at
In the unmedicated vasculature, the stimulus to platelet aggregation following
plaque rupture
be weak, or it
be strong. A small or large
lead to an occlusion of an
artery more or less immediately, or it
do so later,
in conjunction with other prothrombotic circumstances then existing. However
these factors
work out in the normal case, when the selective
inhibition of COX-2 is
added to the mix
, in Prof Harper’s view
there is now another pro-aggregatory factor which,
in all cases
that much more likely that what would not otherwise have been a CVT event
becomes one and that a CVT event that would in
any event have occurred occurs
[Emphasis added].
It should be noted that this observation concerned the increased risk in the
group of Vioxx takers as a whole and does not deal with
an individual case. The
effect of the FitzGerald hypothesis if valid was as the primary judge pointed
out at [528], to leave the
vasculature with “one less defensive mechanism
than it has in the unmedicated state”. However, there is a continued
existence and importance of the other defensive mechanisms, so that the
inhibition of COX-2 by Vioxx will not necessarily render
thrombotic all events
or circumstances which otherwise would not have been so. As the primary judge
observed (Reasons at [528]):
If the FitzGerald hypothesis is valid, it may be supposed that, over a
population of patients, there will be some for whom the inhibition
of COX-2 will
make a difference, but it seems that there may not be a way of knowing before
the event who those patients will be
or of diagnosing after the event who those
patients were.
middle ground between the experts seemed to be that, if the FitzGerald
hypothesis is valid, there are some stimuli that would
be effectively
counteracted by the compensatory systems as they exist in the unmedicated
vasculature, but where the removal of prostacyclin
by the inhibition of its
synthesis would make a clinical difference. The primary judge noted that,
taking into account the various
combinations and permutations involved in the
FitzGerald hypothesis, “it is not surprising that the studies that have
at the cardiovascular consequences of COX-2 inhibition have produced
varying results” (Reasons at [529]).
was identified as possibly having harmful effects in the:
elevation of
blood pressure;
acceleration of
atherogenesis; and
exaggeration of
the thrombotic response to plaque rupture (the FitzGerald
hypothesis).
primary judge concluded that Vioxx did contribute to hypertension in some people
but not to an extent that it would be outside
the range of contribution by
NSAIDs generally. Cardiologists agreed that the available data as to the effect
of COX-2 inhibition
on the progression of atherosclerosis are conflicting.
was some evidence that Vioxx either had no effect, or had an effect by way of
reduction, on the development of plaque (Reasons
at [536]). Professor Zipes was
of the opinion that Vioxx contributed to the progression of atherosclerosis.
Having considered the
whole of the evidence, his Honour concluded (Reasons at
[541]) that he was not persuaded that the evidence was sufficient to justify
conclusion that Vioxx contributed to the acceleration of atherosclerosis in any
or all of the respects identified by Professor
Zipes. However, his Honour
(Reasons at [542]) seemed to accept the evidence of Professor Harper that,
while there was no evidence
that Vioxx caused
atherosclerosis:
...the pro-thrombotic work of Vioxx most probably contributed to the thickening
of plaque by a series of minor, clinically silent,
events which, over time,
accelerated the process of atherosclerosis.
Professor Harper did not suggest that Vioxx had anything to do with the
process of incorporation into plaques and thus the acceleration
development of atherosclerosis. If the FitzGerald hypothesis was correct,
Vioxx could promote the formation of thrombotic
material over time and thus have
an indirect effect on the acceleration of atherosclerosis.
primary judge concluded that these propositions seemed to be conceptual or
logical rather than empirical and were unsupported
by data. In the result, his
Honour said at [544] that in the
circumstances:
...it would be to overreach the science to conclude that Vioxx accelerated
atherosclerosis, or to infer that the results of the studies
and trials of Vioxx
to which I have referred were given a plausible biological explanation not
merely by the FitzGerald hypothesis
itself but also by a state of affairs in the
vasculature which was assumed, conceptually as it were, the more readily to
that hypothesis were valid.
a detailed assessment of the evidence, including the results of the APPROVe
study, the primary judge said he was “persuaded”
that the FitzGerald
hypothesis does provide (Reasons at [561]):
...a plausible biological explanation for the excess of CVT events, and of [MIs]
particularly, observed in APPROVe.
His Honour said that he should make it clear that this conclusion did not
involve a finding that the FitzGerald hypothesis was valid;
much less did it
involve a finding that, in every person who took Vioxx, the mechanism proposed
by the FitzGerald hypothesis was
active such that any CVT events suffered by
that person must necessarily have been contributed to by Vioxx (Reasons at
[562]). His
Honour repeated that Mr Peterson only sought to establish that
the FitzGerald hypothesis provided a plausible biological explanation
results of APPROVe and the other clinical studies.
primary judge then turned to the questions of whether an association between the
consumption of Vioxx and MIs exists, and whether
the consumption of Vioxx in
fact contributed to Mr Peterson’s condition.
Vioxx and the risk of MI across a population
primary judge repeated that, at the population level, the consumption of Vioxx
increased the risk of MI (Reasons at [568]), and
that the mechanism proposed by
the FitzGerald hypothesis provides a plausible explanation for the MI results of
APPROVe. His Honour
also stated (Reasons at
At the same time, [the FitzGerald hypothesis] provides a rational justification
for exercising caution in the application of population
risk increase data to
every individual.
It may also provide a “more obviously persuasive explanation” for
the increase in risk in the case of patients with symptomatic
atherosclerotic
cardiovascular disease (Reasons at [568]).
Honour found that the consumption of Vioxx increased the risk of suffering MI by
a factor of about 2 (Reasons at [570]). The
primary judge expressed the view
that as a doubling of risk would be regarded as significant by the reasonable
person, it should
therefore be regarded as a material risk. However, his Honour
also observed at [528] that if the FitzGerald hypothesis were valid
population of patients, inhibition of COX-2 will make a difference for some but
there may be no way of knowing before or after
the event who those patients are
or will be.
Vioxx and Mr Peterson’s MI
primary judge outlined Mr Peterson’s own circumstances at [764]-[765].
Mr Peterson was characterised by a number of risk
factors for MI as at
2001, namely hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity and the presence of left
ventricular hypertrophy. He was
highly likely to have had coronary
atherosclerosis that was clinically silent at the time. He was a former smoker,
male and aged
51 years. In December 2003 Mr Peterson suffered chest
pain caused by a plaque rupture in his proximal left anterior descending
artery (Reasons at [759]). He had an MI approximately a week later
when a thrombus or blood clot formed in the ruptured plaque,
completely obstructing the artery (Reasons at [766]). By that time the
risk factors were “slightly improved”.
There were insufficient data
to enable the cardiologists to say whether the consumption of Vioxx by
Mr Peterson had affected his
blood pressure. Mr Peterson did not
submit that his MI occurred because of Vioxx induced blood pressure elevation
(Reasons at [765]).
primary judge noted at [767] that the cardiologists agreed that, in a patient
with multiple risk factors such as Mr Peterson,
there was no way
definitively to determine which risk factor caused the heart attack and, in the
words of Professor Celermajer, there
...no footprint of Vioxx, there is no signature of Vioxx to indicate that a
particular heart attack was a Vioxx heart attack versus
a common garden variety
heart attack you have every day.
His Honour noted that this was the same as saying that Mr Peterson may
have had the very heart attack which he did have at the same
time and at the
same level of seriousness had he not been taking Vioxx.
primary judge referred to the evidence of Professor Zipes who said that the
likelihood of Mr Peterson having an infarction was
increased by taking
Vioxx and that, in his view, “to a reasonable degree of medical
probability Vioxx played a substantial
contributing role” (Reasons at
[768]). Professor Harper expressed the view that Vioxx doubled
Mr Peterson’s risk of
having a heart attack and that “if it is
more than two times then it‘s more likely than not that Vioxx contributed
the heart attack”, and that the data from APPROVe indicated a ratio of
slightly more than 2:1 (Reasons at [768]). This meant,
as the primary judge
observed at [769], that the inference from such a study where the events of
interest were twice as numerous
in the group taking a particular drug as in the
placebo group, half of those in the group taking a particular drug would have
experienced
the event anyway. In this context, the primary judge referred to a
passage from the reasons of Spigelman CJ in
Seltsam Pty Ltd v
[2000] NSWCA 29
(2000) 49 NSWLR 262
, where Spigelman CJ said that
actual persuasion does not require a relative risk in epidemiological studies of
2.0, but that nevertheless,
the closer the ratio approaches 2.0, the greater the
significance that can be attached to the studies for the purposes of drawing
inference of causation in an individual case; that the “strands in the
cable” must be capable of bearing the weight
of the ultimate
a key passage (Reasons at [770]), the primary judge looked to the assessment of
the attribution of a contributory role to Vioxx
in Mr Peterson’s heart
attack. His Honour observed that it came down to interpretation of the data
yielded by the various
trials and studies. His Honour placed some weight on
what he considered to be an implicit endorsement of the validity of the
hypothesis by Professor Harper and the conclusion reached by
Professors Harper and Zipes that the consumption of Vioxx increased
the risk of
Mr Peterson having a heart attack by approximately a factor of 2 (which
they derived from APPROVe). While Professors
Celermajer and Vaughan did not
agree, his Honour seemed to conclude that this was because they could not
come to such a conclusion
of a contribution by Vioxx with “a reasonable
degree of scientific certainty” (Reasons at [770]). The primary
accepted that Vioxx did not cause atherosclerosis and did not cause plaque
rupture (Reasons at [771]). After the events early in
December 2003 when
Mr Peterson experienced plaque rupture, he was, the primary judge said, in
the high risk group referred to in
the APPROVe result in that he had symptomatic
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease, that is, he was in that category
immediately
prior to the MI. The primary judge again turned to the
FitzGerald hypothesis and said that, if valid, it required a potentially
thrombotic environment in the vasculature, which existed for Mr Peterson.
The primary judge then said (Reasons at
I think it likely that [Mr Peterson’s] was a case in which the
absence of prostacyclin in the immediate vicinity of his injured
artery made
some contribution to the formation of the thrombus or thrombi that caused the
occlusion which gave him his heart attack.
I do not find that the heart attack
would not otherwise have occurred: there is no way of knowing whether it would
have. But I
am satisfied that some material contribution was played by the
brake on the synthesis of prostacyclin applied by the inhibition of
therefore by the consumption of Vioxx.
[772] the primary judge again referred to his finding that Vioxx made a material
contribution to Mr Peterson’s heart attack.
The primary judge also
observed that, had he not found that Mr Peterson had been taking Vioxx
continuously, he could not have been
satisfied that it contributed to his
parties in the appeal have focused on [772]. On its face there are some
inconsistencies. The primary judge seems to be applying
the FitzGerald
hypothesis to link the MI with the absence of prostacyclin and the taking of
Vioxx. In other parts of his Honour’s
reasons, he was at pains to say
that the FitzGerald hypothesis needed to provide a plausible explanation but
declined to find it
valid. Without that hypothesis, there was no link between
the absence of prostacyclin and the taking of Vioxx. His Honour’s
conclusion was that it was the absence of prostacyclin that made “some
contribution” to the occlusion.
Mr Peterson
emphasised that Vioxx would not only have affected prostacyclin synthesis but
also the dilation of the blood vessels,
which in turn affects whether a thrombus
occludes the artery. The primary judge did not base his conclusion on that
aspect of the
proposed mechanism and action. What is clear, however, from his
Honour’s reasons is that the primary judge was not able to
find that the
heart attack would not have occurred other than for the taking of Vioxx. The
data did not support that conclusion.
The expert evidence did not support that
conclusion and, as described by the primary judge, the FitzGerald hypothesis,
even if accepted
as valid, did not support that conclusion.
concluded our summary of the primary judge’s findings, we turn to address
the arguments agitated on appeal. The first
of these concerns his
Honour’s conclusions on the issues whether the consumption of Vioxx caused
Mr Peterson’s MI.
Peterson was at risk of suffering a heart attack quite independently of his
consumption of Vioxx. The primary judge said at
[764]-[765]:
The cardiologists said that the applicant’s risk factors for [MI] in 2001
were hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity and the
presence of left ventricular
hypertrophy. He was, the cardiologists agreed, “highly likely to have had
coronary atherosclerosis
that was clinically silent at the time”. In
addition, he was a former smoker, of male gender and aged 51 years. He was
moderate to high risk of a cardiovascular event over the next 5 years.
Prof Harper estimated that risk at 20-25%, and the other
cardiologists took
no issue with that.
Putting aside the possibility of the consumption of Vioxx as such increasing the
risk, the cardiologists agreed that, by December
2003, the applicant’s
risk factors were “slightly improved”. They noted that the
applicant had lost weight and
that his lipid profile had improved, although
still abnormal. They considered that the other risk factors were essentially
The cardiologists were unable to say whether the consumption of
Vioxx had affected the applicant’s blood pressure, as there
insufficient data (only three blood pressure readings having been taken since
the applicant commenced to take Vioxx). I should
add that, although counsel for
the applicant made the general submission that the consumption of Vioxx did lead
to elevated blood
pressure (a subject which I addressed at paras 532-535
above), they did not submit that this occurred in the case of the applicant
himself. In any event, the evidence would be insufficient to sustain any such
finding. Neither, in the applicant’s case,
was there any attention given
to the question whether it was elevated blood pressure that led to his
atherosclerosis as it existed
in December 2003, and thus indirectly
contributed to his heart attack.
primary judge’s ultimate conclusions on the issue of causation are at
[772]-[773]:
As the respondents and their experts pointed out, if valid, the FitzGerald
hypothesis proposes an acute risk of thrombotic outcomes
from the consumption of
Vioxx. That there should be such a risk, however, requires first that
there be a potentially thrombotic
environment in the vasculature. That
environment was, in the applicant’s case, present in December 2003. I
think it likely
that the applicant’s was a case in which the absence of
prostacyclin in the immediate vicinity of his injured artery made some
contribution to the formation of the thrombus or thrombi that caused the
occlusion which gave him his heart attack. I do not find
that the heart attack
would not otherwise have occurred: there is no way of knowing whether it would
have. But I am satisfied that
some material contribution was played by the
brake on the synthesis of prostacyclin applied by the inhibition of COX-2, and
by the consumption of Vioxx.
It is a necessary premise of this finding that the applicant was taking Vioxx,
more or less daily, in the weeks leading immediately
to early December 2003. As
I have found earlier, he was doing so because he had access to Vioxx obtained
under his wife’s
prescription. Had that not been the case, I would not
have been able to find, on the probabilities, that Vioxx made a material
contribution
to the applicant’s heart attack. Here I refer to my
treatment of the cardiologists’ evidence as to the relevance of
pattern of use of Vioxx at paras 548-550 above. While I recognise the
force of Prof Harper’s evidence as set out in para
519 (which provided a
measure of support for Prof Zipes’ more categorical evidence on the same
subject), in the light of my
reasons on mechanism, and given the absence of any
trial data with respect to risk in a situation of discontinuous administration
of the drug, I could not be satisfied that Vioxx would, merely by having been
taken by the applicant continuously down to about (say)
the middle of October
2003, have contributed to what happened on 8 December 2003. In the words
of Spigelman CJ in
, there would then have been insufficient
“strands in the cable” to support such a
the hearing of the appeal, Mr Peterson’s Counsel suggested, initially at
least, that the second last sentence of [772],
which seemed to contradict
the last sentence in that paragraph, was either a reference to the angina attack
which Mr Peterson suffered
in early December, or to an inability on his
Honour’s part to be satisfied, as a matter of scientific fact, that Vioxx
consumption
was a necessary condition for the occurrence of a MI.
These suggestions are less than compelling.
the passage in question, the primary judge was expressly making findings in
relation to a crucial question of fact of importance
Mr Peterson’s causes of action; it is impossible to accept that his
Honour was speaking of a scientific, as opposed
to a legal, conclusion. That
this is so is made clear in the immediately preceding paragraph. At [771], his
Honour said relevantly:
Unlike Prof Celermajer, I am required to make an assessment of the probability
that Vioxx caused or contributed to the applicant’s
heart attack. Here
the actual circumstances of the applicant on 8 December 2003 are important. I
accept the evidence of Prof Vaughan
that Vioxx did not cause atherosclerosis and
did not cause plaque rupture. However, the cardiologists are agreed that the
had clinically silent atherosclerosis in and subsequent to 2001, and
that he experienced plaque rupture in early December 2003.
... However that may
be, the fact is that, after plaque rupture, the applicant was in the high risk
group referred to in the APPROVe
results – he had symptomatic
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. He may have been in that situation
earlier, but on 2
December 2003 he unquestionably
may pause here to observe that the primary judge was correct to recognise that
it was not open to him to decline to make a finding
one way or the other on the
issue of causation. As the High Court said in
Amaca Pty Ltd v Ellis
[2010] HCA 5
(2010) 240 CLR 111
When, as here, medical and scientific examination cannot say whether exposure to
respirable asbestos fibres was a cause of [the deceased’s]
cancer, the
medical practitioner and the scientist have little choice but, as one witness
said at trial, to “take it into consideration
in looking at what
have caused his lung cancer”. In their inquiries, the
uncertainty about cause means that they cannot “exclude it from
The courts’ response to uncertainty arising from the absence of knowledge
must be different from that of the medical practitioner
or scientist. The
courts cannot respond to a claim that is made by saying that, because science
and medicine are not now able to
say what caused [the deceased’s] cancer,
the claim is neither allowed nor rejected. The courts must decide the claim and
dismiss it or hold the defendant responsible in
is not possible to accept the suggestion put on Mr Peterson’s behalf that
his Honour was referring in [772] to the chest
pains suffered by Mr Peterson in
early December 2003. His Honour’s findings were directed expressly to the
heart attack which
was the damage in respect of which Mr Peterson sues. To
accept this argument would mean that his Honour did not make a finding on
crucial issue of causation.
for Mr Peterson ultimately submitted, possibly in the alternative to their
earlier submissions, that the last two sentences
of [772] were not
self-contradictory and that his Honour in [772] was making a finding that Vioxx
made a material contribution to
the occurrence of the heart attack even though
he could not find that, but for the Vioxx, the heart attack would not have
On this view, his Honour was satisfied on the balance of
probabilities that Vioxx made a contribution to the formation of a thrombus
sufficiently large to occlude the blood vessel to the heart, but was not
satisfied that a thrombus of the necessary size would not
have developed without
the prothrombotic agency of Vioxx. We consider that this understanding of his
Honour’s conclusions
is correct. It is consistent with his Honour’s
observation at [527] of the Reasons (set out at [68] above), and with his
references to evidence which he regarded as important. The
primary judge said at [519]:
Prof Harper’s response ... because of its importance, should be set out in
full. He said:
In any system there is always [a] compensatory system but if an outcome occurs
such as a thrombus then clearly the compensatory system
hasn’t been
sufficient. I think in the setting that we are describing a plaque rupture is a
very strong stimulus to clot formation
and therefore you need – the
compensatory system has to be strong to overcome it. But the degree of stimulus
depends on –
not all plaque ruptures are the same so in some plaque
ruptures the stimulus is so strong because of exposure of collagen, et cetera,
that nothing can overcome it, and irrespective of whether a patient is or
isn’t on Vioxx some plaque ruptures will clearly
lead to a heart attack.
But it’s possible that some plaques are ruptures that would otherwise not
lead to an event. If the
stimulus for thrombosis is slightly more, is slightly
greater, then in that particular case the thrombus will occur, and my
is that Vioxx does increase the risk of thrombosis. I am not convinced
that it’s necessarily the FitzGerald hypothesis, and
that that sometimes
leads to an event that otherwise wouldn’t
The primary judge added at [519] the comment that:
The sense of what Prof Harper most recently said in this passage would have
been more accurately rendered in transcript as “...
my concept is that
Vioxx does increase the risk of thrombosis (I am not convinced that it’s
necessarily the FitzGerald hypothesis)
and that that sometimes leads to an event
that otherwise wouldn’t occur.”
for Mr Peterson submitted that his Honour’s findings of ultimate fact were
sufficient to sustain the judgment. Counsel
for MSDA submitted that the primary
judge’s express refusal to find that Mr Peterson’s heart attack
would not have happened
but for the taking of Vioxx meant that Mr
Peterson’s case should have been dismissed for want of an essential
factual finding,
namely, that it was more probable than not that the consumption
of Vioxx caused or materially contributed to the occurrence of his
consider that the submission for MSDA must be accepted. Moreover, in our
opinion, the primary judge’s findings of primary
fact do not afford a
sufficient basis on which we should go further than his Honour and conclude that
the consumption of Vioxx was
a necessary condition of Mr Peterson’s
proceed now to explain our reasons for these conclusions. First, we will
discuss the legal principles relating to causation;
we will then discuss the use
of epidemiological studies and then we will discuss his Honour’s findings
of primary fact.
Causation: The Test
Chappel v Hart
(1998) 195 CLR 232 at [27] McHugh J
...If a wrongful act or omission results in an increased risk of injury to the
plaintiff and that risk eventuates, the defendant’s
conduct has materially
contributed to the injury that the plaintiff suffers whether or not other
factors also contributed to that
injury occurring.
This statement was approved in
Naxakis v Western General Hospital
[1999] HCA 22
(1999) 197 CLR 269
Seltsam v McGuiness
at [107]-[108] and [119]-[120], Spigelman CJ
emphasised that proof that “the risk eventuated” in the specific
suffered by the plaintiff is part of the plaintiff’s burden, and
that this burden is not discharged merely by showing an increased
risk of injury
by reason of the defendant’s conduct: “Whether or not the increased
risk ‘eventuated’, is
the issue which must be determined”.
It must be shown that “Y had happened
(emphasis in original).
is the effect of the authorities on the test for causation under the common law
in Australia. The position was summarised recently
Tabet v Gett
240 CLR 537
at [111]-[113]. Kiefel J, with whom Hayne, Crennan and Bell
JJ agreed, said:
The common law requires proof, by the person seeking compensation, that the
negligent act or omission caused the loss or injury constituting
the damage. All
that is necessary is that, according to the course of common experience, the
more probable inference appearing from
the evidence is that a defendant’s
negligence caused the injury or harm. “More probable” means no more
upon a balance of probabilities, such an inference might reasonably
be considered to have some greater degree of likelihood; it does
not require
The “but for” test is regarded as having an important role in the
resolution of the issue of causation, although more
as a negative criterion than
as a comprehensive test. The resolution of the question of causation has been
said to involve the common
sense idea of one matter being the cause of another.
But it is also necessary to understand the purpose for making an inquiry about
causation and that may require value judgments and policy
Once causation is proved to the general standard, the common law treats what is
shown to have occurred as certain. The purpose of
proof at law, unlike science
or philosophy, is to apportion legal responsibility. That requires the courts,
by a judgment, to “reduce
to legal certainty questions to which no other
conclusive answer can be given”. The result of this approach is that when
or damage is proved to have been caused by a defendant’s act or
omission, a plaintiff recovers the entire loss (the “all
or nothing”
[Footnotes omitted].
“but for” test serves, in this field of discourse, as a negative
criterion. That is to say, unless the defendant’s
actionable conduct is
shown to be a necessary condition of the plaintiff’s injury, the
plaintiff’s claim will not succeed.
Amaca v Ellis
[11]-[12], it was accepted that a plaintiff must show on the balance of
probabilities that the actionable conduct of the defendant
was a necessary
condition of the occurrence of the harm in respect of which the plaintiff claims
damages. It is true, as Counsel
for Mr Peterson pointed out, that this
rule was not the subject of argument in
Amaca v Ellis
; but it is also
true that this rule represents the law in Australia binding on all courts below
the High Court.
some countries which share Australia’s common law inheritance this rule
has been relaxed in recent years. In
Evans v Queanbeyan
[2011] NSWCA 230
Allsop P explained how, in the
jurisprudence of Canada and the United Kingdom, the concept of
“material contribution”
to injury may mean something different in
some contexts from its meaning in Australian law. In some cases, a material
contribution
to an event may be shown by evidence of an increase in the risk of
the event even though it is not possible to say that the event
would not have
occurred but for the conduct which gave rise to the increase in risk. Allsop P
said (at [23]-[24]):
It can be accepted that in
Resurfice Corp v Hanke
at 342-343 [24]-[25],
the Supreme Court of Canada expressed the framework for “material
contribution” in the absence
of a positive conclusion from the
“but-for” test as follows:
However, in special circumstances, the law has recognized exceptions, to the
basic ‘but for’ test, and applied a ‘material
contribution’ test. Broadly speaking, the cases in which the
‘material contribution’ test is properly applied
involve two
requirements.
First, it must be impossible for the plaintiff to prove that the
defendant’s negligence caused the plaintiff’s injury
‘but for’ test. The impossibility must be due to factors that
are outside of the plaintiff’s control;
for example, current limits of
scientific knowledge. Second, it must be clear that the defendant breached a
duty of care owed to
the plaintiff, thereby exposing the plaintiff to an
unreasonable risk of injury, and the plaintiff must have suffered that form of
injury. In other words, the plaintiff’s injury must fall within the
ambit of the risk created by the defendant’s breach.
In those exceptional
cases where these two requirements are satisfied, liability may be imposed, even
though the ‘but for’
test is not satisfied, because it would offend
basic notions of fairness and justice to deny liability by applying a ‘but
Further, it can be accepted that the House of Lords and now the United Kingdom
Supreme Court has modified the common law in the United
Kingdom by accepting
that, at least as a special rule in mesothelioma claims, fairness and justice
demand that the factual link between
the wrongful act and the harm to the
plaintiff need only be a wrongful exposure of the plaintiff by the defendant to
an amount of
asbestos that would materially increase the risk of mesothelioma:
Fairchild; Barker v Corus;
Sienkiewicz
Sienkiewicz
, the statements of principle may also be seen not to be
limited to mesothelioma.
P went on to note the policy considerations which led to the adoption overseas
of a rule that increased risk may itself be
sufficient to establish a material
contribution for the purposes of causation. His Honour said at
...[W]hat was common to the several views of their Lordships in
was the necessity to depart from the common law’s usual rule of the
need for proof on the balance of probabilities in circumstances
where it could
be unjust for there to be no recovery. See in particular
[32] per Lord Bingham of Cornhill, 69 [40] per Lord Nicholls of Birkenhead,
73 [56] per Lord Hoffmann and 112 [155] per Lord
Rodger of Earlsferry. These
views reflected the expression of the matter by Justice (now Chief Justice)
McLachlin at the commencement
of an article written by her Ladyship in 1998,
“Negligence Law - Proving the Connection” in N J Mullany and A M
Torts Tomorrow: A Tribute to John Fleming
(LBC Information
Services, Sydney 1998). The foundational legal and moral premise that can be
and in the introductory comments in the above article
is that tort law, as an aspect of the rule of law, is concerned with righting
wrongful conduct. If self-evident wrongs (so characterised by legitimate human
perceptions) are not recognised by the law’s
rules, and thus go
unremedied, people who legitimately feel themselves victims will be left with a
sense of injustice. A legitimate
sense of injustice should not be the product
of the rule of law.
The avowed change to causal principle by the House of Lords that materially
increasing the risk of injury was sufficient factual
tortious involvement for
causation (or attribution of responsibility) to be established was narrowly
confined by all their Lordships
: at 40 [2] and 55 [21] per
Lord Bingham, 70 [43] per Lord Nicholls, 74 [61] per Lord Hoffmann, 91 [108] per
Lord Hutton and 118
[170] per Lord Rodger. Crucial to that confinement were
factors such as the causal element being singular (only exposure to asbestos)
and the inability of medical science to explain cause in terms of a balance of
probabilities.
Further illumination of the policy-based change to the common law in
can be seen from the lively debate in the judgments in
Barker v Corus
as to what was, in fact, decided in
Barker v Corus
was the extent of several liability of the
wrongdoers who had exposed the plaintiff to the asbestos, causing a material
in risk of contracting mesothelioma. Though all their Lordships (with a
caveat by Lord Rodger:
Barker v Corus
at 610 [100]-[102]) came to the
view that the exceptional approach in
should extend to
circumstances where not all the exposure was tortiously caused by the
defendants, a restriction was placed on the
principle being that there must be
one causative agent:
Barker v Corus
at 587 [24] per Lord Hoffmann (his
Lordship recanting his view in
that this limitation was
unprincipled), 599 [64] per Lord Scott of Foscote, 611 [104] per Lord Walker of
Gestingthorpe and 615 [121]
per Baroness Hale of Richmond. Save for Lord
Rodger, all were agreed that the extent of responsibility of individual
should be measured by reference to the extent to which they had
increased the risk, based on the respective length and intensity
of exposure:
Barker v Corus
at 589-590 [35]-[36] per Lord Hoffmann, 599 [62] per Lord
Scott, 612 [109] per Lord Walker and 616 [126] per Baroness Hale. The
recognising that it was justice and fairness that had given rise to the
exceptional rule, thought that justice and fairness
should limit the
defendants’ respective liabilities by reference to the wrongful exposure.
Lord Rodger dissented on this point
- all defendants were liable in full, the
change in rule in
being a relaxation of the rules of causation
- thus each caused the damage.
At this point, the Parliament intervened with the
Compensation Act 2006
(UK), which reflected Lord Rodger’s view in
Barker v Corus
to the responsibility of defendants in mesothelioma cases, and not the
majority’s view of fairness.
The above discussion of
Fairchild and Barker v Corus
reveals, at once,
the policy questions involved in any conclusion that increasing risk is
sufficient for a conclusion of causation
or causal responsibility or legal
responsibility. Such policy questions are a matter for the High Court, not this
P summarised the current position in Australia as follows, at
...Subject to the views of the High Court in respect of any development of the
common law or to the operation of any legislation,
it can be concluded that at
common law, as a general proposition, the increasing of risk of harm by a
tortious act is, alone, insufficient
for a conclusion of causation by material
contribution to that harm or for a conclusion of responsibility in law for that
respectfully agree with Allsop P.
rule that a plaintiff must establish as a necessary condition of recovery that
he or she would not have suffered loss but for
the defendant’s actionable
misconduct is deeply rooted in the policy of the common law that one person
should not be liable
for the loss suffered by another unless the plaintiff can
establish that the defendant’s actionable conduct caused the
plaintiff’s
loss. It is not open to this Court to decide that we should
no longer adhere to this rule and that a different and “better”
should henceforth be applied. This Court must proceed on the footing that
for Mr Peterson to show that the consumption of Vioxx
materially contributed to
his MI, in the sense relevant in Australian law, he is obliged to show that his
consumption of Vioxx was
a necessary condition for the occurrence of the heart
attack on 8 December 2003. To say that the consumption of Vioxx was, for
“in the mix” of possible causes is not enough in this
regard. As Beazley JA said in
Bendix Mintex Pty Ltd v Barnes
at 339, the onus of proof of causation “is not discharged by
establishing that a particular matter cannot be excluded as a
cause of the
conclude that his Honour’s ultimate findings of fact are not sufficient,
as a matter of Australian law, to sustain the determination
of the issue of
causation in Mr Peterson’s favour. We also consider that the conclusion
of ultimate fact necessary to support
such a finding is not open on his
Honour’s findings of primary fact and we now turn to explain why we take
Causation: Epidemiology as a strand in the proof of causation
is desirable to begin by referring to the legal principles governing the scope
of the legitimate use of epidemiological evidence
in relation to proof of
causation. We begin with the proposition that proof of what may be expected to
happen in the usual case
is of no value unless it is proved that the particular
applicant is indeed “the usual case”. In
State Government
Insurance Commission (South Australia) v Laube
(1984) 37 SASR 31
The use of statistical probabilities in legal proof has been the subject of much
learned writing. I need refer only to Glanville
The Mathematics of
[1979] Crim. L.R. 297
; L. Jonathan Cohen,
The Logic of Proof
[1980] Crim. L.R. 91
; Richard Eggleston,
The Probability Debate
Crim. L.R. 678
and the other contributions to the topic in [1980] Crim. L.R. I
refer also to Eggleston,
Evidence Proof and Probability
In the article referred to above, in [1979] Crim. L.R. at p. 305
Professor Glanville Williams refers to a rule of law relating to
“that evidence should focus on the defendant”. ... I am clearly of
the opinion that the statistical fact that
a particular proposition is true of
the majority of persons cannot of itself amount to legal proof on the balance of
probabilities
that the proposition is true of any given
individual.
Seltsam v McGuiness
, Spigelman CJ examined at length the significance of
epidemiological evidence for the resolution of the issue of causation. He
(at [89] and [98]) that epidemiological studies are evidence of
possibility which may, alone or in combination with other evidence,
causation, in a specific case, on the balance of probabilities. Spigelman CJ
said at [118]-[120]:
The issue in the present case is whether an increased risk
materially contribute to the injury actually
There is a tension between the suggestion that any increased risk is sufficient
to constitute a “material contribution”,
and the clear line of
authority that a mere possibility is not sufficient to establish causation for
legal purposes. The latter
is too well established to be qualified by the
former. The reconciliation between the two kinds of references is to be found
the fact that, as in
Chappel v Hart
and in the cases that suggest the
former, the actual risk had materialised. The “possibility” or
“risk” that
X might cause Y had in fact eventuated, not in the sense
that X happened and Y had also happened, but that it was undisputed that
The epidemiological evidence in the present case can be expressed in terms of
“increased risk”. However, in its application
to determining
causation in the specific case of the respondent that evidence never rises above
the level of a possibility. Whether
or not the increased risk
“eventuated”, is the issue which must be determined. The
respondent’s reliance on the
passage from McHugh J was, in my opinion,
[Emphasis in original].
Seltsam v McGuiness
at [121]-[137], Spigelman CJ reviewed the United
States jurisprudence in relation to the legitimate use of epidemiological
The use by American courts of relative risk established by epidemiological
studies for purposes of inferring causation in an individual
case, is set out in
the following extract from the Federal Judicial Centre’s,
on Scientific Evidence
The civil burden of proof is described most often as requiring the fact finder
to “believe what is sought to be proved ...
is more likely true than not
true” ... The relative risk from an epidemiological study can be adapted
to this 50 per cent plus
standard to yield a probability or likelihood that
an agent caused an individual’s disease. ... The threshold for concluding
that an agent was more likely the cause of a disease than not is a relative risk
greater than 2.0. Recall that a relative risk of
1.0 means that the agent has no
effect on the incidence of disease. When the relative risk reaches 2.0, the
agent is responsible
for an equal number of cases of disease as all other
background causes. Thus, a relative risk of 2.0 implies a 50 per cent likelihood
that an exposed individual’s disease was caused by the agent. A relative
risk greater than 2.0 would permit an inference that
an individual
plaintiff’s disease was more likely than not caused by the implicated
agent. A substantial number of courts
in a variety of toxic substance cases
have accepted this reasoning.
reviewed the case law in the United States, Spigelman CJ concluded at
[135]- [137]:
Some of the American cases indicate that the [relative risk] of 2.0 should not
be applied as a rigid mathematical formula. Others
appear to apply it in that
The predominant position in Australian case law is that a balance of
probabilities test requires a court to reach a level of actual
persuasion. This
process does not involve a mechanical application of
probabilities...
In Australian law, the test of actual persuasion does not require
epidemiological studies to reach the level of a relative risk of
2.0, even where
that is the only evidence available to a court. Nevertheless, the closer the
ratio approaches 2.0, the greater the
significance that can be attached to the
studies for the purposes of drawing an inference of causation in an individual
“strands in the cable” must be capable of bearing the
weight of the ultimate inference.
difficulty, as a matter of legal policy in the way of adopting the rule of thumb
adopted in the United States cases, is that it
is apt to mandate an award of
compensation to applicants who have not, in truth, been injured by the
respondent. That is because
those applicants who were actually injured by
causes other than the respondent’s actionable conduct will be able to
compensation because, for them too, a relative risk of greater than 2
can be said to imply probability of greater than 50% that the
respondent’s
actionable conduct was the cause of their loss.
should also be borne in mind that, while a relative risk of 2 might imply a 50%
probability that the risk has come home in a typical
case, a relative risk of
less than 2 would imply a probability of less than 50%, that is to say less
probable than not. The primary
judge’s finding of relative risk was of
“about 2”. And in any event the strength of that finding as a
Mr Peterson’s case is problematic because of the other
candidates as causes of his injury. Further, the absence of a clear
appreciation of the level of absolute risk to Mr Peterson from the actionable
conduct of Merck and MSDA in comparison with those
other candidates detracts
from the force of the circumstantial case which he seeks to mount.
Amaca v Ellis
at [62], the High Court emphasised that the significance of
an epidemiological study depends upon whether the plaintiff is a typical
of the population which is the subject of the study. Their Honours
As explained at the commencement of these reasons, there being no direct
evidence about what actually caused Mr Cotton’s cancer,
plaintiff’s case that the epidemiological evidence established facts which
“positively suggest[ed], that is
to say provide[d] a reason ... for
thinking it likely” that, in exposing Mr Cotton to respirable asbestos
fibres, the negligence
of each defendant was a cause of his cancer. To draw an
inference about causation from what was established by the epidemiological
studies, it would be necessary to decide whether the particular case under
consideration should be treated as conforming to the pattern
described by the
epidemiological studies. Absent evidence which suggests that the individual may
stand apart from the ordinary, there
may be sufficient reason to assume
conformity, but whether or not that is so, it is important to recognise that the
first step that
must be taken, if an inference is to be drawn from
epidemiological studies, is to relate the results of studies of populations to
the particular case at hand. That step is not
inevitable.
[Footnotes omitted].
this case, as has been seen, there was a clear basis for concluding that
Mr Peterson does indeed stand apart from the ordinary
case. His personal
circumstances were such that they afford a ready explanation for the occurrence
of his injury independent of
the possible effects of Vioxx. The strength of the
epidemiological evidence as a strand in the cable of circumstantial proof is
seriously diminished by this consideration. The epidemiological studies do not
provide assistance in resolving the question whether
it was the risk posed by
Vioxx, either alone or in combination with the other candidates, which did
eventuate in this case.
The FitzGerald Hypothesis as a strand in the proof of causation
to the FitzGerald hypothesis, it must be understood that the primary judge did
not accept that it was valid. His Honour’s
reference to Professor
Harper’s evidence, which we have set out at [65] above, suggests reason to
doubt the part played by
the mechanism described by the FitzGerald hypothesis in
the occurrence of Mr Peterson’s heart attack. His Honour referred
length to the competing evidence of the cardiologists for whom the validity of
the FitzGerald hypothesis was a matter of contention
and, in the end, the
primary judge did not hold that the FitzGerald hypothesis was valid. There was
good reason for his Honour’s
circumspection in this regard.
Importantly,
as his Honour acknowledged, there was no scientific evidence of the presence of
COX-2 in the endothelium, a phenomenon
on which the validity of the FitzGerald
hypothesis was dependent. His Honour said at
... I would commence by noting that there is no scientific consensus as to the
presence of COX-2 in the endothelium or as to its
activity in a situation of
atherosclerosis. As noted earlier in these reasons, prostacyclin acts only in
the immediate vicinity
of its synthesis, which means that, if it were to have an
effective anti-aggregatory role in the platelets, it would need to be
synthesised
in the endothelium at, or closely adjacent to, the point of
interest. It seems that, scientifically, whether this is so remains
a matter of
hypothesis.
Further, as his Honour noted at [524]:
One piece of pharmacological evidence that would at least have pointed to the
validity of the FitzGerald hypothesis would, it seems,
have been an increase in
the production of platelet thromboxane in response to the inhibition of COX-2 in
the context of an inflamed
vasculature. However, the researchers who studied
this aspect found no such consequence. Profs Zipes and Harper pointed out
that was not conclusive, a proposition which I accept. But the result does
add to, rather than reduce, the uncertainty associated
with the consequences in
the vasculature of inhibiting COX-2 while sparing
these circumstances, the primary judge’s conclusion in [772] proceeded on
the view most favourable to Mr Peterson reasonably
open to him, in that this
strand of Mr Peterson’s case was no more than a plausible account of
how Vioxx might possibly have
contributed to the occurrence of his MI.
has been seen, the epidemiological studies played an important part in his
Honour’s ultimate conclusion. Accepting at [767]
of the Reasons that
“there was no way definitively to determine which risk factor caused the
heart attack” and that “[he]
may have had the very heart attack
which he did have, at the same time and of the same level of seriousness, had he
not been taking
Vioxx”, his Honour said at
[768]-[770]:
In this state of things, it is perhaps unsurprising that the cardiologists were
not agreed on the question whether Vioxx contributed
to the applicant’s
heart attack. Earlier in these reasons, I have set out their respective views
on the general question whether
Vioxx increased the risk of CVT events, and of
[MIs], occurring. As to the applicant specifically, Profs Zipes and Harper
the view that the consumption of Vioxx increased the risk of him
having his heart attack by a factor of about two. They were asked
whether that
was the same thing as saying that they believed it twice as likely that the
applicant’s consumption of Vioxx in
fact caused, or in some material way
contributed to, the heart attack which in fact took place. Prof Zipes
answered as follows:
That number comes primarily from the APPROVe trial where the relative risk was
around 2. When an individual has multiple risk factors
and suffers a [MI]
it’s very difficult to say one specific risk factor was responsible for
the infarct versus the constellation
of risk factors all interacting and that
summation producing the infarct. I think more likely than not had he not been
taking Vioxx
he would not have had an infarct at that time but it’s
difficult to say that Vioxx was the specific cause of that infarct.
are dealing with statistics and the likelihood of him having an infarct is
increased by him taking Vioxx, so I think
to a reasonable degree of medical
probability Vioxx played a substantial contributing
Prof Harper reiterated that, in his view, Vioxx doubled the
applicant’s risk of having a heart attack. When asked to look
and to express a view as to whether Vioxx in fact
contributed to the applicant’s heart attack, Prof Harper said that it
a difficult question, “but if it is more than two times then
it’s more likely than not that Vioxx contributed to the
attack”. Later in his evidence, Prof Harper revised upwards his
estimate of the extent to which Vioxx increased the
applicant’s risk of
heart attack. Looking at the data from APPROVe, he
There were 21 [MIs] in the rofecoxib group and nine in the placebo group;
slightly more than 2:1. That is the data that I would
rely on over and above
any other data that’s been
When Prof Harper said that a risk of “more than two times”
meant that it was more likely than not that Vioxx contributed
applicant’s heart attack, he was implicitly invoking a rule of thumb that
says that if, for example, in two otherwise
identical groups of people, the
events of interest are twice as numerous in the group taking a particular drug
as in the placebo
group, we may infer that half of those in the former group who
experienced an event would have done so anyway. From this it is said
relative risk of 2.0 goes no further than to imply that an event which occurred
in the drug-taking group is equally likely
to have done so as a result of the
work of the drug as it is to have occurred in any event. This subject is
explained in the judgment
of Spigelman CJ in
Seltsam Pty Ltd v
[2000] NSWCA 29
(2000) 49 NSWLR 262
, 280-285. Concluding, his Honour said (at 285
In Australian law, the test of actual persuasion does not require
epidemiological studies to reach the level of a relative risk of
2.0, even where
that is the only evidence available to a court. Nevertheless, the closer the
ratio approaches 2.0, the greater the
significance that can be attached to the
studies for the purposes of drawing an inference of causation in an individual
“strands in the cable” must be capable of bearing the
weight of the ultimate inference.
The attribution of a contributory role to Vioxx in the applicant’s heart
attack, then, came down to an interpretation of the
risk data yielded by the
various trials and studies and to an opinion as to the relevance of those data
to the circumstances of the
applicant particularly. Inescapably, this required
the cardiologists to form a view as to the validity of the FitzGerald
hypothesis.
Despite what appeared to be a certain agnosticism about the
hypothesis, Prof Harper expressed the opinion that the observed riskiness
of Vioxx was due to its effect in the post-plaque rupture vasculature. This
was, I consider, an implicit endorsement of FitzGerald.
He and Prof Zipes
considered that the applicant’s consumption of Vioxx increased his risk of
having a heart attack by approximately
a factor of two (which they derived from
APPROVe). Profs Celermajer and Vaughan did not agree. They expressed
their conclusion
thus: “We do not believe, with a reasonable degree of
scientific certainty, that Vioxx played a role in causing [the
applicant’s]
heart attack.” When asked by the court what was meant
by “reasonable degree of scientific certainty”, Prof Celermajer
We were presented with a binary outcome – it contributed or it
didn’t. We were not invited to say with what degree of
possibility
might it have contributed. So when asked to make a binary outcome decision we
responded to that by saying we did not.
We simply wished to acknowledge that we
are not absolutely certain of that because the data themselves are [uncertain]
may be said that the primary judge’s conclusions in [772] reflect a
preference for the evidence of Professors Zipes and
Harper over the evidence of
Professors Vaughan and Celermajer. A number of points may be made here. First,
it is clear that his
Honour did not find in accordance with Professor
Zipes’ opinion that it was “more likely than not that had he not
taking Vioxx he would not have had an infarct at that time...”
(Reasons at [768]). That his Honour was not disposed to reach
a conclusion in
those terms may be explicable by Professor Zipes’ qualification: “I
think we are dealing with statistics
and the likelihood of him having an infarct
is increased by him taking Vioxx, so I think to a reasonable degree of medical
probability
Vioxx played a substantial contributory role” (Reasons at
it is apparent that, so far as Professor Harper’s opinion was concerned,
he was invoking the rule of thumb derived
from the relative risk of 2.0. A
small absolute risk may be doubled without making it a likely source of injury.
Doubling a very
low absolute risk of an adverse result may produce an absolute
risk which itself remains so low that a positive finding of causation
balance of probabilities would itself be an affront to common sense. In the
APPROVe study the absolute event rates for MI
were 21 events or 0.69 events per
100 patient years for patients consuming Vioxx, and nine events or 0.27 events
per 100 patient
years for patients consuming a placebo.
epidemiological evidence meant that it was possible that Vioxx consumption was a
cause of Mr Peterson’s MI. But there
were other candidates as causes of
his injury, and the claims of those candidates were strong. Shortly before
Mr Peterson commenced
taking Vioxx, he was, by reason of his age, gender,
hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity, left ventricular hypertrophy and
of smoking, a member of a group within the community, 25% of whom were
expected by the cardiologists to suffer a heart attack within
five years.
Mr Peterson may simply have been the unlucky one in four of this cohort to
suffer a MI. We are unable to see how it
can be said that it is more
probable than not that Vioxx, whether alone or in combination with Mr
Peterson’s personal risk
factors, was a necessary condition of the
occurrence of his heart attack.
Professors Zipes, Harper, Celermajer and Vaughan conferred and provided a joint
report to the Court on a number of questions.
Question Four was: “Did Mr
Peterson have a [MI] in December 2003? If so, what was the aetiology of Mr
Peterson’s [MI]
including the contribution, if any, of his consumption of
Vioxx?” The answer of the cardiologists was in the following
All agree that he had a large acute anterior ST segment elevation [MI] in
December 2003. The aetiology of his heart attack was thrombosis
consequent upon
a ruptured atherosclerotic plaque in his proximal left arterial descending
coronary artery. In a patient with multiple
risk factors there is no way to
definitely determine which risk factor caused the heart attack. Likewise there
is no specific feature
to indicate that VIOXX did or did not cause the heart
(RH/DZ) – We believe Mr Peterson’s consumption of VIOXX increased
his risk of having his heart attack by approximately
a factor of
(DC/DV) – We do not believe, with a reasonable degree of scientific
certainty, that VIOXX played a role in causing Mr Peterson’s
Zipes and Harper were referred to as DZ and RH in the joint report.
That Professors Zipes and Harper did not go beyond
the opinion that Mr
Peterson’s consumption of Vioxx increased his risk of having his heart
attack by approximately a factor
of 2 is significant. It puts paid to the
suggestions advanced on Mr Peterson’s behalf that his relative risk
was increased
by a factor significantly greater than 2. Further, it can be seen
that, unlike Professors Celermajer and Vaughan, Professors Zipes
and Harper did
not in the concurrent report of the cardiologists express any opinion as to the
likelihood that Vioxx did in fact
play a role in causing Mr Peterson’s
heart attack: they confined their evidence in the concurrent report to an
increase in
relative risk. To the extent that Professors Zipes and Harper were
prepared to go further in their oral evidence, there is no evident
prefer their more expansive oral evidence over their more circumspect concurrent
evidence. At least there is no basis
on which this Court could act to make
a stronger finding in favour of Mr Peterson than was made by the primary judge.
this strand of Mr Peterson’s case was no stronger than the
rule of thumb to which the primary judge referred.
interpretation of the epidemiological evidence by Professors Zipes and Harper,
who were called on Mr Peterson’s behalf,
put the relative risk of MI
resulting from the consumption of Vioxx at “about 2”. That is to
say that over the general
population those taking Vioxx were about twice as
likely to suffer a MI as those who were not. A relative risk figure of 2 can be
converted into a statistical likelihood of 50% that Vioxx was causally
implicated in the occurrence of a MI. But, as we have said,
here there were
other candidates as causes of the injury. The strength of this strand of the
case did not rise above the possibility
that it was “in the mix” of
factors which may have caused Mr Peterson’s heart attack.
Sir Frederick Jordan said in
Carr v Baker
(1936) 36 SR (NSW) 301
“Conjecture may range from the barely possible to the quite
possible”. We accept that it is quite possible the
Vioxx was a necessary
condition of Mr Peterson’s heart attack. But in the light of the
causative potential of the other factors
to which we have referred, we consider
that a conclusion that Mr Peterson would not have had his heart attack but
for the consumption
of Vioxx based on the epidemiological studies and the
FitzGerald hypothesis, which was itself subject to unresolved objection, is
matter of conjecture rather than reasonable inference on the balance of
probabilities.
the primary judge’s findings of primary fact were not challenged in this
regard, it was argued on Mr Peterson’s
behalf, by reference to the
relative risk of 9.59 suggested for the most vulnerable members of the
population in the APPROVe study,
that he was much more at risk than the factor
of almost 2. This argument has little force. First, it was not supported by
the cardiologists: even Professors Harper and Zipes put
Mr Peterson’s relative risk from Vioxx consumption no higher than
2, and this was the evidence which the primary judge accepted. Second,
the figure of 9.59 in the APPROVe study was generated from
an obviously
unrepresentative sample.
these reasons we do not consider that it was more probable than not that the
consumption of Vioxx was a necessary condition of
Mr Peterson’s heart
attack of 8 December 2003. We note, however, that it does not follow from
this conclusion that none of
the other applicants represented in these
proceedings can succeed in establishing the ingredient of causation in their
claims. For
example, there may be applicants in relation to whom there is no
likely cause of their MI other than the effects of their consumption
Causation: Past consumption of Vioxx and the cross-appeal
Peterson had originally filed a notice of contention pursuant to which he sought
to argue that the primary judge should have concluded
that the consumption of
Vioxx materially increased the risk of a person suffering a MI if the person had
consumed Vioxx more or less
continuously in the past, notwithstanding that they
had not consumed Vioxx in the weeks immediately preceding the occurrence of such
the hearing of the appeal, Counsel for MSDA noted that this contention was being
advanced to support an answer to a question answered
by the primary judge in the
representative proceedings. Since the contention was being advanced to support
a variation in the orders
made by the primary judge, it should be supported by a
notice of cross-appeal.
response, Mr Peterson sought to file an amended notice of cross-appeal in which
it sought to amend his Honour’s answer to
Question 3 of the Schedule
annexed to the Orders dated 18 June 2010. Counsel for MSDA raised no
objection on the ground of delay,
but submitted that the challenge was
bound to fail on the merits. In turn, Counsel for Mr Peterson argued that
the issue sought
to be raised by the amended notice of cross-appeal did not need
to be determined on the basis that the better view was that the primary
had not determined this issue against Mr Peterson. Counsel for Mr Peterson made
it clear that if the Court accepted this argument,
it would not be necessary for
the Court to determine this aspect of the cross-appeal.
Peterson’s cross-appeal centred on the primary judge’s response to
Question 3, namely the physiological mechanism
by which the consumption of Vioxx
increased the risk of suffering a MI. Mr Peterson took issue with the primary
judge’s findings
in relation to the hypothesis that the development of
atherosclerosis by the acceleration of atherogenesis increased the risk of
suffering an MI. Mr Peterson contended that, even if the finding that the
likely physiological mechanism by which Mr Peterson had
his heart attack
involved an absence of prostacyclin in the vicinity of the injured artery was
overturned, the conclusion that Vioxx
was a likely cause of his heart attack was
amply supported by other evidence and findings of the primary judge.
Peterson also challenged the primary judge’s conclusion concerning persons
who had consumed Vioxx more or less continuously
in the past but not in the
weeks immediately preceding the relevant cardiovascular event. He said that the
primary judge should
have found that the consumption of Vioxx had a long term
effect on the risk of an MI and that aggravation of atherosclerosis was,
least, an additional plausible biological explanation supported by the
FitzGerald hypothesis for the strong epidemiological
association between Vioxx
and MI, both in the long term and in the short term. He contended that the
primary judge failed to consider
properly or at all:
unanimous evidence of the cardiologists that Vioxx increases hypertension which
in turn accelerates atherosclerosis;
cardiological evidence as to the acceleration of atherosclerosis through the
incorporation of thrombotic material into plaques;
epidemiological evidence that established that the cardiovascular risk of Vioxx
persisted in the long term after the patient stops
taking Vioxx.
Peterson submitted before the primary judge that Vioxx promoted the development
of atherosclerosis by increasing hypertension
and through the incorporation of
thrombotic material into the plaque structure.
primary judge’s answer to Question 3 of the Schedule was that the
physiological mechanism by which Vioxx is capable of
causing MI is “the
aggregation of thrombotic material in the vasculature as the result of the
blocking of the production of
prostacyclin by the inhibition of COX-2 in the
absence of any blocking of the production of platelet thromboxane”.
for Mr Peterson proposed that the description of the mechanism should be
amended to read: “the aggregation of thrombotic material
vasculature as the result of the blocking of the production of prostacyclin by
the inhibition of COX-2 in the absence of any
blocking of the production of
platelet thromboxane, and the thickening of plaque in consequence of clinically
silent thrombus formation
Peterson argued that the primary judge did not, by his answer to Question 3,
resolve against him the contention that the mechanism
by which Vioxx is capable
of causing a MI included the thickening of plaque in consequence of clinically
silent thrombus formation
events, as a result of the consumption of Vioxx in the
past. It is clear, however, from [773] of the Reasons that his Honour did
indeed reject that likely mechanism, and that his Honour’s failure to
mention it in his answer to Question 3 reflected that
His Honour did not refer to it because his Honour did not accept that it
was a mechanism.
is not correct to say that this issue was not truly a live issue before the
learned primary judge. Mr Peterson advanced this
view of the physiological
mechanism by which a MI may be caused against the possibility that his evidence,
that he had been taking
Vioxx up to the date of his heart attack, might not be
accepted. That was a live issue in the case which his Honour resolved in
Peterson’s favour at [775].
Peterson relied upon the results of APPROVe, which demonstrated a relative risk
of developing hypertension from taking Vioxx compared
to the placebo of 2.02
(1.71, 2.38). He also pointed to the connection between the taking of Vioxx and
hypertension, as demonstrated
in that study, as well as the significant
effect of Vioxx on blood pressure, as demonstrated in the VIGOR study.
MSDA pointed out, it was not in dispute that Vioxx, at certain doses,
caused hypertension in some patients to some extent. It
shared that
characteristic with all of the NSAIDs. It was also not in dispute that
hypertension at some level, at some duration
and by some mechanism promotes
atherosclerosis. MSDA contended that at trial Mr Peterson did not submit
that the modest increases
in blood pressure, demonstrated by the taking of Vioxx
and other NSAIDs, could accelerate atherosclerosis. He did not seek in his
case to prove any effect of his hypertension from the consumption of Vioxx on
his own MI.
to the merits of Mr Peterson’s cross-appeal, the primary judge’s
findings of primary fact serve to conclude this argument
against Mr Peterson.
The primary judge pointed out that the cardiologists agreed that the effects of
coxib inhibition on the progress
of atherosclerosis data are conflicting. There
was also conflicting evidence as to any effect of Vioxx on the positive
development
of plaque. While there was evidence of hypotheses, there were
no data available to support them. The primary judge held (Reasons
that Vioxx did contribute to hypertension in some people but not to an extent
that would put it outside the range of contribution
by NSAIDs generally.
Mr Peterson referred to the evidence of Professors Zipes and Harper in
support of his theory but he did not
show why the primary judge was in error in
assessing the entirety of the cardiology evidence, including evidence to the
to the effect that the taking of Vioxx reduced plaque formation and
therefore reduced atherosclerosis.
Peterson submitted that once the primary judge accepted the FitzGerald
hypothesis as a plausible biological explanation, he could
not reject as
implausible the accepted consequence of its operation, namely, the acceleration
of atherosclerosis through the incorporation
of thrombotic material into
plaques. However, the primary judge did not say that the hypothetical
consequence was implausible.
Rather, he said that the proposition was
unsupported by data and that it would be to overreach the science to conclude
accelerated atherosclerosis. Mr Peterson did not demonstrate why the
primary judge was in error in saying that even acceptance of
the FitzGerald
hypothesis does not establish the state of affairs in the vasculature for which
Mr Peterson contended.
Peterson relied on the epidemiological evidence as establishing an association
between the consumption of Vioxx and adverse cardiovascular
events some time
after the termination of the treatment. He contended that the plausible
explanation for such an event was the contribution
of Vioxx to the development
of atherosclerosis. In the absence of establishing that link, the plausibility
of the explanation is
diminished.
APPROVe data, with an extension to study the follow-up of participants for at
least one year post-treatment, established a relative
risk of less than 2.0.
However, the relative risk for those patients in the high cardiovascular risk
subgroup was 2.28. MSDA said
that those asserted figures, being drawn from the
post-trial study, cited a relative risk that included events in patients both on
and off the drug and were therefore not relevant to establishing the risk for
patients off the drug. That is, the results mixed
patients who had an event on
the drug with those patients who had an event off the drug and gave an overall
figure which does not
demonstrate the point now sought to be made. Further,
MSDA pointed out that there was no evidence in the follow up study to support
contention that there was a statistically significant increase of MI in patients
after they had stopped taking Vioxx. However,
the primary judge particularly
noted at [550]:
As Prof Zipes pointed out, the debate here involves the question whether Vioxx
had not merely an acute effect in facilitating thrombosis
but also a longer-term
effect of promoting the development of atherosclerosis. For reasons explained
earlier, I am not satisfied
that Vioxx did have the latter effect. I note also
that the follow-up data from the APPROVe trial, to the extent that it related
only to the follow-up period as such, showed no statistically significant
relative risk of taking Vioxx rather than placebo: see
the third table in para
196 above. The conclusions which I reach as to the existence of a plausible
biological mechanism for the
risk disclosed by the main body of data in that
trial, therefore, must be confined to the circumstances of a patient who is
Vioxx more or less continuously. I deliberately express this conclusion
in general terms because I wish neither to anticipate the
circumstances of any
particular group member in the present case, nor to prejudge the question
whether his or her actual pattern
of consumption of Vioxx was such as would
provide a proper basis to infer the existence of the association for which the
Peterson then submitted that the data demonstrated that the relative risk of
suffering an MI during the year following the cessation
of the taking of Vioxx
compared with the placebo, of 1.67 (0.61, 4.59), should be accepted as
sufficient to demonstrate causation,
despite the fact that he accepted that this
does not demonstrate a result that is significant at the 95% confidence level.
Mr Peterson
submitted that the association “was certainly more likely than
not”, despite this statistical inconvenience. Mr Peterson
provided no
basis for the drawing of such a conclusion on the basis of the evidence
available. MSDA pointed out that, statistically,
such a result demonstrated
that the only conclusion is that there is no evidence of a difference.
if there were a plausible explanation of a Vioxx-induced cardiovascular event by
reason of increased atherosclerosis or the
earlier taking of Vioxx this alone
does not necessitate a finding that the cardiovascular event was caused by Vioxx
Amaca v Ellis
). The primary judge did not err in his conclusion
that Mr Peterson had not established the causative link. The effect of Vioxx
hypertension was not demonstrated to give rise to an increase in atherosclerosis
sufficient to cause Mr Peterson’s cardiovascular
event. Vioxx does
contribute to hypertension in some people, as do other NSAIDs; and hypertension
is known to accelerate atherosclerosis.
However, this is some way short of
providing the necessary causative link, especially where some data established
that the taking
of Vioxx was associated with reduced plaque formation.
Honour’s findings of primary fact are not susceptible to challenge. The
evidence to which his Honour referred in these
findings justified his
Honour’s view that he could not conclude that the consumption of Vioxx
caused an acceleration of atherosclerosis
by the incorporation of thrombotic
material into plaques. The evidence which the primary judge was entitled to
accept was not sufficient
to establish that the taking of Vioxx increased
hypertension, which in turn led to accelerated atherosclerosis, which in turn
increased plaque formation, which resulted in plaque rupture, which
resulted in clot formation that caused a cardiovascular event.
primary judge’s answer to Question 3 in the Schedule was
NEGLIGENCE AND
primary judge noted at [737] that Mr Peterson’s evidence was to the effect
that, if he had been told that taking Vioxx
would approximately double his
risk of heart attack, he would not have taken the drug. In the end, his
Honour did not accept that
evidence. His Honour considered that Mr
Peterson would have taken Dr Dickman’s advice and that Dr Dickman
would have continued
to prescribe Vioxx. This conclusion was decisive against
Mr Peterson’s claim.
this regard, his Honour concluded relevantly at [864]-[865] and
[867]-[868]:
What would have happened had an appropriate warning been given to
Dr Dickman? That is a crucial aspect of causation in a negligence
based on failure to warn: see eg
Rosenberg v Percival
. There is a
certain artificiality about the task thus presented to the court in a product
liability (as distinct from a professional
liability) case, particularly where
the product was consumed consistently over a period. However, I consider it is
necessary to
look at the matter as at the time when the duty first arose, and by
reference to a hypothetical warning no more categorical than
has been held to be
the minimum necessary to discharge the manufacturer’s duty of care in the
circumstances obtaining. I have
held that a warning should have been given no
later than October 2000, but had it been given to Dr Dickman at any time before
May 2001 it would presumably have had the same relevance to his decision
to prescribe Vioxx to the applicant on that day. As to
the terms of the
warning, I have held that the terms of the new paragraph in the Vioxx [PI]
inserted in November 2001 would have
sufficient.
How would Dr Dickman have responded to a warning in those terms, if given to him
by correspondence at some time before 10 May 2001?
By then, although Vioxx had
been on the PBS for about four months only, Dr Dickman’s experience with
it had been very positive:
see the entries for 30 January, 15 February, 8 March
and 20 April 2001 in the list in para 718 above. In the balancing of the
considerations
that he would have undertaken had he been aware that Vioxx
involved an increase in cardiovascular risk...I consider that this positive
experience would have made a contribution of some substance. Further, it seems
that Dr Dickman regarded the absolute risk rate of
CVT events for patients
taking Vioxx as disclosed in VIGOR − 1.67 events per 100 patient years
− to be low in the circumstances
of the applicant, whom he regarded as a
“mild to moderate” cardiac risk. With all the problems that the
making of a
judgment about a hypothetical situation involves, I am persuaded
that the most likely response of Dr Dickman to a warning in the
terms that I
have held to be sufficient would have been to advise the applicant that the
increased risk of a cardiovascular event
was relatively low. While Dr Dickman
would have left the final decision to the applicant, my impression is that he
would have placed
rather more emphasis upon the benefits of Vioxx and rather
less upon the cardiovascular risk.
How would the applicant have responded to the kind of advice from
Dr Dickman that I have found would most likely have been given?
applicant described himself as a fairly stubborn person who preferred to reach
his own conclusions, rather than accepting someone
else’s word; and as
cautious and safety-conscious. He said that he was “wary of
medication”. While he was in
the Navy, he experienced a bad reaction from
having omitted to read the label on some migraine tablets that had been
prescribed at
twice the strength of those that he had previously taken. This
taught him a lesson about reading labels and checking carefully what
taking. He regarded himself as risk-averse, and would “tend to
evaluate the pros and cons before making any important
... The applicant respected Dr Dickman and placed store by his advice. He
was not in terms asked how he would have responded to
news that patients on
Vioxx in the VIGOR trial experienced CVT events at a rate of 1.67 per 100
patient-years, but he was asked in
chief how he would have reacted to advice
that the risk of a heart attack was two, three or four times as high on Vioxx as
on naproxen.
He said that he would have wanted to know where the figures came
from, beyond which he declined to speculate:... Had he asked Dr
Dickman where
the figures came from, I consider that Dr Dickman would have told him that
VIGOR was a trial involving patients with
rheumatoid arthritis, that the dose of
Vioxx in the trial was double what was then proposed, and, as mentioned above,
that naproxen
had an antiplatelet action whereas Vioxx did not. As I have said,
I consider that Dr Dickman’s advice would have been generally
towards Vioxx. There was, additionally, the applicant’s long and unhappy
experience with the gastrointestinal side
effects of NSAIDs, which would
have provided him with an incentive to opt for a
Honour also concluded that Dr Dickman was not influenced in his decision to
prescribe Vioxx by the representations made by MSDA
as to its safety. At [872]
his Honour noted the following passage in the cross-examination of Dr
Dr Dickman was cross examined as follows:
It’s fair to say that you from at least 2000 onwards proceeded on the
basis that no prescription medicine was absolutely safe
patient?---That’s correct.
One couldn’t proceed that [way], could
[What] you had to do was to learn about the range of effects of the drug,
ranging from good through to serious adverse effects or
possible serious adverse
effects, and then make a judgment about whether it should be prescribed for the
particular patient?---Yes.
If a drug representative came to you and said, “Here is a prescription
medicine. I can guarantee you that it’s absolutely
safe”, you would
shake your head and think, “I think that’s an overstatement”,
wouldn’t you?---Yes.
Because that doesn’t accord with your experience of prescription
medications?---No.
You would think to yourself, “I had better go and have a look at what I
can find out about this drug to see what the safety
wouldn’t you?---Yes.
You certainly wouldn’t just take the rep’s word for it, would
Indeed, whenever a rep made a comment about safety of a drug you knew that it
had to be placed in the context of all of the information
that was available
These answers were entirely consistent with the impression I had of Dr Dickman
generally. In short, I do not think he relied on
the emphasis given by MSDA
sales representatives as to the safety of Vioxx. Had these statements not been
made to him, I am satisfied
that he would in any event have prescribed, and
continued to prescribe, Vioxx for the applicant.
members of the represented group may not face the difficulty which
Dr Dickman’s evidence presented for Mr Peterson’s
that reason, MSDA appeals against the primary judge’s conclusion in favour
of Mr Peterson on the issue of breach
of duty by MSDA. It is necessary now to
address this issue.
Peterson’s pleaded case of negligence against MSDA was that the
consumption of Vioxx materially increased the risk of MI,
that MSDA knew or
ought to have known of that increased risk, and that MSDA failed adequately to
warn of the risk. The primary judge
rejected the proposition that MSDA was
obliged to give a warning of an increased risk in terms of Mr Peterson’s
pleaded case.
His Honour said at [824]:
The imposition on MSDA of a duty to warn in such terms would be problematic in a
number of respects. First, the “signal”
given by VIGOR was not a
consistent one over all of the pleaded cardiovascular conditions. To say that
the consumption of Vioxx
might have increased the risk of suffering each of
those conditions would have been to overreach the results of VIGOR on any view.
Secondly, the VIGOR results did not speak at all along the Vioxx placebo axis.
The only sense in which they justified a statement
reference to a situation in which the notional comparator was naproxen.
Thirdly, the trial was not
concerned with, and (as the cardiologists in the
present proceeding agreed) said nothing about, a situation in which Vioxx was
at the recommended maximum therapeutic dose in Australia − 25 mg
daily. Fourthly, a warning in such terms as proposed by the
applicant would
have gone beyond what, as would reasonably have appeared to the respondents, was
the prudent scientific consensus
in 2000/2001. Here I refer to the views of the
FDA Arthritis Advisory Committee expressed on 8 February 2001 − see para
above. And fifthly − and perhaps most importantly for present
purposes − a warning in the terms proposed by the applicant
gone beyond what I have held the respondents either knew or ought to have known
until September 2004. I take the
view, therefore, that the availability of the VIGOR results did not oblige MSDA
to issue a warranty
in the categorical terms proposed by the
Honour went on, however, to hold that MSDA had, for a time, been negligent and
had engaged in misleading and deceptive conduct
in contravention of
the TPA, by reason of a failure to provide an adequate warning about the
worrisome signal in the VIGOR results during the period
from October 2000 to
November 2001.
to the negligence case, the primary judge held at [822] that a warning should
have been given after the results of the VIGOR study
were available. His Honour
regarded the warning given by the amendment to the Vioxx PI in November 2001 as
a reasonable warning
so far as its content was concerned. In this regard, the
primary judge said at [830] and [905]:
As a communication addressed to a professional audience, I consider that the new
paragraph inserted into the Vioxx [PI] in November
2001 was a reasonable warning
of the potential cardiovascular risk disclosed by the VIGOR results. It drew
attention to difference
in CVT events as between the two arms of the study, and
to the fact that the comparator was naproxen. It accurately identified the
cohort of patients that had been involved in the trial, and the dose that had
been used. It referred to other clinical data where
no difference had been
disclosed as between Vioxx arms and (non-naproxen) NSAID arms. And it drew
attention to the critical biochemical
difference between coxibs and
non-selective NSAIDs, namely, the absence of any antiplatelet activity in
the case of the former.
As to this last aspect, it is important to note that
the clinical context in which Vioxx might be under consideration was one in
which the patient was presumptively suffering from osteoarthritis and would,
normally, be in need of an anti-inflammatory drug.
The paragraph in the
[PI] was such as would draw the prescriber’s attention to the difference
between coxibs and at least some
other NSAIDs, most obviously naproxen,
with respect to antiplatelet activity. Whereas all NSAIDs inhibit COX-2 (and,
as Prof Celemajer
said, are given in doses that achieve that purpose wholly or
very substantially), traditional NSAIDs also inhibit COX-1, thereby
suppressing,
to an extent at least, the aggregation of platelets. Vioxx did not.
This was the essence of the distinction between
Vioxx and the traditional
NSAIDs. It was the distinction which would have been relevant to the
clinician; and it was the distinction
to which the new paragraph in the [PI]
For the same reasons, a different conclusion must be reached once the [PI] was
amended in November 2001. No longer could it be said
that the existence of the
original [PI] made MSDA’s failure to warn misleading. This is a different
point from my earlier
conclusion that merely to cause an amended [PI] to be
approved by the TGA was not a sufficient warning to doctors. Here the question
is not whether MSDA warned: it is whether it misled. It is quite possible to
refrain from warning without misleading. Given that
the amended [PI] was at
large from November 2001, and that it fairly − albeit compendiously
− referred to the cardiovascular
results of VIGOR, it could no longer, in
my view, be said that merely by remaining silent MSDA had engaged in misleading
It is true that the new paragraph in the “Precautions”
section did not advert to the [MI] figure from VIGOR as such,
but it did refer
to the CVT rate as a whole. The 0.5% [MI] figure was part of the CVT figure of
1.67%. The citation of the latter
was, in my view, sufficient to absolve MSDA
of the charge, made by the applicant, that its failure to advise doctors
directly of
the [MI] risk signal given by VIGOR was misleading.
held at [830] that as “a communication addressed to a professional
audience, ... the new paragraph inserted into the
Vioxx PI in November 2001 was
a reasonable warning of the potential cardiovascular risk disclosed by the VIGOR
results”, his
Honour concluded at [846], [848]-[849], and
[851]-[852]:
I do not think that Dr Dickman’s evidence travels the distance necessary
to justify the conclusion that MSDA was entitled to
assume that, as a matter of
inevitable course, general practitioners would read the Vioxx [PI] amendment of
November 2001. First,
he was not challenged directly on the evidence in his
witness statement to which I have referred. Secondly, the furthest he was
pressed in cross examination was to accept that resources were readily available
to him from which he could ascertain which drugs
had recently had their [PI]
updated: he was not induced to give evidence to the effect that he did keep
abreast of such changes
as a matter of course. And thirdly, it may be one thing
to know which drug’s [PI] had recently changed: it would be quite
to be alerted to those changes that involved new precautions on potentially
serious side effects.
... Dr Dickman’s was the only evidence that usefully dealt with the
question of how a general practitioner would respond, as
a matter of normal
practice, to changes in the [PI] for a particular drug. As appears from what I
have written above, I do not think
it has been established that MSDA was
reasonably entitled to assume that a practitioner would, without specific
prompting, necessarily
have taken note of the fact that the Vioxx [PI] had been
amended, or of the content of the amendment. It was never suggested to
Dr Dickman that he had been remiss in not having done so, or was thereby
acting inconsistently with the accepted norms of his profession.
result, his evidence in chief that he would not be aware of a change to a
drug’s [PI] unless notified about the change
stands unchallenged, and is
not inconsistent with any oral evidence which he
Clearly the making of an amendment to the [PI] should be regarded as a necessary
response by a drug manufacturer to the results of
a clinical trial which
conveyed a signal of risk. However, I do not consider that such an amendment
should of itself be regarded
as a sufficient response − that is to say, as
a sufficient discharge of the manufacturer’s duty of care. Absent the
manufacturer taking steps directly to inform medical practitioners of the
amendments, I do not accept that the manufacturer would
be entitled to assume
that every such practitioner − including the one directly involved in
prescribing the drug for the putative
applicant − would inevitably become
aware thereof. Thus I would hold that, by doing no more than amending the Vioxx
November 2001, MSDA had not taken reasonable steps to warn medical
practitioners of the cardiovascular risk signal thrown up by the
VIGOR results.
Did Dr Dickman in fact come to read, or otherwise to learn of, the new paragraph
in the “Precautions” section of the
Vioxx [PI] of November 2001?
I would find not. Against his evidence in chief that he would not, unless
notified, be aware of a
change to a drug’s [PI], he was cross examined, if
I may so observe with respect, rather tangentially to the important question
whether he read the new paragraph in the [PI]. He was not asked that question
directly. Counsel appeared to be more concerned to
discover whether Dr Dickman
knew “the ideas encapsulated” by the paragraph (which he did, at
some time between 2001 and
2004 − see para 726 above). However that may
be, I could not discern in any evidence given by Dr Dickman that, in November
2001 or thereabouts, the amendment to the [PI] came to his attention.
I would hold, therefore, that the applicant has made good his case that MSDA
failed to warn his treating practitioner of the cardiovascular
risk signal from
VIGOR of which it had been aware since March 2000.
question is not, however, whether MSDA was, as his Honour put it,
“reasonably entitled to assume that a practitioner would,
without specific
prompting, necessarily have taken note of the fact that the Vioxx [PI] had been
amended, or of the content of the
amendment” (Reasons at [848]). The
question is whether MSDA took reasonable steps to ensure that medical
practitioners were
sufficiently informed of the worrisome signal which emerged
from the VIGOR trial to take it into account in deciding whether or not
prescribe Vioxx. In this regard, it is tolerably clear that Dr Dickman was
informed by the means discussed with him in the course
of his cross-examination
the relevant passage of which is set out at [845] of the Reasons and [156] of
our reasons below.
contended that the conclusions adverse to it were reached unfairly; the focus of
Mr Peterson’s case at trial being upon
the adequacy of the warning
conveyed by the amendment to the PI, rather than the adequacy of the means by
which it was conveyed to
medical practitioners. It is not necessary to come to
a final view on MSDA’s complaint about process because we accept that
is entitled to succeed as a matter of substance.
primary judge’s view at [848] that Dr Dickman needed to be made aware of
the amendment to the PI in the VIGOR tests by
a Dear Doctor letter, sits
uneasily with his Honour’s references to evidence which shows that Dr
Dickman actually referred
to the necessary information when prescribing Vioxx
for Mr Peterson. At [845] the primary judge
In his witness statement, Dr Dickman said that he would not be aware of a change
to a drug’s [PI] unless notified about the
change. He was cross-examined
set out in terms what
I perceive to be the relevant aspects of that cross
examination:
So far as you know, is it the position that Medical Director is updated via some
electronic means four times a
year?---Yes.
And such new information as is necessary to be fitted into the program is sent
down about four times a year?---Yes.
So far as the drugs are concerned, does it give you a note of what drugs have
changed?---No, it doesn’t.
Give you a note if an indication has changed?---No, I don’t think
Prior to having MIMS over the Medical Director software, MIMS would be updated
in paper three or four times a year, wouldn’t
The updating version of MIMS would only contain those drugs that needed to be
updated. Is that right?---Yes.
So you would know three or four times a year from your paper copy of MIMS what
drugs were being updated, is that
right?---Yes.
Do you still keep a paper copy of MIMS in your
surgery?---Yes.
Is that updated four times a year still?---Some of the copies are slower to get
to us but I think, yes.
But there is a regular updating process which by looking at the index you can
see what the drugs are that have been updated, is that
right?---Yes.
That’s one way in which you would be notified about a change, isn’t
Another way in which you would be notified about a change would be if a drug
representative told you that the drug was now approved
for a different
indication?---Yes.
So, as an example, with Vioxx, it was initially approved for osteoarthritis,
it was later approved as an indication for rheumatoid
arthritis; that would
be made known to you?---Yes.
When you came next to prescribe the drug, particularly if it was for someone
with rheumatoid arthritis, you would go back to the
product information and look
to see with respect to that indication what the relevant information was,
wouldn’t you?---Yes.
Of course, you may hear about a change from one of your colleagues. Is that
right?---Yes.
Or you may get it from one of your other sources of information; a specialist
noting that something has changed by changing a prescription,
right?---Yes.
Or through one of the other sources that you have spoken about. Is that
right?---That’s right.
are unable to see how this passage of cross-examination does not reflect
Dr Dickman’s acceptance that he did become aware
of the change in PI
in the manner there discussed. Dr Dickman certainly did not suggest that he was
dependent exclusively on “Dear
Doctor” letters as a source of
relevant information about new drugs.
was other evidence of MSDA’s efforts to disseminate knowledge of the
potential risk. In this regard, his Honour said
at [265] and
In August 2001, Mukherjee (2001) was published in the
Journal of the American
Medical Association
. In evidence are two similar letters, each from MSDA
and using the greeting “Dear Healthcare Provider”, dated 28 August
and 3 October 2001. The letters took issue with the scientific basis of
the article with respect to VIGOR. The first letter
The reported differences in the incidence of myocardial infarctions (MI) between
Vioxx and naproxen in the ... VIGOR trial ..., which
is the main focus of the
JAMA paper, can be explained by naproxen’s aspirin like ability to inhibit
platelet aggregation and
reduce cardiovascular events. Unlike some NSAIDs,
Vioxx does not inhibit platelet aggregation (a desirable attribute when trying
to avoid gastrointestinal adverse events) and would not be expected to reduce
cardiovascular events as has been shown with naproxen
in the VIGOR
The corresponding paragraph in the second letter
The main focus of the JAMA article relates to the reported difference in the
incidence of myocardial infarction (MI) between Vioxx
and naproxen in the ...
VIGOR trial ... An explanation for this difference is based on naproxen’s
ability to inhibit thromboxane
synthesis and platelet aggregation.
As a result of this activity, naproxen may reduce the incidence of
cardiovascular events in a
manner similar to that observed with aspirin. Unlike
some NSAIDs, Vioxx does not inhibit platelet aggregation (a desirable attribute
when trying to avoid gastrointestinal adverse events) and would not be expected
to reduce cardiovascular events.
Towards the end of both letters, it was stated:
Patient safety is of paramount importance to MSD. We routinely review data from
completed studies and clinical use of our products,
and consistent with this
approach, we will continue to evaluate such data on agents that selectively
inhibit COX-2 to enhance our
understanding of these medicines and assess the
potential value of future trials.
These letters were tendered without any comment of substance by the applicant,
and without objection by the respondents. They were
both on the
respondents’ list of “final approved pieces”. It was, I
consider, common ground that they were sent
to medical practitioners
The fifth and final letter in this sequence was dated March 2002, and had the
purpose of announcing that Vioxx had been approved
by the TGA for the
symptomatic treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. Amongst other things, the letter
In two efficacy studies involving approximately 2,000 patients with RA, Vioxx
demonstrated a significant reduction in the number
of tender/painful joints and
number of swollen joints versus placebo. Vioxx 25 mg and naproxen 500 mg bd
showed generally similar
The landmark VIGOR Study conducted in 8,000 patients with RA showed that serious
[gastrointestinal] complications (perforations,
obstructions, ulcers and bleeds)
were halved with Vioxx, 50 mg od (twice the recommended dose in RA) versus the
comparator NSAID,
naproxen, 500 mg
This letter was also part of the bundle which related to Prof Donovan’s
evidence, but it was not referred to by him. Rather,
it was tendered by the
applicant on the basis that it had been provided to him. There was no objection
to the tender by the respondents,
who accepted that it is what it purported to
be. It was on the respondents’ list of “final approved
In the circumstances, I am prepared to find that it was sent to
medical practitioners generally.
the light of the foregoing, we accept MSDA’s submission that the primary
judge’s conclusion adverse to it on this
point cannot stand. Once again
it does not follow that other members of the represented group could not make
out this element of
their case. The circumstances of Mr Peterson’s
case were specific to him.
the sake of completeness, we note that in relation to Mr Peterson’s claim
of the TPA, his Honour said at
For the same reasons, a different conclusion must be reached once the [PI] was
amended in November 2001. No longer could it be said
that the existence of the
original [PI] made MSDA’s failure to warn misleading. This is a different
point from my earlier
conclusion that merely to cause an amended [PI] to be
approved by the TGA was not a sufficient warning to doctors. Here the question
is not whether MSDA warned: it is whether it misled. It is quite possible to
refrain from warning without misleading. Given that
the amended [PI] was at
large from November 2001, and that it fairly − albeit compendiously
− referred to the cardiovascular
results of VIGOR, it could no longer, in
my view, be said that merely by remaining silent MSDA had engaged in misleading
It is true that the new paragraph in the “Precautions”
section did not advert to the [MI] figure from VIGOR as such,
but it did refer
to the CVT rate as a whole. The 0.5% [MI] figure was part of the CVT figure of
1.67%. The citation of the latter
was, in my view, sufficient to absolve MSDA
of the charge, made by the applicant, that its failure to advise doctors
directly of
the [MI] risk signal given by VIGOR was
misleading.
Negligence and the TGA
also argued that the regulatory regime based on the
Therapeutic Goods Act
) precludes the legal possibility of common law
obligations co-existing with the legislation. This argument may be disposed of
It may be accepted that the legislation is concerned to establish
minimum safety standards for the availability and use of regulated
medicines in
the public interest. We are unable to discern in the legislation an intention
to abrogate the common law rights of
individual consumers.
respectfully agree with the views of the primary judge expressed at
[792]-[795]:
The respondents’ submissions fell a good distance short of persuading me
that any such implication should be made. They contained
no such rigorous
examination of the terms of the TG Act as would be necessary to make good the
point. In one respect at least, the
submissions overreached the actual terms of
the Act. I refer to the proposition that the TG Act provided for “a
the provision of information and warnings to doctors in a prescribed
form”. The respondents did not identify where the Act
so provided. For
my own part, I have been able to find nothing in the TG Act which either
mandated or regulated the terms in which
a drug manufacturer such as MSDA
provided information and warnings to doctors.
The effect of accepting the respondents’ submission would be that, so long
as the manufacturer of a prescription medicine complied
in good faith with the
system for which the TGA provided, it could never be held to have fallen short
in the discharge of its duty
of care to consumers. The manufacturer, could, it
seems, engage in all manner of negligent promotion, communication or
presentation
without being exposed to claims of the kind that the applicant now
brings. A careless error in the preparation of a particular production
(ie a snail-in-the-bottle problem) could never be held to constitute a failure
to discharge the duty of care. I highlight
here, of course, the
circumstance that the respondents’ point fails to address quite egregious
negligent acts of commission.
By placing on the market a product to be consumed by end users, the manufacturer
of a prescription medicine, no less than the manufacturer
of any other product
intended for human consumption, establishes the setting for the creation of the
relationship of proximity from
which the common law duty of care arises. I
would be slow to hold that a law which did not in terms deal with that very
implicitly qualified the manufacturer’s obligation – as it
would otherwise be defined by the common law – so as
to permit it, in
effect, to act less than reasonably in the discharge of the duty, and to act in
a way that produced loss or damage,
yet to be shielded from claims by injured
parties. There is, in my view, nothing unworkable or anomalous about such a
manufacturer
remaining under an obligation to take reasonable steps to avoid
loss or injury to the end user at the same time as being required
to comply with
the regulatory system for which the TGA provided. The manufacturer’s
obligation is not, in my view, exhausted
upon compliance with the statute
– no more so than the motorist’s obligation to take care in the
driving of his or her
vehicle is exhausted upon compliance with road traffic
regulations: see
Sibley v Kais
[1967] HCA 43
(1967) 118 CLR 424
For the above reasons, I reject the respondents’ point that the steps
required in the discharge of their duty of care went
no further, as a matter of
law, than to participate in the system of regulation for which the TG Act
provided. That conclusion does
not, of a course, exclude the prospect that, in
identifying the steps required in the discharge of the respondents’ duty
care, the requirements of that system, and MSDA’s compliance with them,
might not be relevant under the general law. To the
extent relevant, this is a
matter to which I shall turn in due course.
reject MSDA’s challenge to this aspect of his Honour’s
SECTIONS 74B AND 74D OF THE TPA
turn to Mr Peterson’s claim under s 74B of the TPA that Vioxx was not
reasonably fit for the purpose for which it was, expressly
or by implication,
acquired by consumers and his claim under s 74D that Vioxx was not of
merchantable quality. The primary judge
held Vioxx was not reasonably fit
for the purpose implicitly made known to MSDA (s 74B) and, in relation to
s 74D, held that Vioxx
was not of merchantable quality because it was
reasonable for a consumer to expect that a medication for the relief of
pain would not involve a relative risk of MI of 2. MSDA appealed
against these findings. For the reasons that follow, we would
MSDA’s appeal in relation to the contravention of both ss 74B and 74D
of the TPA.
considering the application of ss 74B and 74D of the TPA (and for that
matter, as will later be demonstrated, s 75AC), it is important
recall the following matters that have already been considered in these
case against Vioxx was circumstantial.
is no medical “signature” for Vioxx which might indicate that Mr
Peterson’s heart attack was caused by Vioxx:
at [8] above.
Peterson was at risk of suffering a heart attack quite independently of his
consumption of Vioxx: at [86] and [120] above.
primary judge expressly refused to find that Mr Peterson’s heart
attack would not have happened but for the taking of Vioxx.
Indeed, there was
no finding that it was more probable than not that the consumption of Vioxx
caused or materially contributed to
the occurrence of Mr Peterson’s heart
attack: at [93] above.
conclusion that Mr Peterson would not have had his heart attack but for the
consumption of Vioxx based on the epidemiological studies
and the FitzGerald
hypothesis, which was itself subject to unresolved objection, was a matter of
conjecture rather than reasonable
inference on the balance of probabilities: at
[124] above.
its highest, the epidemiological evidence meant that it was
Vioxx consumption was a cause of Mr Peterson’s MI but there were other
candidates as causes of his injury and the claims
of those candidates were
strong – age, gender, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, obesity, left
ventricular hypertrophy and history
of smoking: see [120] above.
a necessary condition of recovery was absent – Mr Peterson did not and
could not establish that he suffered loss
or damage by reason of otherwise
actionable conduct on the part of MSDA. Mr Peterson did not establish that
his consumption of Vioxx
was a necessary condition for the occurrence of his
heart attack on 8 December 2003: at [104]-[105] above.
Section 74B
74B relevantly provided:
(a) a corporation, in trade or commerce, supplies goods manufactured by the
corporation to another person who acquires the goods
(b) a person (whether or not the person who acquired the goods from the
corporation) supplies the goods (otherwise than by way of
sale by auction) to a
(c) the goods are acquired by the consumer for a particular purpose that was,
expressly or by implication, made known to the corporation,
either directly, or
through the person from whom the consumer acquired the goods or a person by whom
any antecedent negotiations
in connexion with the acquisition of the goods were
(d) the goods are not reasonably fit for that purpose, whether or not that is a
purpose for which such goods are commonly supplied;
(e) the consumer or a person who acquires the goods from, or derives title
to the goods through or under, the consumer suffers loss
or damage by reason
that the goods are not reasonably fit for that
the corporation is liable to compensate the consumer or that other person for
the loss or damage and the consumer or that other person
may recover the amount
of the compensation by action against the corporation in a court of competent
(2) Subsection (1) does not
(b) where the circumstances show that the consumer did not rely, or that it was
unreasonable for the consumer to rely, on the skill
or judgment of the
corporation.
primary judge held that because he was satisfied that Vioxx approximately
doubled the risk of heart attack, Vioxx was not reasonably
fit for the purpose
implicitly made known to MSDA by Mr Peterson: at [17] above. MSDA’s
appeal against that holding raised
two separate groups of issues –
substantive and procedural. We would uphold the appeal on the substantive
issues. It is not
necessary to consider the procedural questions.
is convenient to deal first with the issues concerning s 74B and fitness
for purpose.
under s 74B by consumers against manufacturers in respect of “goods
unfit for particular purpose” require demonstration
of a number of
separate elements. First, a corporation in trade or commerce must
supply goods manufactured by it to another who
acquires the goods for re-supply:
s 74B(1)(a). Here, MSDA was a manufacturer, as that term is understood by
reference to s 74A of
the TPA. The “goods” were Vioxx. The
person who acquired the goods for re-supply was the pharmacist or pharmacists
who filled the relevant prescriptions.
under s 74B(1)(b), a person must supply the goods to the consumer
(other than by auction). The supplier does not have to
be the person who
acquired the goods from the manufacturer. In the present case, a pharmacist was
the person who supplied the goods
to Mr Peterson.
s 74B(1)(c) requires that the goods must be acquired by a consumer for a
particular purpose that was expressly or by implication
made known to the
manufacturer either directly or, in the present case, through the person from
whom the consumer acquired the goods.
The hinge on which s 74B turns is
the purpose for which the consumer acquired the goods, as that purpose
(expressly or implicitly)
is made known by the consumer, in this case, to the
person from whom the consumer acquired the goods, namely the pharmacist.
Identification
of purpose in s 74B(1)(c) is necessarily a subjective
Rasell v Cavalier Marketing (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1991] 2 Qd R
at 330. In our view, by having a prescription filled by a pharmacist, Mr
Peterson implicitly made known that Vioxx was being acquired
for the purpose of
use as a medication for treatment for arthritic pain without gastrointestinal
side effects: cf
Australian Knitting Mills Ltd v Grant
[1933] HCA 35
(1933) 50 CLR 387
at 415-416 and on appeal,
Grant v Australian Knitting Mills Ltd
[1935] UKPCHCA 1
at 59 citing
Medway Oil and Storage Co v Silica Gel Corporation
(1928) 33 Com Cas 195.
purpose expressly or impliedly made known by Mr Peterson as the purpose for
which Vioxx was acquired is not to be understood
as including, as a negative
element of that purpose, some quality of absolute safety or complete absence of
adverse side effect.
Indeed, the primary judge expressly rejected Mr
Peterson’s case that his purpose was to have a drug that did not give rise
to a material increase in the risk of suffering life-threatening conditions
(Reasons at [943]). No such purpose of acquisition was
expressly or impliedly
made known by Mr Peterson to the supplier of the goods to him. That the primary
judge reached such a conclusion
is hardly surprising. It would be, to say the
least, unusual for an acquirer of goods to describe the purpose for which the
are being acquired in negative terms, and liability under s 74B
depends upon a consumer making known the particular purpose for which
consumer acquired the goods. Yet despite finding that Mr Peterson did not make
known (expressly or impliedly) that he was acquiring
Vioxx for a purpose that
included it not materially increasing the risk of suffering a life-threatening
condition, the primary judge
concluded that Mr Peterson’s claim under
s 74B should succeed.
to that conclusion was the proposition that Vioxx doubled the risk of
Mr Peterson’s MI. As has already been shown
(see [55]-[56],
[111], [119]-[125] above), that proposition should not be accepted. But
even if it were to be accepted, it would
be of relevance to the application of
s 74B only if it were first established that the purpose of acquisition
which Mr Peterson made
known (expressly or impliedly) was a purpose that was
properly to be identified as containing some relevant negative feature or
Neither at trial nor on appeal was that relevant negative feature or
element of known purpose identified with any, let alone sufficient,
In particular, it was not and is not sufficient to observe only that Vioxx
was a medication intended for human consumption,
and to assert that it then
follows that it was impliedly made known to the supplier that a purpose for
acquisition of the product
was that it should be “safe” for
administration or “not dangerous to health”. It cannot be
presumed in law,
and it is not obvious in fact, that Mr Peterson acquired Vioxx
for the particular purpose that was or included the purpose of not
giving rise
to a material increase in the risk of suffering life-threatening conditions.
Almost all medications have side-effects.
Almost all medications can be
contra-indicated for a particular patient or group of patients. The
prescription of drugs by a medical
practitioner requires experience, skill and
training. The patient who has a prescription filled does so relying
primarily on the
skill and judgment of the prescribing doctor. Questions of
dosage and unwanted reactions may be matters for which the patient will
also to the pharmacist. But it cannot be presumed in law, and it is not obvious
in fact, that the patient impliedly makes known
to the dispensing pharmacist
that he or she is acquiring the product that is dispensed for purposes which
include some generalised
purpose of safety or absence of adverse side-effects.
This is reason enough to conclude that s 74B is not engaged.
it is appropriate here to make some further points about s 74B(1)(d) and
(e) of the TPA. Section 74B(1)(d) contains an
objective test of reasonable
fitness. The manufacturer is liable if the goods are not reasonably fit
for the particular purpose
identified in subsection (c). The primary judge
held that because Vioxx “approximately doubled the risk of heart attack,
was not reasonably fit for the purpose implicitly made known to
MSDA” by Mr Peterson (Reasons at [968]). Observing that there
increase in risk described as “doubling the risk” does not in this
case, without more, demonstrate unfitness for
purpose. First, the evidence did
not support the finding that Vioxx “approximately doubled the risk of
heart attack”
for Mr Peterson: see [55]-[56], [111], [119]-[125]
above. Second, whether Vioxx was not reasonably fit for purpose as use as a
prescription
medication for treatment of arthritic pain without gastrointestinal
effects is a question of some complexity that is not answered
by mathematical
comparison of a relative risk. As has already been said, prescription
medications are rarely risk free. No doubt
that is why they are available only
on prescription.
is, however, a further and conclusive reason why this claim should fail.
Under s 74B(1)(e), Mr Peterson must suffer loss or
reason that the goods are not reasonably fit for that purpose” identified
in subsection (c):
Henville v Walker
[2001] HCA 52
(2001) 206 CLR 459
& L Securities Pty Ltd v HTW Valuers (Brisbane) Pty Ltd
at [142]-[143]; and
Butcher v Lachlan Elder Realty Pty Ltd
[2004] HCA 60
. For the reasons stated at [106]-[126] above, we do not
consider that it was more probable than not that the consumption of Vioxx
necessary precondition of Mr Peterson’s heart attack on 8 December
2003. A conclusion that Mr Peterson would not have
had his heart attack
but for the consumption of Vioxx based on the epidemiological studies and the
FitzGerald hypothesis, which was
itself subject to unresolved objection, is a
matter of conjecture rather than reasonable inference on the balance of
probabilities.
The claim under s 74B was not made out. It is
unnecessary to consider the defences under s 74B(2) of the TPA.
relation to s 74B of the TPA, we would uphold MSDA’s appeal.
Section 74D
74D relevantly provided:
(a) a corporation, in trade or commerce, supplies goods manufactured by the
corporation to another person who acquires the goods
(b) a person (whether or not the person who acquired the goods from the
corporation) supplies the goods (otherwise than by way of
sale by auction) to a
(c) the goods are not of
merchantable quality
(d) the consumer or a person who acquires the goods from, or derives title to
the goods through or under, the consumer suffers loss
or damage by reason that
the goods are not of merchantable
the corporation is liable to compensate the consumer or that other person for
the loss or damage and the consumer or that other person
may recover the amount
of the compensation by action against the corporation in a court of competent
(2) Subsection (1) does not
(a) if the goods are not of merchantable quality by reason
(i) an act or default of any person (not being the corporation or a servant or
agent of the corporation); or
(ii) a cause independent of human
occurring after the goods have left the control of the
corporation;
(b) as regards defects specifically drawn to the consumer’s attention
before the making of the contract for the supply of the
goods to the consumer;
(c) if the consumer examines the goods before that contract is made, as regards
defects that the examination ought to
(3) Goods of any kind are of merchantable quality within the meaning of this
section if they are as fit for the purpose or purposes
for which goods of that
kind are commonly bought as it is reasonable to expect having regard
(a) any description applied to the goods by the
corporation;
(b) the price received by the corporation for the goods (if relevant);
(c) all the other relevant
circumstances.
[Emphasis added].
the primary judge held (Reasons at [971]), many of the questions arising under
this section correspond with the questions raised
under s 74B. A
corporation must supply goods manufactured by that corporation to another who
acquires the goods for re-supply (s
74D(1)(a)) and a person must supply the
goods to a consumer (s 74D(1)(b)). In the present case, both those
elements are satisfied:
see [169] above.
as with s 74B, there is a conclusive reason why action under s 74D
must fail. The consumer must suffer loss or damage
the goods are not of merchantable quality: s 74D(1)(d) and see [175]
above. For the reasons stated at [106]-[126] above, we
do not consider that it
was more probable than not that the consumption of Vioxx was a necessary
precondition of Mr Peterson’s
heart attack on 8 December 2003.
A conclusion that Mr Peterson would not have had his heart attack but
for the consumption of Vioxx
is a matter of conjecture rather than reasonable
inference on the balance of probabilities. This is reason enough to conclude
s 74D is not engaged.
primary judge found that Question 23 of the Schedule, which asked
“were Vioxx tablets not of merchantable quality within the meaning of
section 74D of the [TPA] by reason of the fact that the
consumption of Vioxx
materially increased the risk of suffering the condition?” was not a
common question. That is, the answer
to Question 23 could not be determined
uniformly across the representative class. Although we have already disposed of
Mr Peterson’s
claim under s 74D, it is appropriate for the purposes of the
representative class action to make some observations concerning the
judge’s consideration of the last element of Mr Peterson’s claim
under s 74D – that the goods must not
be of merchantable quality:
s 74D(1)(c). Under s 74B(1)(c) and (d), the goods must have been
acquired for a purpose made known
to the manufacturer. If the goods are not fit
purpose and the consumer suffers loss or damage because the
goods are not reasonably fit for that purpose, the manufacturer is liable.
Under s 74D, the subjective purpose for which the goods were acquired
is irrelevant. The enquiry is whether the goods are fit for
the purpose or
purposes for which goods
of that kind
are commonly bought as it is
reasonable to expect, having regard to any description applied to the goods by
the corporation, the
price received by the corporation for the goods and all
other relevant circumstances: ss 74D(1)(c) and (3). The time at
goods are assessed is the time of supply. The test is objective:
Medtel Pty Ltd v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
(2003) 130 FCR 182
and [70]. So
much is made clear by the express words of s 74D(2).
then is the position here? The primary judge upheld Mr Peterson’s
claim under s 74D on the basis that Vioxx was not as
fit for the purpose for
which goods of that kind were commonly bought as it was reasonable to expect
because “they increased
the risk of heart attack by a factor of about
2” in the population of the APPROVe study (Reasons at [975]). However,
the considerations
in s 74D(3) make it clear that an observation that there
was an increase in risk “of about 2” does not, in this case,
more, demonstrate unfitness for purpose.
should point out that this does not determine whether Vioxx was of merchantable
quality in Mr Peterson’s case. It is unnecessary
to reach a conclusion on
this in light of [178] above. As with s 74B (see [174] above), whether
Vioxx was not reasonably fit for
purpose as use as a prescription medication for
treatment of arthritic pain without gastrointestinal effects is a question of
complexity that is not answered for the purposes of s 74D by a simple
mathematical comparison of a particular form of risk. The
statute itself
recognises that the description of the goods, the price of the goods and
“all other relevant circumstances”
are to be taken into account in
determining what was reasonable to expect about fitness for purpose at the time
would allow MSDA’s appeal in relation to s 74D of the
SECTION 75AD OF THE TPA
Legislation and legislative history
75AD gives individuals the right to be compensated by a manufacturer for loss
suffered by the individual as a result of injury
caused by defective goods.
Negligence is not a necessary element. Section 75AE extends liability for
defective goods to loss by
a person other than the injured individual.
Part VA of the TPA also extends liability for defective goods to loss where
goods cause damage to, or destruction of, personal property
(s 75AF) and real property (s 75AG). We are concerned only with
75AD relevantly provided:
(a) a corporation, in trade or commerce, supplies goods manufactured by it;
(b) they have a
(c) because of the
, an individual suffers
(d) the corporation is liable to compensate the individual for the amount of the
individual’s loss suffered as a result of
the injuries;
(e) the individual may recover that amount by action against the
corporation.
[Emphasis added].
was defined in s 75AC as
(1) For the purposes of this Part, goods have a defect if their safety is not
such as persons generally are entitled to
(2) In determining the extent of the safety of goods, regard is to be given to
all relevant circumstances including:
(a) the manner in which, and the purposes for which, they have been marketed;
(b) their packaging; and
(c) the use of any mark in relation to them;
(d) any instructions for, or warnings with respect to, doing, or refraining from
doing, anything with or in relation to them;
(e) what might reasonably be expected to be done with or in relation to them;
(f) the time when they were supplied by their
manufacturer.
(3) An inference that goods have a defect is not to be made only because of the
fact that, after they were supplied by their manufacturer,
safer goods of the
same kind were supplied.
[Emphasis added].
75AD is in a separate part of the TPA, Pt VA, included in 1992:
Trade Practices Amendment Bill 1992
Part VA of the TPA introduced into Australia a strict product liability
on the 1985 European Community Product Liability Directive
): Explanatory Memorandum,
Trade Practices Amendment
). Part VA was described at [1]-[3] of the EM
as follows:
It provides a regime of strict liability, whereby a person who is injured or
suffers property damage as a result of a defective product
has a right to
compensation against the manufacturer
without the need to prove negligence on
the part of the manufacturer.
The key concept of the new Part VA ... is that a person who is injured, or whose
property is damaged, by a defective product will
have a right to compensation
against the manufacturer of the product. Goods are ‘defective’ if
they do not have the
degree of safety which persons are generally entitled to
expect in all the circumstances. ...
The manufacturer can escape liability where it can prove one of a number of
defences, the most significant being ... that the goods
represented the
“state of the art”.
[Emphasis added].
Primary judge’s findings and issues on appeal
primary judge found Vioxx was a good manufactured by MSDA, that the good had a
defect and that Mr Peterson suffered injuries
because of the defect:
s 75AD of the TPA. The “defect” was found to have arisen
because the safety of Vioxx was not
such as persons generally were entitled to
expect: s 75AC of the TPA (Reasons at [918] and [921]). However, the
primary judge dismissed
Mr Peterson’s claim under s 75AD because
his Honour found that the state of scientific knowledge at the time of supply
not such as to have enabled the defect to have been discovered (Reasons at
appealed against the finding of “defect”. Mr Peterson
cross-appealed the primary judge’s orders dismissing
claim. There were, therefore, two issues on appeal – was the primary
judge correct to conclude (1) that Vioxx was
defective within the meaning of
s 75AD of the TPA, and (2) that the state of scientific knowledge at the
time of supply was not such
as to have enabled the defect to have been
discovered?
the reasons that follow in relation to the s 75AD claim, we would
dismiss MSDA’s appeal and dismiss the cross-appeal.
independently of the question of “defect” and the state of
scientific knowledge, Mr Peterson’s claim under
s 75AD must fail
on causation. That is, if there was a defect, Mr Peterson did not establish
that he suffered injuries “because
of the defect” within
s 75AD: see [165] above.
Defect within the meaning of s 75AC
number of matters should be noted about s 75AC. It is an objective
standard based upon what the public at large, not any particular
individual, is
entitled to expect: s 75AC(1) and
Carey-Hazell
v Getz Bros &
Co (Aust) Pty Ltd
(2004) ATPR 42-014
at [186]. Next, it does not require
goods to be absolutely free from risk. The level of safety required is that
which the community
is entitled to expect. Third, “defects” in
prescription pharmaceuticals raise their own issues. As was explained in
at [21] and [24]:
... [T]he court must take all relevant circumstances into account in determining
the safety of goods. Safety expectations may also
depend on matters such as the
nature of the product and community knowledge of that product. For example,
there are a number of
known negative side effects associated with certain
pharmaceuticals and vaccines. It is also generally accepted and known that
side effects cannot be avoided. Such products are known to confer
substantial benefits which flow to the wider community at large.
statistical chance of injury associated with them does not of itself mean that
they are “defective”.
The role which intermediaries may play in the supply of goods may also need to
be taken into account. For example, prescription
pharmaceuticals are supplied
to the consumer by a qualified pharmacist and only on the prescription of a
qualified medical practitioner.
Due to the complex nature and effects of these
products, complete instructions and warnings may not be provided to the consumer
by the manufacturer. However, detailed product information is provided to
doctors and pharmacists by the manufacturer so these learned
intermediaries are
sufficiently informed to be able to decide whether or not it is appropriate to
dispense pharmaceuticals to particular
consumers. This factor will be relevant
in determining whether a pharmaceutical is defective, particularly where a claim
of a defect
in information provided is made.
the statute expressly provides (reinforced by the EM), goods are
“defective” if they do not have the degree of safety
which persons
are generally entitled to expect in all the circumstances and, in the context of
a prescription drug, those circumstances
may include the PI and information
provided to doctors and pharmacists by the manufacturer.
Peterson’s case at trial was that there was a defect within the meaning of
s 75AC because (1) as a matter of its chemistry
and human physiology as
reflected in epidemiology Vioxx increased the risk of MI, and (2) MSDA failed to
provide adequate warning
of that increased risk.
primary judge addressed this issue at [914] as
The circumstances to which [Mr Peterson] pointed for the purposes of
s 75AC(2) were the following:
(a) rofecoxib was a prescription only non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
(b) [MSDA] marketed in Australia Vioxx tablets to pharmacists, medical
practitioners and other health care professionals as a non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drug for the treatment of arthritis that was safer than other
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs in that it
was less likely to cause
adverse gastrointestinal conditions and
(c) it was reasonable to expect that medical practitioners and other health care
professionals would prescribe and pharmacists would
supply under prescription
Vioxx tablets as a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug for the treatment of
(d) it was reasonable to expect that persons who were prescribed by a medical
practitioner or other health care professional and
obtained from a pharmacist
Vioxx tablets would consume the Vioxx tablets as a non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drug for the treatment
(e) it was reasonable to expect that many persons who were prescribed by a
medical practitioner or other health care professional
and obtained from a
pharmacist Vioxx tablets and who consumed the Vioxx tablets as a non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drug for the
treatment of arthritis were likely to be elderly
and, accordingly, at particular risk of suffering the [pleaded] cardiovascular
conditions;
(f) in marketing, distributing and/or supplying for sale in Australia Vioxx
tablets [MSDA] failed to provide pharmacists, medical
practitioners and other
health care professionals any adequate information, advice or warning to the
effect that the consumption
of rofecoxib or Vioxx tablets materially increased
the risk of suffering the [pleaded] cardiovascular
conditions;
(g) the packaging and labelling of Vioxx tablets did not contain or carry any
adequate information, advice or warning to the effect
that the consumption of
rofecoxib or Vioxx tablets materially increased the risk of suffering the
[pleaded] cardiovascular conditions;
(h) the Vioxx [PI] did not contain any adequate information, advice or warning
to the effect that the consumption of rofecoxib or
Vioxx tablets materially
increased the risk of suffering the [pleaded] cardiovascular conditions
primary judge accepted that items (a) – (d) existed in the present case
(Reasons at [915]). His Honour concluded that
there was support in the
evidence for item (e). For items (f) – (h), in the context of MI,
the primary judge held that across
a population the consumption of Vioxx did
involve an increase in risk, but that the extent of the risk in a particular
depend on the conditions presumptively existing in the
patient’s vasculature. So, for example, for a patient in a reasonably
advanced state of atherosclerosis, the risk was more pronounced (Reasons at
[916]). As a result, the primary judge concluded that
“[a]bsent the
provision of any information, advice or warning, ... the risk ... made the
safety of Vioxx less than what persons
generally were entitled to expect”
(Reasons at [917]). The primary judge stated that “the withdrawal of
Vioxx from the
market on 30 September 2004 implied as much” (Reasons at
is important to record that the primary judge did not find that persons
generally are entitled to expect that all drugs will be
free of side-effects.
Instead, his Honour held that “persons generally are entitled to expect
that, to the extent that a drug
is known or believed to have side-effects, or to
carry the potential for side-effects (particularly of a serious nature),
practitioners
will, in whatever terms, and by whatever means, are appropriate,
be furnished by the drug supplier with information or warnings sufficient
permit a balanced, cautious and informed judgment to be made” (Reasons at
the context of the present case, the primary judge held that there was
“nothing in the nature of a warning, and no information
cardiovascular results of the VIGOR trial, were communicated by MSDA to Dr
Dickman before at least November 2001”
(Reasons at [918]).
The primary judge found that until then, the safety of Vioxx (as purchased
and consumed by Mr Peterson) was
not such as persons generally were entitled to
expect (Reasons at [918]). In particular, the primary judge found that the
mere amendment
of the Vioxx PI in November 2001 was, in the context of all the
relevant circumstances, insufficient to make the safety of Vioxx
such as persons
generally were entitled to expect (Reasons at [921]). His Honour held that the
November 2001 amendment to the PI
should have been, but was not, communicated to
Dr Dickman by a “Dear Doctor” letter. His Honour made that finding
the bases that:
PI in its amended form in November 2001 was an instruction or warning within the
meaning of s 75AC(2)(d);
October 2000, MSDA had corresponded with doctors generally including advice
with the consumption of
Vioxx, and various precautions which ought to be observed. An aspect of that
advice was that, in certain
osteoarthritis studies, the MI rate amongst those
taking Vioxx had been less than 0.1 %;
all times that Vioxx was on the market in Australia (see [37] above), MSDA had
available information to the effect that, in the
VIGOR trial, the MI rate had
been 0.5%. Although there may have been a number of legitimate bases upon which
MSDA might have proposed
that this level of risk was not generally applicable,
or was not applicable to osteoarthritis patients, persons generally were
to expect that an advice or a warning that conveyed the outcome of the
VIGOR trial would have been communicated to medical practitioners
by a means no
less likely to capture their attention than the means employed in October
November 2001 amendment to the PI should have been, but was not, communicated to
Dr Dickman by a “Dear Doctor” letter;
Accordingly,
the mere amendment of the Vioxx PI in November 2001 was, in the context of all
the relevant circumstances, insufficient
to make the safety of Vioxx such as
persons generally were entitled to expect.
those bases, the primary judge held that when (after November 2001) MSDA
supplied the Vioxx tablets that were ultimately consumed
by Mr Peterson, those
tablets had a defect within the meaning of s 75AD of the TPA. Although the
primary judge did not identify
the defect in express terms, it is apparent that
he characterised the defect as the risk of Vioxx absent the provision of any
information,
advice or warning as to this risk (Reasons at [917]). MSDA
submitted that the primary judge was wrong to hold that Vioxx had a defect
within the meaning of s 75AD(b) as provided by ss 75AC(1) and (2). We
reject this submission.
way of cross-appeal, Mr Peterson submitted that his Honour should have found
that the defect in Vioxx had been discovered by no
later than March 2000 when
the results of the VIGOR study were released and provided the signal risk that
the consumption of Vioxx
materially increased the risk of MI. We do not accept
this aspect of Mr Peterson’s cross-appeal. It is appropriate to deal
the cross-appeal first.
we have explained earlier in these reasons, we agree with the primary judge that
there were difficulties in drawing definite conclusions
from the VIGOR study
difficulties identified included that
the views of the experts were not
consistent, the VIGOR trial was dealing with very low numbers and experts were
offering other plausible
causes about the relationship between the increased
risk of MI and the consumption of Vioxx. Indeed, in a publication in late 2004,
experts expressed that
plausible cause of the apparent excess risk of
MI in the VIGOR trial was the combination of some cardioprotective effect of
and “the play of chance”. They also said that
“[w]hile other mechanisms cannot be discounted, there is currently
evidence in humans to support a prothrombotic effect for coxibs” (Reasons
at [385]). Moreover, these conclusions were
not supportive of the FitzGerald
hypothesis.
Notwithstanding
these difficulties, the better view is that Vioxx had a defect within the
meaning of s 75AC. The defect was one
which affected some people, not all.
The defect was that in some people, by a mechanism not known and the subject of
no hypothesis,
it increased the risk of MI and provided no information,
advice or warning as to this effect: see [137]-[138] and [198] above. But
the conclusion that Vioxx had this “defect” presents two further
statutory questions. First, the statute requires that
an individual claimant
suffer injuries
because of the defect
: s 75AD(c). As has already
been demonstrated, Mr Peterson did not demonstrate that the increased risk
affected him, in the sense
that the MI he suffered was caused by (because of)
his consumption of Vioxx: see [165] above. In other words,
Mr Peterson’s
claim fails at the first hurdle.
even if Mr Peterson had demonstrated that the MI he suffered was caused by
(because of) his consumption of Vioxx (which
he did not), the next relevant
statutory enquiry would be whether the defect (as it has been identified) was
one which, given the
state of scientific or technical knowledge at the time when
the goods were supplied by MSDA, was not such as to enable that defect
be discovered. It is to that issue we now turn.
Section 75AK(1)(c) – State of Art Defence
75AK(1)(c) of the TPA contained the “development of risks” or
“state of art defence” and relevantly
(1) In a liability action, it is a defence if it is established
(c) the state of scientific or technical knowledge at the time when [the goods]
were supplied by their actual manufacturer was not
such as to enable that defect
to be discovered; or ...
The section was based on Art 7(e) of the Directive.
defence in s 75AK(1)(c) was described in the EM at [55]-[56] as
It is the objective state of scientific and technical knowledge, not the
subjective knowledge of the individual manufacturer, which
is to be taken into
account. It is only if the defect could not have been discovered by anybody
that the manufacturer will be able
to succeed. A manufacturer must expect that
there may be further scientific or technical advances during the period of
testing and
production. The manufacturer should therefore satisfy itself that
there have been no further technical advances which affect the
safety of the
goods before putting them into circulation.
Similarly, a manufacturer must keep up to date with advances in knowledge after
it first puts a product into circulation to ensure
that new information is taken
into account in the manufacture of subsequent goods, as new information may
expose defects in goods.
The crucial time is therefore when the alleged
defective good which caused the injury was supplied by the manufacturer, not the
time at which the manufacturer first supplied goods of that
primary judge dismissed Mr Peterson’s claim under s 75AD because
he found that the state of scientific knowledge at the
time of supply was not
such as to have enabled the defect to have been discovered: s 75AK(1)(c)
of the TPA. As will be detailed
below, we agree with the primary
judge’s findings and conclusions in this respect.
primary judge relied on the factual finding that it was not until September 2004
that the state of scientific knowledge was such
as to enable the discovery of
the fact that the consumption of Vioxx increased the risk of MI (Reasons at
[927]). The primary judge’s
reasoning which led to the factual
finding was as follows (Reasons at [927]):
With respect to the state of the art defence advanced by MSDA, it submitted
that the defect alleged to have existed in Vioxx was
that “Vioxx tablets
materially increased the risk of suffering the [pleaded] cardiovascular
conditions”. MSDA submitted
that, while it was not in dispute that there
was an hypothesis to this effect during the whole of the period that Vioxx was
market in Australia, the totality of the scientific evidence did not take
the matter further, and “it never rose to the level
of scientific
knowledge required to enable a defect to be discovered during the relevant
period.” ...I have concluded that
it was not until the unblinding of
Merck to the cardiovascular data from the APPROVe study in September 2004 that
the respondents
knew or ought to have known that the consumption of Vioxx
increased the risk of the occurrence of cardiovascular events. To that
extent, the respondents’ submission is well-founded. However, the present
question is whether that is one and the same thing
as concluding that the defect
which I have identified could not have been discovered by reference to the state
of scientific or technical
knowledge at the time.
At the scientific or technical level as such, I would hold that the defect could
not have been so discovered. The defect, of course,
is the inadequate
safety of the goods themselves. Vioxx was unsafe in that sense because it
increased the risk of [MI]. However,
it was not until September 2004 that that
increase in risk could be “discovered” in the sense·of
established at
the scientific level. Merck was at the forefront of research in
this regard (understandably, since rofecoxib was its own molecule).
Merck’s own knowledge
the state of scientific knowledge to
which s 75AK(l)(c) refers.
Mr Peterson
cross-appealed against the primary judge’s orders dismissing the
s 75AD claim. Mr Peterson submitted that the
s 75AK(1)(c) cannot apply if, at the time of supply, the defect had already
been discovered and that the primary judge
should have found that the defect in
Vioxx had been discovered by no later than March 2000 (see [199] above), when
the results of
the VIGOR study were released. Mr Peterson submitted that the
primary judge’s failure to make that finding was because he
s 75AK(1)(c) of the TPA as requiring that for a defect to be discovered, it
had to be established at a scientific level
rather than when it is known that
there is a real and serious risk that it exists, notwithstanding that it may
only be later that
the defect can be positively proved to exist at the
scientific level. However, the state of scientific knowledge at the time of
Peterson’s MI was not just the results of the VIGOR study but the
conclusions to be drawn from it. This is clear from his
Honour’s reasons.
Mr Peterson’s cross-appeal raised questions of statutory construction
and disputes as to the factual
findings made by the primary judge.
His complaints should be dismissed.
recorded at [205]-[206] above, the state of scientific knowledge at the time
Mr Peterson took Vioxx was such that it was not demonstrated
caused an increased risk of MI. As the primary judge said at
Section 75AK(l)(c) contemplates the existence of a defect capable of being
discovered by reference to the current state of scientific
or technical
knowledge. It is not concerned with the kind of contextual circumstances
referred to in s 75AC(2). ... The defect
was something inherent in Vioxx
as a matter of composition. I consider that the intent of s 75AK(1)(c) is
defect could not be discovered according to the state of
scientific or technical knowledge, the defence should be available,
notwithstanding
that enough was suspected about the product to activate an
implied obligation to give warnings of the kind mentioned in
s 75AC(2)(d).
That is, the state of scientific or technical knowledge at the time when
Vioxx was supplied by MSDA to Mr Peterson was not such as
to enable the
defect to be discovered. We refer to [35] to [46] above. We agree with these
conclusions.
would allow MSDA’s appeal and set aside the judgment in favour of Mr
Peterson and dismiss his action.
to MSDA’s application for leave to appeal in respect of the determination
of questions which affect the other applicants,
we would grant leave to appeal,
and allow the appeal to the extent indicated in our reasons.
extend time to allow Mr Peterson to file a notice of cross-appeal but dismiss
the cross-appeal.
direct that the parties confer and thereafter by 4:00pm on 26 October 2011 file
minutes of orders (including as to costs), and
in the event of disagreement
file and serve written submissions as to the contentions of the parties.
certify that the preceding two hundred and twelve (212) numbered paragraphs are
a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment herein of
the Honourable Chief Justice
Keane and Justices Bennett and Gordon.
Dated: 12 October 2011
Commonality
Question 1.
Are any and which of the questions set out below common to
the claims of the group members?
Save to the extent indicated in the answers set out below, all
the questions are common to the claims of the group members.
Materially increased risk
Question 2.
Is there a physiological mechanism by which the
consumption of Vioxx is capable of causing any and which of the Vioxx
cardiovascular
conditions?
As amended by replacing “causing” with
“contributing to the onset of”: In the case of myocardial
infarction,
yes; otherwise, no.
Question 3.
If the answer to question 2 is in the affirmative, then
for each such condition, what is the physiological mechanism?
The aggregation of thrombotic material in the vasculature as
the result of the blocking of the production of prostacyclin by the inhibition
of COX-2 in the absence of any blocking of the production of platelet
thromboxane.
Question 4.
Did the consumption of Vioxx increase the risk of
suffering any and which of the Vioxx cardiovascular
conditions?
In the case of myocardial infarction, yes;
otherwise, no.
Question 5.
If the answer to question 4 is in the affirmative, was the
increase in risk material?
To the extent that question 4 was
answered in the affirmative, yes.
Question 6.
If the answer to question 5 is in the
affirmative:
when, if ever, did the First Respondent (“Merck
Australia”) first know that the consumption of Vioxx materially increased
the risk of suffering the condition?
when, if ever, ought Merck Australia have first known that that
consumption of Vioxx materially increased the risk of suffering the
did Merck Australia owe the group members a duty to take
reasonable care to avoid acts and omissions that may expose them to a material
increase in the risk of suffering the condition as a consequence of consuming
Vioxx tablets?
(a) & (b): Late September 2004. However, Merck Australia
was first presented with a worrisome and important signal of potential
cardiovascular risk associated with the consumption of Vioxx in March 2000.
. Did Merck Australia:
not owe group members
the duty of care alleged; or
satisfy the applicable standard of care by virtue of compliance
with the relevant legislative requirements referred to in paragraph
of the Defence to Further Amended Statement of Claim and requirements imposed
upon it in respect of Vioxx tablets by the
Therapeutic Goods Administration
(“TGA”) pursuant to the powers granted by the
Therapeutic Goods
(a) & (b): No.
Question 8.
Did Merck Australia:
not owe group members
the duty of care alleged; or
satisfy the applicable standard of care by reason of the learned
intermediary defence pleaded in paragraph 63 of the Defence to Further
Statement of Claim?
(a) & (b): No.
Question 9.
If the answer to question 5 is in the affirmative:
did Merck Australia fail to make adequate inquiries of the Second
Respondent (“Merck Inc”) regarding the adverse side
effects and
health risks that may be associated with the consumption of Vioxx including a
material increase in the risk of suffering
the condition? If so, was that
failure less than reasonable in all of the circumstances?
Did Merck Australia fail to undertake or cause to be undertaken
any or any adequate research, investigations, clinical trials or
observational
studies in order to ascertain the adverse side effects and health risks that may
be associated with the consumption
of Vioxx including a material increase in the
risk of suffering the condition? If so, was that failure less than reasonable
of the circumstances?
Did Merck Australia fail to have adequate regard to the results of
any research, investigations, clinical trials or observational
undertaken or caused to be undertaken by Merck Australia, Merck Inc or others
suggesting that the consumption of Vioxx materially
increased the risk of
suffering the condition? If so, was that failure less than reasonable in all of
the circumstances?
Australia fail to provide adequate information, advice or warning to the general
public or to health care professionals
to the effect that the consumption of
Vioxx materially increased the risk of suffering the condition? If so, was that
failure less
than reasonable in all of the circumstances?
Did Merck Australia develop and implement a marketing strategy or
campaign by which it formulated and disseminated to health care
professionals in
Australia any and which of the following representations about Vioxx:
Vioxx has an excellent gastrointestinal safety profile compared
with other non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (“NSAIDs”);
Vioxx has an excellent overall safety profile compared with other
Vioxx does not increase the incidence of adverse cardiovascular
higher rates of myocardial infarction and other cardiovascular
events among persons taking Vioxx relative to persons taking other
traditional
NSAIDs (in particular naproxen) did not indicate that Vioxx increased the risk
of suffering adverse cardiovascular events
but were attributable to the fact
that the consumption of naproxen produced a lower incidence of cardiovascular
events because naproxen
inhibits platelet aggregation in a manner similar to
aspirin while Vioxx does not;
the higher rates of myocardial infarction among persons taking
Vioxx relative to persons taking naproxen observed in the Vioxx Gastrointestinal
Outcomes Research Trial (“Vigor”) did not indicate that Vioxx
increased the risk of suffering adverse cardiovascular
any information to the effect that Vioxx was not as safe as other
NSAIDs because the consumption of Vioxx materially increased the
suffering the condition was incorrect, misleading, exaggerated and/or
unreliable.
If so, was that conduct less than reasonable in all of the
circumstances?
(a), (b) & (c): No
(i) Merck Australia failed to provide adequate information, advice or warning
to healthcare professionals generally about the signal
of risk referred to in
the answer to question 6. Whether that failure was less than reasonable in all
of the circumstances is not
a common question.
(ii) Whether Merck Australia failed to provide adequate information, advice
or warning to individual healthcare professionals about
the signal of risk
referred to in the answer to question 6 is not a common question.
(iii) Merck Australia did not fail to provide adequate information, advice or
warning to the general public about the signal of risk
referred to in the answer
to question 6.
(e): As to the dissemination of representations to health care professionals
who treated or advised individual group members, not
a common question.
Otherwise, not appropriate to answer.
Question 10.
Was it less than reasonable in all of the circumstances,
at any time before 30 September 2004, for Merck Australia to distribute
Vioxx in Australia? If so, when?
Question 11.
Is the fact that the Product Information for Vioxx was
approved by the TGA pursuant to the
Therapeutic Goods Act
, if proved, a
complete answer to an allegation that Merck Australia was in breach of any
common law duty by unreasonably failing
to adequately disclose information in
the Product Information?
Trade Practices Act 1974
If the answer to question 5 is in the affirmative, did Merck
label Vioxx without providing adequate information, advice or
warning to the general public or to health care professionals to the
effect that
the consumption of Vioxx materially increased the risk of suffering the
market and distribute and/or supply Vioxx for sale in Australia
without providing adequate information, advice or warning to the
general public
or to health care professionals to the effect that the consumption of Vioxx
materially increased the risk of suffering
the condition?
develop and implement a marketing strategy or campaign by which it
formulated and disseminated to health care professionals in Australia,
which of the following representations about Vioxx:
Vioxx has an excellent gastrointestinal safety profile compared
with other NSAIDs;
Vioxx has an excellent overall safety profile compared with other
Vioxx does not increase the incidence of adverse cardiovascular
higher rates of myocardial infarction and other cardiovascular
events among persons taking Vioxx relative to persons taking other
traditional
NSAIDs (in particular naproxen) did not indicate that Vioxx increased the risk
of suffering adverse cardiovascular events
but were attributable to the fact
that the consumption of naproxen produced a lower incidence of cardiovascular
events because naproxen
inhibits platelet aggregation in a manner similar to
aspirin while Vioxx does not;
the higher rates of myocardial infarction among persons taking
Vioxx relative to persons taking naproxen observed in Vigor did not
that Vioxx increased the risk of suffering adverse cardiovascular events;
information to the effect that Vioxx was not as safe as other
NSAIDs because the consumption of Vioxx materially increased the risk
suffering the condition was incorrect, misleading, exaggerated and/or
unreliable?
(a): Not a common question.
(i) Merck Australia marketed, distributed and supplied Vioxx for sale in
Australia without providing adequate information, advice
or warning to health
care professionals generally about the signal of risk referred to in the answer
to question 6.
(ii) Whether Merck Australia marketed, distributed and supplied Vioxx for
sale in Australia without providing adequate information,
advice or warning to
individual healthcare professionals about the signal of risk referred to in the
answer to question 6 is not
a common question.
(iii) Merck Australia did not market, distribute or supply Vioxx for sale
in Australia without providing adequate information, advice
or warning to the
general public about the signal of risk referred to in the answer to question
(c): As to the dissemination of representations to health care professionals
who treated or advised individual group members, not
a common question.
Otherwise, not appropriate to answer.
Question 13.
If Merck engaged in any of the conduct referred to in
question 12 was any of that conduct in trade or commerce within the meaning
Trade Practices Act
? If so, which conduct?
Merck Australia’s promotional interactions with
prescribers were in trade and commerce within the meaning of the
Practices Act
Question 14.
Was any of the conduct identified in question 12, in all
of the circumstances and context in which it occurred, misleading or deceptive
or likely to mislead or deceive in contravention of
Practices Act
As to the conduct identified in answer 12(b)(i): Until 16
November 2001, yes; otherwise, no.
Question 15.
Upon the proper construction of the
Therapeutic Goods
, does the fact that the Product Information for Vioxx was approved by
the TGA pursuant to the
Therapeutic Goods Act
, if proved, exclude the
operation of the
Trade Practices Act
in so far as an allegation is made
that a failure to adequately disclose information in the Product Information
contravenes:
Trade Practices
section 75AD of the
Trade Practices
(a) & (b): No.
Question 16.
Is the fact that Vioxx was registered on the Australian
Register of Therapeutic Goods pursuant to the
Therapeutic Goods Act
available only by prescription of permitted prescribers, and that the Product
Information for Vioxx was approved by the TGA pursuant
Therapeutic
, if proved, a complete answer to an allegation that the
respondent contravened:
Trade Practices
section 75AD of the
Trade Practices Act
by failing to adequately disclose information in the Product
Information?
(a) & (b): No.
Sections 75AD, 74B and 74D of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
Question 17.
Were Vioxx tablets manufactured by Merck Australia
“goods” that were “ordinarily acquired” as defined in
s 74A(2) of the
Trade Practices Act
Question 18.
Is the fact that Vioxx was registered on the Australian
Register of Therapeutic Goods pursuant to the
Therapeutic Goods Act
available in its approved form and packaging only by prescription of permitted
prescribers, if proved, sufficient to establish
as a matter of law that Vioxx
was reasonably fit for purpose within the meaning of s 74B of the
Practices Act
Question 19
. Is the fact that Vioxx was registered on the Australian
Register of Therapeutic Goods pursuant to the
Therapeutic Goods Act
available in its approved form and packaging only by prescription of permitted
prescribers, if proved, sufficient to establish
as a matter of law that Vioxx
was of merchantable quality within the meaning of s 74D of the
Practices Act
Question 20.
If the answer to question 5 is in the affirmative, were
Vioxx tablets defective within the meaning of s 75AD of the
Practices Act
in that the safety of Vioxx tablets was not such as persons
are generally entitled to expect by reason of the fact that the consumption
Vioxx materially increased the risk of suffering the condition?
In the absence of any information, advice or warning,
addressed to a particular group member or to his or her medical practitioner,
the effect that the consumption of Vioxx materially increased the risk of
myocardial infarction, yes.
Question 21.
If the answer to question 5 is in the affirmative, were
Vioxx tablets defective within the meaning of s 75AD of the
Practices Act
in that the safety of Vioxx was not such as persons are
generally entitled to expect by reason of the fact that the packaging and
labelling of Vioxx and the Vioxx product information did not contain adequate
information, advice or warning to the effect that the
consumption of Vioxx
materially increased the risk of suffering the condition?
With respect to packaging and labelling, not a common
question. With respect to the Product Information, the absence of any adequate
information, advice or warning therefrom was a circumstance which, together with
others, made the safety of Vioxx not such as persons
generally were entitled to
expect within the meaning of s 75AD.
Question 22.
If the answer to question 5 is in the affirmative, were
Vioxx tablets not reasonably fit for the purpose of acquisition within the
meaning of s 74B of the
Trade Practices Act
by reason of the fact
that the consumption of Vioxx materially increased the risk of suffering the
Not a common question.
Question 23.
If the answer to question 5 is in the affirmative, were
Vioxx tablets not of merchantable quality within the meaning of s 74D of
Trade Practices Act
by reason of the fact that the consumption of
Vioxx materially increased the risk of suffering the
Not a common question.
Question 24.
If the answer to question 5 is in the affirmative, at all
times before 30 September 2004 was the state of scientific or technical
knowledge such as to enable Merck Australia to discover that the consumption of
Vioxx materially increased the risk of suffering
Question 25.
Were the defects pleaded in paragraphs 33, 34 and 37 of
the Further Amended Statement of Claim (if found to exist) caused by Merck
Australia’s compliance with a mandatory standard or
Claim against Merck Inc
Question 26.
If the answer to
question 5 is in the affirmative:
when did Merck Inc first know that the consumption of Vioxx
materially increased the risk of suffering the condition?
when ought Merck Inc to have first known that the consumption of
Vioxx materially increased the risk of suffering the condition?
did Merck Inc owe the group members a duty to take reasonable care
to avoid acts and omissions that may expose them to a material
increase in the
risk of suffering the condition as a consequence of consuming Vioxx?
(a) & (b): Late September 2004. However, Merck Inc was
first presented with a worrisome and important signal of potential
cardiovascular
risk associated with the consumption of Vioxx in March 2000.
Question 27.
Did Merck Inc:
not owe group members the
duty of care alleged; or
satisfy the applicable standard of
by virtue of Merck Australia’s compliance with the relevant legislative
requirements referred to in paragraphs 23(a)-(1) of
the Defence to Amended
Statement of Claim and the requirements imposed upon Merck Australia by the TGA
pursuant to the powers granted
Therapeutic Goods
(a) & (b): No.
Question 28.
Did Merck Inc:
not owe group members the
duty of care alleged; or
satisfy the applicable standard of
by reason of the learned intermediary defence pleaded in paragraph 24 of the
Defence to the Further Amended Statement of Claim?
Question 29
. If the answer to question 5 is in the affirmative:
did Merck Inc fail to undertake or cause to be undertaken any or
any adequate research, investigations, clinical trials or observational
in order to ascertain the adverse side effects and health risks that may be
associated with the consumption of Vioxx including
a material increase in the
risk of suffering the condition? If so, was that failure less than reasonable
in all of the circumstances?
did Merck Inc fail to have adequate regard to the results of any
research, investigations, clinical trials or observational studies
undertaken or
caused to be undertaken by Merck Inc or others suggesting that the consumption
of Vioxx materially increased the risk
of suffering the condition? If so, was
that failure less than reasonable in all of the circumstances?
Did Merck Inc withhold from and fail to publish in medical
publications or otherwise reveal data and information of which it was
concerning adverse cardiovascular risks associated with the consumption of
Vioxx? If so, was that failure less than reasonable
in all of the
circumstances?
Did Merck Inc fail to provide to Merck Australia, and health care
professionals in Australia or the Australian public any or any
information, advice or warning to the effect that the consumption of Vioxx
materially increased the risk of suffering the
condition? If so, was that
failure less than reasonable in all of the circumstances?
(b), (c) & (d): No.
Question 30.
Was it less than reasonable in all of the circumstances
at any time before 30 September 2004 for Merck Inc to supply Vioxx to Merck
Australia in Australia? If so, when?
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.16 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter