Application by Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd (No 2) [2020] ACompT 3 (14 December 2020)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Application by Port of Newcastle
Operations Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2020] ACompT 3
Review from:
The arbitration determination by the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission under
section 44ZP
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) in relation to an access dispute between Glencore Coal Assets Australia
Pty Ltd and Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd
File number:
ACT 2 of 2018
ACT 3 of 2018
O'BRYAN J (Deputy President)
DR D ABRAHAM
PROF K DAVIS (Member)
Date of Determination:
Catchwords:
CASE MANAGEMENT
– determination of
the Tribunal set aside by the Federal Court and remitted to the Tribunal for
re-determination in accordance
with law – where an application has been
made to the High Court of Australia seeking special leave to appeal from the
of the Federal Court – whether the Tribunal should proceed to
hear the remitted matter before the High Court application has
been determined
– whether the Tribunal should allow an extension of time for Port of
Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd to make an
application for the issue of a notice
s 44ZZOAAA(5)
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Cases cited:
Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd v Australian Competition
[2020] FCAFC 145
(2020) 382 ALR 331
Date of hearing:
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for Port of Newcastle Operations Pty
Mr CA Moore SC with Dr DJ Roche
Solicitor Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd:
Mr N De Young SC and Mr C Henderson
Solicitor Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd:
Clifford Chance
Counsel for Australian Competition and Consumer Commission:
Ms C Dermody
Solicitor for Australian Competition and Consumer Commission:
DLA Piper Australia
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
ACT 2 of 2018
APPLICATION BY PORT OF NEWCASTLE OPERATIONS PTY LTD UNDER
SECTION 44ZP
COMPETITION AND CONSUMER ACT 2010
REVIEW OF THE ARBITRATION DETERMINATION BY THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION AND
CONSUMER COMMISSION IN RELATION TO AN ACCESS
DISPUTE BETWEEN GLENCORE COAL LTD
AND PORT OF NEWCASTLE OPERATIONS PTY LTD
PORT OF NEWCASTLE OPERATIONS PTY LTD (ACN 165 332
ACT 3 of 2018
APPLICATION BY GLENCORE COAL PTY LTD UNDER
SECTION 44ZP
COMPETITION AND CONSUMER ACT 2010
(CTH) FOR REVIEW OF THE ARBITRATION
DETERMINATION BY THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION AND CONSUMER COMMISSION IN RELATION
TO AN ACCESS DISPUTE
BETWEEN GLENCORE COAL LTD AND PORT OF NEWCASTLE OPERATIONS
GLENCORE COAL ASSETS AUSTRALIA PTY LTD (ACN 163 821
O’BRYAN J (Deputy
DR D ABRAHAM (Member)
PROF K DAVIS
DATE OF DIRECTIONS:
THE TRIBUNAL DIRECTS THAT:
26 February 2021, Port of Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd (
) is to file
and serve any application for the Tribunal to issue a notice pursuant to
44ZZOAAA(5)
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
together with:
(a) a copy of the proposed notice;
(b) in so far as the proposed notice is addressed to PNO or a related company,
any affidavits and documents referred to in the notice
that it wishes the
Tribunal to have regard to pursuant to
s 44ZZOAA(a)(ii)
review (upon remittal of the review by the Federal Court of Australia); and
(c) submissions and any evidence to be relied upon in support of the
application.
12 March 2021, Glencore is to file and serve submissions and any evidence to be
relied upon in opposition to PNO’s application.
19 March 2021, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission is to file and
serve any submissions to be relied upon in relation
application.
matter be listed for the hearing of PNO’s application and further case
management on a date to be fixed.
REASONS FOR
THE TRIBUNAL:
Introduction
matter has been remitted to the Tribunal for re-determination in accordance with
the conclusions of the Full Court of the Federal
Court of Australia in its
decision made on 24 August 2020:
Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd v
Australian Competition Tribunal
[2020] FCAFC 145
(2020) 382 ALR 331.
parties disagree about the timing of the re-determination, in light of the
application that has been filed by Port of Newcastle
Operations Pty Ltd
) in the High Court of Australia seeking special leave to appeal from
the decision of the Full Federal Court. In short, Glencore Coal
Assets Australia
) seeks to press on with the hearing of the remitted
review while PNO argues that the hearing should await the finalisation of its
application for special leave to appeal and, if special leave is granted, the
hearing of the appeal. PNO has also foreshadowed an
application to seek to
adduce further evidence at the hearing of the remitted review (more technically,
an application for the Tribunal
to exercise its powers under
s 44ZZOAAA(5)
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
) to request
the provision of further information).
matter came before the Tribunal for case management on 6 October 2020 at which
time procedural directions were made. At that time,
it was contemplated that
PNO’s special leave application might be determined by the time the matter
was next listed before
the Tribunal.
matter returned before the Tribunal for further case management on 10 December
2020. At that date, and as at the date of these
reasons, PNO’s special
leave application has not been determined. The parties remained apart on the
appropriate course that
should be followed by the Tribunal in these
circumstances and advanced arguments in favour of their preferred course. At the
of the case management hearing, the Tribunal reserved its
the reasons explained below, the Tribunal has come to the view that the remitted
review should not be listed for hearing at this
time, while the decision of the
Full Federal Court remains subject to an application for special leave to appeal
to the High Court.
Nevertheless, practical steps can be taken in the meantime to
resolve any procedural or preliminary disputes relating to the hearing
remitted review so that, once the appellate process has been completed, any
necessary re-determination can be conducted promptly.
4 November 2016, Glencore notified the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission (
of the CCA of an access dispute in
relation to the declared shipping channel service provided by PNO, which
activated the ACCC’s
arbitration powers under
of the CCA. In
part, the dispute concerned the rates of the Navigation Service Charge and
Wharfage Charge levied by PNO.
18 September 2018, the ACCC made a final determination of the dispute under
of the CCA. Significantly, clause 1.2 of the ACCC determination
provided that the Navigation Service Charge and Wharfage Charge,
as determined
by the ACCC, would be backdated so as to apply from 8 July 2016 with interest
being payable on any amount overpaid
to PNO by Glencore having regard to the
ACCC determination.
8 October 2018, PNO filed an application for review of the ACCC's determination
pursuant to
of the CCA (ACT 2 of 2018). On 9 October 2018, Glencore
also filed an application for review (ACT 3 of 2018). By virtue of
of the CCA, the determination of the ACCC did not come into
effect (by reason of the application for review made to the Tribunal).
30 October 2019, the Tribunal (constituted by Middleton J, Mr R Shogren and Dr D
Abraham) made a determination under
of the CCA by which it varied
the determination of the ACCC in two respects. The first concerned the vessels
using the shipping channels
that were within the scope of, and were able to
benefit from, the determination (the “scope” issue). The second
the calculation of the applicable Navigation Service Charge payable by
Glencore to PNO, and specifically whether “user contributions”
should be taken into account in the calculation (the “user
contribution” issue).
24 August 2020, the Full Federal Court set aside the determination of the
Tribunal and remitted the applications to the Tribunal
for re-determination
according to law. As a consequence of the Full Court’s decision, there is
no longer an arbitration determination
25 September 2020, PNO filed an application with the High Court of Australia
seeking special leave to appeal from the whole of
the decision of the Full
Federal Court.
Whether the review should be conducted before the determination
of the appeal
argues that PNO’s position on the remittal involves a procedural
irregularity in that PNO has not sought a stay of
the decision of the Full
Federal Court but asks the Tribunal to stay its own proceeding. Glencore submits
that, in the absence of
any order staying the orders made by the Full Federal
Court, the Tribunal is bound to give effect to the decision of the Full Court
and should proceed to conduct the review by way of remittal. Glencore further
submits that it will suffer prejudice by reason of
delay by the Tribunal in
conducting the remitted review because of uncertainty with respect to the final
determination of the scope
of the shipping services that will become subject to
the access arrangements. Glencore argues that there may be practical
difficulties
in backdating the determination to apply to the broader scope of
shipping services for which Glencore will contend in the remitted
Tribunal accepts the submission of Glencore that the decision of the Full
Federal Court is binding on the Tribunal. However, the
Tribunal does not
consider that PNO’s position on the remittal involves a procedural
irregularity, or that the fact PNO did
not seek a stay of the Full Court’s
decision in some manner disentitles it from making case management submissions
to the Tribunal.
The Full Court’s decision has come into effect which
means that the Tribunal’s determination has been set aside and there
currently no effective determination of the notified dispute. The dispute is now
before the Tribunal. However, the proper management
and conduct of proceedings
before the Tribunal is a matter for the Tribunal in the discharge of its
functions and powers under the
CCA. In exercising those powers, the Tribunal is
conscious that the review that is to be conducted under Subdivision F of
of the CCA is a re-arbitration in which the Tribunal has
the same powers as the ACCC, and that
directs the ACCC to act as speedily
as a proper consideration of the dispute allows. Nevertheless, the Tribunal does
not consider
that speed is the only factor to consider in the management of this
proceeding. The Tribunal also regards as relevant the costs of
the proceeding on
the parties and the public (through the work of the Tribunal) and the
desirability of avoiding wasted costs, as
well as the potential for prejudice to
be caused to a party by delay.
considered the evidence and submissions filed by the parties, the Tribunal
considers that, in the circumstances of the present
matter, it is appropriate
for the Tribunal to await the determination of the High Court appeal process
before conducting the remitted
review. That is for three primary reasons. First,
the Tribunal accepts the submission of PNO that the remitted review will involve
complex issues of fact and economic principle and that the remitted review will
involve the consideration of a large body of documentary
evidence and occupy at
least 5 hearing days. That will impose substantial costs on the parties and the
Tribunal (and thereby, the
public). Second, if the Tribunal were to conduct the
review before the High Court appellate process is completed, there is a prospect
that the remitted review would be nullified in whole or in part by the High
Court. In a worst case scenario, if the High Court were
to set aside the
decision of the Full Court but determine the issues in a different way to the
Tribunal's original decision, the
Tribunal may be required to conduct a third
review of the same issues. Such a course would impose wasted costs on the
Tribunal and
the parties. Third, the Tribunal considers that awaiting the
conclusion of the High Court appellate process will not cause any substantive
prejudice to Glencore. Both the original ACCC determination and the Tribunal's
determination provided for the backdating of the relevant
charges that were
determined as part of the dispute. The Tribunal also accepts PNO’s
submission that the monetary value in
dispute between the parties is not large
in comparison to Glencore's revenues from the sale of coal that is shipped from
of Newcastle.
those reasons, the Tribunal will not list the remitted review for hearing
immediately, but will nevertheless seek to progress
the preparation of the
proceeding for a hearing as soon as practicable after the completion of the
appellate process.
PNO's application to adduce further
of the CCA limits the material to which the Tribunal may have regard in
conducting a review of an ACCC arbitration determination
CCA. In general terms, the Tribunal is confined to the information that the ACCC
took into account in connection with the
making of the arbitration determination
ss 44ZZOAA(a)(i)
(3)(c)). However, the Tribunal may issue a
written notice to a person requesting that person to give to the Tribunal such
information
that the Tribunal considers reasonable and appropriate for the
purposes of making its review decision (see
ss 44ZZOAAA(4)
– (7)). Any
information given to the Tribunal pursuant to such a notice must be taken into
account by the Tribunal in conducting
the review (see
s 44ZZOAA(a)(ii)).
considerations that would ordinarily inform the exercise of the Tribunal's
discretion to give a notice under
s 44ZZOAAA(5)
were the subject of
consideration by the Tribunal in the original review. The Tribunal observed
([2019] ACompT 1 at [105]-[107]):
105 As a starting
proposition, where a party before the Tribunal urges it to request information
that could reasonably have been made
available to the ACCC before it made a
final determination, it would not be reasonable for the Tribunal to request such
information.
This is because in order for the arbitration before the ACCC to
have meaning, it is critical that the parties place before the ACCC
material that they consider to be relevant to the determination of the access
106 In considering making any request for information, the Tribunal should also
keep firmly in mind that the CCA provides for the
Tribunal to make a decision
within 180 days from when the application for review is made:
this period can be lengthened, either by agreement of relevant persons or by the
Tribunal extending the time in which it
has to make a decision, it is an
indication that the Tribunal should be able, and should endeavour, to make
decisions within that
period unless there are exceptional circumstances. In this
way, the time period in which it is intended that a decision will be made
(referred to as the ‘expected period’ or the ‘consideration
period’) should inform whether any request for
information is reasonable and appropriate.
107 Therefore, whether it is ‘reasonable and appropriate’ to request
information will be necessarily informed by a consideration
of the text and
context of the
ss 44ZZOAAA(4)
, including:
that the primary material on which the review
is to be based is that which was before the ACCC when it made the determination,
indicates that the review process before the ACCC is to be a meaningful
one, and one in which the parties have every incentive to
place the material
that they consider to be relevant to the resolution of the dispute before the
the limited timeframes in which the Tribunal has to make a decision, which
indicates that it is not intended that there be any material
broadening of the
information that was before the ACCC when it made its final determination.
has filed evidence and submissions indicating that it considers that there may
be information relevant to the Tribunal's remitted
review that was not before
the ACCC in the original arbitration determination. Some of that material
appears to be historical, while
some of the material appears to be more recent
and post-dates the ACCC determination.
the case management hearing on 6 October 2020, the Tribunal gave directions for
PNO to make any application for the issue of a
notice under
s 44ZZOAAA(5)
CCA by 13 November 2020. PNO complied with that direction in relation to the
“scope” issue but seeks an extension
of time in relation to the
“user contribution” issue. In support of the application for an
extension of time, PNO has
filed evidence explaining why it has taken longer to
investigate the availability of potentially relevant material on that issue
PNO originally anticipated.
considered that evidence, the Tribunal is satisfied that it is reasonable to
afford PNO an additional period of time in which
to make an application to the
Tribunal for the issue of a notice pursuant to
s 44ZZOAAA(5)
of the CCA.
The Tribunal considers that it is reasonable to give PNO until 26 February 2021
to bring forward any such application.
The Tribunal then proposes to hear any
such application as a preliminary issue. The application is unlikely to cause
additional delay
in the hearing of the remitted review because the Tribunal has
concluded that it is preferable not to conduct the remitted review
appellate process has been concluded.
so far as PNO intends to request the Tribunal to issue a notice to produce
information to PNO itself, the Tribunal will also direct
that any affidavits or
documents that are the intended object of the notice must also be filed and
served by 26 February 2021, so
that they can be considered in the course of
hearing the
application.
I certify that the preceding 21 (twenty-one)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination herein of
the Honourable
Justice O'Bryan, Dr D Abraham and Prof K
Dated: 14 December 2020
RTF format (328 KB)
Signed PDF/A format