Private R Army v Chief of Army [2021] ADFDAT 2 (27 August 2021)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Private R Army v Chief of Army
File number:
DFDAT 2 of 2021
Judgment of:
- President
Date of judgment:
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant:
The appellant did not appear
Counsel for the Respondent:
The respondent did not appear
Solicitor for the Commonwealth:
Australian Government Solicitor
DFDAT 2 of 2021
PRIVATE R ARMY
CHIEF OF ARMY
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
1. In relation of the proceedings of the Tribunal at this siting, and until
the sitting at which the appeal hearing is listed, and
subject to any further
order, the Tribunal makes the orders in Annexure A.
Pursuant to
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Tribunal’s implied power, the Tribunal orders
Non-publication and non-disclosure orders
1. There be no publication or disclosure of the name of the
or any personnel who serve, or have served, in a unit under the command of
Special Operations Command (
), in relation to these proceedings,
other than to the following
authorised persons
members of the Defence Force Discipline Appeal
by whom the
appeal is to be heard
and officers of the Tribunal whose involvement is necessary for the conduct of
these proceedings
whose presence is necessary for the recording and transcript of these
proceedings
parties and their legal representatives (including counsel and counsel’s
clerks) and the staff and officers of the Directorate
of the Defence Counsel
Services and the Office of the Director of Military Prosecutions
representatives of the Commonwealth and instructing officers
required to attend these proceedings (including a support person for a witness),
support person for the Appellant, and
representatives
2. There be no disclosure, by publication or otherwise, of information that
identifies or tends to identify the Appellant, or any
personnel who serve, or
who have served, in a unit under the command of SOCOMD, in relation to these
proceedings, except to authorised
3. There be no publication or disclosure of information (including
capabilities, tactics, techniques, processes, strategies, training,
and operations) concerning SOCOMD, in relation to these proceedings, except to
authorised persons.
Pseudonym orders
4. The Appellant be referred to in relation to these proceedings, at any
public hearing in these proceedings or in any documents produced
proceedings on unsecure electronic systems, transmitted on such systems or
otherwise available to the public, by the pseudonym
5. Any personnel who serve, or have served, in a unit under the command of
SOCOMD and are involved in these proceedings, whether as
witnesses in the
proceedings or in any other capacity, be referred to in relation to these
proceedings, at any public hearing in
these proceedings or in any documents
produced for the proceedings on unsecure electronic systems, transmitted on such
otherwise available to the public, by pseudonyms agreed by the
parties and approved by the Tribunal.
Transcript, appeal book and other documents
6. Any part of the transcript of the proceedings, exhibits tendered in the
proceedings, or other documents filed with the Tribunal
in relation to the
proceedings, which identify or tend to identify the applicant or other personnel
who serve or have served in a
unit under the command of SOCOMD, or information
concerning that command (see order 3 above), be disclosed only to authorised
7. If a person not identified in order 1 as an authorised person requests the
of the Tribunal to provide a copy of any part of the
transcript, exhibits tendered or other document filed in relation to the
proceedings:
Registrar will notify the Commonwealth and provide the Commonwealth with a copy
of the requested document
21 days of receipt of the requested document, the Commonwealth will provide the
Registrar with an edited version of the requested
document, from which any part
referred to in order 6 above has been redacted or removed (
edited document may be made available to any person upon
person may seek leave to be heard in respect of edits made to the edited
document, and
the Tribunal grants such leave, or considers that edits made by the Commonwealth
to the transcript are inappropriate, the Court
will give the Commonwealth and
the parties an opportunity to be heard before any version of the document other
than the edited document
is disclosed to any person who is not an authorised
Tribunal decision
8. The question of what orders, if any, are to be made in respect of an
opportunity for the Commonwealth and the parties to make submissions
in relation
to the publication of an unredacted version of the Tribunal’s reasons in
respect of the substantive application
and any consequential appeal, be reserved
to the Tribunal as constituted for the hearing at which those proceedings are
Appeal Hearing
9. Application may be made to vary any part or all of these orders on the
giving of 48 hours’ notice to the Commonwealth and
the parties, or
such shorter time as the Tribunal considers appropriate in the
circumstances.
10. Orders 1 to 3 do not prevent the disclosure of information for the
purposes of any further review, appeal or subsequent administrative
ADF or Department of Defence personnel.
11. For the avoidance of doubt, nothing in these orders shall be taken to
prevent or restrict the Commonwealth, its officers and agents
(including its
legal representatives and instructing officers) from using or disclosing any
information or documents in accordance
with its practices and functions,
including taking any steps in these or related proceedings.
12. Where the Commonwealth is to be given notice of any matter under these
orders, notice may be given in the first instance to the
Australian Government
Solicitor using the following contact details:
AGS file ref: 21004879
Attn: Nathan Sinnathurai
Senior Lawyer
Australian Government Solicitor
T 02 6253 7512
nathan.sinnathurai@ags.gov.au
13. The question as to the continuance of these orders be reserved to the
Tribunal as constituted for the Appeal Hearing.
REASONS FOR
(REVISED FROM TRANSCRIPT)
1 Having regard to the affidavit of Garth Gould made on 19 August 2021 and
filed in the Defence Force Discipline Appeal Tribunal (Tribunal)
submissions both oral and in writing made on behalf of the Commonwealth by the
Australian Government solicitor and to
the draft minutes of order, I am
satisfied that, as revised in the manner discussed in the course of submissions,
the Tribunal does
have, including by implication, power to make the orders in
the form revised, and I make those orders.
2 I do so because I consider that there is a public interest which has been
evidenced in the suppression of the name of the applicant.
Further, there may be
an additional public interest depending on the need, if any, to refer to
particular methods of training or
deployments to restrict publication on those
subjects as well, although it seems inherently likely, firstly, that that would
question for the Tribunal as constituted for the appeal hearing and, in any
event, as far as one can tell from such material as filed
in the Tribunal
already, it seems an unlikely prospect that it would be necessary to go into
such detail, but one should not anticipate.
3 For these reasons the orders will be as per the amended draft.
I certify that the preceding three (3) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 18 October 2021
RTF format (285 KB)
Signed PDF/A format