J v Credit Reporting Agency [2010] PrivCmrA 11 (24 December 2010)
Case Citation:
J v Credit Reporting Agency
[2010] PrivCmrA 11
Subject Heading:
Accuracy of a credit information file
Section 18G(a)
(Cth) and parts 1.3(b) and 3.15
of the Credit Reporting Code of Conduct
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
The complainant applied for a copy of their consumer credit information file
held by a credit reporting agency.
The complainant subsequently complained to the credit reporting agency that a
number of credit applications, addresses, and an overdue
payment default, had
been inaccurately listed on their credit file.
Section 18G
requires a credit reporting agency in
possession or control of a credit file to take reasonable steps to ensure that
personal information
contained in the file or report is accurate, up-to-date,
complete and not misleading.
Part 1.3(b) of the Credit Reporting Code of Conduct requires that where a
credit reporting agency becomes aware that information supplied
by a credit
provider, and included in a credit information file, appears to be of a type not
permitted to be included in the file
the credit reporting agency must remove the
information from the credit information file.
Part 3.15(b) and (c) of the Credit Reporting Code of Conduct requires that
where a credit reporting agency amends a credit file after
a dispute, it must
advise the individual of certain things in writing within 14 days. The
individual may nominate any persons who
have received the credit file in the
past three months to receive notice of the amendment. The credit reporting
agency must then
notify those nominated persons.
The Commissioner investigated the matter under
section 40(1)
The inaccurate information on the complainant’s credit file was the
inclusion of information contained on a credit file under
a different name. The
credit reporting agency had combined the two files because of some common
identity details. However, the common
features were not significant and the
credit reporting agency acknowledged that the credit files should not have been
As required by the Credit Reporting Code of Conduct, the credit reporting
agency removed the inaccurate information, provided the
complainant with a copy
of their amended credit file and offered to write to any credit provider that
had accessed their file in
the last three months to inform them of the
amendments made.
The complainant considered their individual complaint had been resolved.
However they asked that any systemic issues be considered
in future audits or
own motion investigations of the credit reporting agency.
The Commissioner decided not to investigate the matter further under
on the basis that the matter had been adequately
dealt with.
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
December 2010
RTF format (119 KB)
Signed PDF/A format