Plaintiff S52/2025A & Anor v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] HCASJ 27 (1 September 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
PLAINTIFF S52/2025A & ANOR PLAINTIFFS
FOR IMMIGRATION AND CITIZENSHIP DEFENDANT
[2025] HCASJ 27
Date of Judgment: 1 September
S52 of 2025
application of 1 May 2025 for a constitutional or other writ is summarily
dismissed as an abuse of process pursuant to rr 25.09.3(b)
and 28.01.2(c) of the
High Court Rules 2004
name of the defendant is amended from "Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs" to "Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship".
plaintiff pay the defendant's costs of and incidental to the
application.
Representation
The plaintiffs are represented by Residency
The defendant is represented by Australian Government Solicitor
This is an application for a constitutional or other writ, by which the
plaintiffs seek judicial review of a
by a delegate of
the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (the "Minister"),
refusing an application by the plaintiffs
for Protection (subclass 866)
visas under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) ("Migration
plaintiffs are married and are both citizens of Nepal. They assert that their
marriage is "intercaste". On 16 December 2024 they
lodged an application
for Protection visas which was ultimately refused on 14 March 2025. The
first plaintiff is the wife, who was
the "main applicant" in the visa
application; the second plaintiff is the husband, who was identified as a
"member of the same family
unit" in the visa application.
the visa application, the plaintiffs explained that their reason for seeking
Protection visas in Australia was that they feared
harm from their families,
including physical violence, if they returned to Nepal, due to their intercaste
officer of the Department of Home Affairs (the "Department") requested more
information to assess the plaintiffs' application
for Protection visas pursuant
Migration Act
. The request comprised a letter, which was
sent by email to the first plaintiff dated 10 February 2025, inviting the
plaintiffs to
"provide further information about your claims" including details
of harm they
had experienced. It also asked them to explain why it would be unreasonable for
them to relocate to another city in
Nepal and why they had apparently delayed
applying for Protection visas (in circumstances where the first plaintiff had
Australia on 19 July 2015, but did not lodge the visa
application until 16 December 2024).
letter also advised the plaintiffs that they had "28 days starting on the
day after we emailed this request" to provide more
information (ie, a due date
of 10 March 2025). It explained "[i]f you do not send us the information we
need within the time we have
given you, we can decide the application with the
information we have at that time without asking you again" and advised that if
the plaintiffs needed to get any information from another organisation, they
would need to ask them for the information before the
due date and provide the
Department with evidence that they had asked by that time.
the early morning on 13 March 2025, the first plaintiff sent two
(identical) emails to the Department in which she said that she
needed more time
to respond to the request and asked for an "additional 28 days to provide the
documents request[ed]". Later that
day, an officer of the Department sent an
email in response to the first plaintiff, explaining that they could not provide
an extension
in the circumstances. The email relevantly said:
sections 58(4)
Migration Act
and Migration
Regulation 2.15(4), an extension can only be granted before the expiry of
the original prescribed period for response.
In your case, the prescribed period expired on 10/03/2025 [28 days after s56
request was sent]. As today is 13/03/2025, the prescribed
period has expired,
and I am unable to grant an extension.
Please note that you are still able to provide information until a decision
is made on the application, and any information provided
before a decision is
made will be considered."
14 March 2025, a delegate of the Minister made two decisions in respect of
the plaintiffs' Protection visa application (ie, one
decision for each of the
two plaintiffs). The delegate did not accept that either of the applicants were
"in an intercaste marriage",
nor that they were "harmed or threatened with harm
by the families in Nepal on account of their claimed intercaste marriage" based
on the information before them. They concluded, in respect of each, that:
"Due to the delay in lodgement, ... the lack of details in their
claims, as well as their lack of evidence, I am not satisfied that
their claims
are credible."
delegate noted the emails exchanged between the first plaintiff and the officer
of the Department on 13 March 2025, and observed
that no more information
had been provided by the plaintiffs. In their record of decision with respect to
the first plaintiff, the
delegate said:
"As of the date of this
assessment the applicant has not provided additional information in relation to
their claims, I consider that
the applicant has been given a reasonable
opportunity to provide additional information and evidence to substantiate their
As advised in the s56 invitation, I am now proceeding with a decision
based on the information before the department."
A similar comment was also made in the record of the decision with respect to
the second plaintiff.
7 April 2025, the plaintiffs filed an application seeking merits review in
the Administrative Review Tribunal ("ART") of the delegate's
decisions to refuse
Protection.
1 May 2025, the plaintiffs filed in this Court the present application
seeking judicial review of the very same decisions.
application
plaintiffs seek a writ of certiorari quashing the delegate's decisions and a
writ of mandamus compelling the Minister to redetermine
their visa application.
The plaintiffs rely on a single ground for that relief. In substance, they
allege that it was "legally unreasonable"
for, and "a failure ... to be fair and
reasonable" for the delegate to have made their decisions one day after the
first plaintiff
had requested an extension, in circumstances where, inter alia,
the first plaintiff had been told the day before that they could
information until a decision is made".
Abuse of process
application for judicial review must be summarily dismissed as an abuse of
process. This is because merits review of the delegate's
decisions is still
available to the plaintiffs.
Construction Forestry Mining and Energy Union v Director of the Fair Work
Building Inspectorate
speaking, a litigant must exhaust its statutory rights of appeal before this
Court will contemplate an application for
mandamus or prohibition directed to
achieving a result that in substance may be obtained on appeal. As
Gageler J recently observed
Waters v Federal Court of Australia and
the Judges Thereof
[[2015] HCATrans 347 at lines 619-621], it is
inappropriate for the original jurisdiction of this Court to be invoked to
a decision amenable to appeal, whether or not that appeal is subject
Migration Act
relevantly provides inter alia for
merits review by the ART of reviewable protection decisions. A "reviewable
protection decision"
is defined in
s 338A(1)(c)
to include "a decision to
refuse to grant a protection visa" subject to certain exceptions, which are not
relevant to this application,
and therefore the plaintiffs were entitled to seek
ART review of the delegate's decisions. Indeed, as noted above, the plaintiffs
have applied to the ART for merits review.
their application to this Court, the plaintiffs explain their decision to apply
concurrently for both merits review and for judicial
review as follows:
"It is also noted that the plaintiffs are seeking to utilize her
right to have judicial review of the matter despite having an option
merit reviewed by the tribunal first which could be regarded as an abuse of
process leading to relief being denied.
The plaintiffs regard it to be fair and reasonable to seek to have the matter
properly considered by two decision makers: the original
decision maker in the
form of the delegate of the defendant and the Tribunal upon review if there is a
Having denied proper consideration of claim by the original decision maker,
it would be unfair for the plaintiffs to only get one
actual review of the merit
of the case, should she use her merit review right where it is unreasonable for
the decision maker to
refuse the visa in the given circumstances.
Should the Court find the decision to be unreasonable, the plaintiffs would
still be able to have the merit reviewed by both the original
decision maker and
the tribunal and so justifies an action to seek judicial review over merit
review of the matter.
It is submitted that there is no abuse where the decision is unreasonable and
deny the plaintiffs its basis right to proper consideration
of the application
crucial for her."
(Errors in original)
arguments are misguided for two reasons. First, as Gordon J held in
v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
application for merits review is "ongoing and yet to be concluded" (in addition
to being "valid on its face" and made within
the prescribed time limit) it is
"not appropriate" for this Court to determine an application for a
constitutional or other
the Court has not received a copy of the plaintiffs' application to the ART.
However, the plaintiffs, having made that application
themselves, plainly must
be taken to accept that it is "valid on its face" as in
defendant has also accepted that the ART has jurisdiction to determine that
application. It is also apparent from the above
arguments advanced by the
plaintiffs that the merits review application remains extant in the ART (at
least as at the time that their
application in this Court was filed). Moreover,
in respect of the prescribed time limit, the application to the ART was required
to be made within 28 days of the notification to the applicant of the
reviewable protection decision under
s 347(3)(b)
Migration Act
the delegate's decisions were notified to the plaintiffs on 14 March 2025,
they had until 11 April 2025 to make such an application,
meaning that
their application to the ART on 7 April 2025 was made within the prescribed
time limit.
follows that the merits review application was made validly and within the
prescribed time limit, and so the ART is required to
review it under
Migration Act
. As such, it would not be appropriate for
this Court to determine the present application.
second reason that the plaintiffs' arguments must be rejected is that the
plaintiffs, just as in
, do "not, and cannot, identify any fact or
matter that might be said to constitute an exceptional circumstance to warrant
considering the application without [their] statutory rights of
review having been
exhausted".
plaintiffs submit that the alleged legal unreasonableness is the "exceptional
circumstance" which warrants the present application
while the plaintiffs
continue to enjoy a statutory right of appeal. In that respect, they also rely
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
"), in which
this Court found that a decision of the Migration Review Tribunal to refuse the
applicant's request for an adjournment
to obtain further materials in support of
their application for a visa was
unreasonable.
there is no force in this argument. A complaint of legal unreasonableness is not
an "exceptional circumstance" that would
warrant the intervention of this Court
in circumstances where statutory rights of review have not been exhausted. Legal
unreasonableness
is simply a ground of judicial review and is not sufficient for
this Court to supplant the scheme for reviewing decisions under the
the plaintiffs' merits review application is unsuccessful, they may seek
judicial review of the ART's decision in the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of
Australia (Division 2) under
Migration Act
, and thereafter
by way of appeal, including ultimately by way of an application for special
leave in this Court.
these circumstances, the plaintiffs' application for a constitutional or other
writ is an abuse of process and accordingly, should
be summarily dismissed
pursuant to rr 25.09.3(b) and 28.01.2(c) of the
High Court Rules
light of my foregoing reasons, it is unnecessary to determine the underlying
claim of legal unreasonableness on the part of the
Disposition
application for a constitutional or other writ should be summarily dismissed
with costs.
Minister also sought an order that his name in this proceeding be amended to the
"Minister for Immigration and Citizenship" (to
reflect the current description
of their office). I also make that
The plaintiff's application is
expressed to seek judicial review in respect of "the decision" of the delegate
on 14 March 2025.
As explained below, the delegate in fact made two
separate (but closely related) decisions on 14 March 2025.
[2016] HCA 41
(2016) 91 ALJR 1
[2016] HCA 41
at 367 (footnotes omitted).
[2019] HCATrans 174.
[2019] HCATrans 174
[2019] HCATrans 174
[2012] HCA 61
(2013) 249 CLR 332.
RTF format (236 KB)
Signed PDF/A format