Sofia & Treacy [2021] FamCA 647; (30 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Sofia & Treacy
[2021] FamCA 647
File number(s):
MLC 13024 of 2020
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– where respondent lesbian mother gives birth to
child after assisted conception – where former gender fluid girlfriend
mother is named on birth certificate – where any relationship between
applicant and respondent ceases – where applicant
claims that mother and
her were in a de facto marriage relationship at the time of the birth and the
applicant seeks father status;
where mother denies the alleged de facto
relationship and that the applicant has father status – where each party
seeks orders
against the Registrar of Births Deaths and Marriages (Vic) for
details in the child’s birth certificate to be amended to accord
position for which they contend.
– where applicant
seeks that the applicant deliver up baby memorabilia and a ladder and repayment
of money by way of “reparation”.
SUMMARY DISMISSAL
– where respondent mother seeks summary dismissal of applicant’s
application but then discontinues that application –
where some parts of
application dismissed summarily on court’s volition.
DISPUTE RESOLUTION-
preferable that alternative dispute resolution follow
any psychiatric assessment of applicant and respondent.
Legislation:
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act 1996
Evidence Act 1995
Family Law Act
Cases cited:
Baros and Baros
[2021] FamCA 534
[1998] FamCA 14
(1998) F.L.C. 92-799
Korsky & Bright and Anor (No.2)
[2007] FamCA 1512
(2007) F.L.C. 93-352
Lindon v. The Commonwealth (No 2)
[1996] HCA 14
Pelerman v. Pelerman
[2000] FamCA 881
(2000) F.L.C. 93-037
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Sofia In Person
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Russell Kennedy Lawyers
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
MLC 13024 of 2020
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. Paragraph 4, 45 and 55 of the Application Initiating Proceedings filed 27
November 2020 be dismissed pursuant to
section 45A(2)
2. The orders sought in paragraphs 2, 7, 8 and 9 of the Applicant’s
reply sealed 22 February 2021 be dismissed pursuant to
section 45A(2)
Family Law Act 1975
3. The applicant and the respondent do all acts and things necessary to
undergo a psychiatric assessment by a single practitioner
and for the purpose of
payment the Independent Children’s Lawyer is requested to make application
to Victoria Legal Aid to
4. Pursuant to
Section 13C(1)(b)
Family Law Act
parties and their legal representatives (if any) shall attend a confidential
Court-based Family Dispute Resolution (FDR) Conference
on a date to be fixed but
not later than 1 April
(Amended 14 September
5. The matter shall be referred to the Executive Director of Dispute
Resolution for allocation, listing and further orders in relation
to the conduct
of the FDR Conference.
6. There be liberty to the Independent Children’s Lawyer to seek an
administrative adjournment of the Dispute Resolution Conference
in the event the
psychiatric assessment can be undertaken but will not be completed before the
date of the Dispute Resolution Conference.
7. Once the single expert psychiatrist is identified each party to the
proceedings provide that practitioner with a copy of a document
filed in these
proceedings by that party.
8. The respondent mother confirms she relies upon the three affidavits of
witnesses filed on 27 August 2021. Accordingly, the applicant
is at liberty to
respond to those affidavits and, if she wishes to do so, to respond not later
than 1 week before any Dispute Resolution
Conference in this matter.
9. Otherwise, all extant interim applications be dismissed and the matter be
placed in the list of cases awaiting allocation to a
judicial docket.
AND IT IS NOTED BY THE COURT:
the respondent mother does not otherwise wish to pursue an application for
summary dismissal.
the respondent mother has informed the court that items 56(b),(c),(d),(e) and
(g) are not in her possession custody or control.
respondent mother has the pink lava lamp, the star wars diorama and the multi
fold ladder.
the purposes of the Family Dispute Resolution Conference, the parties are
referred to
Evidence Act 1995
and to the Court’s
Dispute Resolution Fact Sheet
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 17.02
Family Law Rules 2004
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this
judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Sofia & Treacy
approved by the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
REASONS FOR
Introduction
1 The applicant, Sofia, instituted proceedings by an
application filed on 27 November 2020 against the Ms Treacy (“the
mother”) in relation to the child X who is two years old.
2 The applicant seeks 58 interim parenting orders and to be excused from
particularising the final orders until after a Family Report
is released. By a
response filed on 16 February 2021, the respondent mother seeks:
1. THAT the Application filed the 27
November 2020 be dismissed.
2. THAT the Applicant pay the Respondent’s cost of and incidental to these
proceedings.
3. THAT there be a declaration that the Applicant is not and has never been a
parent of the child, X born ... 2019.
4. THAT there be no order for the Applicant to spend time or communicate with
the child X.
5. THAT the purported Notice of Child Abuse, Family Violence of Risk be struck
6. THAT the Registrar of Births, Deaths and Marriages issue a new Birth
Certificate for the child, X born ... 2019, listing MS TREACY
as his sole
3 By a reply filed on 22 February 2021 the applicant restates or recasts some
of the relief already sought in the application initiating
proceedings as well
as seeking orders for the admonishment of the respondent mother’s lawyer
and that the respondent mother
and certain deponents be “admonished and
4 The applicant and the respondent have each filed a Notice of Child Abuse
and Family Violence alleging that they have personally
been subjected to
emotional/psychological, sexual and financial family violence by the other as
well as threatening comments. Each
alleges that the other has perpetrated
emotional and psychological violence to X and exposed him to family violence. On
22 December
2020 a family violence intervention order was made against the
applicant and the respondent for the protection of X.
5 The applicant appears in person. Mr Harvey of counsel appears for the
respondent mother. Mr Mort appears for the Independent Children’s
This hearing was conducted by MSTeams because Melbourne is in lockdown due to
the COVID-19 pandemic restrictions.
6 The applicant and the respondent mother have each filed extensive affidavit
evidence which I read in preparation for today although
I have not read all of
the annexures to the applicant’
page affidavit affirmed on 27 November
2020 or the annexures relied upon by the respondent mother. I have not read the
three affidavits
which the respondent mother filed last Friday because I did not
know of their existence until submissions were concluded. In any
event, I do not
have regard to the respondent’s evidence for the purpose of the summary
dismissal application, only for the
future conduct of the matter.
Summary dismissal
7 On 2 June 2021 Registrar Sudholz listed this
matter before me today “for interim hearing of the threshold issue
(summary dismissal)”.
There were no directions requiring a summary of
argument. An order by Registrar Sudholz requiring the filing of an outline of
would have assisted the court to understand each parties’ case
today and, even more importantly, to focus the attention of
the parties and/or
their legal representatives on the issues in the case and the legal principles
to be applied by the court in a
determination of those issues. As it happened,
after the parties and their lawyers waited some hours for me to commence this
counsel for the respondent mother announced that the respondent mother did
into seek to proceed with her application for summary
Section 45A(2)
Family Law Act 1975
provides that the court may
make a decree for
one party against
another in relation to the whole or any part of a proceedings if
the first party is
defending the proceedings or
that part of the proceedings
and the court is
satisfied that the other party has
no reasonable prospect of successfully prosecuting the proceedings or
that part of the proceedings.
Section 45A(3)
Family Law Act
provides that for the purposes of this
section, proceedings or
part of proceedings need
not be hopeless or bound to fail to have
no reasonable prospect of success. If
dismisses all or part of proceedings,
under this section, the court may
order as to costs as the court considers
(s.45A(6)).
Section 45A(7)
provides that the court may
take action under this section on its own initiative or on application by
the proceedings.
Family Law Rules 2004
provides that the court can
on an application under
rule 10.12:
Dismiss any part
of the case
Make a final
order on any issue
Order a hearing
With the consent
of the parties, order arbitration about the case or any part of the
11 The principles to be applied to an application for summary dismissal are
settled. They are summarized in the recent case of
Baros and Baros
and are included in the reasoning in
Lindon v. The Commonwealth (No
[1998] FamCA 14
(1998) F.L.C. 92-799
, and approved in
Pelerman v. Pelerman
[2000] FamCA 881
(2000) F.L.C. 93-037
, and later in
Korsky & Bright and Anor (No.2)
[2007] FamCA 1512
(2007) F.L.C. 93-352.
The principles
sought is rarely and sparingly provided. As Kirby J stated in
Lindon v The
Commonwealth No.2
at [35]. “It is a serious matter to deprive a person
of access to the courts of law for it is there that the rule of law is
including against Government and other powerful interests. This is why relief,
whether under O 26, r 18 or in the inherent
and sparingly provided.
seeking the relief must show, on the face of the opponent’s documents that
the opponent lacks a reasonable cause of
action or is advancing a claim that is
clearly frivolous or vexatious. This is also known as the ‘doomed to
sufficient that the Court may think the case appears weak or that it is unlikely
to succeed. Such a case is not ‘sufficient
to warrant termination’.
Even a weak case deserves determination.
An application
for summary relief is
no substitute for demurrer. If there is a serious
legal question to be
determined then it should ordinarily be determined
at trial – the
proof of facts can sometimes assist the Court to
understand and apply
the law invoked in circumstances where it is more
conducive to
deciding a real case with actual litigants than one
determined on
imagined or assumed facts.
notwithstanding defects in the pleadings, if it appears a party may have a
reasonable cause of action which has been poorly framed,
the Court will
ordinarily allow that party to reframe the pleading.
The guiding
principle is
doing what is just.
proceedings within the concept of the pleading are doomed to fail then there
should be a dismissal to save the respondent from
being further troubled, to
save the applicant from further costs and disappointment and to relieve the
Court from the burden of further
wasted time and resources.
If by taking the
applicant’s evidence at its highest, in the sense that it is untested,
there are facts if found in the applicant’s
favour, could entitle the
applicant to relief sought, then the conclusion will not be that there is no
reasonable prospect of success
and that part of the application will not attract
summary dismissal.
The material
which is used for an application for summary dismissal is only the
opponent’s documents and non-contentious facts.
12 In spite of the respondent mother not wishing to press the summary
dismissal application, there are a handful of orders sought
by the applicant
which, in my view, are doomed to fail. They are as follows:
Application initiating proceedings
4. That make up parenting time, equating to 333 days [approx. 1,500 hours based
on above 2) and 3)] that has been denied the Applicant
by the Respondent as at
the filing date of this initiating application, to be allocated at the
court’s discretion.
45. That both the Respondent and the Applicant shall encourage love and
affection between the child and the other parent, and that
the child is
permitted to express his live and affection for both parents.
55. That if court applications are required in response to a breach of this
parenting order, the party who breached the order will
pay the legal costs of
the other party unless otherwise ordered by the court.
Applicant’s Reply
2. That the Respondent pay the Applicant’s legal, medical and incidental
costs in this matter, as well as any costs incurred
for child contact centres
engaged to ensure the safety of the child and the Applicant.
7. That the Respondent’s legal representative be admonished for seeking
orders that are in clear contradiction to the material
facts in the case (as per
ASCR 2015 rule 22.1, 21.2 & 21.3)
8. That the Respondent be admonished / penalised for providing false
information under oath to this honourable court in her Affidavit,
Annexures and
Notice of Risk filed 16.02.2021.
9. That the deponents named in Annexure T-4 and T-5 be admonished / penalised
for providing false information under oath in their
statutory declarations dated
13 None of the parties sought to make submissions to uphold the orders
sought. I am satisfied that the above orders sought have no
reasonable prospect
of success. To allow them to remain may serve to distract the parties from the
justiciable issues in the case.
14 I will dismiss the relief sought by the applicant and described in
paragraph 13 of these reasons.
Future conduct of matter
15 The applicant and the respondent both seek relief
against the Registrar of Births Deaths & Marriages. The applicant seeks
the Registry of Birth Deaths and Marriages amend/correct the
child’s birth certificate to reflect the true nature of the relationship
between his parents at the time of registration, which should read status: de
facto”. The respondent mother seeks that “the
Registrar of Births,
Deaths and Marriages issue a new Birth Certificate for the child, X born ...
2019, listing MS TREACY as his
sole parent”.
Section 20(1)
Births, Deaths and Marriages Registration Act
provides that “the Court” may,
on application by an interested person or on its own initiative, order the
inclusion of
registrable
information about a birth or
a child's parents in
the Register.
“Court” is defined in
as the County Court. However,
provides that, if a court (including
another State or
the Commonwealth) finds that the registrable
information contained
in an entry about a birth in
the Register under
this Act or a corresponding
law is incomplete or incorrect, the court may
registration of the birth or
the inclusion or correction of registrable
information in the Register under
this Act or the corresponding
law (as the case may require). “Registerable information”
is defined as information that must or may be included in the
17 During the hearing, I read the Children and Parents Issues Assessment by
Ms C released today. It had already been released to the
parties. The Family
Consultant identifies the key issues as:
(1) Whether the Applicant has a parental role, rights
and responsibilities in relation to X.
(2) X’s living and spend-time arrangements.
(3) Mental health issues with regard to both parties, and the impact this has on
their relationship and parenting capacity.
18 The Family Consultant made the following observations about risk
15. There are no drug or alcohol concerns identified for either party.
16. The Applicant reported her concern that the Respondent may physically
assault X so as to cause him injury which the Respondent
would subsequently
blame on the Applicant. Based on the information available, the writer does not
share this concern.
17. Although both parties expressed their relationship difficulties and current
dispute in terms of family violence, neither provided
information to suggest
that family violence has been a significant feature of their relationship or a
current risk issue for X.
18. It appears to the writer that mental health has a more significant role in
the relationship dynamic described by the parties,
and demonstrated in the
affidavit material and current dispute. It is the writer’s view that the
most relevant risk issue for
X in this matter currently, is his exposure to the
possible mental health consequences for the Respondent resulting from
involvement
in the current litigation, particularly if such litigation is
19. There is also a potential future risk for X from being exposed to emotion
regulation and possible mental health issues for the
Applicant, should the
dispute continue. The Applicant reported she experiences anxiety and
agoraphobia. She commented that she has
had a “challenging life
path” and has had several mental health plans. Currently she is attends a
psychologist every
6-8 weeks, pending her financial circumstances and is
provided with emotional support by her friend, Ms B. The Respondent reported
that the Applicant had to wear noise-cancelling headphones when X was crying, as
she finds loud noises “triggering”.
From information provided by
both the Applicant and Respondent, it appears that the Applicant has experienced
significant childhood
trauma which has impacted on her adult mental health,
functioning and interpersonal relationships. Such impacts, if accurate, are
likely to impact future parental capacity.
20. Further information about both the Applicant and Respondent’s mental
health through a comparative mental health assessment
by an independent mental
health professional who has access to the file material is likely to be of
significant assistance to the
Court, should this dispute remain
unresolved.
19 The Family Consultant opines [22] that the current relationship between
the parties appears highly fractured. They both present
as deeply entrenched in
their opposing views with regard to the Applicant’s status with regard to
X. Until the Court provides
clarity in this regard, any attempt to mend their
relationship with the potential for co-parenting (should this align with the
finding) is both premature and highly unlikely.
20 The Family Consultant’s evaluation is:
24. Given the Respondent is X’s primary carer, she
is his major source of safety and emotional security. As is the case with
young children, X will be highly attuned to his primary carer’s emotional
moods and feelings. Ms Treacy has reported that
the current Application has
resulted in significant stress and anxiety for her. She is worried that it is
impacting on her parenting
capacity to be emotionally and practically available
to X as she responds to the needs of litigation. This is a realistic concern.
Should Ms Treacy be experiencing significant stress or anxiety, despite her best
intentions, X will also experiencing such emotions,
even though he will have no
understanding as to why he is feeling this way. X is likely to start acting out
so as to provoke a comforting
and reassuring response from his mother.
25. Given his young age, X will have no knowledge of or understanding about the
current dispute. He has not spent time with the Applicant
since infancy will
have no conscious memory of her. Any relationship between them will need to be
newly established. Given what time-spend
represents to both the Applicant and
the Respondent, it is likely to engender strong emotional reactions from both.
It will be very
confusing for X for any relationship re-establishment to take
place with the Applicant without clarity with regard to what, if any,
Applicant may have in his life.
26. Should spend-time occur, it is likely to have significant mental health
responses for both the Applicant and the Respondent.
The Applicant indicated
that she feels unable to commence time-spend with X without therapeutic support
for herself, as she is worried
Respondent has indicated significant anxiety and distress given her stated
perspective
to the Application and is likely to find this escalates if
time-spend commences. Such mental health consequences for the Respondent
impact on her parenting capacity, and thus have a direct adverse consequence for
X. As such, it is suggested that it will significantly
benefit X for a cautious
approach be taken with regard to any spend time between him and the Applicant
prior to a decision having
been made by the Court as to the Applicant’s
legal role in this matter.
27. Once a decision has been made about the Applicant’s legal role in this
matter, further assessment of the competing living
and spending-time proposals
of each of the parties is likely to assist the Court. Until such time as a
decision has been made however,
such assessment is considered premature and
likely to cause further stress and distress to the parties.
21 The Family Consultant describes the future directions, or her
recommendations, in the following terms:
29. X to remain living with the Respondent.
30. Time-spend between X and the Applicant be reserved pending an independent
mental health assessment as described below:
31. The parties attending a comparative mental health assessment by an
independent psychiatrist/psychologist who can comment on the
mental health, personality and functioning and any impact that this may have on
their parenting capacity.
32. Consideration of re-referral to Child Dispute Services for a Family
33. Consideration be made to this assessment being provided to any professionals
assisting the adults.
22 The parties agree to seek a psychiatric assessment and the Independent
Children’s Lawyer will apply for funding.
23 I have ordered that the parties attend a Dispute Resolution Conference.
They will be able to adjourn this event if it appears that
their application for
funding for a psychiatric assessment will be successful. It would be preferable
for the Conference to follow
a psychiatric assessment (if there is to be an
assessment).
24 In response to my question, the respondent mother informed the court that
of the mementos (property) that the applicant seeks,
under “reparation
orders”, only the lava lamp, the Star Wars diorama and the ladder are
still in the respondent’s
possession custody or control.
25 Counsel for the respondent mother sought a further discrete listing from
me to seek that the applicant’s application be summarily
because, it will be contended, the applicant has no standing. Counsel for the
respondent mother submits that the applicant
is not a person concerned with the
care, welfare or development of X within the meaning of
Law Act 1975
. My preliminary view is that there is no merit in that
argument. I refused to allocate a further discrete listing before myself for
application which is yet to be filed. Notably, the court set aside specific
hearing time today for an application with which
the respondent mother chose not
to proceed.
I certify that the preceding twenty-five (25)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 14 September 2021
RTF format (381 KB)
Signed PDF/A format