Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union and others v SCA Hygiene Australasia Pty Limited [2012] FWAFB 9505 (12 November 2012)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
SCA Hygiene Australasia Pty Limited
(C2012/3688)
“Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union” known as the Australian Manufacturing
Workers’ Union (AMWU) & Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services
Union of Australia
SCA Hygiene Australasia Pty Limited
(C2012/3715)
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT KAUFMAN
COMMISSIONER LEE
SYDNEY, 12 NOVEMBER 2012
Appeal against decision [
[2012] FWA 2946
] of Commissioner Blair at Melbourne on 17 April 2012 in matter number C2011/6522.
Two appeals have been lodged against a decision of Commissioner Blair made under dispute resolution clauses in two enterprise agreements.
Each agreement conferred a power of arbitration on Fair Work Australia in the event a party referred a dispute to it. The dispute
the Commissioner dealt with concerned the entitlement of employees to payments of annual leave loading of a particular quantum depending
on when annual leave was taken.
The appellant in the first matter is the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU). Its appeal concerns the decision
of the Commissioner made under the dispute settlement procedure in the SCA Hygiene Australasia Pty Limited Springvale Site (Production
and Warehouse) Agreement 2009 (the Production Agreement). This agreement covers SCA Hygiene Australasia Pty Limited (SCA) and the
The second appeal is made by the “Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union” known
as the Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union (AMWU) and the Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information,
Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia (CEPU) and relates to the SCA Hygiene Australasia (Maintenance Employees)
Personal Care, Springvale Site Agreement 2009 (the Maintenance Agreement).
This agreement covers SCA and the AMWU. The CEPU is not covered by it.
Each agreement allows for an appeal against a decision of Fair Work Australia made under the dispute resolution procedure. The parties
agreed that such an appeal may be made under
Fair Work Act 2009
(the Act) and that neither of the agreements provided for such an appeal to be as of right; permission was required.
The appeal would proceed as a rehearing, however for us to exercise our powers on appeal the appellants needed to establish error
in the Commissioner’s decision.
We have reproduced the relevant provisions of the annual leave clauses in each of the enterprise agreements in annexure A to this
decision. The key clauses in issue in this appeal are the “Flexibility Loading” clause (flexibility loading) and the
“Loss of Traditional Leave Period Loading” clause (loss of traditional leave loading).
These clauses provide for amounts of annual leave loading which are to be paid in addition to a 20% annual leave loading. The parties
disagreed about the prerequisites or conditions that must exist prior to the additional amounts being paid.
SCA had been paying employees annual leave loading in the same manner from around 1994 when the first enterprise agreement for the
Springvale site was entered into. Prior to that, and back into the 1960’s, industry agreements had dealt with annual leave
loading to be paid to employees and the circumstances in which amounts additional to the base loading would be paid. For present
purposes, it is adequate to note that there was evidence before the Commissioner that some of the wording in the enterprise agreements
had adopted and reflected the industry practice. Other than in very limited circumstances SCA paid annual leave loading, comprising
the 20% loading plus the flexibility loading of 18.75% on all occasions annual leave was taken by employees covered by the Production
Agreement. It seems those employees were rarely rostered to work over the Christmas/January period. Employees covered by the Maintenance
Agreement were routinely rostered to work over this period and when they took their annual leave at any other time SCA would pay
the 20% loading, the flexibility loading of 18.75% and the loss of traditional leave loading of 30%.
In late 2011, SCA introduced a new software system which necessitated consideration of the amounts of leave loading that should be
programmed into the system. SCA says that for the first time it then realised it was paying the higher loadings on occasions the
enterprise agreements did not oblige it to do so. It informed its workforce that it intended to reduce the annual leave loadings
that would be paid. Discussions at the workplace did not resolve the dispute which arose as a result of this decision.
The proceedings before the Commissioner
SCA filed two applications under
Other than for the reference to the relevant clauses in each agreement, the description of what the dispute was about was in similar
terms as was the relief sought. SCA sought arbitration by Fair Work Australia in which it would answer certain questions the company
posed in each matter. The application made in respect of the Production Agreement identified the CFMEU as the party with whom SCA
was in dispute and that in respect of the Maintenance Agreement identified the AMWU and the CEPU as the parties SCA was in dispute
with. The applications were accompanied by a letter from solicitors for SCA indicating they related to substantially the same dispute
and a request they be listed together.
The Commissioner directed the parties to confer “with a view to resolving the matter...” prior to the date the matter
was set for arbitration. To that end, a proposal by SCA to resolve the dispute was sent to the unions. A copy of it was sent to the
Commissioner and he referred to it in his decision as being “an offer that the Tribunal thought was reasonable”.
The Commissioner also issued a recommendation.
He strongly recommended the SCA proposal be accepted as a reasonable compromise and that the clauses in dispute be considered in
the context of negotiations for replacement enterprise agreements. The recommendation was not accepted and the arbitration proceeded.
Written submissions and witness statements were filed by SCA, CFMEU and the CEPU and each appeared before the Commissioner. The AMWU
also appeared in the proceedings. SCA raised a preliminary issue submitting that the CEPU was not a party to the dispute as it was
not covered by the Maintenance Agreement. It then addressed the construction it said should be given to the relevant clauses in the
two agreements submitting that the agreements “mean what they say”, that there was no ambiguity or uncertainty in their
meaning and no necessity to refer to any extraneous documents or evidence. It posed the same questions in respect of both the enterprise
agreements it had included in its
applications and then gave answers to those questions. This was the arbitrated outcome it sought.
The CFMEU filed detailed written submissions. It concentrated on the terms of the Production Agreement and challenged the SCA interpretation
of the relevant clauses. It submitted their meaning was not as clear as SCA asserted and there was ambiguity in the wording of the
clauses. It referred to evidence that it said identified the genesis of the clauses. They were derived from pulp and paper industry
agreements which went back some decades. The terms of those industry agreements were adopted at a site operated by Bowater Scott
(a predecessor to SCA) and then again adopted at the Springvale site when it commenced operations. The evidence supported the CFMEU
submission that the flexibility loading provisions were the compensation to employees for the employer being able to require an employee
to split the taking of their leave. Otherwise, it would have needed the individual agreement of the employee to do so. It submitted
that from the first enterprise agreement at Springvale in 1993 the amount of the leave loadings and the circumstances in which they
were to be paid was the same. With one exception, the clauses in subsequent enterprise agreements remained in the same terms and
at all times were applied and paid by SCA in the same manner. The exception arose in the 2003 negotiations for a new enterprise
agreement when the terms of the clause were specifically considered and a reduction in the percentage amount referred to in clause
26.13 (from 68.75% to 60%) was agreed.
The CFMEU also led evidence about the practice of SCA in compiling annual leave forms prior to Christmas, placing annual leave dates
on those forms and then giving them to employees to sign. It also referred to several decisions and judgments
are to be considered. It also submitted that there had been a common understanding between the parties as to the construction to
be given to the clauses in issue throughout successive agreements and the parties had consistently applied and adopted that common
understanding. It objected to the use of the questions posed by SCA as the frame work for the resolution of the dispute.
The CEPU submitted that for at least a quarter of a century maintenance electricians had been paid an annual leave loading of 68.75%
on all annual leave taken. It opposed any such change now occurring. Its witnesses gave evidence about the practice of rostering
maintenance employees over the period from Christmas through to the end of January. It had always been their understanding that
they were required to be available to work over this time. Any annual leave taken at any time would always have a loading paid at
the rate of 68.75 %.
The CEPU also raised a number of objections which it described as jurisdictional. In summary these were that the first step of the
dispute settlement procedure not been taken, SCA was interfering with an existing over award payment which was not to be altered
during the life of the agreement and that the effect of what SCA sought to do was in breach of the no extra claims clause. The AMWU
supported and adopted the submissions made by the CFMEU and the CEPU.
The grounds of appeal
We turn to the grounds of appeal. We will first concentrate on the grounds raised in the CFMEU appeal which are referrable to the
Production Agreement. Different considerations are raised by the AMWU/CEPU grounds of appeal and we refer to them later in this decision.
The first grounds of appeal identify several errors which the CFMEU submit are apparent in paragraphs [37], [38] and [39] of the
Commissioner’s decision. We reproduce those paragraphs.
“Determination
The argument that the Tribunal has to determine is whether the words in the Agreements mean what they say when given their simple
meaning. Was the Tribunal entitled to read something into the words which would give the employees an entitlement that was not intended?
It is accepted that what has been occurring, has been occurring for some decades. That is the alleged wrongful payment of the leave
loading entitlement to both Production and Maintenance Agreement covered employees.
If it is determined that the leave loading provisions have been applied incorrectly as stated above, albeit for some decades, it does
not follow in the Tribunal’s view, that there is an ongoing entitlement to that mispayment, albeit that the employees may argue
that it is custom and practice and tradition.
The words of the Agreements must be given their true meaning. One cannot read into the words of an agreement something that is not
there, particularly when it gives the employees a benefit, when putting the words together that was not intended.”
The CFMEU submits that the Commissioner took the wrong approach to the task of interpreting the Production Agreement. It submits
he applied the wrong principle in limiting himself to the question he posed that he had to determine
whether the words in the Agreements mean what they say when given their simple meaning. Was the Tribunal entitled to read something
into the words which would give the employees an entitlement that was not intended?” This approach was again returned to in
paragraph [45] when he said he had given the words their "simple meaning". The CFMEU submits that the Commissioner failed
to consider any of the appropriate principles that it had identified as to the approach to be taken to agreement interpretation.
In particular, the Commissioner had given no consideration to the approach discussed in
Short v FW Hercus Pty Ltd
(which had been subsequently adopted in numerous judgments and decisions which the CFMEU had referred to). The correct approach was
that the language of the agreement was to be construed in context which, in this case, necessitated consideration of the whole of
the annual leave clauses as well as the evidence that established the historical context in which the clauses had come into existence.
That evidence included previous industrial agreements which had first introduced the entitlements and the circumstances surrounding
the drafting and adoption of similar provisions and corresponding leave loadings when the first enterprise agreements were entered
into for the Springvale site. It also included consideration of the evidence that all agreements since that time had adopted the
same wording and been applied in the same manner.
The CFMEU acknowledged that at paragraph [32] the Commissioner said that it had detailed the approach to be taken to the interpretation
of agreements, the role of custom and practice and the identification of ambiguity. But that is all the Commissioner said. The approach
he took to the task of interpreting the provisions did not reflect an application of those principles nor did he give any reasons
why he may have concluded they were not appropriate.
We agree with the CFMEU criticism of the approach taken by the Commissioner. With respect, we cannot agree with him there was anything
simple about the terms of the clauses in question. They contained several errors both as to cross referencing of other clauses and
arithmetical mistakes. It was not readily apparent on a reading of the clauses applying either their ordinary meaning or their “simple”
meaning what circumstances or prerequisites needed to exist before entitlements arose. At the very least an approach to their interpretation
informed by the observations of Justice Burchett in Short and Hercus was warranted.
If this approach was not relevant some reasons for rejecting it should have been given.
Next the CFMEU submitted that paragraph [41] of the Commissioner’s decision reflects an error in approach. There the Commissioner
There has been no evidence put that has indicated to the Tribunal that the Applicant’s interpretation is not correct. Even the
witness statements and oral evidence of the CEPU’s witnesses confirmed the Applicant’s interpretation. There appeared
to be an interpretation that the words “as requested” meant the same as “you were expected”. Such an interpretation
is not correct.”
The CFMEU submitted that the Commissioner erred by imposing a burden on the union to disprove the interpretation put forward by SCA.
We agree. This is not the approach to take to the interpretation of an enterprise agreement. We are also of the opinion that to pose
such a burden on the union was unfair and ill-placed. The application before the Commissioner was initiated by SCA and in circumstances
where it was SCA which sought to depart from a practice which it had maintained over several decades. It is difficult to accept the
payment of leave loadings of the magnitude of 38.7% and 68.75% having been, as SCA submits, an oversight. It is also not at all clear
what the Commissioner meant by his comment that the CEPU evidence and submissions supported SCA’s interpretation. We were taken
to no evidence or submissions that may have formed the basis for this comment. In fact the evidence, in the case of the maintenance
employees, concentrated on the payment of the loading of 68.75% having been paid on all annual leave that they took on any occasion
it was taken at any time of the year.
Next, the CFMEU submitted that the Commissioner was in error in the manner in which he dealt with substantial evidence that it had
led which established the context in which the annual leave loading clauses were to be interpreted. That context included the industrial
history of those payments in the pulp and paper industry and the history of enterprise agreements entered into at Springvale. To
some extent this ground raises similar considerations to those in the first ground we have dealt with earlier. In support of this
ground the CFMEU identified evidence that it said was adequate to establish a custom and practice in relation to the manner in which
each of the parties had applied the leave loading clauses. At paragraph [36] the Commissioner dealt with the evidence of the CFMEU
in the following way:
All parties gave sworn statements and were examined in chief and cross-examined by the relevant parties. The Tribunal does not intend
to go into each and every detail put forward by the respective parties in terms of their witness statements. The parties are well
aware of what they said and were heavily involved in the proceedings held on 8 March 2012. In examination in chief and cross-examination
all the parties are well aware of the details of their respective arguments.”
We agree with the CFMEU that the evidence it led was, at the very least, such as to establish an arguable case in support of the
interpretation for which it contended. The Commissioner should have given some consideration to that material indicating why, as
is apparent from his reasons, he disregarded it or thought it to be of little weight. It was not appropriate to discharge this obligation
to give reasons by merely saying the parties were "well aware of the details of their respective arguments".
The next ground of appeal was described by the CFMEU as the "initial misinterpretation theory" ground. It is that the
Commissioner was in error in finding, as he did in paragraph [37], that the manner in which SCA had been paying leave loading was
a "wrongful payment", at paragraph [38] that it was a "mispayment", at paragraph [39] it was giving employees
a benefit that was not intended and at paragraph [44] where he described it as "an initial misinterpretation of the relevant
clauses". The CFMEU submitted that there was no evidence before the Commissioner which would have supported any such findings
or upon which the Commissioner could property draw a conclusion to that effect. The evidence as to the practice of SCA over many
years applying successive agreements in the same manner provided no support for those findings. This was particularly so as there
was evidence before the Commissioner that these very clauses were the subject of consideration and compromise in the 2003 enterprise
negotiations. It is difficult to understand how, in those circumstances, the Commissioner could properly have formed the view that
there had been any initial misinterpretation or wrongful payment. It is far more likely that the first occasion SCA ever considered
there was any alternative interpretation was when this matter was given particular attention upon the introduction of new payroll
The next ground of appeal is that the Commissioner’s interpretation of the annual leave loading clauses was in error. We turn
first to the flexibility loading clause. The Commissioner adopted SCA’s answer to the circumstances in which this entitlement
was to be paid. He said it was only payable when annual leave is taken as requested by the company. Unfortunately, all that answer
does is simply repeat some of the words of clause 26.12. It does not attempt to interpret the sub clause nor to do so in the context
of the annual leave clause as a whole.
Clause 26.5 provides that annual leave to which an employee is entitled is to be given and taken in a continuous period or, if the
employee and SCA agree, then in two separate periods. The clause envisages that there may be exceptions to this entitlement. One
such exception is in the case where the company shuts down the plant or part of it for the purpose of allowing annual leave to be
taken in whole or in part. Clause 26.7 provides for a number of obligations upon the employer in relation to notification of the
date and duration of a shutdown. The clause also deals with the notice the company must give to employees who may be required to
either work during the shutdown or to take annual leave during that period. An employee is not to be required to take annual leave
during more than two shutdowns in one calendar year. It is against this background clause 26.12 is to be read. It opens with the
words that it is "In addition to the payment" described in clause 26.10. Clearly the reference to clause 26.10 is incorrect.
We are prepared to accept that it was intended and should be read as a reference to clause 26.11.
There was uncontested evidence before the Commissioner that production employees were provided with forms in approximately October
of each year which already included their name and the dates of leave that the company required them to take during the Christmas
shutdown period. The evidence established that the shutdown would generally be a period of more than two weeks but was almost always
less than four weeks. Evidence also established that it was a rare occasion that production employees would be rostered for work
over this period. This was to be contrasted with maintenance employees who were almost always rostered during this period. The employees
had no choice in relation to whether they wanted to take leave at the times identified in their forms. It seems that when the company
wanted to restart in the New Year the employees were expected to return at that time. The upshot of this practice was that employees
would not be able to take all of their accrued leave entitlement over the shut down period nor over the Christmas/New Year period
if that was for a period less than 4 weeks. They would have to split the times when they took their leave. In exchange for this they
would be paid the flexibility loading. The circumstances we have referred to above persuade us that the construction placed by the
CFMEU on the relevant provisions of the Production Agreement is preferable to that for which SCA contends. In this respect we adopt,
without repeating, paragraphs 31 to 35 of the CFMEU submissions. In short, had there not been the flexibility provided for in clause
26.12, SCA would not have been entitled to require an employee to take leave on the days the plant was shutdown. It would have needed
their consent to do so. The compensation for employees taking periods of annual leave at times requested by SCA was that the 18.75%
loading would be paid on any annual leave taken throughout the year.
We should indicate that the above construction may not be applicable in circumstances in which an employee takes annual leave in
advance or who may not have any accrued entitlement to leave. It seems the parties also agree these circumstances may be an exception
to the construction of the clause for which the CFMEU contends.
We have not considered the entitlement to annual leave loading which may arise in these circumstances.
We turn to clause 26.13, the loss of traditional leave loading clause. This clause is not at all clear. Other than not being persuaded
to adopt the answers given by the Commissioner to the questions about this clause we have not been able to decide how it should be
read. It is first to be noted that the cross-references in the clause are incorrect. It is likely that where it refers to clauses
26.10 and 26.11 it should have read clauses 26.11 and 26.12. This is the basis upon which the parties read this clause in the hearing
before the Commissioner.
First, the clause defines what the traditional Christmas period is to encompass. It is that period commencing at plant shutdown prior
to Christmas through to the end of January in the following year. The opening words of the clause make it clear that the loading
is "In addition” to the flexibility loading. It is not an alternative or substitute for that loading, it is in addition
to it. The construction for which SCA contends (and the answers given to the questions about this entitlement) would result in little
or no weight being given to these words. The clause then refers to employees who are required to take their leave outside the traditional
Christmas period. In this respect we agree with the CFMEU that it is not clear why the word “required” should be read
as SCA contends, that is, meaning where an employee has applied for leave and been refused. The rostering of employees to work during
the whole of the traditional Christmas period will of course result in the employees being required to take their leave outside that
period. It seems to us that in those circumstances the employee would then be entitled to receive the 60% loading.
In the case of an employee who is rostered to work for some but not all of the traditional Christmas period and takes their leave
during the balance of that period and then leave at another time it is not clear whether the clause intends that the greater loading
be paid. Nor do we know if in fact employees are able to and do in fact choose to work through this period as SCA suggests. The limited
evidence we were taken to does not suggest this is the practice at Springvale. As we have earlier indicated Production Agreement
employees receive a form with the details of the leave they are to take already completed. In the case of Maintenance Agreement employees
it is the accepted custom and practice that they expect to be and are rostered over this period.
Unlike the flexibility loading where the historical evidence assisted in the interpretation of the clause it is not apparent that
the evidence that is said to relate to this clause assists. That evidence seems to concentrate on a period that is of some 15 or
so days commencing immediately before Christmas. None of the evidence said to support the construction of this clause identifies
the traditional Christmas period in the terms it is defined in clause 26.13.
Additional difficulty interpreting the clause is created by the last sentence which provides that it is not to apply to leave taken
outside this period by mutual agreement between the company and employees. It is difficult to understand in this context the reference
to "employees" plural. It might have had some meaning had it referred to an individual employee. But then such an employee
could be easily deprived the loading even though that employee may have worked over the whole of the traditional Christmas period.
All SCA need do is agree to any time the employee wanted to take leave during the remainder of the year and this loading would not
need to be made. We have been unable to confidently reach a view about how this last sentence in this clause is to operate. This
situation is made even more difficult when it does not seem that there was agreement amongst the parties as to how in practice it
had been applied in respect of production employees.
We have decided that the grounds of appeal raised by the CFMEU warrant the grant of permission to appeal. We are also persuaded to
uphold the appeal. We have given much consideration to what we should do next.
Section 607
of the Act provides for a number of options. We are not attracted to deal with the issues raised in this appeal by way of adopting
the limited questions SCA had posed below and then, to the extent we are able, provide our answers to them. Even if we were it is
clear the answers would leave many other questions unresolved and the underlying dispute also remain unresolved. During the appeal
hearing we raised this issue with SCA. We foreshadowed that, in the event we were to uphold the appeal, one outcome may be that we
decide that SCA should continue to pay annual leave loading in the same manner it has since 1993 and that the clauses in the two
agreements should be revisited during the negotiations for replacement agreements. In this respect we note that each agreement has
reached its nominal expiry date. SCA strongly opposed this approach being adopted by this Full Bench.
Having heard the parties in this appeal, and noting the several attempts the Commissioner made to resolve the underlying dispute,
we have considerable sympathy for the position he found himself in. It is clear he was strongly of the view the compromise put by
SCA to resolve the dispute should have been adopted by the unions and employees. It seems it was in principal but a vote of a small
number of Maintenance Agreement employees frustrated it. Although we have some detail before us about the compromise it is not complete.
What we do know is that any resolution of the dispute underlying this appeal would need to address the loadings to be made on accrued
annual leave, annual leave that would be accrued in the future and the amount of loading which would be paid to employees upon termination
of employment.
We have decided to quash the decision of the Commissioner and to refer the matter back to Commissioner Blair to consider the matters
in issue in this appeal further in light of this decision. The Commissioner will also be able to assist the parties in relation to
negotiating clauses in their new enterprise agreements which would better reflect the various annual leave loadings that are to be
paid and any prerequisites or conditions that may attach to an entitlement to such loadings.
We turn now to the AMWU and CEPU appeal. We are of the opinion each appellant is an aggrieved person in terms of
of the Act. We do not propose to deal in any detail with the challenge made by SCA to the standing of the CEPU to pursue the appeal
in light of it not being covered by the Maintenance Agreement. Regardless of any ruling on that challenge the appeal still is competent
insofar as AMWU pursues it and, in light of the manner in which the CEPU was brought into and participated in the dispute below,
it would be entitled to make submissions as an intervener.
The grounds of appeal are limited to the Commissioner’s ruling in respect of what was described as the first jurisdictional
The AMWU and CEPU had submitted that SCA had not followed the dispute settlement procedure in that the dispute had not been “pursued
between the employee or employees concerned and the area or department supervisor”.
It seems that although many discussions had been held between the parties none had involved an SCA employee who, in the unions view,
was the area or department supervisor. The unions submitted that accordingly the matter should be referred back to the parties to
take that step. The Commissioner did not uphold this challenge although he did accept the relevant step of the dispute settlement
procedure "may not have been complied with".
He said that even if that step had been taken it would not have altered the course of events. The issue in dispute was so significant
it was not going to be settled in discussions between the department supervisor and relevant employees and he described the point
as a stalling tactic.
The written submissions before us were confined to this ground although the AMWU and CEPU indicated they adopted the CFMEU submissions
as to the proper construction of the relevant clauses of the agreements.
We are not persuaded we should grant permission to appeal. The point taken is a narrow one and in no way progresses the resolution
of the dispute between the parties. It does not enliven either the public interest or any of the other traditional considerations
which might justify the grant of permission to appeal.
The challenge was not raised below at the earliest opportunity in the conciliation conferences. About this point we agree with the
Commissioner’s description that it was taken as a stalling tactic.
Despite our declining to entertain this appeal we should note that it was accepted by the AMWU and CEPU that regardless of how we
ruled on their appeal the outcome in the CFMEU appeal should apply to them. By this we understood the construction we may adopt of
the clauses in the Production Agreement should apply to the comparable clauses in the Maintenance Agreement.
In respect to the CFMEU appeal we grant permission to appeal and uphold the appeal. We quash the Commissioner’s decision. We
refer the matter which is the subject of this appeal to Commissioner Blair to deal with in accordance with these reasons for decision.
In respect to the AMWU and CEPU appeal we decline to grant permission to appeal.
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
Ms J Maloney
for the “Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union” known as the Australian Manufacturing
Workers’ Union (AMWU)
for the Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia
Mr J McKenna
of counsel, and
Mr P Gardner,
for the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
Mr R Millar
of counsel, and
solicitor, for SCA Hygiene Australasia Pty Limited
Hearing details:
The Production Agreement
“26. ANNUAL LEAVE
Except as otherwise provided (below), the provisions relating to Annual Leave and how and when it is to be taken will be in accordance
with the National Employment Standard
26.1. After the completion of each twelve months' continuous service (less the period of annual leave) with the company, an employee
shall be entitled to annual leave during ordinary working hours to the following extent:
26.1.1. A shiftworker engaged on continuous work as defined in Clause 17.1 of this agreement for the full year on a roster
system operating seven days per week that is, 168 hours per week rotating roster, shall be entitled to accrue 175 hours annual leave
per year (less leave taken).
26.1.2. A dayworker, or a shift worker (including 12 hour permanent dayshift) other than as in paragraph 26.1.1 of this sub-clause
for the full year, shall be entitled to accrue 140 hours annual leave per year (less leave taken).
26.1.3. A shift worker engaged on rotating or permanent night, 12 hour shifts for a full year shall be entitled to accrue 175 hours
annual leave per year (less leave taken).
26.1.4. Where an employee has been for part of the year a day worker or a shift worker as in paragraph 26.1.2 of this sub-clause,
and for part of the same year a shift worker, as in paragraph 26.1.1 of this sub-clause, the employee shall be entitled to a pro-rata
number of hours calculated to the nearest one hour.
26.2. Annual leave shall be exclusive of the public holidays prescribed in clause 25 of this agreement. An employee shall forfeit
the right to payment for any paid public holiday within or immediately following the period of annual leave if the employee fails,
without reasonable cause, to report for duty at the proper time after the period of annual leave.
26.3. Annual leave shall be computed from and including the first day of January in each year.
26.4. An employee who has not completed twelve months continuous service at 31st December shall be entitled to pro-rata annual leave
calculated to the nearest one hour in accordance with the scale set out in sub-clause 26.1 of this clause.
26.5. The annual leave to which an employee is entitled shall, except as prescribed herein, be given and taken in a continuous period,
or if the employee and the company so agree in two separate periods.
26.6. An employee shall be allowed and shall take their annual leave at a time agreed with the company, or, failing such agreement;
26.6.1. Within six months of their entitlement;
26.6.2. After not less than six weeks' notice by the company;
26.6.3. At a time determined in the shift roster.
26.7. The company may shut-down an establishment or a section or sections thereof for the purpose of allowing annual leave in whole
or in part to some or all of the employees at the establishment. The following provisions shall apply to a shut-down under this sub-clause;
26.7.1. The company shall notify employees as early as possible of the commencing date and duration of the shut-down, and in any case
not later than six weeks before such commencing date.
26.7.2. The company shall also notify all employees required to work during such shut-down as early as possible, and in any case not
later than six weeks before such commencing date.
26.7.3. The company may require all employees or any of them to take during a shut-down period the annual leave to which they are
entitled, or such portion of it as can be taken within that period and the remainder in accordance with sub-clause 26.6 of this clause.
An employee who is not entitled to annual leave for portion of any shut-down period may be stood down without pay for such portion
subject to there being no suitable employment available.
26.7.4. An employee shall not be required under this sub-clause to take a period of annual leave during more than two shut-downs in
the one calendar year.
26.8. Any exercise by the company in any year of the right to shut-down an establishment or a section thereof under this clause shall
not prejudice the company's right to operate an establishment or any sections thereof in any subsequent year without a shut-down.
26.9. It is recognised by the parties that in order to meet the needs of the company, the company may from time to time within the
limits allowed by this clause vary the annual leave arrangements of the establishments or of a section or sections thereof.
26.10. The company may require or allow an employee to take all or portion of their annual leave before the employee is entitled to
such leave as accrued on a pro rata basis but in no circumstances shall the operation of this sub-clause entitle the employee to
annual leave in excess of that prescribed elsewhere in this clause.
(a) Where a shift worker engaged on continuous shift (as defined) has accrued more than 350 hours leave, the Company may direct the
employee to take up to � of the amount of accrued annual leave. Consideration will be given to an employee's personal circumstances
in regard to the timing of taking such leave.
(b) Where a day worker, or a shift worker other than on continuous shift, has accrued more than 280 hours leave, the Company may
direct the employee to take up to � of the amount of accrued annual leave.
26.11. Unless they request otherwise, each employee, before going on annual leave, shall be paid their earnings to date, and in addition
shall be paid for the period during which they have then been allowed annual leave, either:
26.11.1. at their ordinary weekly wage rates plus a loading of 20%, or else.
26.11.2. at the average rate of their weekly earnings in ordinary time over the minimum-cycle roster period. Such ordinary time shall
not include overtime or any payment made pursuant to Clause 21-Meal Breaks and Allowances or Clause 36 Other Allowances.
26.11.3. whichever method of calculation gives the higher result.
The loading of 20% prescribed shall be paid to any employee who retires after attaining 55 years of age; and is entitled to paid annual
leave on a pro rata basis
Flexibility Loading
26.12. In addition to the payment described in 26.10 above, employees who take their annual leave as requested by the company (including
such splitting as may be necessary - but no more than 2 periods unless agreed between the parties) shall receive a loading of 18.75%
of their leave payment based on the number of weeks leave taken (base holiday pay x 18.75%) i.e. Springvale employees receive 38.75%
Loss of Traditional Leave Period Loading
26.13. In addition to the payments described in 26.10 and 26.11, employees who are required to take their leave outside the traditional
Christmas period commencing at plant shutdown prior to Christmas through to the end of January, shall receive a loading of 20.25%
of their leave payment based on the number of weeks taken (base pay x 20.25%), i.e, Springvale employees receive 60% loading. This
sub-clause shall not apply to leave taken outside this period by mutual agreement between company and employees
26.14. Special rates, travelling allowances, meal break allowances and overtime shall not be included in the calculation of annual
leave loadings.
26.15. Payment shall not be made or accepted in lieu of annual leave except in respect of accumulated entitlement (calculated pro-rata
to the nearest one hour's pay) on termination of service.
26.16. For the purpose of this clause service shall be deemed to be continuous notwithstanding:
26.16.1. Any interruption or termination of the employment by the company, if such Interruption or termination has been made merely
with the intention of avoiding obligations hereunder in respect of leave of absence;
26.16.2. Any absence from work on paid sick leave on account of personal sickness or injury or on account of leave lawfully granted
by the company; or
26.16.3. Any absence with reasonable cause provided the employee has advised the Company wherever practicable within 24hrs of the
commencement of such absence of their inability to attend for duty, the reason for the absence and the estimated duration of the
26.17. An employee may extend the annual leave by up to and not more than three days when an actual interruption occurs in such annual
leave in circumstances which would otherwise entitle the employee to claim compassionate leave in accordance with Clause 31 of the
26.18. An employee who is incapacitated as a result of a personal illness or injury while on annual leave may submit a claim for the
period of incapacity to be regarded as paid or unpaid sick leave provided that:
26.18.1. The period of incapacity if five or more consecutive days.
26.18.2. The employee proves to the satisfaction of the company by the provision of a certificate from a qualified medical practitioner
that the employee was so incapacitated for the period claimed.
26.18.3. Unpaid sick leave shall not be taken where an employee has sick leave credits.
26.18.4. In making a claim for paid sick leave under this sub-clause, an employee shall comply with all the requirements of clause
28 - Sick Leave.
26.18.5 The time for taking any balance of annual leave shall be negotiated in accordance with clause 26.6 and, notwithstanding the
provisions of the sub-clause, annual leave in such circumstances may be taken in more than two periods.
Annual Leave Outside of Roster
26.19. By agreement with the Company, shift workers may change their annual leave periods provided that:
26.19.1. Appropriate notice is given to the Company.
26.19.2. A suitably trained day or shift worker relief is available and is prepared to voluntarily change to shift work.
26.19.3. The change does not detrimentally affect day work manning; e.g. Exceeds maximum number allowed off by the Company in the
day work area on leave at one time.
26.20. A shift worker who has taken leave other than in accordance with the roster will revert to day work when the shift crew is
on rostered annual leave. During this time, the employee will be paid day work rates and will work to day work conditions.
26.21. Notwithstanding the non-accrual of annual leave credits by employees who are absent without pay, where an employee is absent
on account of illness after the expiration of their sick leave, the Company will allow the continuation of annual leave accrual on
the following basis:
Completed year of service
No leave accrued
For employees with:
1-2 years of service
Leave to accrue at full rate for up to one month
Leave to accrue at half rate for next two months
2-5 years of service
Leave to accrue at full rate for two months
Leave to accrue at half rate for third month
5 years services plus
Leave to accrue at full rate for up to three months
26.22. Where an employee is absent without pay for more than 3 months the Company will review the situation on an individual basis.
Provided that in respect of the above, satisfactory evidence of the continuing illness of the employee is provided.
The Maintenance Agreement
“33. ANNUAL LEAVE
Except as otherwise provided below, the provisions relating to Annual Leave and how and when it is to be taken will be in accordance
with the National Employment Standards (NES).
33.1 After the completion of each twelve months' continuous service (less the period of annual leave) with the company, an employee
shall be entitled to annual leave during ordinary working hours to the following extent.,-
33.1.1 A shiftworker engaged on continuous work as defined in Clause 22.5 of this agreement for the full year on a roster system
operating seven days per week that is, 168 hours per week rotating roster, shall be entitled to 175 hours.
33.1.2 A day worker, or a shift worker (including 12 hour permanent dayshift) other than as in Clause 33.1.1 for the full year, shall
be entitled to 140 hours.
33.1.3 A shift worker engaged on rotating or permanent night, 12 hour shifts for a full year shall be entitled to 175 hours.
33.1.4 Where an employee has been for part of the year a day worker or a shift worker as in Clause 33.1.2, and for part of the same
year a shift worker, as in Clause 33.1.1 the employee shall be entitled to a pro-rata number of hours calculated to the nearest one
33.2 Annual leave shall be exclusive of the public holidays prescribed in this agreement.
33.3 Annual leave shall be computed from and including the first day of January in each year.
33.4 An employee who has not completed twelve months continuous service at 31st December shall be entitled to 'pro-rata annual leave
calculated to the nearest one hour in accordance with the scale set out in sub-clause 33.1 of this clause.
33.5 The annual leave to which an employee is entitled shall, except as prescribed herein, be given and taken in a continuous period,
or if the employee and the company so agree in two separate periods.
33.6 An employee shall be allowed and shall take their annual leave at a time agreed with the employer, or, failing such agreement:
33.6.1 within twelve months of their entitlement;
33.6.2 after not less than six weeks notice by the company;
33.6.3 at a time determined in the shift roster if on continuous shifts.
33.7 The company may shut-down an establishment or a section or sections thereof for the purpose of allowing annual leave in whole
or in part to some or all of the employees at the establishment. The following provisions shall apply to a shut-down under this sub-clause:-
33.8 The company shall notify employees as early as possible of the commencing date and duration of the shut-down, and in any case
not later than six weeks before such commencing date.
33.9 The company shall also notify all employees required to work during such shut-down as early as possible, and in any case not
later than six weeks before such commencing date.
33.10 The company may require all employees or any of them to take during a shutdown period the annual leave to which they are entitled,
or such portion of it as can be taken within that period and the remainder in accordance with sub-clause 35.7 of this clause. An
employee who is not entitled to annual leave for portion of any shutdown period may be stood down without pay for such portion subject
to there being no suitable employment available.
33.11 An employee shall not be required under this sub-clause to take a period of annual leave during more than two shutdowns in
the one calendar year.
33.12 Any exercise by the company in any year of the right to shut-down an establishment or a section thereof under this clause shall
not prejudice the company's right to operate an establishment or any sections thereof in any subsequent year without a shut-down.
33.13 It is recognised by the parties that in order to meet the needs of the company, the company may from time to time within the
limits allowed by this clause vary the annual leave arrangements of the establishments or of a section or sections thereof.
33.14 The company may require or allow an employee to take all or portion of his annual leave before the employee is entitled to
such leave, but in no circumstances shall the operation of this sub-clause entitle the employee to annual leave in excess of that
prescribed elsewhere in this clause.
33.15 Unless they request otherwise, each employee, before going on annual leave, shall be paid their earnings to date, and in addition
shall be paid for the period during which they have then been allowed annual leave either:
33.15.1 at their ordinary weekly wage rates plus a loading of 20%; or
33.15.2 at the average rate of their weekly earnings in ordinary time over the minimum-cycle roster period. Such ordinary time shall
not include overtime or any payment made pursuant the clause regarding Meal Breaks and Allowances;
whichever method of calculation gives the higher result.
33.16 The loading of 20% prescribed shall be paid to any employee who:
33.16.1 retires after attaining 55 years of age; and
33.16.2 is entitled to paid annual leave on a pro rata basis
Flexibility Loading
33.17 In addition to the payment described above, employees who take their annual leave as requested by the company (including such
splitting as may be necessary - but no more than 2 periods unless agreed between the parties) shall receive a loading of 18.75% of
their leave payment based on the number of weeks leave taken (base holiday pay x 18.75%) ie., Sancella employees receive 38.75% loading.
Loss of Traditional Leave Period Loading
33.18 In addition to the payments described above, employees who are required to take their leave outside the traditional Christmas
period commencing at plant shutdown prior to Christmas through to the end of January, shall receive a loading of 30% of their leave
payment based on the number of weeks taken (base pay x 30%). This sub-clause shall not apply to leave taken outside this period by
mutual agreement between company and employees ie., SCA Hygiene Australasia, Springvale site employees receive 68.75%
33.19 Special rates, travelling allowances, meal break allowances and overtime shall not be included in the calculation of Annual
Leave Loadings.
33.20 Payment shall not be made or accepted in lieu of annual leave except in respect of:
33.20.1 accumulated entitlement (calculated pro-rata to the nearest one hour's pay) on termination of service.
Continuous Service
33.21 For the purpose of this clause service shall be deemed to be continuous notwithstanding:-
33.21.1 any interruption or termination of the employment by the company, if such interruption or termination has been made merely
with the intention of avoiding obligations hereunder in respect of leave of absence;
33.21.2 any absence from work on paid personal leave on account of personal sickness or injury or on account of leave lawfully granted
by the company- or
33.21.3 any absence with reasonable cause provided the employee has advised the Company wherever practicable within 24 hrs of the
commencement of such absence of their inability to attend for duty, the reason for the absence and the estimated duration of the
33.22 An employee may extend the annual leave by up to and not more than three days when an actual interruption occurs in such annual
leave in circumstances which would otherwise entitle the employee to claim compassionate leave in accordance with this Agreement.
33.23 An employee who is 'incapacitated as a result of a personal illness or injury while on annual leave may submit a claim for the
period of incapacity to be regarded as paid or unpaid personal leave provided that:-
33.23.1 The period of incapacity is five or more consecutive days.
33.23.2 The employee proves to the satisfaction of the employer by the provision of a certificate from a qualified medical practitioner
that the employee was so incapacitated for the period claimed
33.23.3 Unpaid personal leave shall not be taken where an employee has personal leave credits.
33.24 In making a claim for paid personal leave under this sub-clause, an employee shall comply with all the requirements of the clause
regarding Personal Leave.
33.25 The time for taking any balance of annual leave shall be negotiated in accordance with this clause; and, notwithstanding the
those provisions, annual leave in such circumstances may be taken in more than two periods.
Annual Leave Outside of Roster
33.26 By agreement with the Company, shift workers may change their annual leave periods provided that:
33.26.1 Appropriate notice is given to the Company.
33.26.2 A suitably trained day or shift worker relief is available and is prepared to voluntarily change to shift work.
33.26.3 The change does not detrimentally affect day work manning; eg. exceeds maximum number allowed off by the Company in the day
work area on leave at one time.
33.27 A shift worker who has taken leave other than in accordance with the roster will revert to day work when the shift crew is on
rostered annual leave. During this time, the employee will be paid day work rates and will work to day work conditions.
[2010] FWAA 4727
(Production
[2010] FWAA 1324
(Maintenance
AMWU v Silcar Pty Ltd
[2011] FWAFB 2555
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v AIRC
[2000] HCA 47
Production Agreement clauses 26.12, 26.13 and Maintenance Agreement clauses 33.17, 33.18
[2012] FWA 2946
at paras [4] and [5]
Eg Short and FW Hercus Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 51
,Ulan Coal Mines Limited and Horwarth and Others
[2010] FWAFB 3488
, The Australian Workers’ Union, West Australia Branch and Co-operative Bulk Handling Limited
[2010] FWAFB 4801
, Amcor Limited v CFMEU
[2005] HCA 10
[1993] FCA 51
We note that this approach was recently adopted in the Federal Court judgment in Shop Distributive and Allied Employees’ Association
and Woolworths SA Pty Ltd
[2011] FCAFC 67
Exhibits SCA 3 and 4
We note that in the production agreement the addition of the three amounts is in fact 59% not 60 %.
[2012] FWA 2946
Clause 45.2.1 of the Maintenance Agreement
[2012] FWA 2946
Wan and Australian Industrial Relations Commission
[2001] FCA 1803
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR531121>
No downloadable files available