Tenants' Union of Queensland Inc, Tenants' Union of NSW Co-op Ltd v TICA Default Tenancy Control Pty Ltd [2004] PrivCmrACD 4 (16 April 2004)
Complaint Determination No. 4 of 2004
Federal Privacy
Commissioner
Table of Contents
Determination No. 4 of 2004
section 52.
Parties to the Complaint
Complainants
2. The Tenants’ Union of Queensland Inc, Tenants’ Union of NSW Co-op
3. TICA Default Tenancy Control Pty
4. This determination relates to a complaint lodged by the Tenants’ Union
of Queensland Inc (TU QLD) in February 2003
5. The respondent to the complaint is TICA Default Tenancy Control Pty Ltd
(TICA). As set out below (see [
TICA’s business activities involve the collection, use and disclosure of
personal information. It is complained that certain
acts and/or practices of
TICA may be an interference with the privacy of individuals.
6. The complaint is a representative complaint, lodged pursuant to
. TU QLD has identified the class of members to the
representative complaint as those people:
applying to
rent a house through a real estate agency that is a member of TICA and if
successful, will be listed on the tenancy agreement;
who will be or are living in a house
rented through a real estate agency that is a member of TICA, but their names
appear on the tenancy
agreement as ‘occupants’ rather than
7. I also received a complaint made by the Tenants’ Union of NSW Co-op Ltd
(TU NSW). The individual who is the subject of
that complaint fell within the
class of members identified by TU QLD and, accordingly, that complaint was dealt
with as a part of
the representative complaint brought by TU
8. I decided to investigate the relevant acts and practices of TICA pursuant to
, being satisfied that there was an act or practice
which may have been an interference with the privacy of an individual and that
the complaints received were validly made under
9. I am also satisfied that the requirements for the making of a representative
complaint, set out in
, have been
Background,
allegations and remedies sought
10. TICA is one of a number of organisations that
operates what is known as a tenancy database. Its Tenancy History Database
personal information about many thousands of Australians relating to
alleged defaults on tenancy agreements, including failures to
pay rent or
damaging property. It also holds personal information about applicants for
tenancies in what is known as the Enquiries
information about tenants and applicants from property managers that are
of TICA and makes the personal information it holds on its
11. The complainants allege that the collection of personal information from
prospective occupants is unnecessary for the functions
and activities of TICA
and consequently a breach of National Privacy Principle (NPP) 1.1 (set out below
). They argue that the collection
of information concerning the ‘enquiries’ made by real estate
agents, as a result of
an individual’s tenancy application, is unnecessary
for any of TICA’s functions and that this allows TICA to become a
‘history database’ rather than a record of defaults.
12. Further, the complainants question TICA’s collection process,
including the forms of notice and consent used, and they
argue that if these are
inconsistent with the
then TICA is also using and disclosing
personal information in ways that are inconsistent with the
13. As required by
section 38(2)
, TU QLD set out in its
complaint the remedies it is seeking. These are a declaration by the Privacy
Commissioner
will cease to use its current forms, known as
Acknowledgment for
Acknowledgment for Occupants Only
develop new forms to meet its obligations under NPP 1.5;
will prevent TICA from collecting
personal information about tenancy applications in its Enquiries Database;
will prevent TICA from collecting
personal information about people who are listed as occupants on a tenancy
14. The NPPs in Schedule 3 of the
outline standards for handling
personal information that legally bind organisations, as defined by
Section 13A
specifies that an act or practice of an
organisation is an interference with the privacy of an individual if the act or
breaches an NPP in relation to personal information that relates to
that individual.
16. The issues in this complaint are whether TICA is: collecting personal
information that is not necessary for one or more of its
functions or
activities; relying on an invalid form of consent when collecting personal
information from tenants and occupants; failing
to fully comply with the notice
requirements in NPP 1.5; and using and disclosing personal information for
secondary purposes that
are not related to the purpose of collection and would
not be ‘reasonably expected’ by the individual concerned and is
therefore breaching NPP 2.1(a).
17. NPP 1 deals with the collection of personal information. It limits
collection of personal information to that which is necessary,
specifies how
personal information may be collected and requires organisations to provide
information that will assist individuals
to make informed choices about whether
to provide personal information or at least to be aware, to the extent that is
reasonable,
that information about them has been collected.
18. NPP 1.1 states that:
organisation must not collect personal information unless the information is
necessary for one or more of its functions or activities.
19. NPP 1.2 states that:
An organisation must collect personal
information only by lawful and fair means and not in an unreasonably intrusive
20. NPP 1.3 states that:
At or before the time (or, if that is
not practicable, as soon as practicable after) an organisation collects personal
information
reasonable steps to ensure that the individual is aware of:
the identity of the
organisation and how to contact it; and
fact that he or she is able to gain access to the information;
the purposes for which the information
is collected; and
the organisations (or the
of that kind; and
any law that requires the
particular information to be collected;
the main consequences (if any) for the
individual if all or part of the information is not
21. NPP 1.4 states that:
If it is reasonable and practicable to
do so, an organisation must collect personal information about an individual
only from that
individual.
22. NPP 1.5 states that:
If an organisation collects personal
information about an individual from someone else, it must take reasonable steps
to ensure that
the individual is or has been made aware of the matters listed in
subclause 1.3 except to the extent that making the individual aware
matters would pose a serious threat to the life or health of any individual.
23. NPP 2 allows organisations to use or disclose personal information freely
for the purpose for which it was collected but limits
secondary uses and
disclosures to specified circumstances including those the individual would
expect. This is set out in NPP 2.1(a).
24. NPP 2.1(a) states that:
An organisation must not use or
disclose personal information about an individual for a purpose (the
secondary purpose
) other than the primary purpose of collection: unless
both of the following apply:
(i) the secondary purpose is related to the primary purpose of collection and,
if the personal information is sensitive information,
directly related to the
(ii) the individual would reasonably expect the organisation to use or disclose
the information for the secondary purpose.
Section 6D(1)
defines a small business as one with an
annual turnover of ‘$3,000,000 or less’.
Sections 6D(3)
provides for a small business to be classed as ‘a small
business operator’ and therefore not subject to the
specified circumstances, including where an organisation trades in personal
information.
also provides that small businesses which are subject to the
would not be subject to the provisions of the NPPs until 21 December
2002. Consequently, when investigating this complaint I have
been restricted to
examining evidence relating to the acts and practices of TICA which occurred
after 21 December 2002
except where
27. In this regard with respect to small
businesses:
provides that NPP 1 only applies to personal
information collected after 21 December 2002;
section 16D(4)
provides that NPP 2 applies to personal information collected after
21 December 2002.
provides that after I have investigated a
complaint I may make a
determination:
the complaint; or
finding the complaint
substantiated and making a declaration that:
conduct should not continue or not be repeated; and/or
the respondent should perform any reasonable act or course of conduct to redress
any loss or damage suffered by the complainant;
the complainant is entitled to compensation for any loss or damage –
including injury to the complainant’s feelings or
humiliation suffered by
the complainant.
29. It is also within my powers under
recommendations which will promote compliance with the
Investigation
Section 40(1A)
provides that I must not investigate a
complaint where the complainant has not first complained to the respondent,
unless I consider
that it was not appropriate for the complainant to have done
so. In the present case, I am aware that TU QLD has had ongoing contact
TICA in relation to a number of privacy issues arising out of its activities and
that this contact may be considered to be by
way of ‘complaint’. To
the extent that the present complaint falls beyond those
‘complaints’ made to the
respondent, which I note have not resulted
in the resolution of these matters, I am satisfied that the complex nature of
raised and their significance for the rights of the people concerned
makes it inappropriate for them to be the subject of direct
complaint to the
respondent.
31. My Office’s investigation of this complaint involved the
advising the parties that I was opening an investigation into the complaint
section 40(1)
and inviting the parties to
gathering evidence and
considering information provided by TU QLD, TU NSW, the individual complainants
and TICA in submissions or
in response to matters raised by my staff or the
complainants;
providing the respondent
and complainants with opportunities to comment on an initial preliminary view on
the complaint in September
visiting TICA’s premises to
discuss the issues raised in the complaint, to observe its database in practice
and gather additional
information about the operation of the
providing the parties with
the current Office position on the complaint in February 2004 following changes
in some aspects of the
draft decision since the preliminary view of September
2003 and extending an invitation to make oral and/or written submissions before
a determination was made;
hearing on 3 March 2004 affording the parties the opportunity to appear before
me – TU QLD and TU NSW accepted the
invitation to appear at the
considering written and oral
submissions and gathering information to clarify claims made by the
providing the primary
representative complainant (TU QLD) and TICA with the opportunity to see
information and submissions provided
by the other party;
pursuant to
section 43(5)
and the principles of procedural fairness, providing the parties
with a revised preliminary view in relation to the complaint in
March 2004 and a
final opportunity to comment before I finalised the
determination;
holding a further
hearing on 8 April 2004 affording the parties the opportunity to appear before
me – TICA accepted the invitation
to appear at the hearing;
providing TICA and TU QLD with
copies of the submissions, excluding some material that involved personal
information of third parties,
made by the other party in response to the March
preliminary
considerations
32. Before setting out my findings and reasons in relation to this complaint I
will make some general comments about the context
in which this complaint is
33. Housing is essential for all people and is one of the basic human rights set
out in the Universal Declaration of Human
The operation of tenancy
individuals listed on the
tenancy databases, such as TICA, can be seen as a legitimate risk minimisation
for property managers.
34. A number of the NPPs relevant to this complaint require an assessment of
‘reasonableness’ (for example, the ‘reasonable
required of an organisation under NPP 1.3). I take the view that in making an
assessment of ‘reasonableness’,
it is appropriate to take into
account the purposes for which personal information is collected and the
consequences for the individuals
concerned. In this case my conclusion is that
tenancy databases, such as the one operated by TICA, do have an impact on an
individual’s
ability to obtain housing; my understanding is that this is
part of the intention when establishing such databases.
35. However, this is only one factor I will take into account. I will consider
the overall intention of the
including that business needs to be
able to operate efficiently and effectively and that the NPPs are high level
principles and are
not prescriptive in how they apply.
36. In this complaint I need to consider TICA’s functions, activities and
purposes of collecting, using and disclosing tenancy
application and tenancy
history information and decide if it can lawfully collect information about
tenants and approved occupants
and for what purposes that information may be
used or disclosed. I also need to assess its collection processes with respect
37. It is relevant to note that this complaint is against TICA, not its members.
Accordingly, I will not consider how the NPPs apply
to the acts and practices of
its members. That would be the subject of separate investigation should such a
complaint be made against
a member. I acknowledge TICA's request in its
submission in response to the March preliminary view that it be advised about
of its members that may be breaches of the
so that it can
assist to address these practices.
38. I have set out below issues that this complaint raises together with
information, evidence and discussion about the application
of the law that I
consider relevant to the question of whether TICA complies with its obligations
under NPPs 1 and 2.
Small business provisions
39. I find that TICA is an ‘organisation’ as defined by
, and is accordingly bound by the NPPs.
40. TICA does not fall within the exemption to the
which applies to
‘small business
operators’.
‘small business’ in terms of the
, in that it’s
annual turnover is ‘$3,000,000 or less’. However, as TICA trades in
personal information, it does
not fall within the definition of ‘small
business operator’ by virtue of
section 6D(4)(c)
41. Because of the delayed application of the NPPs to small business, it is open
to TICA to decide that it will use and disclose
personal information collected
before 21 December 2002 without taking account of NPP 2. However, if it
adopted that approach
would need to have in place practices to distinguish
between listings that are not subject to the
and those that are. I
understand that in practice TICA does not make a distinction between personal
information collected pre and
post 21 December
Collection necessary for
functions and activities
42. As noted above (see [10]) TICA holds two separate databases of personal
information (to be referred to as ‘the database’).
The Enquiries
approved occupants. The Tenancy History
tenant’s behaviour during the tenancy. The Enquiries Database contains
identifying information
which the prospective tenant lodged the application. Once the TICA member has
automatically updated to the Enquiries Database.
43. TICA states its functions and activities include the facilitation of
‘proper assessment of risk by landlords and agents
and the determination
of the suitability of an individual for tenancy of a premises’.
44. TICA has advised that it is ‘a tenancy history database that allows
its members to store and recall information about tenants
and their tenancy
history. Members are able to list tenants on the TICA database for various
categories both good and bad’.
Collection of personal information
– risk management
45. The complainants allege that the collection of information about prospective
tenants and prospective occupants is not necessary
to TICA’s functions or
activities, as required by NPP 1.1. Further, the complainants deny that
the Enquiries Database
legitimate risk assessment tool and argue that the
Enquiries Database has limited utility in assessing the risk of prospective
and that the main method of assessing risk is via the Tenancy History
possible reason we
can see for TICA arguing that the Enquiries Database is consistent with the
primary purpose of assessing
of a prospective tenant, is if the
46. TICA states that the Enquiries Database also enables its members to assess
the validity of tenancy applications. It advises
that members’ searches
of the Enquiries Database are used as a risk management tool to confirm the
accuracy of information
provided on the tenancy application form. TICA states
that the Enquiries Database was established in 1998 and contains more than
times the number of records contained in the Tenancy History Database. TICA
states that the collection of information about tenancy
applications is vital to
TICA’s operation because it forms part of the risk management service TICA
provides to its members.
TICA claims that the Enquiries Database helps in the
following risk
situations:
individuals who have made a large number of tenancy applications may have done
so because they have an adverse tenancy history
and this is an indication that
robust reference checking and rental history validation may be
where a person has a default
and the next tenancy is taken out in their partner’s name – this may
come to light when members
tenant’s partner or other family members;
where applicants attempt to falsify
information, for example about where they have been
47. I acknowledge the complainants’ argument that a history of numerous
applications does not automatically mean an individual
is a bad tenancy risk.
The listing of numerous applications may be as a result of other factors or
considerations such as a tight
rental market. It may also indicate that an
individual wanted to ‘shop around’ for a property and make
applications
at a number of locations. However, these limitations to the
utility of the database do not mean that it cannot be considered to
legitimate ‘risk management’ tool.
48. The meaning of the word ‘necessary’
in the context of NPP 1.1 has not been judicially considered. I note, however,
the comments of Gummow J in
General Newspapers Pty Limited and Others v
Telstra Corporation
[1993] FCA 473
(1993) 117 ALR 629
(considering the meaning of
‘necessary’ within
section 236(1)
Telecommunications Act
The term ‘necessary’ will take its colour
from its context; in ordinary usage it may mean, at one end of the scale,
‘indispensable’
and at the other end ‘useful’ or
‘expedient’: Re an Inquiry under the Company Securities (Insider
[1988] AC 660
find that the use of the word ‘necessary’ in the present context
falls between the two ends of the scale identified
by Gummow J. In my view it
does not require that the information be indispensable to an organisation, in
that, without such information,
it would be impossible to carry on its business.
It will not, however, be sufficient to show that the information is merely
or ‘expedient’. Rather, determining whether or
not the collection of personal information is ‘necessary’
consideration of whether or not it is clearly appropriate and relevant to the
functions or activities of the
organisation.
In my view,
information that is only of marginal relevance to the functions or activities of
an organisation is more likely to be
considered unnecessary for the purposes of
NPP 1.1. It will also be relevant to consider whether or not the functions or
of the organisation can be reasonably performed in a manner which
does not require the collection of personal information. It may
relevant to consider whether the information is of a sensitive nature such that
it may be considered to be more invasive
of a person’s privacy.
50. In the present case, I find that, on balance, the
collection of personal information for the purposes of the Enquiries Database
clearly appropriate and relevant to the functions and activities of TICA. I do
not believe that the information could be said
to be of only marginal relevance,
nor do I find that the functions or activities of the organisation could be
performed in a manner
which does not require the collection of this personal
information, as it would diminish the utility of the service provided by TICA.
I therefore find that the collection of the information is
‘necessary’ for the purposes of NPP 1.1.
51. I note that concern has been raised by TU QLD in
its submissions in response to my March 2004 preliminary view as to a statement
made by TICA in relation to the use to which it puts the information contained
in its Enquiries Database. The statement made by TICA
is that the information is
also used for purposes including to pursue tenants who have absconded owing
money, or to argue against
a tenant’s claim in a tribunal that they cannot
obtain accommodation elsewhere. TU QLD states its concern that the database
being used for a completely different purpose to that of prospective risk
assessment.
52. This concern appears to me to be well founded.
TICA agrees its primary purpose in collecting information is for the purpose of
risk assessment and it would appear that the use of the information in the
manner described by TICA may be a breach of NPP 2 which
limits the ability to
use information for a secondary purpose. I would strongly recommend that TICA
gives very careful consideration
to this aspect of its operations. However, I
do not proceed to make any finding on this issue at present as it was not a
which was fully canvassed in the course of my investigation, which
concerned itself primarily with the question of whether or not
the Enquiries
Collection of non-negative
personal information and including information about occupants in the Tenancy
History Database
53. The complainants argue that risk assessment only needs an examination of
defaults. They claim that in their experience any listing
with TICA will have
an adverse affect on an individual and as such, any argument that it is a
‘history database’ is misplaced;
the public perception is that it is
a ‘default database’ and contains the details of ‘bad’
tenants. The
complainants allege that the ‘default database’
perception is reinforced by its name, TICA Tenancy
emphasis] Control Pty Ltd.
54. On this basis the complainants argue that as TICA is a default database it
should be precluded from collecting personal information
is not negative in nature as this is not necessary to the default function. In
particular they argue against
any collection of personal information about
tenancy applications. They also argue that information about occupants should
included on the Tenancy History Database.
55. In this regard, TICA has advised that it currently does not allow
listings about occupants in its Tenancy History Database. It offered the
clarification that in States other than Queensland, an
approved occupant who by
their actions, for example continuing to pay rent after the actual tenant left
or attending periodical inspection,
had in effect become the tenant could be
listed on the Tenancy History Database. TU QLD claims that it has knowledge of
an occupant
being listed on the Tenancy History Database however it has not
provided evidence of this and at this stage I have no other evidence
that occupants are listed on the Tenancy History Database. I am satisfied that
TICA does not now accept listings about
approved occupants except in the
circumstances noted above and I have therefore not considered the question as to
whether NPP 1.1
would allow information about occupants to be included in the
Tenancy History Database. Nonetheless, I believe it would be reasonable
TICA to conduct an examination of the Tenancy History Database to ensure that
all individuals listed on the database were tenants,
not occupants and to remind
members that occupants cannot be listed on the Tenancy History Database.
56. I also note in respect of this issue that the
Acknowledgment
for Occupants Only
that TICA’s members use to meet their own
obligations under NPP 1.3 and TICA’s obligation under NPP 1.5 does state
the details of an approved occupant may be included in TICA’s
I consider that
the current wording is a misstatement of TICA’s purpose in collecting
information about occupants. I consider
that, amongst other things, it is poor
circulation. In its
April 2004, submission in response to the March preliminary
view, TICA acknowledged that the form was incorrect and advised that
rectify this matter.
57. In this complaint, about NPP 1.1, I need to consider the nature of an
organisation’s functions and activities, not how
they are represented to
the public; although this is an issue in terms of NPPs 1.3 and 1.5 which require
organisations to advise
the ‘purposes for which the information is
collected’.
NPP 1.1 allows
an organisation to collect personal information where it is necessary for
‘one or more of its functions or
activities’. I have considered
above what is, in my view, the proper meaning of the word
‘necessary’ in this context
58. I do not consider that a business name limits what can be considered as an
organisation’s functions and activities for
organisation’s name is one factor I can take into account in forming a
view about the nature of an organisation’s
functions or activities, it is
not the only factor. I must also consider what the organisation says it does
and what it actually
does. TICA advises that it allows its members to
‘list various categories both good and bad’. It also advises that
the Enquiries Database is used as a risk management tool.
59. As noted above, my conclusion is that TICA can include personal information
can be considered necessary
to its risk management function. The NPPs require the collection of personal
information to be necessary
for ‘one or more of its functions or
activities’, not for each of its functions. However for completeness I
following comments about the question of whether TICA operates a
default database or a tenancy history database or both.
60. With the exception of
does not prevent an
organisation to which the
applies from establishing a database of
positive information about individuals although such a database would need to be
in accordance with the NPPs. TICA asserts that its functions or
activities include collecting ‘good’ listings –
that is that
it operates a history database as well as a default database. I am satisfied
that TICA’s processes are meant
to allow positive listings and that this
is relevant to a proper assessment of risk – they may, of course, balance
comments. I am also satisfied that the database does contain some
positive listings. While TICA advises that its members do not
often use the
facility, this is not determinative.
61. On balance, I find the collection of non-negative personal information is
relevant to the functions and activities of TICA.
I do not believe that
positive information about individuals could be said to be of only marginal
relevance. I therefore find that
the collection of the information is
‘necessary’ for the purposes of NPP
Findings in relation to NPP
62. For the reasons set out above I find that the compilation of both the
Enquiries Database and the inclusion of non-negative comments
on the Tenancy
History Database are ‘necessary’ to one or more of TICA’s
function and activities and consequently
that TICA has not breached NPP 1.1. I
find that with respect to this part of the complaint that the complaint is not
substantiated.
Collection Issues
63. The complainants allege that TICA is relying on consent that is given in
unfair and possibly coercive circumstances and is therefore
not valid consent
for the purposes of the
. They also allege that TICA’s NPP 1.5
notice is inaccurate and possibly misleading.
64. The allegations are based on the information set out in the
Acknowledgment for Occupants Only
Acknowledgement for
that prospective tenants and prospective occupants are required to
sign when applying for a tenancy through a TICA member organisation.
that these forms were developed by TICA and that TICA asks its members to use
the forms to assist TICA to meet its NPP 1.5
obligations. I also note that
the complainants’ advice that these forms are also used by other
participants in the accommodation
Consent and Method of
65. The complainants have observed that potential tenants and approved occupants
are required to sign the
Acknowledgement for Tenants
Acknowledgment for Occupants Only
as appropriate. The
complainants claim that a tenancy application will often not proceed unless the
forms are signed. Consequently,
individuals cannot make an application without
agreeing to have their details included on the Enquires Database or agreeing to
reports of their behaviour as tenants listed on the Tenancy History
66. The complainants have therefore queried the nature of the consent that might
be gained by tenants’ or occupants’
signatures on these forms and in
particular if it is an acceptable form of consent for TICA to rely on when
collecting personal information
or when using or disclosing personal information
for particular purposes.
67. I note the point made by the complainants that ‘consent’ is
given in circumstances where a failure to ‘consent’
is likely to
result in a person’s application for tenancy being, in effect, refused.
TICA in its April 2004 submission argues
that a failure to give consent results
in applications simply not proceeding, rather than being refused (which would
only happen
after an application is assessed). Either way, I note that NPP 1
does not explicitly require organisations to seek consent to the
collection of
personal information. The requirement imposed by NPP 1.2 is that organisations
must collect personal information only
by lawful and fair means and not in an
unreasonably intrusive way.
68. In the present case, the collection of personal information is being
conducted by TICA’s members, not TICA. That information
is then provided
by the members to TICA for inclusion in the relevant database. While the
acknowledgement forms’ were developed by TICA, and it
is TICA that requires its members to use the form, this does not alter
that the collection of information is carried out by TICA’s members rather
than by TICA. Any complaint in relation
to the manner of collection of personal
information from tenants by TICA’s members should therefore be made
against those members
and would be the subject of a separate investigation
should such a complaint be made to me. I therefore find that TICA is not in
breach of NPP 1.2 in relation to this complaint.
69. In the event that I am wrong on this point, and TICA can be said to be
responsible for collecting personal information from tenants
for the purposes of
NPP 1.2, my view is that there has been no breach of that principle. I
acknowledge there may be negative consequences
for not completing the
acknowledgement form’ (namely that a tenant’s
application will not be processed). I do not, however, consider that this
renders the collection process ‘unfair’ or ‘unreasonably
intrusive’ in terms of NPP 1.2. While, for the
reasons below, I believe
acknowledgement forms’ used by TICA’s
members are deficient, my conclusion is that they are not so inadequate as to
the collection of personal information unfair.
Notice when collecting from third
70. NPP 1.5 is applicable when organisations are collecting personal information
from third parties; that is when they are asking
someone other than the
individual concerned to provide information about that individual. NPP 1.5
requires organisations to take
reasonable steps to ensure that an individual has
been made aware of the matters set out in NPP 1.3.
71. The complainants have taken the
Acknowledgement for
Acknowledgment for Occupants Only
notice provided by TICA to meet its obligations under NPP 1.5 and allege
that the notices breach NPP 1.5 in the following
notices address more than one
they mention disclosures to
debt collectors and other unspecified databases which appears to be contrary to
TICA’s privacy policy
which states that it provides information to
individuals or companies only for the purpose of assessing a tenancy
application;
they imply that removal of
information from TICA’s database is entirely at TICA’s discretion
and does not acknowledge
the requirements of the
in this regard;
they imply that listings will only
occur if there is a breach of a tenancy agreement, whereas listings may occur
for other reasons,
for example when the individual enters into a payment
arrangement or becomes bankrupt;
require individuals to ‘agree, acknowledge and understand’ that
there is a specific cost in making phone calls to
the forms cover matters that are
not required by NPP 1.3, for example in relation to cost of calls and the
removal of information
from the database, and these matters should be excluded
from the forms.
72. Neither NPP 1.3 nor NPP 1.5 specifies how notice
of the matters set out in NPP 1.3 is to be given. In particular, there
limitation in the
as to what information may be given to an
individual (either generally or particularly in relation to the collection of
their personal
information). It is, in my view, permissible to set out more
than one ‘purpose’ on a form – in this case collecting
personal information for inclusion in an Enquiries Database and a Tenancy
History Database – provided that the NPP 1.3 matters
are properly
addressed for each of the purposes. This is clear from the wording of NPP1.3(c)
which refers to ‘the
for which the information is
collected’ (emphasis added).
73. However, the difficulty with seeking to rely on a form to satisfy a number
of purposes is that its terms may become prone to
misinterpretation. In the
present case, it would appear that the ‘
acknowledgement
forms’ aim to advise individuals both about the collection and use of
their information by TICA’s members,
and subsequently by TICA itself. My
understanding is that disclosures made to debt collectors or other tenancy
made by property managers, rather than TICA. TICA in
its April 2004 submission confirms this view and also argues that this is clear
from the form, which says
‘...the database member discloses
that in addition to any information being supplied to a database company other
organisations
may receive information from time to time. Other organisations
may include debt collection agencies, insurances companies, government
departments and other landlords or agents.’
74. I am not satisfied that the form makes the distinction between disclosures
by members and disclosures by TICA clear and consequently
I consider that those
individuals who are reading the forms may find this information ambiguous or may
be misled into thinking that
TICA will disclose their personal information to
other database operators or to debt collectors.
75. Ultimately, the question I need to consider here is whether TICA has taken
reasonable steps to ensure that individuals are aware
of the matters set out in
NPP 1.3. I find that the use of forms which are ambiguous and appear to be
inconsistent with other published
information about TICA’s usual
disclosures, constitutes a failure to take reasonable steps to inform
individuals about the
matters listed in NPP 1.3(d). I therefore find that TICA
has breached NPP 1.5.
76. The complainants also argue that the forms do not properly describe the
nature of the personal information that TICA will collect;
for example the
acknowledgement does not mention payment arrangements or bankruptcies. Under
NPP 1.5, TICA must take reasonable
steps to ensure individuals are made aware of
the matters listed in NPP 1.3.
my view, to be found to have taken ‘reasonable steps’ to ensure the
necessary level of ‘awareness’ required
by NPP 1.3, it is necessary
that the relevant personal information be properly identified (or
identifiable).
77. The information about the nature of the personal information that TICA
collects from its members (over and above the information
contained in the
tenancy application forms themselves) is found on the acknowledgement forms
which state:
I/we understand that TICA... is a database company
that allows its members access to information accumulated from members about
who have breached their tenancy agreements.
78. In my March preliminary view I noted that TICA currently provides over 20
possible categories to report on tenants’ behaviour
only one of which is
specifically mentioned, namely a breach of a tenancy agreement. I accept
TICA’s clarification in its
April 2004 submission that the ‘breach
of tenancy agreement’ is in fact a summary of a number of listing
categories that
describe particular breaches of a tenancy agreement rather than
a reference to the particular category ‘broke tenancy agreement’.
However, I am also satisfied that the term ‘breaking tenancy
agreement’ is not an accurate summary of all the circumstances
TICA’s members may list individuals. In particular, in my view it does
not encompass the listings
bankruptcy;
into a payment arrangement;
satisfactory payment
current tenant;
recommended tenant;
rental bond claim.
79. I also note TICA’s assertion in its April 2004 submission that
information about listing categories, other than the reference
acknowledgement form’, is available to Tenants. TICA
was concerned that the discussion in the preliminary view did not refer
other sources of information which
Courtesy letter to a
What is a default with
Checklist Before you
Consider Approving a Tenant or
80. My Office was aware of the forms listed above. As I noted at paragraph [
] above, neither NPP 1.3 nor NPP 1.5
specify how the obligations are to be met and it is open for information to be
provided in different
forms or in different locations. However, in my view, if
an organisation provides the information required to meet its obligations
different forms or in different locations it would generally need to alert
individuals to the fact the other information was available.
I note here that
there is no reference in the ‘
acknowledgement form’ to
the availability of the other documents mentioned. I understand that the
‘TICA Privacy Statement
for Tenants’ is generally made available to
tenants and occupants when they complete a tenancy application. However, TICA
advised in its submission to me of 6 May 2003 that the document ‘What is a
default with TICA’ is available on its web
site and that ‘a number
of its members actually provide these statements to tenants on upon tenancy
application being made’.
The document ‘What a tenant needs to know
evidence about the extent to which the ‘courtesy letter to
tenants’ is made available to tenants or prospective tenants.
81. Taking into account all of the circumstances, I find that TICA has not taken
reasonable steps to properly identify for individuals
the personal information
which it collects, so as to enable an individual to be adequately made aware of
the matters listed in NPP
1.3. Consequently, I find that TICA has breached NPP
82. In making this finding, I encourage TICA to continue to develop and provide
detailed information, about the
and TICA’s obligations, for
its members and for individuals who are or may become tenants or approved
applicants. If, as is
currently the case, some of the information is critical
to whether TICA is meeting its obligation under NPP 1.5, it should seek to
ensure that there are appropriate references to that information in the primary
83. I have also considered the question of whether TICA has taken reasonable
steps under NPP 1.5 to ensure that individuals
aware of the
particular matters set out in NPP 1.3(a) and NPP 1.3(b), which require
organisations to advise individuals
how to contact
them and that they are able
to seek access to personal information that organisations hold about them. In
considering
whether the
steps are reasonable I have considered:
TICA has taken;
the potentially serious
consequences for individuals who are listed with TICA
the role that access plays in
ensuring listings are accurate;
requirements in NPP 6 to provide access and for charges not to be excessive;
the advice from the complainants
that many of those listed with TICA are in poor financial
circumstances.
84. The current acknowledgement form does advise individuals that TICA can be
charges involved. However
the forms do not advise individuals that they may access personal information
nor do they advise that the 190 number is a channel
for access. TICA also provides access by responding, for a charge, to written
requests. The forms do not currently advise that this channel is available or
that this is generally the less expensive channel.
85. TICA argues in its April 2004 submission that it does meet NPP 1.3(a) by
providing its 190 contact number. I accept that TICA
does provide individuals
with one means to contact it. However, the requirement in the principle is for
organisations to take ‘reasonable
steps’. In view of the nature of
TICA’s business and the impact that it may have on individuals’
ability to gain
housing, I consider it would be reasonable for TICA to also
provide a mailing address. Consequently, I find that TICA has breached
86. TICA’s April 2004 submission did not dispute my preliminary view that
it does not advise individuals, as required by NPP
1.3(b) that he or she can
gain access to the personal information held by TICA in relation to them. I
find that TICA has breached
NPP 1.3(b). I also noted in my preliminary view
that TICA had not provided information about how to gain access to the
information.
TICA does put the view in its April 2004 submission that there is
no requirement in NPP 1.3 to provide individuals with information
gain access. In my view, the effect of NPPs 1.3(a) and 1.3(b) is to require
that individuals are advised about how
to gain access.
87. Depending on the circumstances of collection, the information about how to
satisfy the obligations.
However, in my view there are a range of factors that indicate that more steps
are needed in this case.
These are: the fact that TICA does have two access
channels with varying costs; the important role that access provides in allowing
individuals to exercise their privacy rights; the impact that a listing with
TICA may have on ability to gain housing; and the poor
economic circumstances of
many of the individuals about whom TICA holds personal information.
88. I therefore find, on balance, that TICA has not taken reasonable steps to
ensure individuals are aware of the matters set out
in NPP 1.3(a) and 1.3(b).
Consequently, I find that TICA has breached NPP 1.5 in this regard.
89. The complainants also argue that the ‘
acknowledgement
form’ should not include the reference to TICA’s telephone contact
charges as this requirement is not
included in NPP 1.3. As noted above
[), I do not consider that the
inclusion of this information is a breach of NPP 1.3 or NPP 1.5, neither of
which prevent such
references.
90. The complainants also consider that the current statement in the
acknowledgement form’ to the effect that removal of the
personal information from TICA’s database is at TICA’s
should not be included as it is not one of the matters included in NPP 1.3 and
it appears to be inconsistent with TICA’s
obligations to handle personal
information in accordance with the NPPs. I do not consider that this statement
is a breach of NPP
1.3 or other NPPs. I also note the advice TICA provided
account of the NPPs in deciding on its approach to removing personal information
from its database. However, I do consider
the statement on the form to be
potentially misleading and I encourage TICA to remove this statement from the
acknowledgement.
Findings in
relation to NPPs 1.2 and 1.5
91. In summary my findings in respect to the complaint about TICA’s
collection practices are as follows:
complaint that TICA is breaching the NPPs by relying on improper consent to
collect personal information is not
substantiated;
the complaint that TICA
is collecting personal information by unfair or unreasonably intrusive methods
in breach of NPP 1.2 is not
substantiated;
the complaint that TICA is breaching
NPP 1.5 by including unrelated information in a form that addresses the
requirements of NPP 1.3
is not substantiated;
the complaint that TICA has breached
NPP 1.5 by not taking reasonable steps to ensure individuals are aware of the
matters set out
in NPP 1.3, in particular in relation to the identification of
the personal information it will collect, the organisations to which
usually disclose and that individuals may gain access to personal information,
is substantiated.
and disclosure of personal information
92. The complainants allege that TICA is failing to meet to the requirements of
NPP 2.1(a) when it uses and discloses personal information
from the Enquires
expect’ that information about their
unsuccessful tenancy application
would be disclosed to TICA and stored on its database.
93. However, the provision in the principles that limits uses or disclosures to
those which individuals would reasonably expect only
comes into play in relation
to secondary purposes. NPP 2 does not limit the use and disclose of personal
information for the primary
purpose for which it was collected.
94. As indicated above (see [
satisfied that the collection of personal information about tenancy
applications, whether successful or not, is necessary
for TICA‘s activity
of providing a risk management service. It is also my view that the primary
purpose of the collection
of personal information about tenancy applications by
TICA is to provide this risk management facility to TICA’s members.
95. TICA’s members will need to consider if their disclosures to TICA are
for a secondary purpose and if so if those disclosures
meet the requirements of
96. In the course of this investigation TICA also advised that it discloses
personal information for a number of secondary purposes.
As I discussed above
] above) it would appear that the use of
the information in the manner described by TICA may be a breach of NPP 2.
However, as I
noted above, I do not proceed to make any finding on this issue at
present as it was not a matter which was fully canvassed in the
course of my
investigation.
Findings in
relation to NPP 2
97. I find that disclosing the personal information of tenants and occupants for
the purpose of permitting members to use the database
to check an
individual’s application and tenancy history as part of a risk management
activity is consistent with the primary
purpose of collection by TICA. As such,
I find that is there is no breach of NPP 2 which relates to ‘secondary
of collection in relation to this
Determination
98. In accordance with
section 52(1)(a)
, I determine that the
complaint that TICA has breached NPP 1.1 by collecting personal information
is unnecessary for any of TICA’s functions
is unsubstantiated and is therefore dismissed.
99. In accordance with
section 52(1)(a)
, I determine that the
complaint that TICA has breached NPP 1.1 by operating or claiming to operate a
‘history database’
rather than a database of defaults is
unsubstantiated and is therefore dismissed.
100. In accordance with
section 52(1)(a)
, I determine that
the complaint that TICA has breached NPP 1 by collecting personal information
without proper consent is unsubstantiated
and is therefore dismissed.
101. In accordance with
section 52(1)(a)
, I determine that
the complaint against TICA which alleges that TICA has breached NPP 2.(1)(a) by
using or disclosing personal information
in ways that individuals would not
reasonably expect is unsubstantiated and is therefore dismissed.
102. I find that TICA has breached NPP 1.5 by failing to take reasonable steps
to ensure that individuals are made aware the matters
listed in NPP 1.3. I
therefore find this element of the complaint substantiated and declare in
accordance with
section 52(1)(b)(i)(B)
that TICA has engaged
in conduct constituting an interference with the privacy of individuals who are
members of the class identified
in the complaint, I declare that TICA should not
repeat or continue such conduct.
103. The complainants have asked me to make a declaration requiring TICA to
develop new forms to meet its obligations under NPP 1.5.
I am not satisfied
that I should do so. While I have declared that TICA should not repeat or
continue conduct which constitutes
an interference with the privacy of an
individual, I do not, in my view, have the power under
section 52(1)(b)(i)(B)
otherwise generally prescribe how TICA should act.
104. I am also of the opinion that
section 52(1)(b)(ii)
does not provide the
basis for making a declaration of the type sought by the complainants as to the
future conduct of TICA. I am
not, on the information presently before me,
satisfied that there has been any identifiable loss or damage suffered by the
complainants
that would be redressed by a course of conduct required by such a
declaration.
105. However, I do consider the suggestion made by TU QLD to be helpful in
assisting TICA to meet its NPP 1.5 obligations,
practice’ under the
and allowing the members of the class upon
whose behalf this complaint has been brought to be better informed about matters
are of potentially great significance to their rights.
106. I would therefore encourage TICA to develop a revised acknowledgement form
that more clearly sets out the matters specified
in NPP 1.3 with particular
reference to the nature of the personal information collected, how individuals
may gain access to personal
information about them and to whom TICA usually
discloses personal information. If TICA wishes to use other documents or
to provide some of the information, or more detailed information, it
may be able to do this if there is appropriate cross-referencing
documents and sources of information.
107. I also note that if TICA wishes to prepare the acknowledgement form in such
a way that it may also be used as a collection notice
by property managers, the
form needs to be clear about whether the information relates to an obligation of
TICA or an obligation
or the property manager. I recommend that the
acknowledgement form should also
information
to clearly identify the personal information that is to be collected and
information about how individuals
may resolve disputes about the accuracy, completeness or currency of TICA
listings; and
information about
individuals’ right to complain to my Office if they are not satisfied with
the outcome of the dispute resolution
Federal Privacy Commissioner
Dated 16 April 2004
I note that
section 38C
gives me the power to amend a complaint so that it can be dealt with
as a representative complaint. In the event that it is necessary
to amend the
complaint received from TU NSW so as to make it a part of the wider
representative complaint, I would do so pursuant
TICA is not bound by an
approved privacy code in terms of
section 13A(b)(ii)
Article 25 Universal
Declaration of Human Rights available at
http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html
I note that TICA was asked to
make any submissions or provide any material to me in relation to this
exemption. I did not receive
any submissions or material in relation to this
I note that
does not prevent a body corporate from being a
‘small business operator’ only because it discloses personal
information
with the consent of the individual, or as required or authorised
under legislation. I am not satisfied that TICA has the consent
of all of the
individuals whose personal information appears on their database (in particular,
those individuals whose personal information
was collected before 21 December
2002) and is disclosed to TICA’s members. I note that TICA has not claimed
that it does have
such consent, although it was given the opportunity to do
I note, for example,
that in the context of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
(Cth), under
which it is necessary for a loss or outgoing to be ‘necessarily incurred
in carrying on a business’ for
it to be an allowable deduction, it has
been held that ‘necessarily’ means ‘no more than "clearly
appropriate or
adapted for"’:
Ronpibon Tin NL v Federal Commissioner of
[1949] HCA 15
(1949) 78 CLR 47
TICA’s use of the
listing ‘Tenancy History only’ is considered in Determination No.3
As I have previously
noted, the issue of whether or not TICA’s members are breaching NPP 1.3 by
Acknowledgment forms is beyond the scope of this
determination.
There is an
exception to NPP 1.5, namely that there is a threat to life or health, which is
not relevant here.
No downloadable files available