SZSDK v Minister for Immigration & Anor [2013] FMCA 240 (9 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SZSDK v MINISTER FOR
IMMIGRATION & ANOR
[2013] FMCA 240
MIGRATION – Review of Refugee Review
Tribunal decision – refusal of a protection visa – applicant
claiming persecution
in Sri Lanka – applicant not believed – no
arguable case of jurisdictional error.
Migration Act 1958
First Respondent:
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP
Second Respondent:
REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNAL
File Number:
SYG 2563 of 2012
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
The Applicant appeared in person by telephone
Solicitors for the Respondents:
Ms N Johnson
Sparke Helmore
INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS
(1) The application is dismissed, pursuant to
44.12(1)(a)
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(2) The applicant is to pay the first respondent’s costs and disbursements
of and incidental to the application in the sum
of $3,239 in accordance with
rule 44.15(1)
and item 1(b) of
of schedule 1 to the
Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(3) The Court notes the undertaking of the applicant to file and serve on the
respondents a Notice of Address for Service within
seven days.
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYG 2563 of
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION &
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNAL
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(revised from transcript)
is an application to review a decision of the Refugee Review Tribunal
(Tribunal). The decision was made on 2 October 2012.
The Tribunal affirmed a
decision of a delegate of the Minister not to grant the applicant a protection
visa. The applicant is a
Sri Lankan citizen of Sinhalese ethnicity. He arrived
in Australia in February 2012. He applied for a protection visa on 19 May
That application was refused by the Minister’s delegate on 11 July 2012.
The applicant, who was then in immigration
detention, was notified of that
decision on the same day and applied for review by the Tribunal. The Tribunal
was unable to make
a favourable decision on the papers and invited the applicant
to appear at a hearing. The applicant attended that hearing on 10
2012. He was assisted by a Sinhalese interpreter and Ms Beatriz Stotz of
Vrachnas Lawyers.
applicant claimed for protection for various reasons. Central to his claims was
a story concerning one of his sons who had engaged
in an unapproved relationship
with the daughter of a rich family. The applicant claimed that his son and the
girl had eloped and
were married in Italy. The applicant claimed that this
conduct had caused the enmity of the girl’s family. He feared harm
result. At the Tribunal hearing, the applicant also referred to his fear of
being harmed for his imputed support for General
Fonseka. He also feared that
the girl’s family had sought to associate him and his family in some way
with the LTTE.
the hearing, the Tribunal expressed concern at how the applicant’s claims
had evolved over time. The Tribunal member put
to the applicant at the hearing
his difficulty in accepting that the applicant was telling the truth. In its
reasons, the Tribunal
rejected the applicant’s accounts of his asserted
past harm in Sri Lanka. At [83] the Tribunal
regard to the changes in the applicant’s evidence in the course of the
hearing before me and his attempts to change
what he said in his original
application and the declaration accompanying that application and to add in new
claims, I do not accept
that the applicant is a witness of truth. I consider
that he is prepared to change his evidence if he believes that this will be
his advantage. I do not accept that he was nervous or unable to recollect
matters when he prepared his original application.
While I accept that he would
not have been familiar with the relevant procedures, he had the assistance of
his representatives in
preparing his application. The changes to his claims are
not mere matters of detail. Rather they appear to be an attempt to make
substantial changes to his claims in the hope of enhancing the prospect that his
application will be successful. Unfortunately,
as I put to the applicant, these
changes make his claims less believable, not more believable.
consequence, the Tribunal rejected all of the essential elements of the
applicant’s factual claims. The Tribunal concluded
that the applicant did
not qualify for a protection visa under either of the two criteria.
proceedings began with a show cause application filed on 7 November 2012. The
applicant continues to rely upon that application.
In that application, the
applicant raises no issue in relation to the Tribunal’s finding that the
applicant is not a refugee.
He complains, however, that the Tribunal failed to
apply the complementary protection provisions in accordance with
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) (Migration Act).
matter came before me for first court date directions on 19 December 2012. The
applicant attended in person with the assistance
of a Sinhalese interpreter. He
consented to orders including an order listing the matter for a show cause
hearing today. At that
time, the applicant was held in immigration detention at
Villawood. It appears that the applicant was released from immigration
detention some time in January this year. He is now living in Melbourne.
However, he has not filed any notice of change of address.
There was no
appearance by the applicant in person today. However, the Court was successful
in contacting the applicant on a mobile
telephone number provided by the
Minister’s solicitor. It appears that the Minister’s Department has
a residential address
for the applicant at an address in Altona Meadows. The
applicant told me that he has left that address and is now living at an address
in Laverton with five other people. He undertook to provide a new notice of
Address for Service within seven days.
agreed to hear the applicant by telephone and he agreed to participate in the
hearing by telephone. The applicant told me that
he has not had the benefit of
advice under the Minister's panel advice scheme. He had, however, received the
court book which was
filed on 10 January 2013. He has apparently also received
some legal advice while he was held in immigration detention. While it
unfortunate that the applicant has not had the benefit of further advice under
the Minister's scheme I am satisfied that the Court
and the Minister's
Department have done all that they could to seek to facilitate the provision of
that advice.
applicant was not able to make any meaningful submissions in support of his
application. He has no understanding of the complementary
protection criterion
for the provision of a protection visa.
is, however, plain to me that there is no substance in the application. The
Tribunal assessed the applicant’s claims against
the complementary
protection criterion at [95] and [96] of its
As referred
to above, the information available to me suggests that failed asylum-seekers
who are involuntarily returned to Sri Lanka
do not appear to be subject to
harassment or mistreatment while checks are carried out on them at the airport
(DFAT, Country Information
Report No. 09/75, dated 14 October 2009, CX234989).
Having regard to my findings of fact above I do not accept that there are
substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of the applicant being removed from Australia to Sri Lanka,
there is a real risk that he will be arbitrarily deprived of his life, that the
death penalty will be carried out on him, that
he will be subjected to torture,
that he will be subjected to cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment or that he
will be subjected
to degrading treatment or punishment as defined, in the
context of the treatment of failed asylum-seekers who have left Sri Lanka
illegally by boat and who have been involuntarily returned to Sri Lanka from
regard to my findings of fact above, I do not accept that there are substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary
and foreseeable consequence of the
applicant being removed from Australia to Sri Lanka, there is a real risk that
he will be arbitrarily
deprived of his life, that the death penalty will be
carried out on him, that he will be subjected to torture, that he will be
to cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment or that he will be
subjected to degrading treatment or punishment as defined. Accordingly
accept that there are substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary and
foreseeable consequence of the applicant
being removed from Australia to Sri
Lanka, there is a real risk that he will suffer significant harm as defined in
subsection 36(2A)
of the Act.
Tribunal found that the applicant did not qualify for complementary protection
because it rejected the factual bases upon which
that protection was sought.
That conclusion was plainly open to the Tribunal on material before it. The
Tribunal clearly understood
the criteria it had to apply under the
. There is nothing to support the contention that the Tribunal misapplied
the law. It follows that the applicant is unable to demonstrate
an arguable
case of jurisdictional error by the Tribunal.
the circumstances, I will dismiss the application pursuant to
rule 44.12(1)(a)
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(Cth) (Federal Magistrates
Court Rules). I will so order.
consequence of the dismissal of the application the minister seeks an order for
costs. The minister seeks scale costs. The applicant
did not wish to be heard
on that issue. I will order that the applicant is to pay the first
respondent’s costs and disbursements
of and incidental to the application
in the sum of $3,239 in accordance with rule 44.15(1) and item 1(b) of part 2 of
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
I certify that
the preceding twelve (12) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment
of Driver FM
Date: 12 April 2013
court book (CB)
RTF format (101 KB)
Signed PDF/A format