Singh v Minister for Immigration & Anor [2013] FMCA 243 (11 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SINGH v MINISTER FOR
IMMIGRATION & ANOR
[2013] FMCA 243
MIGRATION – Review of Migration Review
Tribunal decision – refusal of a skilled visa – applicant providing
document in support of his visa application – no jurisdictional
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
Zhang v Minister for
Immigration & Anor
[2012] FMCA 544
Mudiyanselage
Minister for Immigration & Anor
[2012] FMCA 887
Mudiyanselage v
Minister for Immigration
[2013] FCA 266
for Immigration & Anor
[2012] FMCA 1002
Singh v Minister for
Immigration & Anor
[2012] FMCA 145
Zhang v Minister for
Immigration & Anor
[2012] FMCA 1011
GURINDER SINGH
First Respondent:
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP
Second Respondent:
MIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
File Number:
SYG 2715 of 2012
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
The Applicant appeared in person
Counsel for the Respondents:
Mr T Reilly
Solicitors for the Respondents:
Sparke Helmore
(1) The application is dismissed.
(2) The applicant is to pay the first respondent’s costs and disbursements
of and incidental to the application, fixed in the
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYG 2715 of
GURINDER SINGH
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION &
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
MIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(revised from transcript)
have before me a judicial review application filed on 22 November 2012, seeking
review of a decision of the Migration Review Tribunal
(Tribunal) made on 30
October 2012. The Tribunal affirmed a decision of the delegate of the Minister
not to grant Mr Singh a skilled
provisional class VC visa. This is the second
occasion on which a Tribunal decision concerning Mr Singh’s visa
application
has come before me. On the first occasion, I dealt with the matter
in my judgment of
Singh v Minister for Immigration &
background facts are detailed in that judgment.
addition, the following statement of background facts is derived from the
Minister’s written submissions filed on 4 April
Singh is a citizen of India, who first travelled to Australia in April
. He applied for
the visa on 7 July
. The delegate
refused the visa on 31 August
applied to the Tribunal for review on 16 September
earlier decision of the Tribunal dated 31 August 2011 was set aside in my
earlier judgment in
Tribunal wrote to Mr Singh pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
Migration Act
) on 20 June
. The Tribunal
invited Mr Singh to a hearing on 10 October
, which Mr Singh
Tribunal found that Mr Singh did not meet clause 485.224 (“The
applicant...satisfies public interest criterion...4020...”).
interest criterion (PIC) 4020 is set out in the Tribunal’s reasons at
. The Tribunal
found that Mr Singh’s first skills assessment of 28 September 2009 from
Trades Recognition Australia (TRA) for
assessment of his skills as a
was obtained
on the basis of false or misleading statements and was therefore a “bogus
document” within
. As Mr Singh
had caused this document to be given to the delegate in support of his visa
application the Tribunal found that he
did not meet the requirements of PIC
Tribunal declined to waive this requirement pursuant to PIC
Accordingly Mr Singh did not satisfy clause 485.224, and so the visa had to be
have before me as evidence the court book filed on 12 December 2012.
application contains two grounds:
Tribunal erred in concluding that the purported skills assessment outcome letter
dated 28 September 2009 issued by Trade
Recognition Australia (TRA) was a bogus
document and thus found the Applicant did not meet the Public Interest Criterion
in Schedule 4 to the
Migration Regulations
Particulars
purported skills assessment outcome letter dated 28 September 2009 was issued by
TRA at a time when TRA was not properly
approved and specified as a relevant
assessing authority. Accordingly, the effect of the purported skills assessment
nullity and must not be taken into consideration by the
alternative, the Tribunal failed to give regard to all information before it in
concluding that the purported skills assessment
outcome letter dated 28
September 2009 issued by Trade Recognition Australia (TRA) was a bogus
Particulars
Tribunal failed to have regard to an email communication dated 27 July 2011
(after the purported investigation undertaken
by the First Respondent’s
Department and TRA) fro the TRA confirming the Applicant’s skills
assessment outcome remains
in these proceedings, Mr Singh was legally represented, but his solicitors
withdrew from the record by notice filed on 9 April
2013. He represented
himself at today’s hearing.
Singh made oral submissions at today’s hearing. It is plain that Mr Singh
is concerned about the Tribunal’s decision
in two respects. First, he
contests that he provided false or misleading information to TRA which led to
its assessment in 2009.
Secondly, he feels that he has been unfairly treated as
he has provided more recently additional information to TRA which, it appears,
has led to a second provisional TRA
the Tribunal wrote to Mr Singh through his legal advisors, pursuant to
Migration Act
in a letter dated 20 June
Singh’s legal advisors chose to limit their response to legal issues.
Further, Mr Singh, apparently on advice, declined
to attend the hearing to which
he was invited by the Tribunal as presently constituted. The factual issues
which Mr Singh sought
to raise in oral argument before me could have been raised
before the Tribunal. It may be unfortunate that those factual issues
raised before the Tribunal. However, as I explained to Mr Singh in oral
argument, if the Tribunal decision is a legally
valid one, only the Minister can
Court must deal with the grounds advanced in the application. In that regard I
agree with the Minister’s submissions.
The first ground claims that Mr
Singh’s first skills assessment of 28 September 2009 was a
“nullity” and “must
not be taken into consideration by the
Tribunal” because at the time it was issued the TRA was not properly
approved as a relevant
assessing authority. However as the Tribunal notes at
485.224 is a “time of decision” criterion, so the relevant date for
determining whether clause 485.224 is applicable
to Mr Singh is that of the
Tribunal’s decision on 30 October 2012. As at that date, the TRA had been
validly specified as
a relevant assessing authority for the purposes of
regulation 2.26B
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) in relation to
persons (such as Mr Singh) who applied for a visa before 1 July 2010 by
Legislative Instrument IMMI
Tribunal could therefore have regard to the first skills assessment. Even
leaving aside the effect of IMMI 11/068, on the
basis of currently authority I
accept that the Tribunal was entitled to have regard to the fact that Mr Singh
had in fact submitted
a bogus document, being the first skills assessment, and
whether TRA was validly appointed at the time of this skills assessment
relevant to whether the skills assessment met the definition of a “bogus
am unable to conclude that the decisions of this Court relied upon by the
Minister bearing upon that question are wrong. They should,
therefore, be
followed. In addition, I consider myself bound by the observations of the
Federal Court on appeal from this Court
Mudiyanselage v Minister for
Immigration
at [28]-[35].
is unnecessary for me to revisit my earlier decision in
sufficient to conclude, on the basis of the available authorities, that a TRA
assessment may be a bogus document, regardless
of whether the TRA was authorised
to make the assessment. Accordingly the first ground fails.
second ground refers to an email reproduced in the court book at 89. There is,
in my view, no substance to that ground, by reference
to the email. The email
from an officer of TRA to the Tribunal was apparently sent on 27 July 2011. In
response to an inquiry from
the Tribunal, the officer responds somewhat
cryptically that, at that date, TRA regarded the skills assessment as still
email predated my earlier decision in
, which dealt with
the issue of the validity of the earlier Tribunal decision, based on that skills
assessment.
view one takes of that legal issue, and whatever view one takes of the
significance of the more recent and provisional TRA
assessment concerning Mr
Singh’s qualifications, I am bound to conclude that the Tribunal was
entitled to treat the 2009 TRA
assessment as a bogus document for the purposes
of its decision, and the email had no significance in the Tribunal’s
consideration.
Ground 2 therefore also fails.
find that Mr Singh has failed to demonstrate any jurisdictional error in the
decision of the Tribunal. The decision is therefore
a privative clause
decision, and the application must be dismissed. I will so order.
application having been dismissed, the Minister seeks an order for costs, fixed
in the sum of $5,400. I am satisfied that costs
of that order have been
reasonably and properly incurred on behalf of the Minister on a party and party
basis. Mr Singh is concerned
the short term. As I pointed out to him, however, he is free to negotiate terms
of payment with the Minister’s Department, and if in a position of
hardship, he may request a waiver of the debt.
will order that Mr Singh is to pay the first respondent’s costs and
disbursements of and incidental to the application, fixed
in the sum of
I certify that the preceding seventeen (17) paragraphs
are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Driver FM
Date: 12 April 2013
[2012] FMCA
(CB) 175 [11]
at [40], [69];
Zhang v Minister for Immigration & Anor
[2012] FMCA 1011 (Barnes
Zhang v Minister for Immigration & Anor
[2012] FMCA 544
FM) at [50-51;
Minister for Immigration &
[2012] FMCA 1002 (Hartnett
FM) at [30];
Mudiyanselage
Minister for Immigration & Anor
[2012] FMCA 887 (Emmett
FM) at [20], and
Mudiyanselage v Minister for Immigration
[2013] FCA 266 (Tracey
RTF format (116 KB)
Signed PDF/A format