McClean v Northwest Radio Pty Ltd [1998] IRCA 32 (1 October 1998)
McClean v Northwest Radio Pty Ltd [1998] IRCA 32 (1 October 1998)
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF AUSTRALIA
INDUSTRIAL LAW
– alleged UNLAWFUL TERMINATION – whether
VALID REASON – whether employee given opportunity to defend himself
Industrial Relations Act 1988
Workplace Relations Act
ss 170EA, 170DE(1), 170DE(2),
LAURENCE MCCLEAN -V- NORTHWEST RADIO PTY LTD
WI 1737 OF 1995
R.D. FARRELL JR
PERTH (HEARD IN KARRATHA)
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
WI 1737 OF 1995
ANDREW LAURENCE MCCLEAN
NORTHWEST RADIO PTY LTD
R.D. FARRELL JR
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
PERTH (HEARD IN KARRATHA)
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The application is dismissed.
2. The time prescribed by Order 75 Rule 3 for any application for review of
this order shall run from the date on which reasons for
decision are issued.
NOTE: Settlement and entry of Orders is dealt with by Order 36 of the
Industrial Relations Court
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
WESTERN AUSTRALIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
WI 1737 OF 1995
ANDREW LAURENCE
NORTHWEST RADIO PTY
R.D. FARRELL JR
PERTH (HEARD IN KARRATHA)
REASONS FOR DECISION
This was an application under Section 170EA of the
Industrial Relations
Workplace Relations Act 1996
) for compensation
arising from the alleged unlawful termination of the employment of the
applicant, Andrew Laurence McClean (“Mr
McClean”), by the
respondent, North West Radio Pty Ltd (“Northwest Radio”).
Reinstatement was not sought, and it
was readily apparent that from the
behaviour of the parties during the hearing that reinstatement was
impracticable.
Orders were made some time ago dismissing the application. Brief reasons for
those orders follow.
Mr McClean was employed by Northwest Radio as a radio announcer in January
1995. Mr McClean was hired to perform the “breakfast
station 6KA in Karratha. He was thirty five years of age, and had had
substantial prior experience in radio before
work in the resources industry
brought him to the Pilbara.
Northwest Radio is a regional commercial radio company, running stations in
Karratha and in Port Hedland. Its manager, Mr Andrew Lenton
Lenton”) had not long taken over. Northwest Radio’s owner, Mr
Terance Leo, believed in giving young, untried
and, no doubt, relatively
inexpensive talent an opportunity at his station. Accordingly, many of the other
announcers recently hired
with Mr McClean had little practical experience in the
radio industry. Mr McClean, with his experience in radio, was therefore of
assistance to them and came to wield considerable influence over the on air
activities of the station.
I am satisfied that Mr Lenton was initially happy with Mr McClean’s
performance. There was evidence, however, that soon after
Mr McClean commenced
his employment, he began to manifest behaviour which eventually led Mr Lenton to
put disciplinary processes
The radio announcer’s role included the playing of music from a music
log, the playing of pre-recorded ads and the reading of
live ads in accordance
with an advertising log. There were also occasional live telephone discussions
with advertising clients, in
the course of which the clients would commend their
wares to the listening audience.
On one such occasion during the breakfast shift, Mr McClean rang a sales
representative of an electrical store in Karratha to enable
him to advertise a
special deal on mobile telephones. Prior to the telephone link up, the sales
representative had faxed minimal
details of the offer to be advertised. The
facsimile is dated 20 February 1995, indicating that the incident took place on
after that date.
Mr McClean described the ensuring “live cross” as a
“debacle”. It seems clear that after conveying the basic
the mobile telephone offer, the sales representative had nothing else prepared
to say. Consequently, there were awkward
pauses and the advertisement was
embarrassing for all concerned. The facsimile was tendered in evidence, and Mr
McClean identified
his annotation across the top of the fax. The annotation
describes the sales representative with a generic expletive, and notes that
sales representative “was not ready” and “had nothing to say
At the end of his shift that day, Mr McClean felt he “couldn’t
let it go by”. He contacted the electrical store
with the intention of
speaking to the manager. The sales representative answered the telephone, and
would not put Mr McClean through
to the manager, wanting instead to talk about
the incident himself. Mr McClean agrees he told the sales representative he had
down his company, and had “dropped the ball”. Mr McClean
concedes he was “fairly firm”, and that the conversation
fairly heated, so that they were both shouting by the end of the call. He said
that the call concluded on the basis that they
should put this problem behind
Mr McClean recalls Mrs Karen Lenton, who was the station’s
“traffic coordinator”, coming into the room. Mr McClean
claims that
Mrs Lenton told him “good on you”, or words to that effect, and that
as she left the room she told one of
the other employees “someone’s
got to stand up to these idiots”. Mrs Lenton denies this.
Mr McClean claims he raised this telephone conversation with Mr Lenton. He
says Mr Lenton was not all perturbed. He says Mr Lenton
said he wasn’t too
worried, noting that, given the size of the advertiser, they were more trouble
to the station than they
were worth.
Both Mr and Mrs Lenton contest Mr McClean’s evidence on this matter. It
was Mr Lenton’s contention that Mr McClean, in
his capacity as an
announcer, should not have been calling clients to upbraid them for the
perceived inadequacies of their sales
representative’s performance. This
was, Mr Lenton contended, the function of management. He also contended that, as
result of Mr McClean’s actions on this occasion, the electrical
store withdraw their advertising from Northwest Radio.
It seems, however, that nothing was said to Mr McClean at the time as to the
inappropriateness of his actions.
These were bitterly contested proceedings and I have no doubt that the
applicant and Mr Lenton of the respondent were both prepared
to go to great
lengths to ensure success in this case. For this reason, and for other reasons
to which I will refer in due course,
I was hesitant to rely on the evidence of
either of them where it was not corroborated by other evidence. I had fewer
reservations
thoughtful, measured manner and I found her evidence convincing. Mrs
denied making the comments attributed to her, and indeed denied going into the
room during the telephone conversation.
Another witness, Mrs Coral Howe (nee Maher), recalls hearing Mr McClean
“yelling and swearing” at a customer on the telephone
recalled as being the sales representative from the electrical store. She also
recalls the staff feeling surprised that Mr
McClean would conduct himself in
this manner to a customer. A number of the respondents’ witnesses
commented that, to the extent
that the live cross was unsatisfactory, some of
the responsibility was Mr McClean’s, as it was part of his role to assist
who might be ill-prepared.
Mr McClean also concedes that on another occasion he abused a listener who
telephoned him during his shift. I regard this as a less
significant incident.
Again, there does not appear to have been a clear response from Mr Lenton
indicating unequivocally that this
behaviour would not be accepted in
In about April 1995, Mrs Howe, who was one of Northwest Radio’s sales
executives, succeeded in interesting Robe River Iron Associates,
River”) a mining venture with a significant presence in the area, in the
idea of sponsoring the station’s
news program. When Mr McClean was advised
of this proposition, he was strongly opposed to it. He explained in evidence
that he did
not believe it was advisable to have the news sponsored because the
sponsorship of the news could effect its credibility. He also
held the view that
Robe River’s public image was fairly low at the time.
Mrs Howe’s evidence was that Mr McClean’s reaction was that it
couldn’t be done and that it wasn’t good radio.
She says he started
swearing, yelling and throwing things down. She says he was abusive, and stated
that he wasn’t doing it
on his shift. It seems that Mrs Howe found this a
traumatic experience. She gave evidence that she walked out of this discussion
and quit her job. She says she was reduced to tears. Mrs Howe was eventually
talked out of leaving by Mr Lenton, and she says Mr
McClean later rang and
apologised.
It was apparent on all the evidence that Mr McClean demonstrated himself
during his employment to be a difficult character, with a
volatile temperament.
It was also amply demonstrated at times in the manner in which he gave his
It might fairly be said that some indulgence was extended to Mr McClean on
this score by the station’s management that would
not necessary be
expected by ordinary employees. Perhaps it was considered appropriate to accept
a degree of “artistic temperament”
in the station’s on-air
announcers. While this behaviour did not lead to formal warnings or ultimatums
at the time, it does
not follow that the behaviour was endorsed, nor that Mr
McClean believed they were regarded as acceptable. The fact that he usually
the need to pre-emptively raise these incidents with Mr Lenton shows that he
recognised they were matters about which he should
apologise, as indeed they
When the employer was later considering whether Mr McClean’s employment
should continue, it was not inappropriate that they
take into account this
aspect of his past behaviour.
Mrs Howe decided to go back to Robe River and recast the arrangements so that
instead of sponsoring the news, they would instead sponsor
the weather and
sports results.
A contract for sponsorship of sports results was concluded on 21 April 1995.
There was evidence that an agreement for sponsorship
of the weather, linked with
the broadcasting of a “Robe Facts” segment, was concluded at about
the same time. However,
the need for Robe River to provide the facts and
Northwest Radio to prerecord those segments meant that the sponsored sports
began going to air some time before the sponsorship of the weather.
Mr Lenton tendered a memorandum from him to Mr McClean bearing the date 26
April 1995. It was his evidence that he caused this memorandum
to be typed and
given to Mr McClean on or soon after that date. The memorandum was in the
following terms:
“So we have no misunderstanding with regard to Robe River Iron
Associates contracts.
1. You have voiced an opinion and sought backing from other staff members to
the effect that sponsoring News or Weather compromises
the station and is
“Bad Radio”.
2. You have also said that we should not be associated with Robe River
because a mate of yours works for them and they are bad
I feel your arguments have no validity and we will go ahead with the segments
in accordance with our contract.
Your attack on Coral Maher for writing the contract was disgraceful and will
not be tolerated. Whether we deal with Robe River or
not is none of your
This was the first of a series of four memoranda that Mr Lenton
tendered on behalf of Northwest Radio. Three originated from him and
the traffic coordinator, Mrs Lenton. Mr McClean in his evidence denied ever
having seen any of these memoranda before the
exchange of documents as part of
the preparation for these court proceedings.
Mr McClean, through his representative, sought to prove that these memoranda
had been generated after the fact to provide documentary
support for the
respondent’s contentions. Mr Lenton’s secretary Ms Anne O’Hern
(“Ms O’Hern”),
when shown the memoranda from Mr Lenton, did
not recognise them and did not recall having typed them. She said that if she
re-examination that often when she typed things she did not
read them, so one
might infer that she would not necessarily have a recollection of having typed a
document some ten months after
the event. Given the convenient terms in which
the memoranda are written, it is perhaps understandable that the
applicant’s
representative was suspicious. He sought and was granted
orders allowing inspection of the respondent’s word processing equipment
for the purposes of establishing the date of creation of the memoranda.
Mrs Lenton confirmed in her evidence that the inspection did not succeed in
locating any records of the memoranda in the office’s
word processor. Mrs
Lenton explained that this would be because the word processing files were
regularly purged, wiping any documents
within three or four months of their
In the context of the discussion prior to the granting of those orders, Mr
Lenton offered not to rely upon the memoranda if that would
forestall the need
for an inspection. In the end, the inspection went ahead, and so I have assumed
that the respondent now seeks
to rely upon the memoranda.
I find that Mr McClean genuinely has no recollection of having received the
memorandum dated 26 April 1995. As for the events canvassed
in that memorandum,
having assessed the evidence of Mr McClean and Mrs Howe, I am satisfied that, in
the course of a conversation
with Mrs Howe, Mr McClean vigorously opposed Robe
River’s sponsorship of the news. I am satisfied that this opposition was
based both upon an objection in principle to sponsorship of the news by any
commercial entity, but also an objection in particular
to Robe River’s
sponsorship based upon Mr McClean’s perception that Robe River had a poor
public image. It may be that
Mr McClean felt a personal antipathy for Robe
River. Mrs Howe was of the opinion that his opposition was motivated more by the
that the sponsor was Robe River than through any objection in principle to
sponsorship. I am satisfied that the vehemence of Mr McClean’s
made it a traumatic experience for Mrs Howe and I accept as a matter of fact
that she tendered her resignation as a result.
I would have been satisfied of
these matters in the absence of the memorandum. Nor do I rely on the other
memoranda for my findings
on the matters considered below.
Mr McClean’s initial reaction to the proposed Robe River advertising
assumes a greater potential significance because of his
later persistent
non-compliance with the advertising log in relation to those advertisements. Mr
McClean explains this non-compliance
as arising from a misunderstanding on his
part of what was required of him. In short, he thought the advertising logs were
or mistaken, and indeed the logs appear to show persistent efforts on his
part to “correct” these perceived mistakes.
By the time of the
hearing, he accepted that he was wrong in this, but protested that it was never
made clear to him what was required
Northwest Radio respond by saying that it was made clear to him on numerous
occasions what was required of him and that his consistent
failure to comply
with the log was due to a wilful refusal to play Robe River advertisements.
There were two sorts of Robe River advertising contract. The first related to
the sports results. An example of that contract was
tendered in evidence. It
provided for sports results sponsored by Robe River to be put to air at 7.34am
and 5.04pm on both Mondays
and Tuesdays. The sports results were compiled by an
announcer at the Port Hedland station, Mr Nigel Weston. He gave evidence that
the Karratha and Port Hedland stations would be networked for the Monday morning
sports results, which he would read out in conversation
with Mr McClean. He said
that he would then fax the sport results that he had read down to the Karratha
station. It was his understanding
and the station’s understanding that
those results would then be read out on the Monday and Tuesday afternoon shifts
announcer doing those shifts (normally, Mr Paul Ferrall) and also on
Tuesday mornings by Mr McClean.
It is clear that Mr McClean did not read out sports results on Tuesday
mornings. It is also clear that it was his view that it was
radio” to read out old results that had already been heard the previous
day. Numerous advertising logs were tendered
for Tuesday’s in May, bearing
“LIVE - ROBE RIVER IRON ASSOCIATES - SPORTS RESULTS
...07:34:00...”
It is apparent from the annotations on the logs which were
tendered that the sports results were not announced by Mr McClean, with
being annotated on the logs. For example, the log for 2 May 1995 bears the
annotation “no - Mondays only”. Similarly
the log for 9 May 1995 is
annotated “no - these occur on Mondays” and on the log for 16 May
1995 is annotated “n/a”.
Paul Ferrall, another announcer, gave evidence that he also did not read
these sports results in the afternoon shifts. He claimed
he was never shown were
the sports results file was.
The other type of advertising contract concerned the Robe River “fact
sheets” to be played or reads in conjunction with
the weather. I have
dealt with the early failures to play the recorded fact sheets. It was also
alleged that Mr McClean subsequently
consistently refused to perform “live
reads” when new Robe fact sheets were introduced. Mr McClean contends that
sheet was available to be read during that period. On balance, I accept
his evidence in that regard.
Another point of contention was Mr McClean’s occasional departure from
the programmed music lists. He agrees that, as the morning
announcer, he
sometimes indulged himself and his earlier rising listeners with personal
favourites, the most memorable and recurrent
of which was apparently a novelty
track entitled the “Rubber Biscuit Song”. This came to Mr
Lenton’s attention,
and I am satisfied, despite Mr McClean’s
denials, that this was a matter that was raised with him by Mr Lenton on a
of occasions, albeit perhaps less formally than Mr Lenton suggests. Mr
McClean persisted in this practice.
Apart from complaints from listeners less enamoured with the “Rubber
Biscuit Song” than Mr McClean, his practice of not
following the music
list had some relatively serious implications for the station’s
management, given that royalties to be
paid by the station were calculated on
the basis of the pre-programmed list. Thus the spontaneity and autonomy which Mr
McClean was
exercising could potentially result in real problems for the
station. Still more obviously, his failure to play programmed advertisements
created difficulties with the billing of those advertisements to clients.
Matters came to a head on 15 June 1995, when Mr Lenton confronted Mr McClean
day. The discussion
became heated and degenerated into a shoving match, at the conclusion of which
Mr Lenton advised Mr McClean that
he was to be suspended. Mr McClean was
suspended on full pay. In my view, neither participant’s behaviour in the
that day was exemplary. Mr Lenton contributed to the level of
agitation and it is appropriate that the employer does not rely upon
incident as a ground for Mr McClean’s dismissal.
Suspension was a reasonable option in the circumstances, as Mr McClean was
not financially disadvantaged, and it might potentially
have been a
“circuit breaker, giving both parties the opportunity to reassess the
situation and reach a basis upon which the
employment relationship might be
Mr Lenton documented his position in the following letter dated 19 June
“Dear Mr McClean
SEVERE DISCIPLINARY WRITTEN WARNING FOR MISCONDUCT.
On Thursday 15th it came to my attention you had omitted to play Robe River
Facts. This is after I specifically told you to do so
several times during the
When I approached you to hear your explanation you said they were not on the
logs, I informed you this was not the case and that the
Robe River facts were
indeed listed on the logs.
Further to this it has been bought to my attention that on a number of
occasions you failed to play properly logged ads during your
In addition to this, without my permission you have substituted music
specified on the logs with music of your own choice resulting
in complaints from
The matter of your personal conduct both to myself and other staff members
has reached such an intolerable level that your behaviour
is affecting the
morale of staff employed at the radio station.
Your behaviour has caused me to lose confidence in both your personal
integrity and your ability to perform your contracted work duties.
Accordingly you are hereby
formally and severely warned
further occurrence whereby you again breach your contract of employment with
North West radio will result in the Company
taking whatever action it deems
necessary in accordance with that contract of employment, including if warranted
the termination
of your contract of employment.
A copy of this warning will be placed on your Company personnel file.
Yours sincerely
General Manager”
In my view, this letter represents a genuine and legitimate
attempt by Mr Lenton as station manager to reassert the station’s
over Mr McClean’s activities as an employee.
Mr Lenton also prepared another warning letter of the same date about the
abusive call to the listener that I have referred to earlier.
represented a retrospective reassessment of the seriousness of the incident, and
a warning that such behaviour would not
be tolerated in future, even if it had
been acquiesced to in the past. It is irrelevant to these proceedings because no
further incidents
of that kind occurred.
Mr Lenton then arranged a meeting with Mr McClean on 20 June 1996. I accept
the accuracy of the evidence of Ms Anne O’Hern,
Mr Lenton’s
secretary, who attended the meeting, and of the minutes of the meeting prepared
by Ms O’Hern.
The only attendees to the meeting were Mr McClean, Mr Lenton and Ms
O’Hern. Mr Lenton gave Mr McClean the letters.
Mr McClean reacted angrily. He told Mr Lenton to “shut up” and
refused to discuss the letters. He called Mr Lenton a “buffoon”.
refused to accept the letters. Ms O’Hern says he threw them in Mr
Lenton’s face. There were the usual arguments in
evidence as to the exact
trajectory of the letters, but I was satisfied that there was some extravagance
in Mr McClean’s persistent
refusal to accept the letters.
Mr Lenton terminated the meeting and told Mr McClean they would meet again
when Mr McClean could control himself. He suggested Mr
McClean get advice from
Following that meeting, Mr Lenton became aware that Mr McClean may have
recently organised the production of a jingle for one of the
clients in his own time, with the jingle’s producer being paid directly.
The production of jingles was part
of the business of the station.
It transpires that Mr McClean also used the station’s stationery for
that purpose, whether for convenience or not, and that
Mr McClean was involved
in arranging the prompt payment of the producers account. It seems that the
client may have been under the
misapprehension that he was dealing with the
While Mr Lenton and the station owner, Mr Leo, had become aware that Mr
McClean may have been involved in this questionable transaction,
they had not
had an opportunity to properly investigate it. It was, however, a matter that
they legitimately wished to raise with
Mr McClean.
The only attendees to the next meeting, on 22 June 1996 were again Mr
McClean, Mr Lenton and Ms O’Hern. Mr McClean was late,
and then the
meeting was taken up in unresolved argument about the attendance of a witness or
representative on behalf of Mr McClean.
Mr Lenton was prepared to have a union
representative or member present, but not merely a fellow staff member, as he
viewed the employment
relationship as confidential.
The next day, the final meeting took place.
Mr McClean acknowledged that
he had read the letters. In response, he read a statutory declaration he had
prepared on 20 June. The
declaration:
• dealt with the altercation on 15 June 1996;
• dealt with his disputes with Mrs Lenton as to the adequacy of the
station logs;
• raised the fact that he had no written contract of employment;
• offered explanations for his failure to play the Robe facts relating
to production problems;
• offered a favourable assessment of his overall contribution to the
station; and
• characterised Mr Lenton’s managerial approach as “almost
fascist”, offering other criticisms of Mr Lenton’s
Mr Lenton then asked Mr McClean about the production of the jingle. After
initially answering some of the questions, Mr McClean refused
to answer further
Mr Lenton, being of the view that things had reached an impasse, decided to
terminate Mr McClean’s employment and read from
the following letter,
which had been prepared in advance.
“Dear Mr McClean
FINAL DISCIPLINARY WRITTEN WARNING - UNSATISFACTORY CONDUCT.
On June 20th, 1995 in North West Radio’s managers office you:
1) Insulted both the General Manager and Managing Director of North West
2) Repeatedly threw papers in the General Managers face.
3) Refused to obey a lawful and proper instruction from the General
In addition:
Your continued frustration of our attempts to negotiate a solution and your
continual failure to explain your behaviour on three separate
opportunities.
Finally it has come to my attention that you have been guilty of serious
misconduct through betrayal of trust which has breached your
contract of
employment and left us no alternative other than to terminate your services
You will be paid one weeks wages in lieu of notice, plus any accrued holiday
pay and this will be directed to your bank account on
Friday the 23rd
Monday 26th June 1995. (hand written)
Yours sincerely
General Manager”
Mr McClean refused to accept the letter and left the meeting
without further comment.
Section 170EDA(1)(a) confers the onus on the employer to prove that there was
a valid reason connected with the employee’s capacity
or conduct or based
on the operational requirements of the undertaking, establishment or service, as
is required by Section 170DE(1).
At the time the orders were made, I had also taken into account the question
of whether, having regard to Section 170DE(2), the termination
was harsh, unjust
or unreasonable.
I was satisfied that there was a valid reason for the termination of Mr
McClean’s employment connected with his conduct.
Up to the point of the meeting on 20 June 1996, the position was arguably
equivocal. While some aspects of Mr McClean’s conduct
was not acceptable,
it might reasonably be argued that the standards of behaviour required of him
had not been articulated with sufficient
Had the meeting proceeded in a restrained manner, with Mr McClean indicating
that he was prepared to conduct himself in future in
accordance with Mr
Lenton’s lawful and reasonable directions, then it would have been
difficult for the station to have justified
his dismissal. In my view, at that
time, the station was not intending to bring about his dismissal.
Mr McClean’s conduct during that meeting was, however, a reasonable
basis for the station to decide to dismiss him. Such a dismissal
would not have
been harsh unjust or unreasonable.
Nor was there a breach of Section 170DC of the Act, which requires that an
employee be given an opportunity to defend themselves against
allegations in
relation to their conduct.
It is arguable that, given the nature of the conduct at the meeting on 20
June and the circumstances in which it occurred, there was
nothing to discuss,
so that it would not be reasonable to expect the station to give Mr McClean that
opportunity, for the purposes
of Section 170DC(2) of the Act.
In any event, Mr McClean was given a further opportunity to defend himself on
23 June 1996. While dismissal was likely prior to that
meeting, I accept that Mr
Lenton’s mind was not closed to other options, had Mr McClean given some
indication that their working
relationship could be restored and had he
addressed Mr Lenton’s concerns about the production of the jingle.
On this basis, I concluded that the employer was not in breach of the
relevant provisions of the Act. A decision of the High Court
since my orders
were made which invalidates Section 170DE(2) of the Act has lent additional
support to this conclusion.
Accordingly, I will order that this application be dismissed.
I certify that this and the preceding fourteen
(14) pages are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment herein of Judicial
R.D. Farrell
Dated: 1 October 1998
Representative of the Applicant:
Mr C. Smyth
Media, Entertainment and Arts Alliance
Representative of the Respondent:
Mr A. Lenton
General Manager
Date of Hearing:
14, 15, & 16 February 1996
Date of Orders:
Date of Reasons:
RTF format (72.3 KB)
Signed PDF/A format