WHS v The King [2025] HCATrans 62 (10 September 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 062
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Sydney No S92 of 2025
B e t w e e n
GORDON A‑CJ
BEECH‑JONES J
TRANSCRIPT OF
PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA ON WEDNESDAY, 10 SEPTEMBER 2025, AT 10.00
MR S.J. ODGERS,
May it please the Court, I appear for the appellant with
my learned friends
MS S.A. ANDERSON
MS C. BEESLEY
. (instructed by Legal Aid
MS H.R. ROBERTS, SC
May it please the
Court, I appear for the respondent with
MS S. PALANIAPPAN
MS K.M. JEFFREYS
. (instructed by Director of Public
Prosecutions (NSW))
GORDON A-CJ:
Thank you, Ms Roberts.
Thank you, your Honours.
Your Honours, I take it, have had an opportunity to read the outline of
oral submissions?
GORDON A-CJ:
Both of them, thank
Thank you, your Honour.
Your Honours, as is indicated in that outline, the central
issue – at least, the preliminary issue
– raised under
ground 1 is the correct construction of section 293(6)(a) of the
Criminal Procedure Act
(NSW) which, as your Honours appreciate, has
been re‑enacted in 294CB, and was originally enacted in the
under 409B. As your Honours would appreciate, the critical words
in that provision, subsection 6(a) – and I am looking at
page 9 of the ‑ ‑ ‑
GORDON A-CJ:
I think each of us have a working copy of the relevant provisions, thank
All right. Well, I am looking at the
provision, your Honour, and subsection (6) says:
If the court is satisfied—
(a) That it has been disclosed or implied in the case for the
prosecution –
Of course, what that means is something that I will be making submissions
against the accused person that the complainant has –
I need to pause here, has:
or may have . . .
. . . a lack of sexual experience –
specified period, or without reference to any period, and it could be a lack of
experience:
of a general or specified nature –
Those words “or
may have” will have some significance in what I am about to say. Now,
just the preliminary matters.
Prior to the second trial of the appellant after
the first appeal to the Court of Criminal Appeal had been successful, as
your Honours
appreciate, a new trial was ordered. Prior to that, there was
what I will two 293 applications made on behalf of the appellant.
Defence counsel submitted that 293(6) was engaged on the basis
that evidence would be adduced by the Crown that the complainant was
old when she first gave an account of the alleged offences to the police in
November 2012, and the jury would infer from
this as argued –
put to Judge Traill that if those offences were not committed she lacked
sexual experience sufficient to fabricate
the account that she gave to the
police. I have given references in the outline to various parts of the
transcript where those submissions
Prosecutor’s response – and this is only of marginal relevance,
but just the background – was pretty
brief, but I will refer
your Honours to the appellant’s book of further materials at
page 49 – really, the bottom of
48, if I could just take
your Honours to that. At line 45, her Honour says:
The highest the defence have really put it is that it’s implied,
really. Because you’re not relying on this material.
So implied in
the material – well, I am not entirely sure what her Honour was
referring to, but implied that there is a lack
of sexual experience. Then
Mr Lynch, who was the Crown Prosecutor:
If I understand my friend’s, or Mr
Krisenthal’s –
he was the previous defence
submission that my friend adopts, the young age of the complainant
necessarily implies . . . “That she’s a person
no sexual experience who has not taken part in sexual
Then Mr Lynch continued:
and that remains so whether or not it’s explicitly raised during the
That was Mr Lynch’s understanding of the
submission that was made. Then he says:
If that’s the case, then any child who as a complainant gives a
description of a sexual act having taken place that they’ve
been a party
to, if there are also records available of prior
dealings . . . that material then gets in
through . . . subs (6) –
So, reading
between the lines, the submission that was being made was it is necessary for
the Crown to explicitly raise the lack of
sexual experience for
the 293(6)(a) requirement to be satisfied. An argument was put why that
was so, which was what I will call
the thin edge of the wedge – it
will let in – if that is not the case, then a young age of
complainant will always have
the effect that evidence of sexual experience will
Her Honour’s judgment on this –
your Honours have no doubt seen it – is in the core appeal book.
I will not take
your Honours to it at this point, but her Honour
effectively held that because the Crown would not be making a submission to the
jury – how could the complainant give such a graphic account of the
sexual acts, if those sexual acts were not true –
because the Crown
would not be making that submission, her Honour held that the requirement
of 293(6)(a) were not satisfied.
So, now, taking you to the
judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal, I think the key passages are
at 37 and 38. It is at the core
appeal book page 134, the
judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal, and I want to take your Honours
to paragraphs 37 and 38. His
Honour Justice Fagan accepted, in
paragraph 31 that it would
GORDON A‑CJ:
we going back to paragraph 31 now?
did I say 31? I meant paragraph 37. I am sorry,
your Honour.
GORDON A‑CJ:
My apologies.
GORDON A‑CJ:
It is all right.
Justice Fagan said at
the beginning of 37:
I accept it would likely be the common experience amongst jurors that, up to
the age of nine, it would not be expected that a girl
would have gained sexual
experience or engaged in sexual activity, within the meaning of the section,
unless in circumstances of
abuse. It does not follow that in this case, as a
result of the Crown tendering the November 2012 JIRT interviews of the
nine‑year‑old
complainant, there arose any positive implication that
she had not previously been abused by someone other than the appellant or
she had not exceptionally and precociously gained sexual experience or engaged
in sexual activity in other circumstances.
paragraph 38:
The appellant argued that it would be sufficient to engage
subsection (6) if “there [was] a real risk that a juror, or the jury,
would reason in that way”; meaning that they would infer a lack of prior
sexual experience or activity (other than with the
appellant) from the
circumstance of the complainant being only nine years old. I do not accept that
argument. The activation of
subsection (6) depends upon the trial judge
being “satisfied that it has been [...] implied in the case for the
prosecution”
that the complainant had, or did not have, prior sexual
experience or activity.
Can I stop there for a moment. That is not
strictly accurate, because it
GORDON A-CJ:
Which bit is not accurate?
that it has been [...] implied in the case for the prosecution” that
the complainant had, or did not have, prior sexual experience
or activity.
Focusing on the words:
did not have, prior sexual experience –
As I have shown your Honours, subsection (6) refers to:
the case for the prosecution . . . that the
complainant . . . may have . . .
(i) . . . a lack of sexual experience –
I will come back to that in a moment. His Honour
continues –
BEECH‑JONES J:
it correct, though, that the submission was that whenever – that the
existence of the risk of the reasoning was
sufficient to engage it?
It was put in alternative ways. It was put that it was
inevitable that the jury is going to draw the inference – that was
put. It was also put that it was very likely that the jury was going to draw
the inference. It was also put that there was a real
risk that they would draw
the inference, and we certainly contended that it would be sufficient that there
is a real risk.
BEECH‑JONES J:
And that is
That is enough.
BEECH‑JONES
And that is what you put here?
we are wrong about that, we say that it was inevitable, but the argument that
was put was that it was a real risk.
BEECH‑JONES
But just to be clear, you say even if the Crown does not ask
for it ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
‑ ‑ ‑ and the Crown
does not ask a particular question that might imply it, like one of the examples
the second reading speech of asking a surgeon whether a person was a
virgin, that that ‑ ‑ ‑
No, your Honour, that is not quite how I put it.
We relied on the Crown adducing evidence that the complainant was nine years
BEECH‑JONES
Right – her age.
‑ ‑ ‑ in the absence of
any evidence adduced by the Crown that she had sexual experience. So, it is not
mere fact that there was evidence of age, it was also that the totality of
the prosecution case was: nine years old, no evidence
of prior sexual
experience. Going back to Justice Fagan:
The statutory test is not one of risk as to how jurors might reason but of
whether the evidence and submissions relied upon by the
Crown have conveyed an
implication of prior sexual experience or activity, or lack thereof. Here, I
find nothing in the presentation
of the Crown case that effectively invited the
jury to draw an inference about lack of prior sexual experience or
activity . . .
on the basis of her age.
issue of construction, then, is whether the provision – we say the
issue is whether the provision is engaged not only
where the Crown Prosecutor
says something to the jury, either directly or indirectly – directly
in submissions or indirectly
in questioning witnesses – to invite the
inference of lack of sexual experience on the basis or generally, but also where
evidence adduced in the prosecution case makes it likely or at least creates
a real risk that the jury will draw the inference.
Now, I want to
explain something about that. Going back to the language of 293(6)(a), how
do we say that evidence of fact A implies
the possible existence of
fact B? How
Well, I think we need to be more specific, do we not? As I
understand it ‑ ‑ ‑
I was about to put it in the circumstances of this case. How does
evidence that the complainant was nine years old at the time
she spoke to
the police imply that she may have a lack of sexual experience, that she
possibly had a lack of sexual experience?
So, I have put it in the more general
sense, to look at the question of logic. Now, one
sorry, Mr Odgers, are you putting this in two ways? Are you saying that
there is a process of inferring from the age alone
and a process of inferring
from the age alone and the lack of prosecution evidence of prior sexual
experience?
The latter, because I am saying you have
to look at what is – the prosecution case can be understood as the
totality of the
evidence adduced in the prosecution case. So, that includes
what they have adduced and what they have not adduced,
that implies that the prosecution could have adduced evidence of the
complainant’s sexual experience.
exactly right, and we say that
where that is exactly what happened.
What do you say
the admissible evidence was?
Well, they did not. I
am saying in this case, unlike
, where there was
some evidence of sexual experience, so that the Court of Criminal Appeal in that
case held that the prosecution
case had not implied a lack of sexual experience,
because there was some evidence of sexual experience deduced in the prosecution
case, it was concluded in
that the prosecution
case had not implied a lack of sexual experience.
may be you do not need the counterfactual.
not think I do, your Honour. Returning to the analysis of how we say that
it makes sense to ask whether a risk that the jury
might reason in a particular
way would be sufficient to satisfy the terms of 293(6)(a). One way that
you concluded that an inference
will be drawn from fact A –
sorry, one way you imply fact B from fact A or imply the possible
existence of fact B from fact
A is if the inference will be drawn from
fact A that fact B existed. So, if you could conclude the jury will
infer lack of sexual
experience from age, then you have
satisfied 293(6).
Equally, if you are satisfied that the inference
will be drawn from fact A that fact B possibly existed, then you have
293(6). And we do submit that at the time that the 293
application was before Judge Traill, it should have been concluded that the
jury in the forthcoming trial would infer from the fact that the complainant was
nine years old that it was possible that the complainant
lacked sexual
experience.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, just to be clear, any case
involving a nine‑year‑old who gives evidence of sexual abuse would
fall into 293(6)?
because ‑ ‑ ‑
GORDON A‑CJ:
Identify what would fall outside of it. What is
the prosecution adduces evidence of sexual experience in some way, or there is
some agreement that there was sexual experience.
of sexual experience.
No, no, evidence of sexual
experience.
BEECH-JONES J:
All right. So, in other
words, (6) – this would never bite for a
nine‑year‑old. The whole section would
Section 293?
BEECH-JONES
Section 293, every case, because the Crown would either have to
adduce it or it would be implicitly opened up.
If the Crown agreed that – just to put it blandly – there
was prior sexual experience, so that the jury would not imply
a lack of sexual
experience, then 293(a)(6) would not apply. You would not be able to
cross‑examine – my first point.
Second point –
before you could cross‑examine, you would have to persuade the judge that
there was evidence of prior
sexual experience.
You would not be able to
start cross‑examining without having demonstrated that there was evidence
of prior sexual experience.
Now, in most cases with nine‑year‑olds,
there would not be – you would not be able to show a lack of sexual
experience.
It is only in a case where there is evidence of sexual experience
that you would be permitted to cross‑examine about
BEECH‑JONES J:
What if you do not know? You
might – on your analysis, you would be able to ask, would you not?
To ask, just to find out.
that – no, the question is whether the prosecution case
BEECH-JONES J:
asking about the consequences of your
construction.
BEECH-JONES J:
I am trying to understand why the consequence of your construction would be
that the section, on this approach, does not fail in the
nine‑year‑old, or an eight‑year‑old, or a
seven‑year‑old.
My answer is,
firstly, it would not apply if the prosecution adduced some evidence of sexual
experience or if there was some agreement
that there was prior sexual
experience – that is the first point. The second point is that the
trial judge would have to be
satisfied that there is some evidence of prior
sexual experience before the judge would grant leave to cross‑examine
Does not the effect of your
submission mean that in every case where the Crown knows there is prior sexual
experience of someone
under the age of 10, that you are saying that they really
need to disclose that to the jury.
cross‑examination, yes.
But does not that
then undermine the very purpose of 293(3), that in every case they would
have to do that?
Your Honour –
the core of the submission is, of course, the precondition for any
cross‑examination would be that the accused
might be unfairly prejudiced
if it could be put before the jury that there was some prior sexual experience.
So, that is a precondition,
plus the balancing test of probative value and
distress, humiliation or embarrassment would also have to be
But, clearly, one precondition to all of this is that the
defence can demonstrate to the judge that there will be unfair prejudice
accused if the jury is left in a position of potentially inferring lack of
sexual experience – which could be critically
important in supporting
the credibility of a complainant, for the reasons as articulated in the first
Court of Criminal Appeal judgment
– and that that prejudice must be
removed, must be avoided.
It just seems to me
that role of subsection (6) is to create an exception to what is otherwise
a general rule against leading such
accept that.
And what (6) is really saying is
that if the Crown put it in as an issue – it does something
positive – then the exception
Your Honour, you are not to be surprised that I submit to the
No, I understand that. But you have
to give work to the phrase:
in the case for the prosecution –
That is what the core of this appeal
do those words mean? It is necessary for the prosecutor to invite the inference
of lack of sexual experience or is it sufficient
that the jury is likely to draw
the inference from the evidence adduced by the prosecution in its
BEECH‑JONES J:
In terms of the prejudice
you identified, which is a prejudice that arises where there is evidence, why
cannot the jury be directed
not to reason from, say, the graphic detail given by
the complainant, that that must have been derived from knowledge they acquired
from being sexually abused? That would not – what is wrong with
Actually, that might be a solution to
the problem – that might be a solution to the problem. But, in a
way, the difficulty
with that is a judge
could ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
Is it that prosecutors are not inviting it? They do not want
that inference drawn.
BEECH‑JONES J:
What is the
Well, a judge, to give that
direction, I would respectfully submit that the parties would have to agree that
that would be an appropriate
direction, and that would only be an appropriate
direction where the parties agreed that there was some evidence of prior sexual
experience. Not that they would say it to the jury, but if a judge is directing
the jury: do not infer she has prior sexual experience
from the detail of what
she said when she was nine years old – that is pretty close to saying
that she does have sexual experience.
BEECH‑JONES J:
would be ‑ ‑ ‑
It would be the other way around.
Sorry, your Honours?
BEECH‑JONES
But do not reason – it is not so much: do not
infer she has prior sexual experience. Your concern, as I understand it,
ultimately, the jury might reason – that was what
Justice Fagan – from the detail that the complainant gave, and
that she is nine years old, you could only know about that if you had been
sexually abused as she contends by your client.
Without going to whether
she has sexual experience or not, a direction that says do not reason that
way – that could be given,
could it not? And that does not tell
anything about whether she does have other sexual experience, it simply says:
if you are thinking
asking for it; you reject it. No one – the jury does
prior sexual experience or lack of it, or whatever has
occurred with the complainant is not revealed. The section still serves its
purpose, does it not?
I have to engage with
what you anticipate the judge would say to the jury, but in my submission, the
only way the judge could deal
with it by way of direction would be to direct the
jury that they must not infer that she was telling the truth because she lacks
sexual experience so that she could fabricate the allegations. That is the
concern – that the jury is going to say, look,
a highly detailed
account of sexual offending, how could she fabricate that account unless she had
prior sexual experience?
BEECH-JONES J:
No: how could she
fabricate that account by – how could she know that unless what she
said about the accused is true? That
reasoning ‑ ‑ ‑
I disagree with – I
respectfully ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
That is the reasoning that Justice Fagan identified that you embraced as
the foundation for the whole argument, is it not?
your Honour. No, the foundation for the whole argument is: how could she
fabricate such a detailed account of sexual activity
unless she had prior sexual
experience? That is the argument,
GORDON A-CJ:
we find that formulation set out in your submissions? Or even anywhere, for the
moment? The reason why I ask that, Mr
Odgers, is the risk is the really
important question here, and I had understood from the passage that you took us
to in Justice Fagan’s
judgment that that was the risk, because that
identifies – there are two aspects here. First of all, what is
disclosed or
implied in the case for the prosecution as a matter of
construction.
GORDON A-CJ:
Second, having identified that, what are the risks that we are to meet or we
have to grapple with?
GORDON A-CJ:
And if you took us ‑ ‑ ‑
Well, I am going back to the first sentence of paragraph 38:
that they would infer a lack of prior sexual
experience –
“there [was] a real risk that a juror, or the jury, would reason in
that way”; meaning that they would infer a lack of
prior sexual experience
or activity (other than with the appellant) from the
circumstance –
of the complainant being only nine years old.
GORDON A-CJ:
That is it.
Yes, your Honour, but that is in the context of an argument that the
jury would – and I am sure that there are parts of the
judgment which
recount this argument, but in my own language
GORDON A-CJ:
argument that was put was the danger is the jury will infer, from the detailed
allegations of the subject
of the counts, that she must be telling the truth
because she could not have fabricated that account unless she had prior sexual
experience.
BEECH-JONES J:
At the hands of the
BEECH-JONES J:
what 38 is about.
BEECH-JONES
Because it leads towards a finding that your client perpetrated this
Well, of course,
BEECH-JONES J:
what you are worried about.
No, no, but I use the
word “fabricated”. She could not have fabricated it unless she had
prior sexual experience. That
is the concern. Of course, the alternative is
she is telling the truth and she is recounting what actually happened and what
appellant did do to her. But that is the Crown case.
The concern is
the jury, confronted by this highly detailed account of all these sexual acts
committed by the appellant, says: well,
there is no evidence of prior sexual
experience, we will assume a nine‑year‑old does not have prior
sexual experience,
how could she have fabricated those accounts; therefore, they
must be true.
That is the concern, and I am confident that the Court of
Criminal Appeal understood that that was the argument that was being put,
the submission that was being put, and that because the jury would draw the
inference of lack of sexual experience, because the
Crown had led evidence that
she was nine years old and had not led any evidence of prior sexual
experience, they would infer she
lacked it, therefore, she could not have
fabricated it, therefore, what she said must be true.
I think I was, a
little while ago, dealing with the question of what section (6)(a)
requires, and again I remind your Honours that
you have to – the
prosecution case must imply that she may have had a lack of sexual experience.
So, if you can be satisfied
that the inference will be drawn from the age that
she may have had a lack of sexual experience, that is enough.
that at the time of the 293 application before Judge Traill, it should
have been concluded that the jury would infer from
the fact that she was
nine years old that it was possible that she lacked sexual experience. So,
that satisfies, we say, an implication
that she may have a lack of sexual
experience.
Now, we did also submit – and your Honours
have all appreciated this – that a finding that the jury might infer
of sexual experience would satisfy 293(6)(a), and I want to make
good that proposition. We submit that a finding that fact B might
inferred from fact A necessarily carries with it the proposition that the
possible existence of fact A would be inferred from
fact A. So,
putting it – one can conclude that fact B might be
inferred – sorry, one cannot conclude fact B might be
without first concluding that the possible existence of fact B would be
In our submission, a finding that the jury might infer a lack
of sexual experience from the fact that the complainant was nine years
satisfies the requirement in 293(6)(a) that the age of the complainant, in
the absence of any evidence or agreement that the
complainant did have sexual
experience, implied that the complainant may have lacked sexual
experience.
So, we say that there was a basis to conclude that the jury
would infer it was possible that she lacked sexual experience and that
necessarily also carried with it a conclusion that the jury might infer that she
did lack sexual experience. They are really two
sides of the same
GORDON A‑CJ:
Just so I am clear – I
understand that there are two limbs to the argument.
GORDON A‑CJ:
One is the jury would infer from the
fact that she was nine years old, given the graphic details that she
explained – that
is the first limb?
your Honour.
GORDON A‑CJ:
That is what you said. You
said the jury would infer from the fact that she was nine years old that
she lacked sexual experience.
your Honour. The jury would have inferred from the fact that she was
nine years old that she might have lacked sexual
experience.
GORDON A‑CJ:
Thank you. And then the second
limb is that the jury might infer, in a sense, making a finding from the age of
consent in the
absence of evidence. So, we have an additional limb to that
I am not sure I can put it in those
terms, your Honour. What I have put it in – in the last few
minutes, I have put it in
the alternative: the jury would have inferred that
she might have lacked sexual experience – sorry, would have inferred
her age that she might have lacked sexual experience. The alternative is
the jury might have inferred that she did lack sexual experience.
We put both
of those propositions, we say both are sufficient to satisfy
subsection (6)(a).
GORDON A‑CJ:
So, can I just ask
one qualifying question, then, about that? In relation to the alternative, you
put it in the context, as I
understood the submission, in the absence of
evidence of her sexual
experience ‑ ‑ ‑
Absolutely.
GORDON A‑CJ:
‑ ‑ ‑ and that only applies to the second limb,
that is, the alternative formulation.
think it applies ‑ ‑ ‑
So, what I am asking, what I am trying to work out is, does it
apply ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes, so, it applies to both limbs, because the jury would not infer that she
might have lacked sexual experience if there was evidence
adduced in the
prosecution case that she did have sexual experience. The risk would
be – you could say that the risk could
be vitiated or removed and, in
those circumstances, it would not be appropriate to grant leave to
cross‑examine.
Equally – alternative
situation – if there was evidence of some kind of evidence, as in
, of sexual experience, then you would not be
satisfied that there was a real risk that the jury would infer lack of sexual
because there was evidence of sexual experience in the prosecution
GORDON A‑CJ:
your Honour.
Is the distinction you are trying to
draw that if it were only that the jury might infer that she might lack sexual
experience,
that would not satisfy (a)?
second alternative is that there is a real risk the jury might infer that she
did lack sexual experience.
I get that, that is why I
am asking. Does it follow from that that if the jury might infer that she might
lack sexual experience,
you accept that would not satisfy
I can see that there could be problems in
that being sufficient under – to satisfy (6)(a).
Just to clarify, in my mind – you accept, I assume, the
sexual experience or lack thereof in (6) is other than the alleged
do accept that, okay.
It was just something that you were saying suggested to me that it
might not be. Okay.
No, of course. The whole
thrust of 293, of course, is that it is concerned with sexual experience or
activity other than that
the subject of the charges.
BEECH-JONES
Well, in any event, in any case where the prosecution prosecutes for
the alleged offence, that sexual experience is clearly disclosed
or part of the
prosecution case.
Yes. I just wanted to say in
respect of that, your Honour, because it goes to an argument that my friend
for the Crown has run
our position is that evidence of sexual – the actual evidence of the
offences is caught by subsection (3). It is caught by it, but the
exception in (4)(a) applies.
So, that is an important point,
because to take the example that was given in the second reading
speech – we are back in 1981,
so the world has moved on a bit,
but reference there was to evidence led in the prosecution case that the
complainant’s hymen
had been broken, so that she was, to use the old
language, a virgin prior to the alleged sexual offending. If that evidence was
led in the prosecution case, it was made clear in the second reading speech that
that was caught by the prohibition, but that it
falls within the first exception
in subsection (4), which I think was subsection 409B(3).
is important because it goes to the argument like the Crown, but it also is
significant because, as your Honours appreciate,
in the second reading
speech when there was a discussion about 293(6), or what was
then – let me get it right, I always get
the numbers
wrong – 409B(5), in the second reading speech – perhaps I
can take you to it now, because I am here. I have
to find it – it is
in the appellant’s book of further materials, page 950. This was, of
course, a discussion in the
third paragraph, point 3 on the page, about
409B(3)(f) ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Sorry, what page was that again?
I am sorry,
page 950 of the further book of materials, point 3 of the page,
your Honour:
Proposed section 409B(3)(f) –
which is now 293(4)(f):
has to be read in conjunction with proposed
section 409B(5).
Which is now 293(6):
It will allow cross-examination concerning prior sexual history where it has
been disclosed or implied in the case for the prosecution
that the complainant
was of particularly limited sexual experience at the time of the alleged
offence. For example, if it is said
by the prosecution –
So, I am focusing on the word “said” there:
that the complainant was a chaste married woman, or a virgin, the accused
ought to be entitled to cross-examine about that.
Moving on, I will not
read the next sentence, and then I submit that the next sentence, beginning
“Thus”, is a second
Thus if it is somehow suggested during the prosecution case – for
example through the evidence of the police surgeon –
complainant was a virgin prior to the events, then the accused may explore that
matter by cross-examination, if he sees
any benefit in it.
submission, that is a reference to, where there is evidence – in that
case, evidence from a prosecution witness –
that the complainant was
a virgin – that is, evidence of a lack of sexual
experience – then, or now, 293(6) is engaged;
cross‑examination about that is permissible.
So, we say the second
reading speech recognises the two scenarios: one, where the Crown Prosecutor
says something to invite the
inference of lack of sexual experience; or, two,
where the evidence in the prosecution case implies a lack of sexual
experience –
discloses or implies, which, of course, is the statutory
I was referring your Honours to the discussion of what
was then the first exception in 293(4), which is discussed at 948 of
book. I will not take your Honours through that, but that is where
there is a discussion about getting evidence from the police
this is at point 3 on 948, that:
the hymen . . . had been recently broken –
that was understood to be evidence that fell within the first exception.
So, I think your Honours
understand ‑ ‑ ‑
GORDON A‑CJ:
In relation to the outline, where are we up to, do you
I think we are at 5,
your Honour. I have just been putting the arguments that there are two
ways that the prosecution can disclose
or imply a lack of sexual experience, and
to support that construction, I refer your Honours – I will take
your Honours now
to the outline of our submissions – sorry, the
written submissions – appellant’s submissions,
paragraph 6.6.
I am just going to – your Honours
would have read this, but I will just take your Honours through it
briefly – page 12
of the written submissions. We
say – this is line 20 – that the construction for
which we contend – what the prosecution
case means is two alternative
things: what is said by the prosecutor and what the prosecution evidence
implies. We say the first
argument is the exception should not be narrowly
construed – that is the last sentence at the bottom of the
should not take a narrow approach to the
exceptions.
We have read your
submissions.
your Honour.
It might be better just to add
Yes. I appreciate that,
your Honour. I will not repeat them. I have put the arguments over the
page. I have submitted that
the purpose of 293(6) is to prevent a jury
having a misconception – that is, we say, key –
particularly where that misconception
would unfairly prejudice the
GORDON A‑CJ:
So, that is the risk that we have
been identifying.
And, the fourth
point on that page, it cannot be right that the misconception can only be
removed where the prosecution actively
fostered it, as distinct from the
prosecution creating the risk that it will be drawn – that
misconception will occur –
and doing nothing to prevent
Your case is fairly simple, is it not?
This is not a disclosure case. It is a case of – you say it is
implied from the
prosecution case, because the prosecution led evidence of the
Exactly. Yes.
And it had to do so because of the nature of the offences in
That is correct and did not lead
any evidence, as in
, of prior sexual
experience.
Yes. Understood.
It is simple, and I appreciate that, your Honour.
The third point on page 13 is getting the balance
BEECH‑JONES J:
I just want to be clear,
on that argument, there would never be a case of a nine‑year‑old
with prior sexual experience
who does not get the benefit
There would never be a
BEECH‑JONES J:
That you have a
nine‑year‑old who has prior sexual experience where 293 would
engage to prevent that being adduced.
think that is correct. That would be the effect, because if there was prior
sexual experience, and where there was a real risk
that the jury would infer
lack of sexual experience, and that would go to support the credibility of the
allegations, 293(6) is directed
to preventing that unfair
I mean, of course, we know that when 409B was enacted,
not a lot of thought, we say, was given to how it would operate when you came
young children. The focus was, I think it is fair to say, protecting adult
sexual complainants from investigation of their sexual
historically and who they
consensually had sexual intercourse with before or on other occasions. That was
the primary focus. I
think that is a fair point.
The fact that, if our
argument is correct, where you do have what I will call a very young complainant
who does have prior sexual
experience – which would be a relevantly
rare phenomenon in a criminal trial, but where that child does and there is a
if not an inevitability, that the jury will infer that she does not and
use that to enhance the credibility of the allegations, then
it is, with
respect, self‑evident that the accused is going to be unfairly prejudiced.
In most cases, the probative value of
the evidence of sexual experience will
outweigh the distress that might be occasioned to the
complainant.
It would have to be a child with prior
sexual experience, and the accused would have to have something to
cross‑examine the
child on in relation to that experience.
I see them as two sides of the same coin. The evidence of that
prior sexual experience would be something that the defence would
put before the
judge at a 293 application, and say, look, we have this evidence, we want
to cross‑examine the complainant about
it. So, in this
am just suggesting the category of children with prior sexual experience, one
would hope, would be a fairly small one, but the
accused would also have to have
something to cross‑examine the child about.
Yes. Absolutely. Yes, you cannot – I say it is not
speculative – you would have to persuade the judge that you have
basis for the cross‑examination.
GORDON A‑CJ:
paint the facts of this case, you say we had the disclosure, which disclosed
what it disclosed.
You made the application to the judge under
section 293(6) to do what you have just described.
GORDON A‑CJ:
And you were
Yes, correct.
The question here is whether or not that was the appropriate
outcome, i.e. two things, in the way you put your case, on the disclosed
implied, and then the two ways in which you put it for the purposes of the
construction.
I generally agree with what
your Honour has put to me. We do not rely on the disclosed. We say it was
implied that she lacked
sexual experience. We say that it was argued before the
judge that the young age, in the circumstances, implied lack of sexual
experience.
Her Honour appears to have concluded – as did, we
say, the Court of Criminal Appeal – that because the Crown Prosecutor
was not going to say to the jury: you should infer lack of sexual experience,
that, therefore, 293(6) was not satisfied.
We say that is wrong
because it should be concluded that either it was inevitable that the jury would
infer lack of sexual experience
or, at the very least, there was a real risk
that they would infer that. And we say it is implied, at the very least, that
have a lack of sexual experience which, of course, is the requirement
under (6)(a).
BEECH‑JONES J:
Section 293 is only
there to protect or to address the circumstance where the complainant has prior
sexual experience. Every child
– so, no child from nine years
or below would ever get the benefit of it, on your argument, and, indeed,
probably up to age
11 or 12, because there is no point talking about
it with children who do not have sexual experience, because 293 is
prior sexual experience – because it is not
engaged. The section is
there ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES J:
‑ ‑ ‑ for a category of witness, and
the effect of your construction is to exclude it entirely for anyone at least
nine or below, and probably up to some age of around 12
Whatever the point is reached where a
judge ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Would say: no, you would not necessarily conclude that, or you might not
conclude that.
You might not conclude that,
BEECH-JONES J:
Okay, I understand.
I think I am comfortable with that proposition, your Honour. I think I
would respectfully submit that when one asked the question,
when 409B was
being enacted and when it was recognised that there should be exceptions to the
prohibition, my respectful submission
is that subsection (6) in combination
with (f) recognised that where the prosecution case – that is,
the evidence in the prosecution
case – created a substantial
risk – let us put in that language – of the jury having a
significant misconception
likely to cause real prejudice to the accused, then of
course, I say, there should be an exception.
I mean, it should not be a
difficult proposition to say if there is a real risk that the jury is going to
have a very significant
misconception which is going to cause real prejudice to
an accused, the accused should be given the opportunity to remove that
misconception,
assuming the Crown has not done something to do that or assuming
that the judge does not do something to remove that. It should
difficult proposition to satisfy your Honours, in my respectful
submission.
GORDON A-CJ:
We were back in your written
submissions at paragraph 6.6. I think we have dealt with those points,
Yes. The only other point was the sixth
point on page 14 which is the reference to
Munn and Miller
again, I assume your Honours have read that and you understand the argument
that has been put.
going to be moving pretty fast – to 6. I am really now
responding to counter‑arguments.
Paragraph 6 is the counter argument
that the language itself of “the case for the prosecution” implies
that something
is said by the prosecutor. We say that that is an unduly narrow
construction. Paragraph 7 is the argument that I will leave my
develop, which is that 293(3) itself leads to a conclusion about the proper
construction of 293(6)(a).
I have dealt with that in considerable
detail in the reply. I do not know whether it is necessary for me to say
something in reply
later today, but I cannot add anything significantly to what
is in the reply. I just need to make one correction to the reply.
your Honours have the reply, at paragraph 6, at line 7 there is a
reference to 293(4)(a) which is then said to be
409B(4)(a))”. Of course, I have made a mistake. It
is 409(3)(a).
BEECH-JONES J:
I am sorry, Mr Odgers,
what paragraph of your reply was that?
paragraph 6 on page 4, line 7, your Honour. I have given a
reference to 409B(4)(a), it should be 409B(3)(a), and the same
mistake is made
at line 11 – 409B(4)(a) should be 409B(3)(a). That is all I
wanted to say about that. I lost my outline,
I have now found
GORDON A‑CJ:
Can I just ask one question about it,
which may arise in paragraph 7, and you may be coming to it. In your
reply, at the foot
of page 1, you say looking at:
the (totality of the) evidence adduced in the prosecution case is likely to
GORDON A‑CJ:
distinct from the argument based upon age alone?
In practical terms, no, but what was being put against us by the Crown was that
we were saying evidence of the age alone was sufficient
to activate 293(6).
We are saying no, it has to be the prosecution evidence in totality that must
imply lack of sexual experience.
Now, in this case, it was the
combination of two things: one, the evidence of age; two, the absence of any
evidence of prior sexual
experience. Unlike
where there was some evidence of prior sexual experience, there was an absence
of that, therefore, the prosecution case as a whole
implied lack of sexual
experience, but, of course, I accept it is based on the age
GORDON A‑CJ:
Thank you, Your Honour. So, I am now
at 8. I think this is really Justice Beech‑Jones’s point
to me, and I am really
repeating what I have said in that paragraph, and I will
not read it out. So, in summary, then, before I get to 9, we say that in
this case the evidence of the young age of the complainant without any evidence
of prior sexual experience adduced in the prosecution
case meant that the
prosecution case implied that she may have a lack of sexual experience, and that
engaged paragraph (a). Then
the question is, under paragraph (b),
whether the appellant:
might be unfairly prejudiced if the complainant could not be
cross‑examined –
BEECH-JONES J:
Are you at paragraph 9 of your
BEECH-JONES J:
in that outline you adopt the first Court of Criminal Appeal judgment that
identifies that material as potentially providing
an innocent explanation for an
ability to describe sexual acts.
BEECH-JONES J:
And this is the point I was
ham‑fistedly trying to suggest earlier. Why could that not be protected
against by a direction?
And I responded as I did,
your Honour, by saying, well, it would depend on the terms of the
direction, and that would in turn –
I think my submission would be
that a judge could not give the necessary direction without an agreement between
the parties that
there was evidence of sexual experience. Now, your Honour
may disagree with me about that, but that is my submission, that the direction
would have to be: do not infer a lack of sexual experience. That could only be
properly given where there was evidence of sexual
experience agreed between the
But we would be, ex hypothesi, in that
situation, would we not, if you were seeking to cross‑examine? Or not
necessarily?
Your Honour, my answer – I
think I am going to answer it indirectly. You are making a 293 application
to the judge. You say
to the judge: look, there is this real risk that the
jury are likely or very likely to infer lack of sexual experience and use that
against the accused. That would be unfair, in circumstances where there is
sexual experience. So, that has to be solved. One way
to solve it is to allow
cross‑examination, but another way to solve it is to ensure that there is
no risk that the jury will
reason in that way.
thought you agreed with me that there was going to be nothing to
cross‑examine about unless you had something to cross‑examine
I am certainly making that – yes, I
am. I misunderstood your Honour’s question to me.
And that would be evidence, would it
You have to have evidence of sexual experience
in order to persuade the judge that you should be entitled to
cross‑examine.
BEECH-JONES J:
I mean, you could
direct the jury that they should not reason that a nine‑year‑old
could not provide an explanation
or was unable to describe sexual acts of the
kind alleged against the appellant unless they had actually occurred. You would
have to into the fact of whether she did or did not have sexual –
you get, as it were, to the chase and say: well, do not
reason that way. Could
you not do that?
I submit that that direction would
be something that the jury would really struggle with unless you made it
explicit that they must
not assume that there was a lack of sexual
experience.
BEECH‑JONES J:
My submission is that a direction on its own could not solve the
problem. In this case – and this is a reference to what
submissions at 5.6 – we know that this complainant had given a
very comprehensive interview in which she had said
to the police that she had
been sexually abused in many different ways when she was – I am not
sure of the ages now, I think
it was seven to eight, or six to eight. That is
prior to when she spoke to the police when she was nine years old and making the
allegations against the appellant.
So, there was evidence that she had
been sexually abused in ways that were not dissimilar to what she alleged the
appellant did to
her. In my respectful submission, evidence of
that – which is summarised at 5.6 of the
submissions – supports a conclusion
that the appellant might be
unfairly prejudiced if he was not permitted to cross‑examine her about
that, to say: all these
things happened to you.
That would be the end
of the cross‑examination, which would then permit the submission to be
made to the jury in final address:
so now we do have a basis upon which she
could have fabricated the allegations against the appellant, because she had
sufficient to allow her to do that. To prevent the misconception is
what the concern of 293(6) is about.
Yes, we do rely to some extent
on the first CCA judgment, and we say that what I have just said supports a
conclusion under 293(4)
– which, of course, you would need to go
through – which is that the probative value of the evidence would
outweigh any
distress, humiliation or embarrassment that the complainant might
suffer as a result of its admission. So, what would be the distress,
humiliation or embarrassment of saying to the complainant: you were sexually
abused, were you not, when you were six or seven and
these various things
happened to you, is that correct? Yes. End of
cross‑examination.
Given that she had been prepared to go to the
police and make complaints about all of these things, it is difficult to see, we
respectfully submit, that she would suffer significant distress,
humiliation or embarrassment from that fact that she had made these
allegations
identified, which is to show that she could
have – had the capacity
to – had the knowledge to fabricate the allegations against the
Paragraph 10 of the outline, we submit that
your Honours would accept that, in particular, the evidence relating to AT
would properly
have been something that – subject to the Crown making
a concession or subject to the judge saying: I will give appropriate
of the kind your Honour Justice Beech‑Jones referred
to – would satisfy all the requirements of 293 to permit
cross‑examination to prevent the prejudice that would otherwise arise, and
that the probative value of the evidence relating
to her allegations in respect
of AT to remove the significance of the detailed allegations going to
support the credibility of the
complainant – the probative value of
the evidence for that purpose would outweigh the distress, humiliation or
embarrassment
that the complainant might suffer.
Then the question
becomes, well, if that is right, we say the appeal should be allowed. Then the
question is: what are the appropriate
orders? The Crown has put the submission
that the matter should be remitted. Our submission
GORDON A‑CJ:
They have pushed for a new trial, you mean.
your Honour, I think they have pushed for a remit to decide whether or
not – again, my friend will explain it, but I
think their submission
GORDON A‑CJ:
In paragraph 14 of their outline of oral argument:
A new trial should be ordered –
I had not looked at that, your Honour. I will leave it to my friend to
respond to that. My submission is that verdicts
of acquittal should be entered.
This would be the third trial, in circumstances where there was a
non‑disclosure of this material
at the time of the first trial, long delay
that led to the first CCA appeal, where the significance of 293 was not
raised by the
Crown, then a further delay while the application was made, the
Crown opposes all of the evidence on 293 grounds.
We say that
your Honours would be persuaded that that caused unfair prejudice to the
accused and that, in those circumstances, where
he is now on parole, has served
his non‑parole period, where his sentence has to be reduced, the
appropriate order would be
enter the verdicts of no new trial, but that is all I
have to say about that.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Mr Odgers, can
I ask you two matters. Firstly, it is in your notice of appeal and it is in
your written submissions that you seek
to quash convictions on counts 1, 2,
4 and 5. Were 1 and 4 not already quashed?
Yes, I think – yes, that is absolutely correct,
your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Right, okay.
That may mean that we were under a misconception as to what this
Court would need to do. What we are saying is the orders that
were made were:
quash 1 and 4 below. We are saying, no, no, the orders should be to
quash all four of them, not just 1 and 4.
BEECH‑JONES J:
see. All right. The second is this debate about ground 1, it is directed
to the evidence summarised by Justice Fagan in paragraph
24, is that
right – paragraphs 24 and 25?
BEECH‑JONES J:
There is some lack of clarity
I am just not
BEECH‑JONES J:
Or does that not matter?
In this Court, we have
placed primary importance on the evidence of the police interview where she
alleged that when she was six
to eight years old she had been sexually abused
GORDON A‑CJ:
You rely upon what is in 25 primarily, do you not? That is, the contents
of the JIRT interview.
Yes. We say that is a
really – it is much more detailed than what his Honour has
summarised it as there in 25.
BEECH‑JONES
Just to be clear, is that
16 August 2017?
BEECH‑JONES J:
Because MW was 14, I think,
your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
But I thought
there was an interview in 2012.
your Honour.
BEECH‑JONES J:
So, is it that
interview, or is it ‑ ‑ ‑
No, your Honour – just so we are
clear ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
It is not the interview in 2012, it is that one.
It is the one in
BEECH‑JONES
‑ ‑ ‑ where she
makes an allegation that when she was somewhere between six to
eight – that is, before
2012 – she had been sexually
abused in many ways, on many different occasions, by AT. We have
summarised the evidence in relation
BEECH‑JONES
I see. Yes, all right.
‑ ‑ ‑ in some
BEECH‑JONES J:
understand.
And when you look at it in
detail, there is a lot of similarity between what she said happened at the hands
of AT and what she
said happened at the hands of the appellant. So, that is why
there would be unfair prejudice, because it provides a source of experience
information which she could have used to fabricate the allegations against the
appellant in 2012.
BEECH‑JONES J:
is 24 and 25.
But it is mostly 25, is it
Do we need to – do you maintain it in relation to
That would be something where I could
see an argument that you would remit it to make the assessments of unfair
prejudice and balancing
exercises. So, the reason I have relied on it here is
to say this Court would be satisfied that the AT evidence did meet the
requirements
of 293(6) in terms of causing unfair prejudice if you could
not cross‑examine about it and the requirement of balancing probative
value, et cetera. But this Court would then be satisfied that it was
something that could properly have been the subject of cross‑examination
and, therefore, there was a miscarriage of justice.
Just so we are clear, you write in paragraph 11 that
in relation to ground 2 you are relying on written
submissions.
your Honour.
GORDON A-CJ:
Given the time, we
might take a short adjournment.
AT 11.09 AM
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 11.24
GORDON A-CJ:
Ms Roberts.
MS ROBERTS:
Your Honours,
section 293, and its earlier forms, has been closely considered by this
Court in some relevantly similar circumstances,
and the two decisions to which I
am going to take your honours are
HG v The Queen
– which is in
the joint book, volume 3, tab 9 –and then, of course,
(2024), which is in the joint book, volume 4,
The provision section 293 must be construed as a
cohesive scheme – as a provision as a whole – and not, in
our submission,
as the appellant seeks to construe subsection (6), as a
standalone provision. In our submission, the appellant’s contended
construction of (6) does not achieve construction of the provision taken as
a whole, and consistently with this text and its statutory
number of propositions emerge from the judgments of this Court in
. Turning first to
, at paragraph [35] of the
judgment, your Honours, section 293(3) is a prohibition from which
there are exceptions. The prohibition
is drafted broadly and, as we know, the
purpose for which it was enacted in 1981 – that is, in 409B at that
I am quoting:
to “ease, so far as is possible, the humiliation experienced by sexual
assault victims, to remove the stigma attached to the
rape victim, to encourage
victims to report the offences, and to bring the offenders to justice as justice
My learned friend referred to the fact that the second reading speech in
1981 is focused on adult complainants of sexual assault,
but the question of the
application of 293, or its predecessor, to child sexual assault complainants was
raised and considered in
and confirmed that it applies in the same
way, and for the same reasons, to child sexual abuse complainants –
as it does with
respect to adult complainants – or to a past history
of non‑consensual, sexual activity in the case of adult
complainants.
In the judgment in
– first of all,
the judgment of his Honour Justice Hayne at paragraph 147, which
is at page 73 of the joint book of authorities,
your Honours:
There is no warrant for reading the provision as confined to consensual
acts. Nothing in the language used suggests any intention
other than to extend
the reach of the provisions as broadly as possible.
His Honour goes on to say:
so, it by no means follows that a distinction between consensual and
non‑consensual sexual acts is warranted. Distress, humiliation
embarrassment are very likely present for any person required to describe, in a
public forum, sexual activity in which they have
engaged. There is no basis for
suggesting that the distress, humiliation or embarrassment
felt . . . would be less if the activity
occurred as a result of
the unlawful conduct of another or others.
is a case involving a child sexual assault
complainant. His Honour the Chief Justice in the same case at
paragraphs 29 to 31, deals
with this point, picking up and approving what
President Mason had said in the New South Wales Court of Criminal
Appeal below:
“To limit s 409B –
this is at paragraph 30 of the judgment, your Honours:
“To limit s 409B to consensual sexual activity would lead to a
most invidious distinction in the case of child sexual assault
Is what is said there. Your Honours, we pick up those words and we
say that the invidious – the appellant’s contended
construction
of this provision would introduce the invidious distinction identified there by
the Chief Justice and would be contrary
to the purpose of
section 293.
are decisions involving
allegations of child sexual assault, and they are both decisions in which the
accused wished to rely –
or to introduce evidence of prior sexual
, your Honours, the prior sexual abuse was not
disputed. It had occurred in Queensland at a time prior to the alleged offences
there was – as
your Honours are well aware – a disputed opinion about the
possibility of such having occurred.
In each case, and particularly in
, it is expressed that what the appellant wanted to do was rely on that
by way of an alternative explanation, an innocent explanation,
of that young
child complainant’s ability to give a compelling description of the sexual
it was to support a suggestion of fabrication or
conflation. In
that can be seen at paragraph 13 of the judgment
of the Chief Justice, who observes there that the complainant, who was
eight or nine when she complained to her mother, about ten
when she spoke to the police, and twelve when she was giving
. . was also giving a detailed
description . . . A trial judge or jury might well regard
that description as lending weight to her
allegations. The defence wished to be
able to explain –
in a manner consistent with the innocence of –
the accused.
The theory was, as expressly set out there, that she had been a victim of prior
child sexual abuse, but that the abuser
was her by this time deceased natural
Putting aside the issues in that case about the admissibility of
the opinion to that effect, because that was where the evidence
, the Court clearly accepted the relevance or the forensic
purpose of using this evidence in this way, but nevertheless concluded
was inadmissible by reason of 409B, and that is at 35. I think the
citations are in our oral outline, but it is in the Chief
judgment at 35, Justice McHugh at 95, Justice Gummow
at 124 and Justice Hayne at 149.
you accept that the material relating to AT would have been important to
the defence case if it could have been adduced?
MS ROBERTS:
Your Honour, I have a short answer and a longer answer to
your Honour’s question. We accept, of all the material that is
relied upon, that that is the only material that can clearly be said to be
evidence of some relevant prior event. We do not accept
the characterisation
placed on it in oral submissions this morning that it was prior sexual abuse
necessarily, and the reason we
say that is the age of AT at the time that
what occurred, occurred. But it may be described as sexual activity; we would
The reason we draw the distinction between experience and
activity is because of the question of timing and observations of this
survivor of child sexual assault. We do not accept that characterisation
respect to this evidence.
My longer answer is, we accept that it is
material which engages with the question that is before this Court in a
meaningful way,
and we do not necessarily accept that with respect to the other
documents listed in 24, for different reasons with respect to them,
we came to the point of considering – that is, if our construction of
subsection (6) was rejected and we came to the
point of considering the
admissibility of this evidence, we have to highlight that it was not pressed
before the trial judge under
subsection (6).
The significance of
that is not to get into a dispute about what was said below and whether it is
different from now for the sake
of it. It is because – and I was
going to come to this for how the provision operates – we do not
actually know –
your Honours do not know what it is that the
accused, the appellant, proposes to cross‑examine the complainant about
and exactly
how that is to be done. Respectfully, we do not accept that it
would be as simple as: did these acts take place; were you the subject
sexual abuse at a particular time where certain acts took place?
in order to establish – and again this is assuming that
your Honours are against us on our primary contention, but
in order to
engage the unfair prejudice aspect of subsection (6), one would need to
understand the similarities and differences between
what was said to have
occurred with AT and what is being alleged, in order to make good the
proposition that the allegations with
respect to AT or the disclosure with
respect to AT necessarily does what is being advanced, which is that it both
corrects an implication
– we do not accept there is one –
and does so in a way that provides a basis for fabrication.
reason that it is necessary to understand what was proposed to be put, and how,
is because my learned friend puts to one
side the tailpiece to
subsection (4) and says, well, the distress and humiliation would not be
that much, because all you need to
do is put to the complainant: you were
previously sexually abused and these sexual acts took place.
accept that, with respect, because the context of what she says, the timing of
what she says, the person with whom she
engaged in the activity – all
of those matters, once it is introduced for the purpose of saying this is a
basis for the complainant
to have fabricated her account against the accused,
they would necessarily need to be explored. I would anticipate that the
for a start, would wish to explore them in some detail, in order to
make good the forensic purpose for which he seeks to have the
evidence admitted.
That is a very long answer to Your Honour Justice Gleeson’s
Perhaps I could check
that – what I was really asking was whether or not the simple
proposition that is put at the end of
is analogous to
this case, in that the theory that the complainant had in truth been a victim of
sexual abuse but that the abuser
was someone else would have been important to
the defence case. So, the theory that she had in truth been a victim of sexual
at the hands of AT would have been important to the defence case.
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, with the caveat that we do not
necessarily accept the characterisation of sexual abuse
From her perspective.
‑ ‑ ‑ it is prior
sexual activity.
Sure, from her perspective
it would be abusive, would it not? It would have been experienced as
MS ROBERTS:
Based on the transcript alone, it
is potentially ‑ ‑ ‑
She made a complaint about it as sexual abuse.
She did, your Honour. She did, in the context
that when she was 14 and he was 17 he had contacted her via social
media and, in
effect, invited her to talk about it or invited her to rekindle
their contact. I accept that that could be one characterisation,
accept, yes, at the very least – perhaps without resolving that
characterisation or that descriptor, we accept that
it is prior sexual activity
which could have relevance to a defence case of fabrication. Yes. I am sorry,
your Honour Justice Beech‑Jones.
BEECH‑JONES
My first question is: do you accept the first sentence
of 37 of Justice Fagan’s judgment about – that the
jurors would
be likely to have that understanding?
This is on page 134, at the bottom.
BEECH‑JONES J:
then do you also accept the risk that at least was argued for that may arise in
paragraph 38, first sentence? I will put them
all, so you know where I am
going. Then the next question is: do you accept that the material –
at least in 25, possibly
24 – if available would at least address
that risk of reasoning?
Then, the last question I was going to come to
was: do you accept, concede, propound or reject the suggestion of a direction
capable of addressing the risk without addressing whether there was or was
not sexual experience? I put them all four, because sometimes
reluctant to know where they are all going.
MS ROBERTS:
Thank you, your Honour. We do not argue against the first sentence of
paragraph 37 of Justice Fagan’s judgment, but we do
that his Honour includes:
unless in circumstances of abuse.
Which is a rider to that. So, his Honour is saying that is:
the common experience amongst jurors that –
a girl of nine would not necessarily:
have gained sexual experience –
other than:
in circumstances of abuse.
BEECH-JONES J:
MS ROBERTS:
does not go very far to accepting that the misconception – in any
meaningful way – exists, because if the
experience of jurors is,
well, she may not have engaged in mutual sexual activity, but she might have
been previously sexually abused,
then that answers the proffered misconception
itself. So, that is a qualified assumption by his Honour. We do not disagree
it, but we just emphasise that it is qualified in an important way in the
circumstances of this case.
GORDON A‑CJ:
But does it
matter whether it is abuse or sexual activity or sexual
experience?
MS ROBERTS:
No. Well, not
GORDON A‑CJ:
terms of the qualification that is in the first sentence
MS ROBERTS:
It does not matter, but what
matters is – what his Honour is not saying is that it would be a
common experience of jurors
that a child of nine would have no sexual experience
at all. His Honour is simply saying: no sexual experience except in
circumstances
The point that I understand is being put
is – the important point from the appellant’s point of view is:
do they think
she has no knowledge of sexual matters? Is really what it is
fabricate an account or no information from which to fabricate an account, and
the risk of that jury reasoning.
BEECH-JONES J:
element of that reasoning, if you have no basis – we will assume she
has no prior sexual experience, no basis to fabricate,
therefore the only way
she could have given this account is if she had been sexually abused by the
appellant. That is the next step
in the reasoning, is it not? That is the
MS ROBERTS:
It is only the risk if one accepts that
they are going to assume no knowledge, your Honour,
BEECH-JONES J:
MS ROBERTS:
understand that, as I am
GORDON A-CJ:
that is now 38.
MS ROBERTS:
your Honour.
GORDON A-CJ:
And you accept
MS ROBERTS:
That the risk might arise of that
reasoning, your Honour? I am sorry, I
GORDON A-CJ:
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, but that is not sufficient to engage
the provision.
BEECH-JONES J:
I am not suggesting it is, but
then my next question is: do you accept that the next step is that the evidence
was not capable of
at least – maybe not disproving, but addressing or
responding to that?
MS ROBERTS:
Evidence in
paragraph 25 of the CCA judgment?
BEECH-JONES J:
MS ROBERTS:
BEECH-JONES J:
Then, my next question is: do you accept that that reasoning can be avoided
or minimised? The risk of that being adopted can be
avoided by the trial judge
giving a direction in terms that does not cut across the section, to effectively
say you should not reason
that the complainant had no means of knowledge of the
events she describes in her evidence about the appellant, other than having
sexually abused by him.
MS ROBERTS:
Potentially,
your Honour, but I have considerable hesitation about it. I think this is
probably one, or the one, area where my
learned friend and I agree, because of
the difficulty in how – two reasons. One, because of the difficulty
in how that direction
would be fashioned, so as to not refer to the idea of
prior sexual experience, because that would undermine, with respect, the purpose
of the provision on our construction. Secondly, there would need to be some
agreement between the parties, because it
BEECH‑JONES J:
But you had that here, because you had a Crown undertaking that they would
not invite that form of reasoning, did you not?
MS ROBERTS:
your Honour. It is. If I could take your Honours to the
summing‑up in the core appeal book, pages 23 to 24. The direction
that has been given there is usually referred to in shorthand as a no motive to
lie – the motive to lie direction – but
it actually in
some cases, and particularly in this case, goes quite a lot further.
is quite a comprehensive warning to the jury about not looking for a reason for
the complainant to have lied, fabricated or got
her account wrong, or why she
might be unreliable, and towards the middle of page 24 his Honour
you cannot be satisfied that the complainant is telling the truth merely
because there may be no apparent reason for her to have made
allegations. There may be a reason for –
the complainant:
to be untruthful that nobody knows about, or it might be that for reasons no
one can discern, she genuinely believes what she is saying
but it simply is not
That would be a conflation‑type idea. Then whether or not
motivated to be dishonest or to lie, or whether their evidence is inaccurate
even if genuinely believed by them, are matters for you
determine –
Bearing in mind that the accused does not have to provide a reason. We
would submit that that direction, combined with the Crown
not making a
submission that the jury should reason in a particular way and combined with the
trial judge directing the jury in the
conventional way, and firmly to focus on
whether the allegations in respect of each of the counts on the indictment are
that it does – it guards against improper reasoning in any
event. Reasoning that
BEECH‑JONES J:
Well, the difficulty is though it is not motive, it would be a direction you
should not assume she does not have the means of knowledge
to have made up the
allegation, and you say, well, that might implicitly disclose prior sexual
experience.
MS ROBERTS:
Well, that is what it directs the
jury’s mind towards, your Honour, because it means
motive – means and knowledge.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Motive is different. Motive and reason may look to personal animus towards
the appellant, but as I understand it, this is all getting
towards: how could
someone who is nine years old be in a position to – the
reasoning is ultimately, well, she cannot have
fabricated it because where would
a nine‑year‑old know about these things?
MS ROBERTS:
BEECH‑JONES J:
Anyway, I understand your misgivings
It is no difficulty, your Honour. The point I was
seeking to make about
is that the question of admissibility and the
question of whether the exception should be engaged is not answered by the
argument or how persuasive the forensic purpose of the appellant is.
Relevant evidence – it was accepted in
implicitly, that
this would have been relevant, but it was not admissible.
So, this is the point – I mean, the argument
you are putting is you should not have the tail wagging the dog.
Quite, your Honour, with respect.
And that is, in a sense, understandable, but because the
provision sets out, as you describe, a cohesive scheme giving rise to
carve‑out in 293(6) ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes, your Honour.
But it does identify, in effect, the circumstances in
which the issue arises. In
, there was common ground that there was a
body of evidence available which – consistent with the last line in
paragraph 13.
Here, we have an issue about the – we have
identification of the body, an issue about characterisation, although that may
be parked for the moment, I
think ‑ ‑ ‑
Yes, your Honour.
So, we are really back to what, in those circumstances,
does 293(6) extend to, in terms of the language of the provision about
“disclosed or implied” and how it operates?
Yes, yes. Thank you, your Honour. With respect,
I do not mean to cavil with your Honour, but in
actually, the
evidence was disputed, because it was an opinion – disputed
opinion – but there was evidence that could
identified ‑ ‑ ‑
‑ ‑ ‑ that would
have gone straight to the issue. Yes. So, the provision –
subsection (6) is not the
starting point for answering this question, in
our respectful submission. The prohibition – subsection (3)
prohibits the admissibility
of certain evidence. That includes, relevantly,
Evidence that discloses or implies—
(a) that the complainant has or may have had . . . a lack of
sexual experience –
I am taking that part of the section out, because that is what we are
talking about. It also prohibits:
Evidence that discloses or implies—
(a) that the complainant has . . . had sexual experience –
That is, in our submission, an answer to Mr Odgers’
proposition that the Crown should lead agreed facts in these cases in order
correct the misconception. That evidence is not admissible under
subsection (3).
is an example of a case
where there was some evidence in evidence, and in the judgment in
– I will just take a small amount of time,
if I may, just addressing this.
What does not emerge from this judgment
with clarity is why the evidence about the 12‑year‑old boy was led
or admitted
in the case. It appears that it is because there was hymen injury
evidence in that case. I cannot identify a passage of the judgment
actually expressly says that, however – I apologise,
your Honours, but it appears that it may have been that, or it could
been the complainant says it in part of her interview, and it could have been
not properly considered. That is not
GORDON A-CJ:
think in paragraph 6 it is says it is part of the interview, is it
MS ROBERTS:
Part of the what, sorry,
your Honour?
GORDON A-CJ:
Part of the
MS ROBERTS:
Well, yes, that is where it appears to
be. But unfortunately that does not make it admissible, necessarily, of
BEECH-JONES J:
Do you mean it is not clear how it got
in, but somehow it did?
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour, it
did. But that does not mean that, when construing this provision, it is correct
to say that the Crown could
lead evidence of the complainant’s prior
sexual experience, just as we could not lead under – just as the
Crown, I should
say, could not lead, under 293(3), evidence that the
complainant had no prior sexual experience, because it would be inadmissible.
We also could not lead evidence of prior sexual experience unless it came within
one of the exceptions under subsection (4), and
there is no identified
exception here with respect to that evidence.
argued – with respect to the interview about AT, that was
pressed and it was pressed as admissible under one of the
subsection (4)
exceptions. It was excluded, and the argument then advanced in the Court of
Criminal Appeal was that it should have
been permitted via subsection (6)
So, its admissibility – so, the Crown is prohibited
from doing that. That is no answer to the – there is no freestanding
ability for the Crown to, as it were, seek to correct what is considered to be a
risk of misconception by adducing evidence or agreeing
a fact, even if that fact
could be comfortably agreed between the parties.
Subsection (3) is
a broadly‑construed prohibition on the admissibility of evidence, then
subsection (4) provides exceptions
to that prohibition. The relevant
exception in this case, is under – and my learned friend has already
taken your Honours
to it – it is subsection (4)(f). The
exception is:
(f) if the evidence has been given by the complainant in
cross‑examination . . . being evidence given in answer to a
that may, pursuant to subsection (6), be asked,
and if the probative value of the evidence outweighs any distress,
humiliation or embarrassment that the complainant might suffer
as a result of
its admission.
The reason that is important – so, one does go to (6)
first, and then to have that evidence admitted as an exception to the
prohibition in (3), that is via subsection (f), assuming one can
satisfy the tailpiece, but the procedure for complying with this
prohibition and
exceptions is set out in the provision itself.
So, subsection (5),
unusually for an admissibility provision – and that is an observation
made by his Honour Justice Barr in
, which is a decision we
put in our book at tab 15, volume 4 of the joint book of authorities,
his Honour – I do not understand
any aspect of this procedure to
be in dispute – it is at paragraphs 44 to 48 of the
But it is necessary for the – unusually, the
accused is required to advise the court in advance of the proposed
cross‑examination
by way of at least, a list of topics – not
questions – provide that to the trial judge in order that the
admissibility
of the evidence can be ruled upon. The reason for that is to
satisfy – so that the court can be satisfied or otherwise of
matters which it needs to be satisfied before admitting the evidence contrary to
the prohibition.
BEECH-JONES J:
Can I just ask a basic question
cross‑examination ‑ ‑
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
BEECH-JONES J:
And to ask the question in
cross‑examination, you do not undertake the process of comparison of
probative value v distress;
if the Crown opens the gate, you can ask the
questions. Is that right?
MS ROBERTS:
I appreciate why
your Honour is putting it that way, because of the structure of the
section, but we would say no. We would say
that both the matters in (6), (4)(f)
and the tailpiece have to be considered at once, because (f) just
describes – if the question
is asked and the witness adopts the
proposition, then the evidence has been adduced.
BEECH-JONES J:
But before the question is asked, you do not ask as well whether it has
probative value. So, in other words, (6) is read with (4)
sense, is that right?
MS ROBERTS:
That is my –
And with (8)?
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour. Yes. So, the trial judge has to give reasons
for – in practice, the way that is described by
Campbell – I think I said Justice Barr
before – I intended to say – I am sorry, I withdraw that,
it was Justice
Campbell. So, what his Honour observes at 47 is
The proposed evidence would need to be known in some detail before
. . . the judge was in a position to tell whether it fell within
or other of –
the exceptions in (4):
and whether the probative of the evidence value outweighed any distress,
humiliation or embarrassment that the complainant might suffer
as a result of
its admission.
GORDON A‑CJ:
And that is because, as I
understand your submission, one has this
prohibition ‑ ‑ ‑
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
GORDON A‑CJ:
‑ ‑ ‑ and one starts with the prohibition, and
one realises that in order to go behind what is the statutory prohibition,
must only do it in (a), rare circumstances, and (b), on a proper
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour, that is our
submission. It is a very regulated basis, and the relevance of that is
that – to our construction
point – is that that is why it
cannot be based on what one might think is an assumption that a juror might
draw. The court
has to be satisfied:
that it has been disclosed or implied in the case for the prosecution against
the accused –
All of those words need to mean something, in
our respectful submission. So, there are two aspects to that. The first one is
disclosure or implication are also the words used in subsection (3).
Evidence that discloses or implies—
(a) that the complainant has or may have had sexual experience . . .
is inadmissible.
And this is our point about the complainant’s
age, which Mr Odgers has answered by reference to subsection (4). But
– this is the point about the complainant’s
age – that is an element of the offence. It must be admissible
It would be not a sensible reading to say that the
complainant’s age is a matter of itself which discloses or implies a lack
of sexual experience.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Is that another way
of saying: look, textually, if the words “disclosed or implied in the
case for the prosecution” do
not add something to what is in (3),
then the exception just follows the rule. Is that what this is really coming
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour, or that the
exception ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
At least in the case of children.
MS ROBERTS:
‑ ‑ ‑ cannot operate – I am
BEECH‑JONES J:
At least in the case of
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour, yes. What those
words mean, that is, what “disclosed or implied” mean – I
withdraw that.
We do say that the case for the prosecution in (6) is the
evidence in the Crown case and the way that the case is presented by the
Prosecutor. It is both of those things and all of those things, but what we say
it cannot be is the evidence that is not called,
because that, again, would
render the provision entirely inoperable,
because ‑ ‑ ‑
Mr Odgers did not seem to really be talking about the evidence that was not
called today as an element. He just seemed to be talking
the positive case, being a case which lacks evidence in respect to sexual
experience.
MS ROBERTS:
Thank you, your Honour. So, we say
age – it is therefore advanced on the basis that age alone, and my
learned friend also
referred, at points, to the compelling nature of the
description, which I do not think can be part of the evidence from which a lack
of sexual experience can be assumed, because that reasoning is –
respectfully, I am not sure that I completely understand that
aspect of the
submission, but the age, of itself, carries some amount of
uncertainty.
So, it has been nominated in this case as the age of nine.
The complainant was actually nine years, nine months when she did the
first record of interview, and, of course, the procedure in New South Wales,
which was not the case at the time of
, is that that interview is
recorded and tendered as evidence‑in‑chief in the trial. If the
complainant is nine years
old, it is advanced that that carries the
necessary implication. I ask, rhetorically, at what age does that cease? The
because ‑ ‑ ‑
GORDON A‑CJ:
This was put to Mr Odgers. What point, what is the range that is to apply
to age in considering this submission that age alone
sufficient?
MS ROBERTS:
In our submission, the need to
really ask that question or make that inquiry demonstrates the difficulty that
faces a trial judge,
who has to be satisfied of something.
You put it higher than that, do you not? You say that that is
indicative – so, there are two consequences that you say,
understand your argument, that go against the construction offered by
Mr Odgers. One is the uncertainty of the age
MS ROBERTS:
GORDON A‑CJ:
‑ ‑ ‑ which is the point that you are just
making now, I understand it. The second is, as I understand it, the
consequences argument that Mr Odgers addressed that you put, and that is it
would mean in any case in which a child was involved
where there was a body of
prior sexual experience, one would have to permit it. So, the way I understand
your argument, it carves
a hole in the protection provided by 293
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour. In a moment,
can I return to your Honour’s first proposition with respect to the
text, because I would
like to add a couple of things to that. As to the
consequences argument, there is a further matter with respect to those
consequences
that needs to be considered, which is that the age – as
I understood it – that is seized upon is the age at which the
makes her complaint or, in modern times, gives her evidence‑in‑chief
when it is recorded by the authorities in
the form of a disclosure
allegation.
So, the appellant’s construction would –
and assuming that there is some evidence of prior sexual abuse with respect
the individual child being considered, that would mean that if the child
complains while she is still a child, contemporaneously,
cross‑examined about her prior history of child sexual abuse as a young
child. Whereas if the complainant delays
her complaint to authorities, at least
until she is an adult, she cannot be, because the inference – the
assumption –
would not arise on the appellant’s argument,
because people would not necessarily assume the same thing about an
Where that age changes, we do not venture a suggestion, because
we do not, respectfully, accept this disclosure or implication.
construction must be, in our respectful submission, in direct conflict with the
purposes of this provision, which is to
encourage victims to come forward, to
encourage reporting and to protect complainants.
The fact that the
protection of complainants has had or is said to have unfair consequences for
accused on some occasions and in
some types of cases is something that has been
the subject of judicial comment, submissions, and law reform submissions, and
provision has been re‑enacted in the same form since that has
It was re‑enacted from 409B to 293 – I
am sorry, via 105, I apologise – but in essentially the same terms,
Honours, after this Court held in
that it applied to
children and it applied to child sexual abuse victims.
Children are unlikely to be encouraged to report by the
legislative scheme. I mean, they might be encouraged to give evidence
course, when they understand the protections – if they are capable of
understanding it – but we cannot say that
the purpose here is to
encourage reporting by children.
MS ROBERTS:
necessarily by the children themselves, your Honour, but the authorities
involved in it can be taken to understand and to know
how this operates. I
understand what your Honour is putting to me as a matter of practical
reality, but as a matter of purpose,
it introduces the invidious distinction
identified by Chief Justice Gleeson, which is that a young child will
be cross‑examined
I am not sure that I want to take
this too far, but in the case of the adult, there will always – if
there is an assumption,
as an adult, that one has had sexual experience and
therefore one is capable of fabricating an account of sexual experience, then
the accused will always have the benefit of making that submission to the jury,
but they will not have that protection in the case
of a child complainant.
Perhaps the answer to that is – I mean, surely this provision is
trying to strike a balance, it is
not solely about the protection of
complainants. Or am I wrong?
MS ROBERTS:
strike a balance, your Honour, yes, but the balance that is struck has been
confirmed as being focused on prohibition and
protection of complainants.
His Honour Justice Leeming in
– I will not
take your Honours to it, necessarily, now – but at
paragraphs 166 through to 178 discusses this topic of
re‑enactment of the provision in the same form, despite judicial criticism
and submissions for reform, and the significance
Your Honour, there may well be that distinction,
although – certainly, in this case, I mean, the case is clear that
the allegations
are fabricated, but the – to return to the statutory
language, in our submission, subsection (6) is a provision designed to
provide an exception where:
it has been disclosed or implied in the case for the
prosecution –
something which, if the prosecution had sought
to call evidence of it under subsection (3), it would have been not
permitted to do
so, and it may have been permitted to do so by reason of an
exception. I hesitate to return to it, but
Munn and Miller
is actually
an example, because in that case what the case was about was an application to
adduce evidence suggesting that there
may have been a different assailant to the
mother’s boyfriend, or the complainant’s stepfather. In that
BEECH‑JONES J:
Sorry, can I just – so I am just clear. What you are saying is
there may be an assumption in what Mr Odgers said, that (6)
assuming there is just a permission in the Crown to lead prior sexual experience
whenever it likes, but in fact it is addressing
a circumstance where the Crown
can do so under an exception to (4), and then addressing the consequences
of what happens when that
occurs. Is that what we
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, or it makes a submission which would arguably be not a proper
BEECH‑JONES J:
Or does something that –
so, either violates the section or comes in under (4).
Yes, your Honour, or unexpectedly or inadvertently violates
the section, of course, by reason
BEECH‑JONES J:
Yes, or the spirit or the essence of it.
MS ROBERTS:
either by submission or by some evidence that a witness gives that could be
unexpected or, importantly – and, I mean,
the second reading speech,
to which Mr Odgers has already taken the Court, gives this example, and it
is to do with the injury to
the hymen, which was admissible as an exception
under (4) but, nevertheless, was considered to have therefore disclosed in
for the prosecution that the complainant had no prior sexual
experience.
So, it was not inadmissible evidence by reason of one of the
exceptions, and then, as the Attorney‑General said in the speech,
that would engage subsection (6) in that example. In
, what happened was that the Crown Prosecutor actually said, in his
address, invited that type of reasoning, contrary to the ruling
that had earlier
been made excluding the evidence. Sorry, I will double‑check that I am
correct about that, your Honour.
GORDON A‑CJ:
think, Ms Roberts,
MS ROBERTS:
paragraph 36 of
Munn and Miller
, the Crown Prosecutor said he would
not, and then he did. I do not mean to reduce the complexity, but that was the
basis on which
the miscarriage was made out, ultimately, in that case, at
paragraph 36 of
Munn and Miller
. Of course, that did not happen in
this case and that is accepted, that the Crown Prosecutor did not invite the
jury to reason on
the basis of the complainant having no experience available to
her by which to fabricate the case. He did not make any submissions
kind at all. So, it is ‑ ‑ ‑
So, are we up to outline paragraph 8? That is, that:
The relevant disclosure or implication must derive from evidence adduced (or
submissions made) in the case for the prosecution, not
rom an assumption a juror
might hold based upon a complainant’s age.
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour. First of all, that is found in the CCA judgment in this
case at paragraph 39, which is at page 135 of the core
appeal book.
His Honour Justice Fagan reproduces the extract from
– a judgment of
his Honour Justice Heydon – about what disclosure
means. We rely on that. We embrace that, which is
that it must mean:
intentional expressed revelation . . . “implied”
in the expression “disclosed or implied” means intentional
suggestion. It cannot be said that the silence of the Crown about the
complainant’s sexual experience . . . “implied”
a lack of sexual experience or a failure to take part in sexual activity.
So, that case was in a different context because it was about injury.
That is why his Honour Justice Fagan observes, at 40,
Those conclusions were not necessary to the Court’s decision.
Also, your Honours, in
in a slightly different context,
but at paragraph [57] – as your Honour will recall in
, one of the complaints was what was adopted in that trial as
describing the Queensland assaults as physical assaults in order to
it was described as the expedient adopted in order to permit the complainant to
be asked questions about them without contravening
section 293.
the judgment of the majority of this Court, at [57], addresses the questions
offender as physical
was whether it was misleading, and the observation there is:
The description of these assaults as “physical” neither implied
that they were sexual assaults nor implied that they were
Even in the context of the instant case being about sexual assault, the
Court was not satisfied that that invited any inference that
a description of
the earlier assaults as physical meant that they were not therefore sexual, and:
Even if there were such a possibility, albeit falling short of an
implication –
and then there is a reference to a direction as
a means of avoiding any proper speculation. What we submit is that
or implied” in the case for the prosecution must mean
more than an assumption that a juror might hold or a risk that a juror
hold a particular assumption, and the reason for that is
First, that subsection (6) must be read
with (3) and must be applied as an exception to (3), and a limited
one. That means that
the use of disclosure implied in (3) and in (6)
must be read similarly. The idea is that something is done in the accused trial
that would, if introduced by evidence, contravene – prima facie, at
least – subsection (3), or perhaps it has been introduced
exception, but it – prima facie – is
inadmissible.
And that it is not possible – given that the
highly‑regulated way in which this prohibition and the exceptions operate
within the provision itself, for the purpose of the protection of complainants
so far as is possible, in order for the trial judge
to be satisfied of the
matters that he or she would need to be satisfied of to engage the exception, it
must be more than what a
juror might assume in a particular
Perhaps one considers the age of nine is a straightforward
example. I do not necessarily, with respect, accept that, but if one
as well. I am not trying to address hypotheticals,
but just simply to
illustrate that the language of the provision must be able to operate by
reference to something that is evidence
– or submissions –
in the case for the prosecution, as it is presented at the trial of the accused
and not based on reasoning
and assumptions.
The purpose of (6) is not a
freestanding purpose to ameliorate unfairness or correct misconceptions that
might arise, other than
by the way that the Crown case is being presented and
has been presented at the trial. That is the reason, consistently with that
reasoning, why his Honour Justice Fagan speaks of there being no
positive invitation and no positive implication arising based on
the age of the
complainant. The evidence is silent.
GORDON A-CJ:
things that arises in relation to this, of course, is this inquiry –
at least in part – is done at a pre‑trial
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour.
GORDON A-CJ:
And so, there is a prediction, in one sense.
MS ROBERTS:
There is. There is a prediction from all perspectives, your Honour.
That is why it is – in a practical sense, there is some
tension when
speaking about the Crown submissions in the closing address, but it is to be
understood that the Crown presents a particular
case that foreshadows a
presentation of a particular case and then does so.
GORDON A-CJ:
So, in the pre‑trial disclosure, they identify the witnesses that were
going to be called and then provide the relevant hand‑up
brief, or the
brief that is going to contain the case – an identification of the
case. Is that what we are talking about in
terms of the
prediction?
MS ROBERTS:
Yes. Well, the practice would be a
Crown case statement, which contains a summary of the evidence and the evidence
to be adduced
and the way in which it is to be relied on, where that is not
apparent. In this context, one would expect that the type of exchange
occurred before her Honour Judge Traill would occur, so that the Crown
could indicate what is proposed, and it is not uncommon
– more in the
case of adult complainants, but it is not uncommon to have served material, even
in the statement of the complainant
herself, from the Crown saying: well, we
will not be proposing to adduce this, or this or this.
GORDON A-CJ:
Particular paragraphs of the evidence is the point I am getting
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour, quite.
BEECH-JONES J:
And then if the trial unfolds in a different
way, then consequences follow.
MS ROBERTS:
your Honour.
BEECH-JONES J:
It could be, well, you opened
it up, you can cross‑examine it. Or mistrial or, whatever the
consequences, the way it unfolds.
MS ROBERTS:
your Honour.
GORDON A-CJ:
Including recall of the
complainant if necessary.
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, that is a
possibility, your Honour. Yes. Your Honours, the appellant relies on
the 2020 judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal.
I just wanted to make some
observations and make some submissions about that. It is in the
appellant’s book of further materials,
commencing at page 5, but the
particular passages relied upon are – I think, as I understand
it – principally 14 and
47, and also
So, what I seek to point out about that is that this
judgment is in the context of an alleged miscarriage of justice arising from
failure of prosecution disclosure, and that the Crown concession is about
failure of disclosure and nothing further, in this case.
The question, as
your Honours would well appreciate, when one is considering whether a
failure of disclosure has given rise to a
miscarriage of justice is firmly
focused on potential relevance of material. It is not settled relevance. It is
certainly not admissibility.
The prosecutor is of course obliged to disclose
all material that could be directly or indirectly relevant. So, the
considerations
are quite – it is a preliminary stage, if I can put it
that way, of relevance.
There is some criticism made – or
certainly implied – about the Crown changing its position. That is
not so. So, the
Crown did not rely on section 293 in the 2020 case because
the Crown, having identified in submissions – which are not before
your Honours – that there is potential for the provision to
apply to some of the material, nevertheless said we do not rely
on that for the
purpose of our concession that we should have disclosed it.
It is not we
do not invoke it when it comes to the question of admissibility. What the Crown
said was we appreciate that the ultimate
question of admissibility is no answer
to a failure to disclose potentially relevant documents.
GORDON A-CJ:
Do you say that when you are considering non‑disclosure arguments, one
is not looking to see whether evidence is admissible?
MS ROBERTS:
Quite, your Honour, yes.
GORDON A-CJ:
One is looking to see
whether there is material in it that is not just relevant – whatever
the broad language is, which presently
escapes me – which might give
rise to chains of inquiry and the like. That is the inquiry that is being made
at that point,
not one about admissibility.
MS ROBERTS:
your Honour, but this is just a response to something that is put in my
learned friends’ oral outline at the end, which
suggests that the Crown
changed its position. Paragraph 52 of this judgment makes clear
that 293 was left to one side because it
did not inform the question of
whether the material should have been disclosed, or it certainly did not answer
it. It may have informed
it, but it did not answer it. The question was: was
it potentially relevant? Again, at 58, the Court of Criminal Appeal
Again, leaving aside questions of admissibility –
is the only real point that we wanted to make about that. The concession was
limited to potential relevance. In fact, it
was limited – although
this is not before your Honours – to the documents that did not
have a sexual character, because
the ones about the complainant failing to take
opportunities to complain and the ones about the complainant making complaints
other things that were not sexual matters. For example, the cricket bat
complaint, which arises under ground 2.
Putting the point of the
Crown aside, the reliance on the judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal in
2020 has to be necessarily
limited to what question those observations were
directed, and they were directed to the question of potential relevance and
importance in order to consider, first, whether the concession as to
non‑disclosure causing a miscarriage was properly made
and, second, as to
what the outcome should have been in that case. Rather, a retrial or an entry
of a verdict acquittal.
GORDON A-CJ:
Have you now
dealt with all of your arguments on construction?
Yes, your Honour. In fact, paragraph 10 of
my oral outline was where I proposed to address the other aspects of it, but I
I may have done that in answer to some earlier questions from
her Honour Justice Gleeson about the AT interview, and his Honour
Beech‑Jones.
That is to say that what we point out
here is, even if this Court was to accept the appellant’s construction
argument, it is
necessary for him to make good the proposition that the evidence
was admissible, which has more steps to it than engaging the provision
first place. That, we say, has not
BEECH‑JONES
Does he have to go that far? I mean, we looked at this in
– would it be a question of law decided
wrong? I know we are in miscarriage, but if the section has not been properly
that may be enough.
MS ROBERTS:
respectful submission, no, because the error would be the exclusion of
admissible evidence. Otherwise, if it is properly
excluded on the wrong
construction, there is no error.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Then who decides the second step? We do.
MS ROBERTS:
our submission, the appellant needs to persuade your Honours that the
evidence – or some of it – ought to
have been admitted in
order to succeed, because the ground 1 of his appeal pleads that:
The New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal erred in holding that evidence
of sexual experience was inadmissible.
So, the proposition being that the
evidence was admissible. In my submission, the
– we have not reached the
stage, but what would need to be demonstrated is that not only that the first
words of (6) were engaged but also that there was evidence
refusal of leave to cross‑examine the complainant although –
and I say, again parenthetically, that leave
was not in fact refused at trial
because this was not the way the argument was put at trial.
where we make – I would not say we press for it, but we make
the – we refer to the possibility of remittal because
your Honours do not have before you what the proposed
cross‑examination would involve, or any arguments about in reality the
forensic – the probative value of that item if my friend is
not – well, certainly not in oral argument today, pressing
material, the probative value of the interview about AT. That is just the point
we wished to make about that.
GORDON A‑CJ:
MS ROBERTS:
I think I have already addressed 11,
your Honour. I would like to just say a couple of brief things about
ground 2, however, if
I may. We say that the closing address must be read
in full, and, your Honour, we have set out a portion of it – and
certainly not going to read it to your Honours, but we have set out a
portion of it in our written submissions, but it is a little
longer than that in
the book of materials.
The focus of it was on complaining
the relationship between
the complainant and the appellant, and there were
important aspects of that relationship. He was the – as the Crown
points out in the address – husband of her foster mother.
She had had multiple foster placements.
She had lived with this
particular foster mother, DB, for a number of years, and then she had gone to
different care where she had
lived in almost seven different places over a
period of almost a year, because DB was unable to sufficiently care for her and
brother due to other commitments. Then it was only when the appellant and
DB married, and he was able to contribute, that the children
were returned to
their care.
It was in the context of arguments and relationship
breakdowns that the complaint was made, but prior to that, the
complainant’s
perception of him, first of all, would have been that he was
a member of her family, that he had something to do with where she was
live and how she was able to stay, and that her living arrangements
were – she knew they were precarious – and
arrangements were precarious.
And, of course, he was the husband of her
foster mother, who she at that time called “mum” and had been the
person with
whom she had had the longest time living with her. So, all of that
is the focus of the submission, and we
BEECH-JONES J:
the evidence that was available included evidence that the complainant had
complained about sexual abuse by the foster
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, and we say that is not right, with
respect, we say there is not evidence. I understand that is what is
is very – It seems very thin and
inconclusive.
MS ROBERTS:
It is extremely, with respect,
extremely thin and inconclusive, so we say
BEECH-JONES J:
am just looking at what page 142 – correct me if I am
wrong – of the core of appeal book, in Justice Fagan’s
judgement, point (4). Paragraph 53(4).
MS ROBERTS:
Yes. So, we agree with what Justice Fagan says there, in that:
none of the FACS records would have materially weakened the
prosecutor’s argument –
BEECH-JONES J:
I am just – just his Honour’s
characterisation.
MS ROBERTS:
We do not accept the
appellant’s characterisation that the complainant had made several prior
complaints about sexual matters.
There are only three documents, and I ask that
I take your Honours to them now to make good that
proposition.
GORDON A-CJ:
So, this is the supplementary book
that was provided?
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour, which
is just a compilation of materials already in the appellant’s book of
further materials, confined
to the facts documents on which he relies before
this Court. The materials relied on are, the first one – I am sorry,
me your Honours. The first one is the second‑to‑final
document, document 11 in the supplementary book.
BEECH-JONES J:
When you said the first one, the one in paragraph 53(4)? Is that the
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, your Honour. Thank you,
your Honour. I apologise, I should have gone through them in chronological
order. What that document
is, is a – it is called a finalisation
submission, and it is finalising an investigation into – if
your Honours would
just excuse me for a moment, I have more than one
version of the book. I am sorry, your Honours.
GORDON A-CJ:
That is all right.
MS ROBERTS:
It will be easier if I take
it in chronological order. Appellant’s book of further materials page
475, which is document number
4 in the supplementary book, that is an
interview between the complainant and her then current case workers on
24 September 2009;
she is aged six. This was one of a number of
attachments to a confidential placement report, dated October 2009, which
led to the complainant and her brother being returned to the care of
DB and the appellant.
So, it is during a period of disruption and she is
asked some questions about where she might like to live. Your Honours will
on page 475, line 40 to 43, she complains about her carer DB using
“pull ups” when she does not think she should have
to, and then the
allegation that is relied on by the appellant is at page 477, and it is the
CB: What else happens at –
house when you visit?
M: Her husbands there ‑ ‑ ‑
GORDON A-CJ:
Sorry, can you just identify where you are reading
MS ROBERTS:
Oh, I am sorry, your Honour, I
GORDON A-CJ:
I see, it is the bottom of 476 is the
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, I am sorry your Honour:
M: Her husbands there and they have sex.
CB: What does sex mean?
M: They ‑ ‑ ‑
GORDON A-CJ:
I think we can read that.
MS ROBERTS:
GORDON A-CJ:
Where do you want us to read down
MS ROBERTS:
M: In the bathroom and in the bedroom.
GORDON A-CJ:
Thank you, that is all
MS ROBERTS:
then there is the McDonald’s allegation. We say that is not a complaint
on behalf of her foster mother.
It just does not bear that characterisation. It makes a reference to some
perception held by the
complainant, but it is not a complaint of sexual
misconduct. Then at appeal
GORDON A-CJ:
Ms Roberts, given the time, would it be useful if we adjourn and came back
to this at 2.15 pm?
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, I apologise,
your Honour. It is just the second set of books. Thank you,
your Honour.
GORDON A-CJ:
The Court will
At 12.43 PM LUNCHEON
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT
GORDON A-CJ:
Ms Roberts, we
were dealing with the material on the aide‑mémoire.
Thank you, your Honour. In the supplementary book at
item 6, or tab 6, that is the document that is referred to in
Justice Fagan’s
judgment at paragraph 53 as item (2). That
is an interview of the complainant with investigators from what is recorded
as the “Allegations Against Employees Unit”. It is a
specialist‑type interview.
The complainant was aged six and
contextually we say it is a follow‑up from the 24 September 2009
interview, noting that both
DB and the appellant were employees of DoCS,
relevantly. What is relied on there is what is said about the nappy,
particularly at
– I think, as I understand it – the
appellant’s book of further materials, page 441, line 15 and
line 36, about
touching the complainant on the private parts when she is
putting a nappy on her, and that this has happened lots of times.
we say about this is we note the doubt expressed by the primary
judge – that is, Judge Traill – about whether this
was an allegation of sexual conduct or not, given all the context of the
pull‑up nappy, and I will just give your Honours the
references to
that. I will not need to take your Honours to it. It is at
paragraph 65 of Judge Traill’s judgment, which is
appellant’s book of further materials, page 84. Also in
the 2020 Court of Criminal Appeal judgment, at paragraph 55,
there observed they were also unpersuaded that the complainant:
was purporting to make a complaint of sexualised touching.
place that in that context because of what it is said to be able to be put
against under ground 2. The final document relied
upon, which is
paragraph 53(4) of the CCA judgment – and it is document 11
in the supplementary book – this is a finalisation
submission.
Your Honours can see that heading on page 294, and it is a
finalisation of – it appears to be, I should say, a
finalisation of
the allegations against employees, and the date that that is finalised
GORDON A‑CJ:
is over the page, I think, on the last page. It is recorded as
22 July 2011.
MS ROBERTS:
your Honour. So, this is a document that contains what appear to
be – which are clearly – paraphrased descriptions
allegations. They are given a classification from what appears to be some sort
of drop‑down menu or list and then a finding.
There is no detail and
there is no source.
This the source for what is said to be that third
allegation on the first page, but we have not identified – and the
does not point to – any other source for that. So, it is
of an unknown source. Whether or not it is an accurate paraphrase
inaccurate paraphrase of something else that has been said in another interview,
we do not know. So, this is not an identifiable
reliable source of a complaint
by the complainant of sufficient note to make good the complaint that is made
under ground 2 about
the unfairness.
That is where we rely on what
his Honour Justice Fagan found, which is that none of the constraints
articulated by the prosecutor
explaining why the complainant had not made timely
complaint would have been contradicted by the material in these FACS records.
For those combined reasons – that is, the full context of the address
and the true nature of the material put against the
Crown Prosecutor, as it
were – that ground is not made good.
With respect to the
further documents in this book, I have not addressed further on the documents
because my learned friend has not
addressed further on them, but
globally – or compendiously – I just want to make two
points, which is that what section
6 permits, if engaged, and is
cross‑examination of the complainant – and it is not, with
respect, completely clear what
would be proposed to be put to the complainant in
respect of this material – much of it is descriptions of what other
say, or hearsay descriptions of what she said to have been observed to
The second of those documents is an example of that, and it is
really the first line of that. It is unclear, with respect, whether
proposed to be put into the complainant in respect of this
BEECH-JONES J:
say this is ground 2?
MS ROBERTS:
your Honour. While I am on the documents, but it is
BEECH-JONES J:
Right. I am sorry,
MS ROBERTS:
I am sorry, that is my fault, I
BEECH-JONES J:
You meant ground 1,
MS ROBERTS:
Yes, just whether what would be proposed to be
put would be: did you do that action or did it – for it to have some
it would appear on the appellant’s argument that it would need
to be taken, whether together or individually, as some sort
of indicator that
there had been relevantly some other prior sexual abuse, and quite how the
evidence makes good that proposition
and how it would be proposed to be done has
not been fully explained, in our respectful submission.
It is also just,
as a final observation, that if the documents are considered to have that
character – that is, if the conduct
that is said to have been
observed on the part of the complainant that is being described as
sexualised conduct is accepted, at documents 8 through 11 – the
date of the observed conduct postdates the commencement of the
period. So, it is behaviour that she is observed to have displayed after the
allegations on the Crown case. The forensic
benefit of that might
be – it may flow in more than one direction, but we do not accept
that the evidence makes good that proposition,
in any event.
finally to the question of relief. I may have misapprehended what
your Honour Justice Beech-Jones was putting to me earlier
point, and I note that in
at [55], it is described what this
Court did, which was to find that the section had been incorrectly engaged or
incorrectly considered
– or in this case, it would be incorrectly
construed – but to remit the matter to a retrial for consideration of
in fact, in the event, the material was
admissible.
BEECH‑JONES J:
there already was going to be a trial.
MS ROBERTS:
BEECH‑JONES J:
Whereas, I think my query
is, are you saying that before you can set the convictions aside and order a
retrial, there needs to
be an assessment made, or that it needs to be remitted
to the Court of Criminal Appeal to make the assessment to determine whether
conviction should be set aside. That is what I was querying.
By the way the ground is pleaded, we would say in order
to uphold ground 1 your Honours would need to determine that the
was admissible, but in making mention of the remittal, we just seem to
recognise that aspects of this have not been developed. That
is in part by
reason of the fact that the argument was not conducted on the same basis, at
least with respect to what is now been
described as sort of the key document
that the appellant relies on at the trial, and the argument at the trial
Aside from that, your Honours would know from our written
submissions that we accept – on relief, we accept that the delay
considerations are significant but it is our submission that that determination
is one – the determination of whether there
should be a retrial is
properly one for the Director of Public Prosecutions. So, we would say that if
the appeal is upheld, the
appropriate order be one for a retrial rather than
entry of verdicts of acquittal. Unless there is anything further, those are our
submissions, thank you.
GORDON A‑CJ:
Ms Roberts. Mr Odgers, reply.
you, your Honour. Just a few short points. Ms Roberts queried
whether it was appropriate to describe what happened
– to describe
what AT allegedly did to the complainant when she was six to eight years old as
sexual abuse. We say it was,
but the important point for the purposes of this
appeal is whether what she described happening could be regarded as relevant
experience. Sexual experience is the important question, and we would
say that can hardly be doubted.
Second point, we agree – I
think in response to your Honour Justice Beech‑Jones,
your Honour asked, well, given subsection
(6) is the route, would that
be enough? It was put to your Honour: no, you would also have to consider
whether the requirements
of subsection (4) were satisfied. We agree with
that. Indeed, subsection (8) would also apply. So, there would have to be
process of working out what was the evidence that was sought to be
elicited in cross‑examination.
If the answers were given as
expected, would that evidence be admissible under subsection (4)(f)? Would
it satisfy the balancing
test of probative value, et cetera? The judge
would have to give reasons identifying the evidence sought to be adduced in
cross‑examination
and giving a ruling on that before the
Now, your Honours were taken to parts of the
summing‑up where the trial judge directed the jury about how to approach
lies and motive to lie, but we would draw your Honours’
attention to other parts of the summing‑up. Can I take you to
appeal book, at page 61. More than one time, the judge invited the
jury – we are looking at point six on 61 of the
appeal book,
which is page 49, and the summing‑up at point six he
as I have indicated –
I am not sure I have that reference, but:
using in that exercise –
your common sense and your experience of the world, and your knowledge and
experience of people and human behaviour. You bring all
of that to bear in your
assessment of the evidence, and in working out what you accept from the evidence
and what you cannot –
We say that that would have encouraged
the jury to infer that a nine‑year‑old is most unlikely to have
sexual experience
such that she could fabricate the allegations that were made
against the appellant. Those directions were repeated at summing‑up
GORDON A-CJ:
So, we are going back now? Sorry,
have realised I am confused now as to where I am – I see, that is how
I it got wrong, because page 26 is where it was first
raised, I am sorry,
and his Honour was at 61 repeating it. So, at the bottom
So together, you represent a cross-section of the community’s wisdom
and its sense of justice, and you each bring with you into
the jury room, and
are expected to use, in your consideration of the evidence and what is proved by
it, your individual qualities
of reasoning, your own common sense, and your
accumulated experience and understanding of people and of human behaviour.
That was repeated, as I say. Next point, we had not anticipated from our
friends’ written submissions that reliance was being
placed on what
Justice Heydon said in
. That is a discrete
Justice Fagan noted the dicta and said he was not relying on it
for purposes of determining the appeal. My friend the Crown is now
it, even though it was not relied on in the written submissions. We say that
what Justice Heydon said should not be accepted,
basically for the same
reasons we say that it cannot be right that the Crown Prosecutor has to invite
the inference.
All of the reasons which lead us to submit that that is
an unduly narrow reading of 293(6)(a), we say – for the same reasons,
it would be an unduly narrow reading of 293(6)(a) to require that the Crown
Prosecutor had to intentionally imply that there was
a lack of sexual
experience. In our submission, that is an unduly narrow and inappropriate
reading of this exception to the prohibition.
Next point is, in respect
of the actual evidence of prior sexual experience, we accept that most of
it – it would be necessary
for either this Court or another court to
consider the nature of the questions that might be put in
cross‑examination, with
respect to that evidence, to see whether or not
the requirements of subsection (6) – unfair
prejudice – and the requirements
of section (4) –
probative value outweighs, et cetera – would be met.
reliance is on, really, the allegations made in respect of AT. We say that that
evidence plainly would satisfy the test
of being admissible to meet the unfair
prejudice of the inference the jury would otherwise draw. I have identified the
kind of cross‑examination
one would reasonably
expect, simply
confirming with the complainant that these events occurred and then that would
be the end of it.
We say that your Honours would be
satisfied – in respect of that evidence, at least – the
requirements of subsection
(6) and subsection (4) would have been
satisfied in the event that her Honour had ruled that the Crown had implied
the existence
– the lack of sexual – sorry, I need to get
it right – implied not that there was a lack of sexual experience but
implied that there may be a lack of sexual experience, to use the statutory
Lastly, in respect of ground 2, we accept that the
various matters that we have identified in the written submissions at 6.11 are
relatively innocuous, and certainly nothing like the kinds of allegations that
were made in respect of the appellant, but we nonetheless
maintain ground 2
for the reasons that are identified in the reply at – and this is my
last submission – paragraph 9,
which is that that evidence
showed that it was not hard for this complainant to complain about even
relatively minor quote unquote
“sexual matters”, including behaviour
that she misconstrued as quote unquote “sex” in the context of
specialised counselling.
The very fact that she did not find it
too hard to do that would rebut the argument of the – the submission
that was made by
the Crown Prosecutor that it would be hard for her, and indeed
for any young girl, to talk about sexual things. May it please the
GORDON A-CJ:
Thank you, Mr Odgers. The Court will
reserve its decision in this matter and otherwise adjourn to 9.30 tomorrow
on 11 September.
AT 2.32 PM THE MATTER WAS
RTF format (1.57 MB)
Signed PDF/A format