Joshua Brown and Department of Home Affairs (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 170 (17 September 2025)
Joshua Brown and Department of Home Affairs
Freedom of information)
[2025] AICmr 170
(17 September 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of Rocelle Ago, General Manager Freedom
of Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian
Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Joshua Brown
Department of Home Affairs
Decision date
Application number
Freedom of Information —
Respondent to process request following removal of practical refusal reason claim
s 55K of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I set aside
the decision of the Department of Home Affairs (the Department) of 24 July 2024.
In considering the Department’s
indication that it no longer maintains
that processing the applicant’s revised request would amount to a
substantial and unreasonable
diversion of the Department’s resources from
its other operations, I substitute my decision that a practical refusal reason
does not exist.
of this decision the
Department must process the applicant’s request and notify the applicant
of its decision in accordance
with s 26 of the FOI Act. The Department must also
advise whether it has fully implemented my decision.
decision sets aside the Department’s access refusal decision where the
Department no longer maintains a practical refusal
reason exists.
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
2024, the applicant applied to the Department for correspondence relating to the
applicant between the Minister of Home Affairs
and various third parties from 1
July 2023 to the date of their request.
Department initiated a request consultation process with the applicant (s 24AB).
The applicant responded by removing the third
part of their request which sought
‘all documentation outlining governance and frameworks regarding all types
of correspondence
similar to the received by the applicant’ (the revised
Department advised the applicant that the request was still too broad and made
further suggestions for reducing the scope. The
applicant did not provide a
further revised request prior to the conclusion of the consultation period on 23
a result, on 24 July 2024, the Department decided to refuse access to the
requested documents under s 24(1) of the FOI Act, on
the basis that processing
the applicant’s revised request would substantially and unreasonably
divert the Department’s
resources from its other operations.
applicant sought IC review on the basis that a practical refusal does not
this IC review, the Department advised that it no longer maintains that
processing the revised request would amount to a substantial
and unreasonable
diversion of the Department’s resources from its other operations (s
24AA(1)(a)(i)).
on the information before me, I am satisfied that the practical refusal reason
no longer exists. The Department must now process
the applicant’s request
and notify the applicant of its decision within 30 days of receipt of this
Rocelle Ago
General Manager, Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Whether a practical refusal reason exists (ss 24 and
Section 24 of the FOI Act
enables an agency or Minister to refuse access to a document where the agency
has undertaken a request consultation
process in accordance with s 24AB of the
FOI Act, and after that process the agency or Minister is satisfied that the
practical refusal
reason still exists.
Subparagraph 24AA(1)(a) of the FOI Act lists the following practical refusal
(1) For the purposes of section 24, a practical refusal reason exists in
relation to a request for a document if either (or both)
of the following
(a) the work involved in processing the request:
(i) in the case of an agency--would substantially and unreasonably divert
the resources of the agency from its other operations;
(ii) in the case of a Minister--would substantially and unreasonably
interfere with the performance of the Minister's functions;
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
Accessing your information
If you would like access to the information that we hold about you, please
FOIDR@oaic.gov.au
information is available on the
information
page on our website.
On the question of the
processing deadlines that now apply, see
Fletcher and Prime Minister of
RTF format (22 MB)
Signed PDF/A format