Laming v Electoral Commissioner of the Australian Electoral Commission [2025] HCA 31 (13 August 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
EDELMAN, GLEESON AND JAGOT JJ
ANDREW LAMING APPELLANT
ELECTORAL COMMISSIONER OF THE
AUSTRALIAN ELECTORAL COMMISSION RESPONDENT
Laming v Electoral Commissioner of the Australian Electoral
[2025] HCA 31
Date of Hearing: 9 April 2025
Date of Judgment: 13 August
aside orders 1, 4, 5 and 6 of the orders made by the Full Court of the Federal
Court of Australia on 23 August 2024 and, in their
place, order that the appeal
be dismissed.
aside the order made by the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia on 8
October 2024 and, in its place, order that each
party pay their own costs of the
appeal, the cross-appeal and the notice of contention before the Full
respondent pay the appellant's costs of the appeal to this Court.
On appeal from the Federal Court of Australia
Representation
N H Ferrett KC with J R Moxon for the appellant (instructed by Bell Dore
Solicitors)
T M Begbie KC with S Zeleznikow for the respondent (instructed by Australian
Government Solicitor)
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
Laming v Electoral Commissioner of the Australian Electoral Commission
Parliamentary elections (Cth) – Communication of electoral matter
– Where s 321D(5) of
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
requires "notifying entity" to ensure certain "particulars" notified –
applies in relation to electoral matter that is "communicated
to a person" – Where "electoral matter" posted on Facebook page
occasions – Where failure on each occasion to ensure required
"particulars" included in post – Where each post
seen by several people
who viewed Facebook page – Whether
contravened on each
occasion person viewed post or on each occasion post made available for
Words and phrases – "authorisation", "civil penalty provision",
"communicated", "communication", "conduct", "contravention",
"deterrence",
"digital", "disclosure entity", "dominant purpose", "electoral advertisement",
"electoral matter", "federal election",
"free and informed voting",
"impressions", "notifying entity", "particulars", "political communication",
"political entity", "proportionality",
"reach", "statutory construction", "text,
context and purpose".
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
GAGELER CJ, GLEESON AND JAGOT JJ.
narrow issue of statutory construction in the present appeal is whether
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
(Cth), a civil
penalty provision,
requires a "notifying entity" to ensure that certain "particulars" are notified
in "electoral matter", is contravened by a
single failure to ensure that the
particulars are notified provided the "electoral matter" is communicated to one
person and irrespective
of the number of people to whom the "electoral matter"
is communicated or is contravened on each and every occasion the "electoral
matter" is communicated to a person.
question arises in a context where the appellant, Mr Laming, posted
"electoral matter" on the "Redland Hospital: Let's fight
for fair funding"
Facebook page on three occasions: 24 December 2018, 7 February 2019, and 5 May
2019. On each occasion he failed
to ensure that the required "particulars",
comprising his name and the town or city in which he lived, were included in the
Each such post was communicated to (meaning seen by) several people who
viewed the Facebook page: six people in the case of the 24
December 2018 post,
eight people in the case of the 7 February 2019 post, and 14 people in the case
of the 5 May 2019 post.
The Courts below
a civil penalty proceeding brought against Mr Laming by the Electoral
Commissioner in the Federal Court of Australia the primary
(Rangiah J) held that Mr Laming contravened
Commonwealth Electoral Act
on three occasions (being the occasion of each
post to Facebook by Mr Laming). The primary judge imposed penalties of
$10,000 for
the 24 December 2018 post, $5,000 for the 7 February 2019 post, and
$5,000 for the 5 May 2019
The Electoral
Commissioner appealed. The Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia
(Logan J and Perry J with whom Meagher J agreed)
Mr Laming had contravened
on at least 28 occasions, being
each occasion on which a post had been communicated (by being seen by a person).
The Full Court set
aside the penalties imposed by the primary judge and instead
imposed penalties of $20,000 for the 24 December 2018 post, $10,000
7 February 2019 post, and $10,000 for the 5 May 2019
applied for and was granted special leave to appeal on the sole ground that the
Full Court erred in finding that
"was contravened on each
occasion that a person viewed a post published by [him] on ... Facebook ...
rather than finding a contravention
occurred when [he] caused a post to be" to
be made available for viewing. The appeal must be upheld on that ground.
primary judge's construction of
Commonwealth Electoral Act
is correct. As will be explained, the correct construction, that
is engaged by any failure to ensure that the required
"particulars" are notified in "electoral matter" provided that the "electoral
matter" is communicated to one person and otherwise irrespective of the number
of people to whom the "electoral matter" is communicated,
accords with the text,
context and purpose of the provision in a manner which the construction adopted
by the Full Court does not.
The background to the statutory
were inserted into the
Commonwealth Electoral Act
Electoral and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2017
Schedule 1 also contained provisions repealing ss 328 to 328B of that
Act. Section 328, for example, made it an offence for
a person to "print,
publish or distribute or cause, permit or authorize to be printed, published or
distributed, an electoral advertisement,
handbill, pamphlet, poster or notice
unless" certain information appeared "at the end thereof".
amendments were consequential on recommendations in a report of the Joint
Standing Committee on Electoral Matters ("the
In this report the
JSCEM recognised the importance of authorising electoral material to provide
"clear context for the message and
[to allow] voters to have confidence in the
message or point of view expressed in that material" while ensuring that "the
or organisation putting the information into the public domain is
accountable for that
information".
identified that there had been a shift from traditional communication methods to
social media and SMS which had "significantly
changed the landscape for the
modern political campaign".
The perceived problem was that the legislation had "not kept up with modern
communication".
report recognised that communications technology was "rapidly evolving" so that
"SMS, email, 'robo-calling' and variations as
yet unimagined will continue to be
recorded that view of the JSCEM that the "current requirements for authorisation
for print and broadcast do not appropriately
cover many new forms of
communications of electoral
materials".
concluded that the legislation "requires amendment so that it can evolve to deal
with new, digital forms of communication
that have changed the landscape of
political campaigns".
recommended that there be a "level playing field with regulation applying to all
forms of electoral advertising" based on the
principles of "accountability,
traceability and
consistency".
Second Reading Speech for the
Electoral and Other Legislation Amendment Bill
(Cth) recorded that the Bill addressed the recommendations of the JSCEM
in its report.
was said to promote "free and informed voting at elections and referendums by
allowing electors to know who is communicating
with them" by "extending current
authorisation requirements and harmonising existing requirements across
communication
Revised Explanatory Memorandum for the Bill records that the Bill "applies the
electoral authorisation requirements to modern
communication channels",
"requires all paid electoral advertising (which includes distribution or
production) to be authorised, no
matter the source", and "replaces the current
criminal non-compliance regime with a civil penalty regime to be administered by
Australian Electoral
Commission".
The Revised
Explanatory Memorandum, in respect of s 321D(5), says that the "amount of
the relevant penalty is calculated in accordance
section 4AA
Crimes Act 1914
, and is commensurate with similar Commonwealth regulatory
These regimes
are not identified.
The statutory provisions
321C(1) specifies that the objects of
(into which ss 321B-321H
were inserted) are to promote free and informed voting at elections by
enhancing: (a) the transparency of
the electoral system, by allowing voters
to know who is communicating electoral matter; (b) the accountability of
those persons participating
in public debate relating to electoral matter, by
making those persons responsible for their communications; and (c) the
traceability
of communications of electoral matter, by ensuring that obligations
imposed by this Part in relation to those communications can
be enforced.
According to s 321C(2):
"This Part aims to achieve these objects by doing the following:
(a) requiring the particulars of the person who authorised the communication
of electoral matter to be notified if:
(i) the matter is an electoral advertisement, all or part of whose
distribution or production is paid for; or
(ii) the matter forms part of a specified printed communication; or
(iii) the matter is communicated by, or on behalf of, a disclosure
(b) ensuring that the particulars are clearly identifiable, irrespective of
how the matter is communicated."
321C(3) is in these terms:
"This Part is not intended to detract from:
(a) the ability of electoral matters to be communicated to voters; and
(b) voters' ability to communicate with each other on electoral matters."
Section 321D
is the key provision. Section 321D(1) relevantly provides that:
"This section applies in relation to electoral matter that is communicated to a
(a) all of the following apply:
(i) the matter is an electoral advertisement;
(ii) all or part of the distribution or production of the advertisement was
(iii) the content of the advertisement was approved by a person (the
notifying entity
) (whether or not that person is a person who paid
for the distribution or production of the advertisement); or
(b) both of the following apply:
(i) the matter forms part of a sticker, fridge magnet, leaflet, flyer,
pamphlet, notice, poster or how-to-vote card;
(ii) the content of the matter was approved by a person (the
(c) the matter is communicated by, or on behalf of, a disclosure entity (the
notifying entity
) (and the matter is not an advertisement covered
by paragraph (a), nor does the matter form part of a sticker, fridge magnet,
flyer, pamphlet, notice, poster or how-to-vote card)."
321D(2) identifies the relevant "notifying entity" in certain circumstances
which are not material to the present case.
321D(3) and (4) provide that s 321D does not apply in relation to certain
"electoral matter".
321D(5) appears as follows (in part):
"The notifying entity must ensure that the particulars set out in the following
table, and any other particulars determined under
subsection (7) for the
purposes of this subsection, are notified in accordance with any requirements
determined under that subsection.
Required particulars
the following particulars are required ...
the communication is a sticker, fridge magnet, leaflet, flyer, pamphlet,
notice, poster or how-to-vote card authorised by a disclosure
entity who is a
natural person
(a) the name of the person;
(b) the address of the person;
(c) the name of the printer who printed the communication;
(d) the address of the printer
the communication is any other communication authorised by a disclosure
entity who is a natural person
(a) the name of the person;
(b) the relevant town or city of the person
321D(7)(b)(i) enables the Electoral Commissioner, by legislative instrument, to
determine particulars for the purposes of
matter" is defined in
in these terms:
Electoral matter
means matter communicated or intended to be
communicated for the dominant purpose of influencing the way electors vote in an
federal election
) of a member of the House of
Representatives or of Senators for a State or Territory, including by promoting
or opposing:
(a) a political entity, to the extent that the matter relates to a federal
election; or
(b) a member of the House of Representatives or a Senator.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1), each creation, recreation,
communication or recommunication of matter is to be treated separately
purposes of determining whether matter is electoral matter.
s 321B defines, relevantly, "address", "authorises", "conduct" and
"disclosure entity". "[A]uthorised", which appears
in the table to s 321D,
is defined in these terms:
: a person authorises the communication of electoral
(a) if the content of the matter is approved before the matter is communicated
– the person approves the content of the matter;
(b) otherwise – the person communicates the matter."
Construction of statutory provisions
Contextual and purposive considerations
may be accepted that the imposition of a civil penalty for contravention of
s 321D(5) is intended to deter non-compliance so that
the expressly stated
objects of s 321D, as identified in s 321C(1), may be achieved.
However, the argument of the respondent, accepted
by the Full
that the maximum
penalty of $25,200 is inadequate to achieve deterrence if the number of
contraventions is the number of times the
notifying entity failed to comply with
s 321D(5) (provided that the non-complying "electoral matter" was in fact
communicated to
one person as required by s 321D(1)) does not follow and
cannot be supported.
the contrary, the context of s 321D, the regulation of "electoral matter",
involves a quintessential form of political communication.
Fundamental aspects
of the Australian legal and political system, specifically that freedom of
political communication is an indispensable
incident of "the principle of
responsible government – the system of government by which the
executive is responsible to the
legislature" which has been said to be "not
merely an assumption upon which the actual provisions are based ... [but] an
element in the
Constitution
the critical context in which s 321D is to be construed.
context explains why s 321C(3) expressly provides that
to detract from the ability of persons to communicate "electoral matter". It
also explains why s 321C(2) expressly provides
achieve its objects. The explanation of how the objects are to be achieved
includes that the required particulars are to be
, relevantly,
"the matter
is communicated
by, or on behalf of, a disclosure entity" and
by "ensuring that the particulars are clearly identifiable,
irrespective of
how the matter is
communicated
the specific purpose of the provisions was to create a "level playing field" by
subjecting all forms of communication to the
regulation,
notorious fact that electronic communications can be easily re-communicated to a
mass audience irrespective of the intention
of the person responsible for the
original communication, it is understandable that the Parliament would confine
the number of contraventions
to the number of times a notifying entity failed to
comply with s 321D(5). If the Parliament had not done so, persons
to engage in the political process could be exposed to penalties
based on contraventions numbering in the hundreds, thousands, or
depending not on the notifying entity's failure to comply with s 321D(5) in
respect of its intended recipients or audience,
but on the mere happenstance of
re-transmission by electronic methods or modes of communication by any recipient
with the requisite
dominant purpose so that the "electoral matter" remains
"electoral matter" as re-transmitted.
the objects identified in s 321C(1) are of fundamental importance to the
proper functioning of Australian democracy and the
"vote of every elector is a
matter of concern to the whole
Commonwealth",
legislation should not be construed on the basis of assumptions that:
(a) those subject to its provisions are rogue actors intent
on exploiting
any loophole in the regulation; or (b) the achievement of the purposes of
the legislation is to be secured at any cost,
including the exposure of
notifying entities to crippling penalties by reason of the number of
contraventions, one effect of which
would be to discourage political
communication by contemporary methods given the lack of control of the notifying
entity over the
ultimate audience numbers.
321C(2) and (3), reflecting the importance of the implied constitutional freedom
of political communication, speak against
the respondent's approach of assuming
that the greatest number of potential contraventions, carrying the greatest
maximum penalty,
is an object of the legislation or the best way in which the
legislation might achieve its goals.
context of political communications also exposes why no meaningful analogy can
be drawn between s 321D and consumer protection
or industrial legislation.
The concept that a civil penalty, as the respondent would have it, puts a "price
on contravention which
is sufficiently high to ensure that the penalty cannot be
seen as the acceptable cost of doing business, but is rather seen as an
economically irrational choice" makes sense in many contexts both commercial and
protective, but does not resonate in the context
of political communications in
a political system which depends on free political communications and in which
compliance is to be
encouraged and non-compliance deterred, but not at any price
as s 321C(3) makes clear.
in the political context, the maximum amount of a penalty is not an effective
gauge of the deterrent effect of the provision.
The mere fact of a contravention
of s 321D(5) being found by a court could be expected to have material
reputational and other effects
of potential significance to those subject to its
as the respondent put it, a "'per person' approach to civil penalty
provisions – in which the necessary protection is
operate at the level of each individual affected or
involved – is commonplace", that circumstance must be understood
to be a manifestation of the proper construction of the particular statutory
provisions creating the civil penalty provision. It
is not an "approach" which
exists as a matter of principle separate from the particular statutory
provisions in each case.
doubt a "per failure" approach to s 321D(5) means that the number of
contraventions will vary with different types of communications.
In some cases
ascertaining the number of contraventions based on the number of failures to
comply with s 321D(5) may involve some
complexity. To the extent the proper
construction of s 321D(5) involves anomalies and arbitrariness, the
principle that civil penalty
regimes are to be applied having regard to
"concepts familiar in criminal sentencing such as totality, parity and course of
expected to have a substantial ameliorating effect.
these important matters of context in mind the proper construction of
s 321D(5) is apparent.
Textual considerations
definition of "electoral matter" in s 4AA as matter "communicated or
intended to be communicated" for the specified dominant
purpose identifies the
matter that is "electoral matter". Section 321D(1) specifies the "electoral
matter" in relation to which s
321D(5) potentially applies. If matter is
not "communicated or intended to be communicated" for the specified dominant
purpose, or
is otherwise excluded from the scope of "electoral matter" by either
s 4AA(5) (specifying exceptions to "electoral matter") or s
(4) (specifying exceptions to s 321D), then s 321D(5) does not apply
to that matter.
if matter is "electoral matter" within the scope of s 4AA, then for
s 321D(5) to apply to that "electoral matter", the
requirements of
s 321D(1) must be satisfied and the exceptions specified in s 321D(3)
and (4) must not apply to that "electoral matter".
The requirements in
s 321D(1) are that the "electoral matter" is "communicated to a person" and
one of para (a), (b) or (c) of s
321D(1) applies.
requirement that the "electoral matter" is "communicated to a person" in
s 321D(1) is to be understood as involving a fact or
circumstance that must
exist for s 321D to apply. The required fact or circumstance, being that
"electoral matter" is "communicated
to a person", involves proof of a past event
of "electoral matter" being "communicated to a person". In circumstances where
"communicated"
is not a defined term but takes its ordinary meaning (as the past
participle of the regular verb "to communicate"), s 321D(1) is
understood as requiring that the "electoral matter" was imparted, transmitted,
given to, conveyed to, or expressed to a person.
Once it is established, by
applying s 321D(1) to the facts, that s 321D applies, s 321D(1)
has no further function. Its function,
of identifying when s 321D(5) may
apply, is performed.
While this does not mean that s 321D(1) no longer forms part of the context
of s 321D(5) (it clearly does), it is necessary to recognise
the distinct
function of each provision. Once it is recognised that s 321D(1) performs a
gateway function, it is apparent that the
fact of the "electoral matter" having
been communicated to a person is a requirement that must be satisfied for
s 321D(5) to apply,
and no more.
obligation imposed on a notifying entity by s 321D(5) under pain of civil
penalty is to ensure that the particulars set out in
the table to s 321D(5)
are notified in accordance with any requirements determined under
s 321D(7)(b)(i). The table in s 321D(5)
is repetitive because it
distinguishes between a disclosure entity that is not a natural person (items 1
and 2), a disclosure entity
who is a natural person (items 3 and 4), an entity
that is not a disclosure entity or a natural person (items 5 and 6) and a
person who is not a disclosure entity (items 7 and 8).
is apparent that the table of particulars in s 321D(5) distinguishes
between types of "communication". In the first type the communication
"a sticker, fridge magnet, leaflet, flyer, pamphlet, notice, poster or
how-to-vote card". In the second type the communication
communication". From the language used, it is manifest that the word
"communication" is being used as a noun in s 321D(5),
to describe a thing.
The thing (sticker or otherwise) is capable of performing a communicative
function, but no part of s 321D(5)
attaches to the performance of that
communicative function. That is, s 321D(5) is not expressed as a
prohibition on communicating
electoral matter without the required particulars.
The reason for this is that the communicative function, to the extent required,
has already been performed for s 321D(1) to have been satisfied (by the
fact or circumstance of communication of "electoral matter"
to "a person").
the terms of s 321D(5), it is the notifying entity's failure to ensure that
the particulars are notified as required which constitutes
the contravention.
Such a failure can only occur before an act of communication, but it is not an
element of a contravention that
"the communication" is "communicated". Rather,
the fact or circumstance of "electoral matter" having been "communicated" to a
must already have been established for any question of contravention of
s 321D(5) to arise. For the fact or circumstance of having
"communicated" to be an element of the contravention, it would be necessary for
that element to appear in the table to s 321D(5)
(eg, in item 4 "the
communication is any other communication authorised by a disclosure entity who
is a natural person [
and which has been communicated to a person or
]"). Those words do not appear, however.
the present case, there is now no dispute that the requirements of
s 321D(1) were satisfied. That is, each post by Mr Laming on
was "electoral matter", it was "communicated to a person", and the matter was
communicated by Mr Laming who was a disclosure
entity in accordance with
s 321D(1)(c). Thereafter, to ascertain a contravention, it is the terms of
s 321D(5) which govern.
relevant item in the table to s 321D(5) is item 4. That is because
Mr Laming is a natural person and because each post to Facebook
sticker, fridge magnet, leaflet, flyer, pamphlet, notice, poster or how-to-vote
card within item 3 but was "any other communication"
within item 4. The
obligation imposed on Mr Laming was to ensure that the particulars set out in
the table as applicable to that
form of communication (his name and the town or
city in which he lived) were notified in accordance with any requirements
under s 321D(7)(b)(i) in each post.
the context of the table to s 321D(5), a "communication" is simply a thing
capable of performing a communicative function. This
follows from the
distinctions in the table between specified things ("is a sticker, fridge
magnet, leaflet, flyer, pamphlet, notice,
poster or how-to-vote card") and
non-specified things ("is any other communication"). In context, the distinction
is between things
which are traditional forms of political messaging and things
which are new forms of political messaging.
is no inconsistency between s 321D(1) requiring as a gateway to
s 321D(5) that "electoral matter" in fact be "communicated"
to a person
(using "communicated" as the past participle of the verb "communicate", meaning
imparted, transmitted, given to, conveyed
to, or expressed to a person) and
s 321D(5) using "communication" as a noun ("
communication
..."). On this basis, a post to Facebook is a "communication" in the
same way that a sticker or a fridge magnet is a "communication".
contravention in respect of each such "communication" is failing to notify the
particulars set out in the table to s 321D(5)
in accordance with the
requirements determined in accordance with a legislative instrument under
s 321D(7)(b)(i). Nothing in s 321D(5),
however, involves the
"communication" in fact having been "communicated to" a person (in the sense of
imparted, transmitted, given
to, conveyed to, or expressed to a person), as that
required fact or circumstance must have already occurred to satisfy
is not to the point that "electoral matter" is defined in s 4AA(1) to mean
matter communicated or intended to be communicated
for a specified dominant
purpose. Nor does it matter that s 4AA(2) provides that, for the purposes
of s 4AA(1), "each creation, recreation,
communication or recommunication
of matter is to be treated separately for the purposes of determining whether
matter is electoral
matter". These provisions operate only for the relevant
purpose of identifying whether a particular matter communicated or intended
be communicated is "electoral matter" within the meaning of s 321D(1).
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
assist the respondent's construction.
Acts Interpretation Act
in "interpreting a
provision of an Act, the interpretation that would best achieve the purpose or
object of the Act (whether or not
that purpose or object is expressly stated in
the Act) is to be preferred to each other interpretation". As explained,
however, the
expressly stated objects of s 321D do not exist in a vacuum,
as s 321C(2) and (3) expose. The assumption that the provisions seek
achieve their expressly stated objects at any price is particularly inapt for
these provisions.
Acts Interpretation Act
"words in the singular number
include the plural and words in the plural number include the singular".
Accordingly, it would be open
to read "a person" in s 321D(1) as "persons".
That, however, would not be material to the construction of s 321D(5)
because, even
if s 321D(1) referred to "persons", the plural would include
the singular (person) so that s 321D(1) would be satisfied by a
communication
to a single person in any event. The key to understanding
s 321D(1), as noted, is that it is the gateway, and its requirements must
be satisfied, before s 321D(5) applies. And the key to s 321D(5) is
that its focus is the fact of non-compliance by non-notification
particulars, not the fact of communication.
Conclusion and
these reasons, the Full Court erred in its construction of
Commonwealth Electoral Act
. The primary judge's construction was correct.
Accordingly, as sought by the appellant, the appeal must be allowed, orders 1
4-6 made by the Full Court on 23 August 2024 must be set aside, and in their
place it be ordered that the appeal be dismissed. In
respect of costs, it is
necessary to set aside the order made by the Full Court on 8 October 2024 and in
its place order that each
party pay their own costs of the appeal, the
cross-appeal and the notice of contention before the Full Court. The respondent
pay the appellant's costs of the appeal to this Court.
The appellant, Mr Andrew Laming, was elected as a member of the House of
Representatives in the Commonwealth Parliament
for the electorate of Bowman in
2016. He was a candidate in the federal election held on 18 May 2019. In
the six months prior to
the 2019 election, Mr Laming posted a series of posts on
a Facebook page called "Redland Hospital: Let's fight for fair funding"
("the Facebook page"). A total of 28 people viewed the posts.
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
(Cth) ("the
required Mr Laming, as the "notifying entity", to ensure that
certain particulars were notified with each post on the Facebook page.
Before the primary judge, the respondent in this Court – the
Electoral Commissioner of the Australian Electoral Commission
("the Commissioner") – sought declarations and pecuniary
penalties against Mr Laming for contraventions of
Electoral Act
on the basis that Mr Laming had failed to disclose his
name and relevant town or city in accordance with the requirements of the
Commonwealth Electoral (Authorisation of Voter Communication) Determination
primary judge held that three of the five posts (namely, posts on
24 December 2018, 7 February 2019 and 5 May 2019) contravened
Electoral Act
and ordered Mr Laming to pay a penalty of
$10,000 for the 24 December post and $5,000 for each of the other two
posts. In doing so,
the primary judge rejected the Commissioner's
contention that a contravention occurred each time one of the posts was viewed
different person. The Commissioner appealed that decision to the Full
Court of the Federal Court of Australia on the basis that the
primary judge
erred in finding that each post constituted a single contravention of
, rather than finding that Mr Laming contravened
each time a post was viewed by a person.
The Full Federal Court upheld
the appeal and found that "there was a contravention on each occasion that the
post was communicated
to a different person by reason of that person viewing the
post". The Full Federal Court, finding 28 contraventions, imposed a total
penalty of $40,000, comprising $20,000 for the 24 December 2018 post;
$10,000 for the 7 February 2019 post; and $10,000 for the 5
Laming appealed the Full Federal Court's decision to this Court on
the ground that the Full Federal Court erred in holding that
a contravention on each occasion that the posts were viewed. For the
reasons that follow, the appeal should be allowed.
On the proper construction of
, there was a contravention on each occasion that Mr Laming
caused a post to be published on Facebook, not on each occasion that the
were viewed.
Legislative framework
appeal concerns the proper construction of
Electoral Act
Section 321D
is located in
is headed "Authorisation of electoral matter".
Section 321C
sets out the objects of
, and how the Part aims to
achieve the stated objects, in these terms:
"(1) The objects of this Part are to promote free and informed voting at
elections by enhancing the following:
(a) the transparency of the electoral system, by allowing voters to know who is
communicating electoral matter;
(b) the accountability of those persons participating in public debate relating
to electoral matter, by making those persons responsible
communications;
(c) the traceability of communications of electoral matter, by ensuring
that obligations imposed by this Part in relation to those
communications can be
(2) This Part aims to achieve these objects by doing the following:
(a) requiring the particulars of the person who authorised
the communication of electoral matter to be notified if:
(i) the matter is an electoral advertisement, all or part of whose distribution
or production is paid for; or
(ii) the matter forms part of a specified printed communication; or
(iii) the matter is communicated by, or on behalf of, a disclosure entity;
(b) ensuring that the particulars are clearly identifiable, irrespective of how
the matter is communicated.
(3) This Part is not intended to detract from:
(a) the ability of electoral matters to be communicated to voters; and
(b) voters' ability to communicate with each other on electoral matters."
is the "gateway" to the substantive obligation imposed by
It provides the circumstances in which
Section 321D(1)
relevantly provides:
"This section applies in relation to electoral matter that is communicated to a
(c) the matter is communicated by, or on behalf of, a disclosure entity (the
notifying entity
) (and the matter is not an advertisement covered
by paragraph (a), nor does the matter form part of a sticker,
fridge magnet, leaflet,
flyer, pamphlet, notice, poster or how-to-vote
Note 1: For paragraph (1)(c), matter may be communicated on behalf of an entity
whether or not the entity pays for the communication
of the matter.
Note 2: Examples of matters that may be covered by this section include internet
advertisements, bulk text messages and bulk voice
calls containing electoral
is the focus of this appeal. That sub-section, a civil penalty
provision, imposes a substantive obligation on notifying entities
following terms:
"The notifying entity must ensure that the particulars set out in the following
table, and any other particulars determined under
subsection (7) for
the purposes of this subsection, are notified in accordance with any
requirements determined under that subsection."
and its context are particularly important.
First, a Note to
provides that "[a] person may
contravene this subsection if the person fails to ensure that particulars are
notified or if the particulars
notified are incorrect".
the particulars are set out in the table referred to in, and following,
The table contains eight items. The required particulars vary
according to the form of communication and the nature of the notifying
(for example, where the communication is authorised by a disclosure entity who
is a natural person). Items 3 and 4 are set
out below and
Required particulars
the following particulars are required ...
the communication is a sticker, fridge magnet, leaflet, flyer, pamphlet, notice,
poster or how‑to‑vote card authorised
by a disclosure entity
who is a natural person
(a) the name of the person;
(b) the address of the person;
(c) the name of the printer who printed the communication;
(d) the address of the printer
the communication is any other communication authorised by a disclosure
entity who is a natural person
(a) the name of the person;
(b) the relevant town or city of the person
Item 4 is applicable to this appeal.
the obligation in
only applies where the communication is in
relation to "electoral
matter" is defined in
Electoral matter
means matter communicated or intended to be
communicated for the dominant purpose of influencing the way electors vote in an
federal election
) of a member of the House of
Representatives or of Senators for a State or Territory, including by promoting
or opposing:
(a) a political entity, to the extent that the matter relates to a federal
election; or
(b) a member of the House of Representatives or a Senator."
then provides that, for the purposes of
"each creation, recreation, communication or recommunication of matter is
to be treated separately for the purposes of determining
whether matter is
electoral matter". The Note to
provides, by way of example,
that matter that is covered by an exception (such as a news
) when originally
communicated may become electoral matter if recommunicated for the dominant
purpose referred to in
provides for the geographical scope of
Section 321E(1)
relevantly provides that a person does not contravene
unless the conduct constituting the alleged contravention occurs
wholly or partly in
or the conduct
constituting the alleged contravention occurs wholly outside Australia and a
result of the conduct occurs wholly or
Construction
appeal concerns a difficult question of construction of
application to posts on a Facebook page. As will be explained, I consider
the preferable view to be that a contravention of
is determined
by reference to the act of the contravener – namely, in this case, by the
act of publishing posts on Facebook
– as opposed to the acts of the
recipients in viewing the posts. In other words, there is a contravention
each time a person
publishes the electoral matter by posting a post on Facebook,
not each time a person views the post.
the text of
suggests that there is one act of contravention which
is determined by reference to the conduct of the contravener, not by reference
to the acts of the recipients.
Section 321D(5)
provides that
the "notifying entity must ensure" that certain particulars are
notified in accordance with certain requirements. The
focus of the provision is
on the act of the notifying entity and their positive obligation to "ensure"
that the identified particulars
are notified with the electoral matter. As such,
the operation of the provision turns on a unilateral act on the part of the
entity. It is an obligation that can only be performed prior to
or at the point that the electoral matter is published, uploaded
or broadcast
– that is, prior to the communication being received by any other person.
required "particulars" are set out in the table referred to in
which prescribes the required particulars by reference to different types of
communication. The language used in the table to identify
the different types of
communication is in the following style: "the communication is a sticker".
The reference to "the communication" in the
table referred to in
is not a phrase devoid of content. The
better view is that "the communication" in
– for example,
the sticker, or, in this case, the post – is the method of communication
of the "electoral matter that
is communicated" referred to in
Section 321D(1)
is followed by, in effect, a definition of
"the communication" in the table referred to in
(being that
the communication is a sticker, the communication is a fridge magnet, etc).
In other words, each "communication" in the
table is defined by reference
to a mode of communication, not the event of communication itself.
is not the case that "the communication" thereby has two different meanings
Rather, variations on the phrase "the communication"
are used in
in different places and in different ways, as
necessitated by their different contexts and grammatical forms: unlike
does not use the noun "communication", but rather
uses the past participle "communicated".
provides that "[a] person may contravene this subsection if
the person fails to ensure that particulars are notified or if
the particulars
notified are incorrect", reinforcing the view that the
contravention is the failure by the contravener to do something. The notifying
entity has one opportunity to do, or not do, the act that constitutes the
contravention. The act or omission that constitutes the
contravention occurs
when the electoral matter is published, uploaded or broadcast because that is
the point at which a notifying
entity can and must
the inclusion
of the required particulars.
does not undermine, but reinforces, the construction adopted.
Section 321D(1)
provides that the "section applies in relation to electoral
matter that is communicated to a person if [certain criteria are satisfied]".
may be accepted that communication is a bilateral act; it involves both the
giving and receiving of information. The ordinary
meaning of "to communicate"
includes "to give to another as a partaker", "to impart knowledge of",
and "to convey one's feelings,
thoughts, etc, successfully to
As recognised by the Full Federal Court, the concept ordinarily involves
"the transmission of information from one person to another
may be understood as providing the field of operation of the obligation
or the circumstances in which the obligation under
arises. In that sense,
must be satisfied, and so
is an "element" of the obligation under
Put in different terms,
can be read as: "[In circumstances where electoral matter is
communicated to a person such that
is satisfied,] [t]he
notifying entity must ensure that
the particulars ... are notified ..." Similarly, Note 2 to
may be read as: "A person may contravene [s 321D(5)] if
the person fails to ensure that particulars are notified or if the particulars
notified are incorrect [in circumstances where electoral matter is communicated
to a person such that
is satisfied]." In that way,
and (5) may be read together and operate together.
The obligation, performed unilaterally, is to ensure the notification of
particulars,
prior to or at the point of communication. The contravention is,
and occurs at the point of, the failure to do so.
appeal concerns posts on a Facebook page. In
Fairfax Media Publications Pty
Ltd v Voller
defamation case, Gageler J and I observed that "[e]ach appellant became a
publisher of each comment posted on its public Facebook
page by a Facebook user
as and when that comment was accessed in a comprehensible form by another
Facebook user".
that there was participation in the publication process when a person "having
contracted with Facebook for the creation and
ongoing provision of its public
Facebook page, post[ed] content on the page the effect of which was
automatically to give Facebook
users the option (in addition to 'Like' or
'Share') to 'Comment' on the content by posting a comment which ...
was automatically
accessible in a comprehensible form by other Facebook
that defamation law is a different area of law seeking to address a different
liability, the construction of
Electoral Act
the understanding of "communicated" is consistent with the bilateral nature
of publication in defamation law, where the publisher
makes matter available and
a third party has it available for their
comprehension.
Steward J observed in
, "[t]he act of posting on a public
Facebook page starts an electronic conversation, whether long or short, with
potentially millions
of other Facebook
On the other
hand, it may be different if the notifying entity sent an email to multiple
named recipients. In that case, the act
of communication – the act of
making matter available for comprehension by a third party – is
practically and necessarily
different to a post on a Facebook page. In sending
an email to multiple recipients, it may be argued that the notifying entity has
sent the same electoral matter multiple times, where each act of communication
via the email had a specific intended recipient, and
so each act of
communication via the email had its own
Electoral Act
does not require or even support a different
construction. That section accommodates and envisages that there can be multiple
communications of the same matter, with differing dominant purposes,
thus reinforcing that communication is a bilateral act which
depends on the
participation of both the giver and receiver of information. However, the fact
that there may be separate communications
for separate recipients does not alter
the fact that the text of
provides that the obligation to provide
the stated particulars is a unilateral act.
321D(7)(b)(i)
provides that the Commissioner may, by legislative instrument,
determine requirements or particulars for the purposes of
effect, this means that the Commissioner can determine additional particulars to
provided in the table referred to in
Section 321D(7)(b)(i)
can, in that limited way, be seen as an extension of
The Note to
s 321D(7)(b)
provides that the "[r]equirements
or particulars may be determined by reference to
communications
, and different requirements or particulars may be determined
for different
classes of communications
subsection 33(3A)
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
)" (emphasis added). It is
significant that the Note states that particulars may be determined by reference
to "classes of communications",
reinforcing the view that "the communication"
in the table referred to in s 321D(5) is referring to a mode, or
"class", of communication
and that different classes may have different
requirements because of the attributes of a particular class of communication.
s 321E, headed "Extended geographical application of section 321D",
provides for the geographical application of s 321D. The
distinguishes between the "conduct constituting the alleged contravention" and
the "result" of that conduct. For example,
s 321E(1)(b) provides that
a person does not contravene s 321D unless, among other things, "the
constituting the alleged contravention occurs wholly outside
Australia and a
result of the conduct
occurs: (i) wholly or partly
in Australia" (emphasis added). "[C]onduct" is defined in s 321B as "an act
or an omission to perform
an act". "[R]esult" is not defined in the
. Nonetheless, the fact that
distinguishes between the conduct
contravening
and the result of that conduct shows that there is a
distinction and that that distinction is not unimportant. In other words, the
act constituting the contravention is separate from, and not the same as,
the effect or result of that act.
is readily comprehensible that a "result" of a contravention of
the viewing of the matter.
Section 321E(1)(b)
provides for the situation where
the act contravening
(such as publication) occurs outside
Australia, but the matter is viewed inside Australia. It is difficult
to see what else could
be meant by a "result" of a contravention of
of publishing, broadcasting or putting into the world the matter
is the contravention, which is separate to the receiving, viewing
or hearing of
the matter, which is the
we have seen, the objects of
are to "promote free and informed voting at
elections by enhancing ... (a) the transparency of the electoral system,
by allowing
voters to know who is communicating electoral matter;
(b) the accountability of those persons participating in public debate
to electoral matter, by making those persons responsible for their
communications; [and] (c) the traceability of communications of
matter, by ensuring that obligations imposed by this Part in relation to those
communications can be
"aims to achieve these objects by ... (a) requiring the particulars of the
person who authorised the communication of electoral matter
to be notified [and]
(b) ensuring that the particulars are clearly identifiable, irrespective of how
the matter is
communicated".
consistent with this Court's finding in
electors "may be less likely to be misled or unduly influenced if they know the
authority upon which they are asked to rely".
construction that I prefer is consistent with those objectives. But so is the
Commissioner's construction. Both constructions
involve penalising persons who
do not notify the required particulars with electoral matter. Both deter
anonymous publication of
electoral matter. Both promote free and informed voting
at elections. The only substantive difference between the competing
constructions
in respect of their achievement of the objects of
that the Commissioner's construction provides scope for a larger maximum
penalty. Undoubtedly, a higher maximum penalty means
greater deterrence of
wrongdoing, and therefore, in theory, better ensures that
complied with, thus better promoting free and informed voting.
merely because a competing construction may result in a larger maximum penalty
does not necessarily mean it is the intended
construction. Of course,
increasing a penalty will increase its deterrent value. But Parliament chose a
specific, and limited, maximum
penalty. The identified maximum penalty is what
Parliament intends to be
deterrence.
The purpose
of a penalty is sufficient
deterrence, not maximum deterrence.
has chosen the maximum penalty for
It is a penalty that,
while not an overwhelmingly large sum, is, objectively speaking, a not
insignificant amount of money. It is
not so low as to suggest that Parliament
have intended it to apply "per viewer" of the contravening matter,
particularly for those matters broadcast en masse. Further, the
Court can take
into account the number of people who viewed the contravening matter when
determining what penalty to impose in the
The adopted
construction achieves the objects of
It is consistent with
Parliament's purpose for
That it may result in a lower maximum
penalty than the competing construction is an insufficient basis to prefer the
competing construction.
extrinsic materials state clearly, and at length, that the purpose of
the introduction of
was to ensure that the rules regarding the
authorisation of electoral matter applied consistently to all forms of
communication,
across all technological
The focus was not
on introducing a "per person" or "per voter" approach to
contraventions. Prior to the introduction of
the authorisation requirements under the
Electoral Act
only applied to
printed and video recorded
advertisements;
electoral advertisements on the
how-to-vote
and headings to
electoral advertisements in newspapers, magazines and other
periodicals.
authorisation requirements did not apply to electoral advertising using
telephone, text messaging or social
was clearly and expressly introduced to ensure that the authorisation
requirements applied consistently to all technological media.
paragraph of the Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters' report's chapter
on "Authorisation of electoral materials"
is in the following
"This chapter focuses specifically on issues raised about authorisation of
communications to voters in electoral materials. Significant
concerns were
raised about how changes in technology have led to the change in the way voter
communications are delivered to the
public. Additionally, considerable concerns
were raised that current legislation is inconsistent, and has not kept up with
methods of communication."
itself was considered, with the report citing the following
observations:
"we live in a world where mainstream sources of media are trusted less and less.
People are drawing their information from a variety
of sources and if people are
targeting a number of those sources, whether they be text messages or Facebook
pages, at the right demographic
with the right messages, even if they are
untrue, the propensity of people to weigh that up against what they are hearing
from traditional
media is becoming less and less. I think the effectiveness
of lines of communication like that is only increasing and if people are
using them responsibly then we leave ourselves open to a lot of trouble.
Different vehicles and different platforms have their own challenges because of
the nature of the number of characters you can send
or on forwarding material
through Facebook et cetera. But, as a general principle, the
Electoral Act
should protect the right of the electors to know who is sending them messages. I
think that in all of these cases there will be a
way forward to identify who is
sending you a message and then you can make a judgement about it. I do not
think that technology has
got to the point where it is inconceivable to make it
plain who it is from."
this background in mind, the significance of the introduction of the words
"communicated to a person" in
lies not in the fact that they
embrace the recipient of the communication; it is that they are technologically
agree with the orders of Gageler CJ, Gleeson and Jagot
Thwarting the Commonwealth Parliament's intention
that a political campaigner distributed 1,000 pamphlets containing electoral
material that failed to comply with a statutory
requirement, such as the
inclusion of the name of the person authorising the pamphlet. Subject to any
defences, the political campaigner
would have committed 1,000 offences under the
relevant provisions of the
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1902
(Cth) and the
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
(Cth), in the forms in which the relevant
provisions existed from 1902 until
Of course, notions
of proportionality, including limiting the criminal penalty to what was
deserved, and associated principles such
as the totality, consistency or parity,
and course of conduct principles, would prevent the political campaigner from
being penalised
by an amount which is 1,000 times the penalty for a single
offence. But the
Commonwealth Electoral Act
(in any of its iterations
before 2018)
did not deem the distribution of 1,000 pamphlets to be a
single offence.
2018, the legislation that created the various forms of the offence discussed
above was amended and rewritten by what can be described
as "the Digital
Amendments". The report which provoked the Digital Amendments described how
concerns had arisen that "electoral material
is communicated through new means
without the requirement to authorise" and that "[p]eople are drawing their
information from a variety
of sources ... whether they be text messages or
Facebook pages".
Digital Amendments created a civil contravention which responded to the concern
that "those who wished to hide their identity
from voters could do so by
communicating via media—including modern technologies—not covered by
the ... authorisation
A note in the
amended legislation gave examples of "matters that may be covered" by the
provision, including "bulk text messages
and bulk voice calls containing
electoral matter".
the appellant's submissions in this case were to be accepted, then a political
campaigner who transmitted 1,000 text messages
by a "bulk text message" or who
transmitted a bulk email copied, or blind copied, to 1,000 people, without
disclosing the name and
relevant town or city of the person who authorised the
communication, would commit only one contravention of the applicable provision
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
(Cth) ("the
Commonwealth Electoral Act
)). The Digital Amendments would have had the
effect that, by adapting a regime designed in a non-digital era for a digital
commission of 1,000 offences would become only one civil contravention.
The effect of the Digital Amendments, if the appellant's
submissions were to be
accepted, would be that the attempt by the Commonwealth Parliament to modernise
Commonwealth Electoral Act
would have badly backfired. I do not
accept that the words of the Digital Amendments were so poorly expressed that
the modernisation
attempt by the Commonwealth Parliament gutted the effect of
Commonwealth Electoral Act
in this respect.
the present appeal, the medium of communication used by the appellant was a
public page on the social networking website, Facebook.
Three infringing "posts"
were made on that public page, which was administered by the appellant. To
generalise from the finding of
fact explained most clearly in relation to the
first post, those posts were transmitted to various devices or end systems where
were accessed by a number of unique Facebook profiles belonging to
individual users. Specifically, in respect of each of the posts
found to have
contravened
Commonwealth Electoral Act
24 December 2018 post was transmitted to and received by six people, the
7 February 2019 post was transmitted to and received
by eight people, and
the 5 May 2019 post was transmitted to and received by 14 people. In total,
for these three posts combined,
the cumulative number of occasions the posts
were transmitted to and received by a unique Facebook user was 28.
to the Digital Amendments, there is no doubt that if the appellant had handed
out an infringing pamphlet to six people, another
to eight people, and a third
to 14 people then, subject to any defences, the appellant would have committed
28 offences. The enforcement
of the offences would have been particularly
impactful if those to whom the pamphlets had been provided had either requested
information or had provided a general request for information of that
nature. The contraventions in this case were the digital equivalent
of this. The
packets of data comprising the three Facebook posts were transmitted to devices
or end systems used, respectively, by
six, eight, and 14 people who either
clicked on or "followed" the Facebook page.
text of the Digital Amendments reveals, reflects, and gives effect to their
modernising purpose. No amount of anguished linguistic
analysis of verbs,
tenses, and gerunds should require the Digital Amendments to be interpreted in a
way that so thoroughly thwarts
the intention of the Commonwealth Parliament by
allowing a horse and cart to be driven through the operation of the Digital
Amendments.
The purpose of the Commonwealth Parliament's amendments did not
fundamentally miscarry. This appeal should be dismissed.
facts in outline
facts and background to this appeal are set out in detail in other reasons for
decision and can be summarised briefly. The appellant
was the administrator of a
public Facebook page. Before the primary judge, the Electoral Commissioner of
the Australian Electoral
Commission ("the Electoral Commissioner") alleged that
five posts made by the appellant on the Facebook page entitled "Redland
Let's fight for fair funding" ("the posts") were "electoral matter"
within the meaning of
Commonwealth Electoral Act
by failing to disclose his name and relevant town or city, the appellant had
contravened
in respect of each post.
primary judge held that only three of the posts contravened
three contravening posts were made by the appellant on 24 December 2018,
7 February 2019, and 5 May 2019 ("the contravening posts").
requirements for contravention that were met by these three posts included that
they were communicated for the "dominant purpose
of influencing the way electors
vote in an election (a federal election) of a member of the House of
Representatives or of Senators
for a State or
Territory".
findings of contravention were not challenged on appeal. Rather, the issues on
appeal to the Full Court of the Federal Court
of Australia were confined to
issues concerning the penalties imposed in relation to the contravening posts.
of the contravening posts was publicly available due to the public setting of
the Facebook page. Although there is some discrepancy
with the agreed statement
of facts which was not explained on this appeal, the first contravening post was
found to have had a reach
of, or unique views by, six people, the second had a
reach of eight people, and the third had a reach of 14 people. The concept of
"reach" or "unique views" is explained in the next section of these
Analogies with digital use: a Luddite's guide
appeal was rife with misleading analogies between circumstances that fell within
the terms of the
Commonwealth Electoral Act
prior to the Digital
Amendments and circumstances that fell within that legislation after the Digital
Amendments. Several basic points
must be made in simple terms. First, the
sending and receipt of bulk text messages, emails, or instant messages via an
application
is not analogous to creating and placing for public viewing a bumper
sticker on a car, a magnet on a fridge, or a corflute in front
of a house. In
the examples of digital communication to separate people, there is a digital
transfer of packets of data to a device
or end system accessed by each person.
Content is thus separately received and accessed by each recipient even if the
that digital file (including images, text, and sounds) is identical
to the content provided to many others. If an analogy must be
drawn, then the
more apt analogy is with the creation and bulk distribution to multiple people
of pamphlets or brochures. The analogy
is not with the creation and public
viewing of a single bumper sticker, fridge magnet, or corflute.
same reasoning applies where the digital communication is a post to a public
Facebook page accessed by the profile of another
Facebook user rather than a
text message, email, or other instant message sent to another. A post on a
public Facebook page is not
like a sticker or fridge magnet that sits in some
digital world waiting to be seen by ethereal beings.
is important to understand the digital operation of Facebook by reference to the
concept of "reach" which was described by the
primary judge by reference to the
evidence of Mr Pennekamp, a witness who runs a digital marketing agency.
The "reach" of a post
is the number of unique individuals who have accessed a
post through their Facebook profiles. In order for each of those individuals
have accessed the post, there must have been a transfer, to the device or end
system used or accessed by the individual, of the
packets of data that comprise
the images, text, and sounds on the public page. The reach of a post is not the
number of times that
the recipient sees the post. The post might appear several
times on the recipient's screen. Or there might also be ten people standing
around the recipient's screen when the post is displayed. Nevertheless, the
reach remains at only one user (the recipient). This
was described by the
primary judge as a "unique (individual)
order to avoid misleading analogies, the concept of "reach" must be
distinguished from a broader concept of "impressions" which
is the number of
times that a post is shown on screens. A post that "reaches" a single recipient
might have multiple impressions.
For instance, the post might be shown several
times within a short period on the recipient's Facebook feed. The "reach" can
be described as the digital equivalent of a print-on-demand pamphlet
being provided to a single person even if it is read by dozens
of people. The
"impressions" would be the dozens of people who read the pamphlet.
Full Court's finding of 28 contraventions relied upon the concept of "reach". It
appears, at least from the primary judge's findings
contravention, that the notion of the reach of the posts extending to each of
the six, eight, and 14 people to whom
each Facebook post was communicated was
based upon those individuals having "clicked on" or "followed" (effectively an
advance request
for information or content) the public Facebook
The analogy in a
non-digital world is if those people had requested or subscribed in advance to a
was no suggestion in the reasons of the primary judge or the Full Court of the
Federal Court that any of the contraventions
based upon reach arose from what
the primary judge described as "promoted posts (paid advertisements) or
suggested posts, based on
what Facebook's algorithm has determined the user may
be interested in".
even if that were the case, the analogy with multiple pamphlets would still
hold. A promoted post with a reach of 28 individuals
would be the equivalent of
28 identical pamphlets delivered by an advertising agency to 28 individuals who
may not have wished to
receive it but who the agency knows have some interest in
the subject matter.
The progenitor provisions prior to the
Digital Amendments
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1902
(Cth) provided in s 180(a)
for a criminal offence as follows:
"[a]ny publication of any electoral advertisement hand-bill or pamphlet or any
issue of any electoral notice without at the end thereof
the name and address of
the person authorizing the same, and on the face of the notice the name and
address of the person authorizing
the notice".
more than 100 years, this provision, or a provision in similar terms, remained
in the successors to the
Commonwealth Electoral Act
In 1983, the
provision was repealed and reformulated in s 160 (later renumbered
s 328) of the
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
"[a] person shall not print, publish or distribute or cause, permit or authorize
to be printed, published or distributed, an electoral
advertisement, handbill,
pamphlet or notice unless ... the name and address ... of the person who
authorized the advertisement, handbill,
pamphlet or notice appears at the end
2006, the prohibition in s 328 was supplemented by a new prohibition in
s 328A, creating an offence directed at the "[p]ublication
of electoral
advertisements on the
committed the offence where the person published, or caused, permitted, or
authorised the publication of, a paid electoral
advertisement on the internet
that was intended to affect voting at an election, and the name and address of
the person who authorised
the advertisement did not appear at the end of the
advertisement. Both ss 328 and 328A remained in force until the
commencement of
the Digital Amendments in 2018.
The purpose of these progenitor provisions was explained by this Court in
Smith v Oldham
that case, Griffith CJ described s 180 of the
Commonwealth
Electoral Act 1902
(Cth) as "not in an unusual form" for the not uncommon
offence provisions for the previous half century "requiring advertisements,
pamphlets and other election literature to bear the name of the printer and of
the person by whose authority it is
described the purpose of such provisions as
"It is a notorious fact that many persons rely upon others for their guidance,
especially in forming their opinions. It is obvious,
therefore, that the freedom
of choice of the electors at elections may be influenced by the weight
attributed by the electors to
printed articles, which weight may be greater or
less than would be attributed to those articles if the electors knew the real
Isaacs J added that "[t]he vote of every elector is a matter of concern
to the whole
Commonwealth".
Unsurprisingly,
it was not suggested on this appeal, nor could it have been suggested, that
printing, publishing, or distributing
1,000 pamphlets that violated the
progenitor provisions of the
Commonwealth Electoral Act
involved anything less than 1,000 offences. Just as the "bilateral nature of
publication underpins the long-established
common law rule that every
communication of defamatory matter founds a separate cause of
bilateral nature of publication would have founded a separate offence for each
pamphlet that was provided to a different
for the Digital Amendments
the 2016 federal election, the Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters
Interim Report on the authorisation of voter communication
("the JSCEM Report"). The JSCEM Report described
"concern has arisen when electoral material is communicated through new means
without the requirement to authorise. This places in
doubt the integrity of the
material being disseminated to the public and is at odds with the overarching
purpose of authorisation
which exists to ensure that electors know the source of
any electoral advertising they receive."
Committee concluded that "the current requirements for authorisation for print
and broadcast do not appropriately cover many
new forms of communications of
electoral materials".
Committee recommended that a consistent approach be taken with some flexibility
provided for different formats (after receiving
evidence of the unique
characteristics of some "[n]ew media" such as Twitter) where "reasonably
possible", so as not to "interfere
with the purpose of the communication, which
is to communicate with
321D was part of the Digital Amendments introduced by the enactment of the
Electoral and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2017
(Cth) ("the Bill").
The Revised Explanatory Memorandum indicated that the purpose of the Bill was to
"implement[] the Government response
to the recommendations of the JSCEM
Report", including to "appl[y] the electoral authorisation requirements to
modern communication
The offence
provisions of ss 328 and 328A were
and replaced
with a civil penalty provision,
The Revised
Explanatory Memorandum indicated that in order "to fall within the scope of the
requirement", "electoral matter must
be communicated to a person" but, if that
requirement were met, it was intended that "[a]ny method of communication is
his Second Reading Speech for the Bill, the Minister for the Environment and
Energy, Mr Frydenberg, indicated that the effect
of the Bill was "to
harmonise authorisation requirements applying to electoral communication across
different channels, addressing
gaps and inconsistencies wherever
In doing so,
the objects of the Bill were: to "address[] the recommendations made by the
first interim report of the Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters
inquiry into the 2016 federal election"; to "promote[] free and informed voting
at elections and referendums
by allowing electors to know who is communicating
with them"; and to protect the "strong public interest in ensuring voters are
of who is communicating with them without adversely impacting public
In his Second
Reading Speech in the Senate, the Assistant Minister for Social Services and
Multicultural Affairs, Mr Seselja, referred
to the findings of the JSCEM
Report that "current authorisation requirements have not kept pace with
technological
history of the Digital Amendments thus makes it clear beyond peradventure that
the purpose of the Digital Amendments was to modernise
the progenitor provisions
so that they would apply to all forms of communication in a digital era. But the
appellant's interpretation
of s 321D of the
Commonwealth Electoral Act
was contrary to this history and purpose.
appellant argued that a single "bulk" electronic communication, such as a single
email sent to ten recipients, should be treated
as only a single communication.
By contrast, the appellant accepted that "where the Communicator recreates the
message many times
with a view to conveying it to different individuals or
groups on each of those recreations", there would be multiple contraventions.
the appellant's interpretation, therefore, the email sent to ten recipients
would involve only one contravention but the bulk
photocopy of a pamphlet that
is dropped in ten letterboxes would involve multiple contraventions. The
appellant asserted that the
difference arose because in the instance of the
digital communication "the Communicator creates the message in contemplation of
being disseminated to multiple persons at once". The premise of this
difference was said to be that "[o]nce one person has received
the message ...
[s 321D] is engaged". Modern technology would mean that the instantaneous
delivery to ten email recipients would
be only one contravention but the slower
delivery of ten pamphlets would be ten contraventions. For the reasons below,
the text of
s 321D does not require the conclusion that the purpose of the
Commonwealth Parliament misfired so badly.
The text and
interpretation of s 321D in light of its history and purpose
relevant terms of s 321D are set out in the reasons of Gageler CJ,
Gleeson and Jagot JJ. The offence provision in s 321D(5) relevantly
"The notifying entity must ensure that the particulars set out in the following
table ... are notified in accordance with any requirements
determined under ...
subsection [(7)]."
required particulars in the table to which reference is made in s 321D(5)
are divided according to categories which describe
"the communication". In each
category, "communication" is used as a noun. The categories are relevantly
divided by means which include
whether "the communication" is tangible (a
sticker, fridge magnet, leaflet, flyer, pamphlet, notice, poster, or how-to-vote
or "any other communication". Plainly, the categories concerned with "any
other communication" were intended to include digital communications.
required particulars differ according to the category of "the communication" but
the particulars generally include those contained
in the progenitor provisions.
For example, in all instances, the name of the notifying entity must be
provided. In some instances,
the address of the notifying entity must be
provided. Other particulars required in some categories include the name and
of the printer who printed the communication.
321D(1) provides for the circumstances in which s 321D applies. It
specifies that s 321D "applies in relation to electoral
matter that is
communicated to a person" with the section only applying to such electoral
matter if the electoral matter falls into
one of various categories. One such
category of electoral matter, which spans both digital and non-digital forms of
communication,
is electoral advertisements that meet various
requirements.
category, relating to tangible forms of communication, is where "the [electoral]
matter forms part of a sticker, fridge magnet,
leaflet, flyer, pamphlet, notice,
poster or how-to-vote card; [and] the content of the matter was approved by [the
notifying entity]".
s 321D(1) might leave open the possibility that the notifying entity could
be further liable if a leaflet, flyer, or pamphlet
were photocopied by the
recipient (not acting as an agent of the notifying entity) and communicated to
another person, that possibility
is excluded by s 4AA(2) which requires
each recreation and communication of matter to be treated separately for the
purpose of determining
whether it is "electoral matter". The required dominant
purpose "of the
communication"
"matter communicated or intended to be
communicated"
must be the
dominant purpose of the person doing the communication. This is obviously
because "the communication" (leaflet, flyer,
or pamphlet) is not capable of
having the dominant purpose itself. The dominant purpose can only be that of the
person who engages
in the act of communication.
third category is where the electoral matter does not satisfy the requirements
of the category of electoral advertisements and
does not form part of any of the
listed tangible forms of communication but "the [electoral] matter is
communicated by, or on behalf
of, a [notifying
categories of required particulars in s 321D(5) concerning "any other
communication", this final category of electoral matter
is plainly intended to
include digital forms of communication. A note to s 321D(1) provides
"Examples of matters that may be covered by this section include internet
advertisements, bulk text messages and bulk voice calls
containing electoral
can immediately be seen that s 321D is structured in a way that divides
between the manner of communicating electoral matter by:
(i) the traditional
category of tangible forms of communication (such as where "the communication"
is a pamphlet and the electoral
matter that "is communicated" by or on behalf of
the notifying entity forms part of the pamphlet); and (ii) generally intangible
forms of communication (such as where "the communication" is an email or text
message and the electoral matter that "is communicated"
by or on behalf of the
notifying entity forms part of the email or text message). But that structure
plainly is one of convenient
exposition rather than substantive effect since the
category of electoral advertisements encompasses advertisements by both digital
and non-digital forms of communication.
term "communicate" is not defined in the
Commonwealth Electoral Act
definition section for
(of which s 321D forms a part), in
s 321B, provides only an exclusion from the scope of "communicate": "a
carriage service provider
does not communicate electoral matter merely because
the carriage service provider supplies the listed carriage service used to
communicate
the matter". The word "communicate", used as a verb in
s 321D(1), must bear its relevant, contextual, ordinary meaning.
relevant, contextual, ordinary meanings of communicate, from
communicare
(to make common), in relation to something tangible or intangible are
virtually indistinguishable. The meaning is "[t]o
"to give to
another as a partaker",
or "to impart".
some slight shade of a different meaning in relation to something intangible is
to "transmit".
specialist meaning in relation to computers is "to exchange
The essence of
this ordinary meaning of communicate is to transfer or share information from
one person to another.
light of the history, purpose, and structure of s 321D, the ordinary
meaning of "communicate", and the impossibility of any rational
contention that
the categories of "the communication" in s 321D(5) are to be treated
differently based upon the means by which the
matter is communicated, there is
only one principled interpretation of s 321D. That principled
interpretation relevantly treats "the
communication" in s 321D(5) as being
each separate form of transmission of information. Consistently with
s 321D, a separate contravention
occurs each time a form of transmission of
information "applies" so that non-complying electoral matter "is communicated to
Hence, there is a contravention on each occasion that electoral
matter is imparted or transmitted by, or on behalf of, a notifying
(whether through electronic or physical means) to another person without the
inclusion of the relevant particulars.
interpretation means that the requirements of s 321D will not be met if any
"communication" within s 321D(5) (that is, any individual
transmission of
digital or non-digital information) is not received by another. A pamphlet that
is printed but never distributed
has not been "communicated to a person". An
email that bounces back has not been "communicated to a person". A Facebook post
is posted but removed before it has any reach has not been "communicated to
a person". The mere act of posting information on Facebook
is no more a
contravention than the mere act of printing a pamphlet that is never provided to
any recipient. There is no sense of
the word "communication" (other than perhaps
in a quantum universe) in which matter that is never provided or transmitted to
is communicated.
the other hand, where the requirements of s 321D are otherwise met and no
exception applies, the number of contraventions will
be the same whether the
method of communication involves the receipt by six people of electoral matter
by the following means: imparting
six pamphlets to six different people;
transmitting an email to six different people (whether the email is transmitted
to each person
as carbon copies or as staggered transmissions); transmitting a
text message to six different people; and, in this case by reference
first contravention, transmitting a Facebook post to six different people.
Deterrence and the injustice of present authority
interpretation above is narrower than the broadest form of the Electoral
Commissioner's submission. That broad submission was
that a contravention occurs
every time that any of the forms in which a communication is made is "seen".
Hence, the Electoral Commissioner
argued, a single contravening corflute erected
outside a house by a notifying entity could involve 1,000 contraventions if
cars drove past the house and the corflute was seen by 1,000 drivers. By
analogy, a single contravening fridge magnet seen by 50
people at a party would
involve 50 contraventions.
submission should not be accepted. The progenitor provisions of the
Commonwealth Electoral Act
never created multiple offences in this way.
The notions in those progenitor provisions of printing, publishing, or
distributing were
tied to the particular tangible things that were printed,
published, or distributed. The viewing by multiple people of infringing
in a single tangible thing did not create additional offences. So too, the
reference in s 321D(1) to "electoral matter that
is communicated to a
person" is tied by s 321D(5) to "the communication" which is a tangible or
intangible creation. The viewing
by multiple people of infringing content in a
single digital transmission does not create additional offences. In the digital
this distinction is one between "reach", as relied upon by the primary
judge as described above, and "impressions".
Nevertheless,
the Electoral Commissioner argued, with the support of the reasons of the Full
that the broad
interpretation was required due to the inadequacy of the maximum penalty of
$25,200, in some cases, as general deterrence
against contraventions. For
instance, it might be thought that a maximum penalty of $25,200 would be more
than sufficient deterrence
against a contravening text message, email, or
Facebook post that might be transmitted to a single person. The effect of the
Commissioner's submission about deterrence is that a penalty of
$25,200 would be inadequate deterrence against transmitting a contravening
message, email, or Facebook post to 1,000, 10,000, or perhaps even 100,000
recipients. The Electoral Commissioner submitted
that such an approach would not
provide sufficient scope for effective general deterrence, particularly for
deterrence of "the most
egregious breaches by the most deliberate –
perhaps, repeating – contraveners with resources that make $25,000 a
reason that this submission should not be accepted is that if this Court were to
interpret the scope of a civil penalty provision
by reference to a perception
that the level set by Parliament was inadequate then the Court would heap
injustice upon injustice.
That is due to the unfortunate state of the
jurisprudence on civil penalties developed by this Court.
the context of a different civil penalty
and restating
this Court's general principles concerning civil
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v
that it was
impermissible to consider whether the penalty was proportionate to the
seriousness of the contravention when assessing
the "appropriate" civil penalty.
In that case, I expressed my grave regret for the state of the present
jurisprudence on deterrence.
I continue to hold that regret. Notions of "just
desert", a core element of justice, have been marginalised in the pursuit of
particular instances of that broad principle retained (in the form of the
totality, consistency or parity, and course of
conduct principles) as a bulwark
against the flood of injustice arising from disproportionate
damage to justice done by the approach of this Court to civil penalties is
great: "problems run deep in maintenance of the prevailing
jurisprudence on
civil penalties which is based almost entirely on
deterrence".
The decision
of this Court in
, and its predecessors, have had few friends or
supporters among those commentators who have carefully considered the subject.
consequences of the decision in
have even been the subject
of concerns expressed
extra-judicially.
commentators have pointed to anomalies and uncertainty that have arisen from the
commentators have made powerful and cogent arguments for
or not this Court should re-open that jurisprudence if an application to do so
were made is unnecessary to decide in this
appeal. The simple point is that the
present injustice created by the jurisprudence of this Court concerning
deterrence should not
be turbocharged by any further use of deterrence to expand
the conduct that will amount to a contravention in a civil penalty regime
means of what the Electoral Commissioner described as an interpretative
principle of ensuring "sufficient" deterrence. For these
reasons, therefore, I
agree with Gageler CJ, Gleeson and Jagot JJ that considerations of
deterrence should generally be irrelevant
in the interpretation of the scope of
a civil penalty regime.
Conclusion and how to restore the
intention of Parliament
my view, the intention of Parliament was not to treat as a single contravention
conduct that would previously have amounted to
1,000 pre-digital offences, such
as the distribution of 1,000 pamphlets. Instead, when electoral matter is
communicated digitally
through Facebook rather than by pamphlet, with a reach of
1,000 people and for the dominant purpose of influencing the way electors
in a federal election, the intention of Parliament was that there should be
1,000 contraventions. The reasoning of Gageler CJ,
Gleeson and
Jagot JJ in this appeal rejects that conclusion. It may be impossible to
distinguish the approach of their Honours to
the contravening posts from the
approach that would be taken to bulk emails, text messages, or other instant
messages sent digitally
with a reach of 1,000 people. In each case, packets of
digital data are sent, en masse, containing an identical message.
remedy to restore the intention of the Commonwealth Parliament must now lie with
the Commonwealth Parliament itself. If the Commonwealth
Parliament seeks to
treat digital communications in the same way as it treated non-digital
communications immediately prior to the
commencement of the Digital Amendments
in 2018, it is now necessary for s 321D of the
Commonwealth Electoral
to be made clearer. Section 321D will need to provide expressly for
that which I consider to be implicit in the present terms of the
provision. A
further express provision could be added which contains words that make it clear
that when the other requirements of
the provision are satisfied, a contravention
will occur by a notifying entity each time an unauthorised message is sent by,
behalf of, the notifying entity, and received by another person,
irrespective of whether the form of that communication is tangible
or digital.
or until any amendment is made by the Commonwealth Parliament, there will now be
a radical change in the digital equivalent
of the treatment, which has endured
for more than a century, of a political campaigner who would have committed
1,000 offences by
dropping 1,000 contravening pamphlets in letterboxes. The
political campaigner of today will commit only a single contravention by
electronic message transmitted and received by 1,000, 10,000, 100,000 or
1,000,000 unique profiles on Facebook, or on TikTok,
Reddit, or any other social
media. The same reasoning applies, by necessary analogy, to transmissions by
text message or email; indeed,
as is plain from the passages quoted from the
JSCEM Report in the introduction to these reasons, Facebook posts were intended
be treated in the same way as text messages. The democratic roadblock
presented by today's interpretation of s 321D, from which I
dissent, can be
appreciated without speaking of the penalty of $25,200 for a single
contravention of that provision having become
"an acceptable cost of doing
Regulatory Powers (Standard
Provisions) Act 2014
Commonwealth Electoral Act
Electoral Commissioner of the
Australian Electoral Commission v Laming [No 2]
[2023] FCA 917.
Electoral Commissioner of the
Australian Electoral Commission v Laming
[2024] FCAFC 109
; (2024) 304 FCR 561.
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim Report on
the authorisation of voter communication
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim Report on
the authorisation of voter communication
(2016) at 2 [1.9].
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim Report on
the authorisation of voter communication
(2016) at 3 [1.15].
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim Report on
the authorisation of voter communication
(2016) at 7 [2.1].
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim Report on
the authorisation of voter communication
(2016) at 8 [2.8]-[2.9], quoting
The Law of Politics
(2010) at 181.
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim Report on
the authorisation of voter communication
(2016) at 10 [2.18].
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim Report on
the authorisation of voter communication
(2016) at 25-26 [2.102].
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim Report on
the authorisation of voter communication
(2016) at 26 [2.105], [2.108].
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 30 March 2017 at
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 30 March 2017 at 3794.
Australia, Senate,
and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2017
Revised Explanatory
Memorandum at 2 [4].
Australia, Senate,
Electoral and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2017
Explanatory Memorandum at 24 [75].
Electoral Commissioner of
the Australian Electoral Commission v Laming
[2024] FCAFC 109
; (2024) 304 FCR 561 at 584-585
Australian Capital
Television Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
(1992) 177 CLR 106 at 135; see also at
138-140. See also
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189
CLR 520 at 559-560;
Aid/Watch Inc v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2010] HCA 42
; (2010) 241 CLR 539 at 555-556
Emphasis added.
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim Report on
the authorisation of voter communication
(2016) at 26 [2.105], [2.108];
Commonwealth Electoral Act
s 321C(2)(b).
Smith v Oldham
[1912] HCA 61
; (1912) 15
CLR 355 at 362.
Australian Building and
Construction Commissioner v Pattinson
[2022] HCA 13
; (2022) 274 CLR 450 at 469
See, to the same effect,
Electoral Commissioner v McQuestin
[2024] FCA 287
Electoral Act
Electoral Act
Electoral Act
s 4AA(5)(a).
Electoral Act
s 321E(1)(a)(i).
Electoral Act
s 321E(1)(b)(i).
Macquarie Dictionary
online, "communicate", meanings (1)-(3).
[2021] HCA 27
; (2021) 273 CLR 346.
[2021] HCA 27
; (2021) 273 CLR 346 at 376
[2021] HCA 27
; (2021) 273 CLR 346 at 376
Dow Jones & Co Inc v
(2002) 210 CLR 575 at 600 [26]-[27];
Google Inc v Duffy
(2017) 129 SASR 304 at 404 [359];
[2021] HCA 27
; (2021) 273 CLR 346 at 355
, 364 [61].
[2021] HCA 27
; (2021) 273 CLR
346 at 401-402
Electoral Act
Electoral Act
Mulholland v Australian Electoral Commission
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181;
Ruddick v The Commonwealth
(2022) 275 CLR 333.
Electoral Act
[1912] HCA 61
; (1912) 15 CLR 355 at 358.
Australian Building and
Construction Commissioner v Pattinson
[2022] HCA 13
; (2022) 274 CLR 450 at 457
, 459-460 [15]-[18].
Section 384A
provides that each civil penalty provision of the
Electoral Act
enforceable under
Regulatory Powers (Standard Provisions)
(Cth) ("the
Regulatory Powers Act
Section 82(6)
Regulatory Powers Act
provides that, in determining the pecuniary
penalty, the court must take into account, among other things, "(a) the nature
of the contravention" and "(c) the circumstances in which the
contravention took place".
See Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim Report on
the authorisation of voter communication
(2016), especially at 19-23
[2.66]‑[2.90]; Australia, House of Representatives,
Parliamentary
(Hansard), 30 March 2017 at 3793‑3795; Australia, Senate,
Electoral and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2017
, Revised Explanatory
at 2 [1], [4], 16 [48].
Inserted by the
and Other Legislation Amendment Act 2017
Electoral Act
, s 328, as in
force on 1 July 2016.
Electoral Act
, s 328A, as in
force on 1 July 2016.
Electoral Act
, s 328B, as in
force on 1 July 2016.
Electoral Act
, s 331, as in
force on 1 July 2016.
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim
Report on the authorisation of voter communication
at 20 [2.72].
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim
Report on the authorisation of voter communication
at 7 [2.1].
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim
Report on the authorisation of voter communication
at 9 [2.14] and 22 [2.87].
Commonwealth Electoral Act
(Cth), s 180(a); from 1918 to February 1984:
Commonwealth
Electoral Act 1918
; from February 1984 to 2018:
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
s 160(1)(a)
, later renumbered
s 328(1)(a) by the
Commonwealth Electoral Legislation Amendment Act 1984
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim Report on
the authorisation of voter communication
(2016) at 7 [2.2], 9 [2.14].
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 30 March 2017 at
Commonwealth Electoral Act
Commonwealth Electoral
Electoral Commissioner of
the Australian Electoral Commission v Laming [No 2]
[2023] FCA 917
Electoral Commissioner of
the Australian Electoral Commission v Laming [No 2]
[2023] FCA 917
Electoral Commissioner of
the Australian Electoral Commission v Laming [No 2]
[2023] FCA 917
Commonwealth Electoral Act
Commonwealth Electoral Legislation
Amendment Act 1983
, inserting s 160(1)(a) into the
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
(Cth), renumbered s 328(1)(a) by the
Commonwealth Electoral Legislation Amendment Act 1984
Commonwealth Electoral
Legislation Amendment Act 1983
, inserting s 160(1)(a)
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
(Cth), renumbered
s 328(1)(a) by
Commonwealth Electoral Legislation Amendment Act 1984
Electoral and Referendum
Amendment (Electoral Integrity and Other Measures) Act 2006
Sch 1, item 87.
[1912] HCA 61
; (1912) 15 CLR 355.
Smith v Oldham
[1912] HCA 61
; (1912) 15
CLR 355 at 358.
Smith v Oldham
[1912] HCA 61
; (1912) 15
CLR 355 at 358.
Smith v Oldham
[1912] HCA 61
; (1912) 15
CLR 355 at 362.
Dow Jones & Co Inc v
(2002) 210 CLR 575 at 600 [27], referring to
Duke of Brunswick v
[1849] EngR 915
; (1849) 14 QB 185 [117 ER 75];
McLean v David Syme & Co Ltd
(1970) 72 SR (NSW) 513 at 519-520, 528.
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim Report on
the authorisation of voter communication
(2016) at 7 [2.2].
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim Report on
the authorisation of voter communication
(2016) at 10 [2.18].
Australia, Joint Standing
Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal Election: Interim Report on
the authorisation of voter communication
(2016) at 23-25 [2.91]-[2.99].
Australia, Senate,
and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2017
, Revised Explanatory Memorandum at
2 [2], [4].
Electoral and Other
Legislation Amendment Act 2017
Electoral and Other
Legislation Amendment Act 2017
Australia, Senate,
and Other Legislation Amendment Bill 2017
, Revised Explanatory Memorandum at
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 30 March 2017 at
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 30 March 2017 at
Australia, Senate,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 7 September 2017 at 6734. See also
Australia, Joint Standing Committee on Electoral Matters,
The 2016 Federal
Election: Interim Report on the authorisation of voter communication
at v, 2 [1.6].
Commonwealth Electoral Act
s 321D(1)(a).
Commonwealth Electoral Act
s 321D(1)(b).
Commonwealth Electoral
Commonwealth Electoral Act
Commonwealth Electoral Act
s 321D(1)(c).
Commonwealth Electoral Act
Oxford English
, 2nd ed (1989), vol 3 at 578, “communicate”,
Macquarie Dictionary
9th ed (2023), vol 1 at 322, “communicate”, sense 1.
Oxford English Dictionary
, 2nd ed (1989), vol 3 at
577, “communicate”, sense 1.
Oxford English
, 2nd ed (1989), vol 3 at 577, “communicate”,
senses 1, 3a;
Macquarie Dictionary
, 9th ed (2023), vol 1
at 322, “communicate”, sense 1.
Oxford English
, 2nd ed (1989), vol 3 at 577,
“communicate”, sense 1;
Macquarie Dictionary
9th ed (2023), vol 1 at 322, “communicate”,
Macquarie Dictionary
9th ed (2023), vol 1 at 322, “communicate”, sense 9.
Electoral Commissioner of
the Australian Electoral Commission v Laming
[2024] FCAFC 109
; (2024) 304 FCR 561 at 565-566
, 570-571 [38], 584-585 [101], [105].
Fair Work Act 2009
The Commonwealth v Director,
Fair Work Building Industry Inspectorate
[2015] HCA 46
; (2015) 258 CLR 482 at 506
Trade Practices Commission v CSR Ltd
(1991) ATPR 41-076 at
Australian Building and Construction Commissioner v Construction,
Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(2018) 262 CLR 157 at 195-196 [116].
[2022] HCA 13
; (2022) 274 CLR 450 at 467
468 [42], 469 [44].
Australian Building
and Construction Commissioner v Pattinson
[2022] HCA 13
; (2022) 274 CLR 450 at 478
481-482 [89]-[91].
Australian Building and
Construction Commissioner v Pattinson
[2022] HCA 13
; (2022) 274 CLR 450 at 469-470
Game and Palaniappan,
"Proportionality by Another Name in the Imposition of Civil Penalties", in
Kayis, Gluer and Walpole (eds),
The Law of Civil Penalties
(2023) 50 at
65. See also Boncardo and Bromberg, "Civil Penalties in Industrial Law", in
Kayis, Gluer and Walpole (eds),
The Law of Civil Penalties
(2023) 261 at
275-276; Ramsay and Webster, "The Origins, Evolution and Merits of the Civil
Penalty Regimes Enforced by ASIC" (2024)
Company and Securities Law
261 at 281.
See Muys and Fischbein, "Beyond
all Proportion: High Court in ABCC v Pattinson Affirms Primacy of Deterrence in
Fixing Civil Penalties"
Australian Journal of Competition and
Consumer Law
See, eg, Fisse,
“Australian Cartel Law: Recent Developments – First Set of Two
Sets” (2023) 51
Australian Business Law Review
70 at 84-85.
See, eg, Gleeson and Sharma,
"Course of Conduct and Totality in Civil Penalties", in Kayis, Gluer and Walpole
The Law of Civil Penalties
(2023) 93 at 108.
Australian Building and
Construction Commissioner v Pattinson
[2022] HCA 13
; (2022) 274 CLR 450 at 460
Singtel Optus Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2012] FCAFC 20
; (2012) 287 ALR 249 at 265
Competition and Consumer Commission v TPG Internet Pty Ltd
[2013] HCA 54
; (2013) 250 CLR
RTF format (556 KB)
Signed PDF/A format