URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/2019/35.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:43:09
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
The Queen v A2; The Queen v Magennis; The Queen v Vaziri [2019] HCA 35 (16 October 2019)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
BELL, GAGELER, KEANE, NETTLE, GORDON AND EDELMAN
Matter No S43/2019
THE QUEEN APPELLANT
A2 RESPONDENT
Matter No S44/2019
THE QUEEN APPELLANT
KUBRA MAGENNIS RESPONDENT
Matter No S45/2019
THE QUEEN APPELLANT
SHABBIR MOHAMMEDBHAI VAZIRI RESPONDENT
The Queen v A2
The Queen v Magennis
Queen v Vaziri
[2019] HCA 35
16 October 2019
S44/2019 & S45/2019
Matter No S43/2019
aside the orders of the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal made on 10
August 2018.
the matter to the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal for determination of
Ground 2 of the respondent's appeal to that
Court according to law.
Matter No S44/2019
aside the orders of the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal made on 10
August 2018.
the matter to the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal for determination of
Ground 2 of the respondent's appeal to that
Court according to law.
Matter No S45/2019
aside the orders of the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal made on 10
August 2018.
the matter to the New South Wales Court of Criminal Appeal for determination of
Ground 2 of the respondent's appeal to that
Court according to law.
On appeal from the Supreme Court of New South Wales
Representation
D T Kell SC with E S Jones for the appellant in each matter (instructed by
Solicitor for Public Prosecutions (NSW))
H K Dhanji SC with D R Randle for the respondents in S43/2019 and S45/2019
(instructed by Armstrong Legal)
T A Game SC with G E L Huxley for the respondent in S44/2019 (instructed by
Armstrong Legal)
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
The Queen v A2
The Queen v Magennis
The Queen v
Statutes – Construction – Where s 45(1)(a) of
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) provides that a person who "excises, infibulates or otherwise
mutilates the whole or any part of the labia majora or labia minora
or clitoris
of another person" is liable to imprisonment – Where two respondents
charged with having "mutilated the clitoris"
of each of complainants –
Where other respondent charged with assisting those respondents following
commission of those offences
– Where defence case that procedure performed
on complainants merely ritualistic – Where trial judge directed jury that
word "mutilate" in context of female genital mutilation means "to injure to any
extent" – Where trial judge directed jury that
"clitoris" includes
"clitoral hood or prepuce" – Whether "otherwise mutilates" should be given
ordinary meaning or take account
of context of female genital mutilation –
Whether "clitoris" includes clitoral hood or prepuce – Whether trial judge
misdirected jury as to meaning of "mutilate" and "clitoris".
Appeals – Where s 6(2) of
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
provides that if appeal against conviction allowed, subject to special
provisions of Act, Court of Criminal Appeal "shall ...
quash the conviction and
direct a judgment and verdict of acquittal to be entered" – Where
provides that on appeal against conviction, Court of Criminal Appeal may order
new trial if it considers that miscarriage of justice
has occurred and it can be
more adequately remedied by order for new trial than any other order –
Where Court of Criminal Appeal
allowed appeals against convictions based on
construction of s 45(1)(a) of
and on other grounds
including that verdicts unreasonable or unsupported by evidence – Whether
open to Court to quash conviction
and decline to make further order –
Whether sufficient evidence to warrant order for new trial – Whether
matter should
be remitted to Court of Criminal Appeal for redetermination of
ground alleging that verdicts unreasonable or unsupported by evidence.
Words and phrases – "child abuse", "clitoris", "context", "de minimis
injury", "female genital mutilation", "injury", "khatna",
"mischief",
"misdirected the jury", "mutilation", "offence provisions", "otherwise
mutilates", "purposive construction", "ritualised
circumcision", "sufficient
evidence", "tissue damage", "umbrella term".
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes (Female Genital Mutilation)
Amendment Act 1994
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
CJ AND KEANE J.
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) came into
effect on 1 May 1995. It was introduced by the
Crimes (Female Genital
Mutilation) Amendment Act 1994
(NSW). The section is headed "Prohibition of
female genital mutilation". At the relevant time, s 45(1) was in these
"A person who:
(a) excises, infibulates or otherwise mutilates the whole or any part of the
labia majora or labia minora or clitoris of another
(b) aids, abets, counsels or procures a person to perform any of those acts on
another person,
is liable to imprisonment for 7 years."
respondents A2 and Ms Kubra Magennis were charged upon indictment with
having "mutilated the clitoris" of each of C1 and C2 on
separate occasions.
They were also charged with an alternative count of assault occasioning actual
bodily harm
The respondent Mr Shabbir Mohammedbhai Vaziri was charged with assisting A2
and Ms Magennis following the commission of those
and her husband, A1, are members of the Dawoodi Bohra community. The members of
this community adhere to Shia Islam. Mr Vaziri
is the head cleric and
spiritual leader of the community in Sydney. Ms Magennis is a member of
the community, and a trained nurse
and midwife. The Crown alleged at trial that
she performed the practice in question for members of the community.
Crown case was that A2 (the mother of C1 and C2) and Ms Magennis were
parties to a joint criminal enterprise to perform a ceremony
called "khatna",
which involves causing injury to a young girl's clitoris by cutting or nicking
it. The procedure was said to be
intended to suppress the development of a
girl's sexuality as she attains puberty. The Crown did not suggest that the
has a basis in religion but rather suggested that it is cultural in
procedure was allegedly conducted on each of C1 and C2 in the presence of A2 and
other family members. With respect to C1,
the procedure was allegedly conducted
at the home of A1's aunt when C1 was aged between six and eight years of age.
C2, the younger
of the sisters, was six years old when she was later allegedly
subjected to the same treatment.
respondents did not dispute that there had been a procedure performed by
Ms Magennis on C1 and C2. The defence case was that
it was merely
ritualistic and did not involve any nick or cut to the clitoris of either
complainant. To rebut this aspect of the
defence case, the Crown relied on:
the accounts given by C1 and C2, in their recorded interviews with police, of
feeling pain; expert
evidence tendered in relation to the practice of khatna
within the community; and conversations between A2, A1 and others, which
intercepted or recorded via listening devices, as to what was involved in the
respondents also argued that even if there was a cut or a nick (the latter
presumably being a lesser version of the former) to
the clitoris of either
complainant, that would not amount to "mutilation" within the meaning of
s 45(1)(a). The trial judge in the
Supreme Court, Johnson J, made a
pre-trial ruling concerning the words "otherwise mutilates" in s 45(1)(a).
His Honour subsequently
directed the jury in accordance with that ruling in
terms that:
"The word 'mutilate' in the context of female genital
mutilation means to injure to any extent."
Honour then went on regarding the Crown case to direct that:
is not necessary for the Crown to establish that serious injury resulted. In
the context of this trial, a nick or cut is capable
of constituting mutilation
for the purpose of this alleged offence."
written direction in the same terms was provided to the jury.
and Ms Magennis were each found guilty by the jury of two counts of female
genital mutilation contrary to s 45(1)(a) and Mr Vaziri
guilty of two counts of being an accessory to those offences. Johnson J
sentenced each of the respondents to an aggregate
of 15 months'
imprisonment with a non-parole period of 11 months and ordered that the
sentences imposed upon A2 and Ms Magennis be
served by way of home
detention. Mr Vaziri was required to serve his non-parole period by way of
full-time imprisonment.
appeal, the Court of Criminal Appeal (Hoeben CJ at CL, Ward JA and
Adams J) quashed the respondents' convictions and ordered verdicts
acquittal on all
Honours concluded that the trial judge had misdirected the jury as to the
"mutilates"
and that there had been a miscarriage of justice due to fresh
their Honours' view, the word "mutilates" should be given its ordinary meaning
for the purposes of s 45(1)(a). That meaning
"connotes injury or damage
that is more than superficial and which renders the body part in question
imperfect or irreparably damaged
leave to appeal was granted by Bell, Gageler and Edelman JJ on two grounds.
The first is a matter of general importance respecting
the operation of
s 45(1)(a). It is that the Court of Criminal Appeal erred in construing
"otherwise mutilates" as it did. The second
relates to the meaning the Court
gave to the term "clitoris", namely that it did not include the clitoral hood or
"Otherwise mutilates"
The reasoning of the courts below
essential difference in approach to the meaning of the term "otherwise
mutilates" in s 45(1)(a) as between the trial judge and
the Court of
Criminal Appeal is that, whilst the Court of Criminal Appeal applied the
grammatical or literal meaning of the word
"mutilates", the trial judge
considered that the meaning to be given to that word should take account of the
context in which the
word is used. In his Honour's view, the word should be
understood as part of the broader umbrella term, "female genital mutilation"
broader construction, advanced by the Crown, would best promote the purpose or
object of prohibiting such procedures generally.
This purpose is evident from
extrinsic materials and in particular the report published in June 1994 by the
Family Law Council with
respect to the practice of female genital mutilation in
Australia ("the FLC
Court of Criminal Appeal regarded it as important that the
does not use the term "female genital mutilation" in describing the elements of
the offence in
It uses only the word "mutilates". Although apparently
accepting that the term "female genital mutilation" has come to be accepted
collective name, which is to say a term encompassing all forms of cultural
ritual practices of the kind in question, the Court
of Criminal Appeal did not
consider this to be relevant given the words used in
Court of Criminal Appeal accepted that, regardless of whether there was
ambiguity in the text of
, it was permissible to have recourse to
extrinsic materials to determine the context for the offence provision,
including its purpose
and the mischief it sought to
The Court accepted that the word "mutilates" should be construed in the context
of the FLC Report and that the recommendations
contained in it informed the
legislature's purpose in enacting
However, their Honours considered
that that general purpose cannot extend the scope of the conduct prohibited by
the actual words
used. The umbrella term "female genital mutilation" was not
, and the phrase cannot supplant the meaning of the words
FLC Report, to which reference will be made shortly in these reasons, refers to
four categories of female genital mutilation.
The least severe of these
practices was referred to as "ritualised circumcision". Both the FLC Report and
the World Health Organization
("the WHO") had recommended its inclusion in the
forms of female genital mutilation to be prohibited by law, the Court of
category is relevant to the Crown case because "ritualised circumcision"
involves nicking or cutting the clitoris. The Court
of Criminal Appeal,
however, observed that while the Second Reading Speech of the Bill which became
the Act that introduced s 45
contained no disagreement with the
recommendation of the Family Law Council that all forms of female genital
mutilation be prohibited,
it was notable that the speech referred expressly only
to the three more severe forms of
Court of Criminal Appeal considered this to support the view that
s 45(1)(a) requires some more severe form of injury than
a nick or a cut
that leaves no visible scarring and which cannot be seen on medical examination
to have caused any damage (let alone
irreparable damage) to the skin or nerve
Court of Criminal Appeal concluded that the term "mutilates" controls the scope
of s 45(1)(a). It requires some imperfection
or irreparable damage to have
been caused. Their Honours accepted that "a cut or nick could, in a particular
case, amount to mutilation
The error that their Honours saw in the direction given by the trial judge was
that it included the words "to any extent", because
they suggested that a de
minimis injury would
Their Honours
if the legislature intended to encompass all forms of female genital mutilation,
legislative amendment would be necessary to
expressly incorporate the least
severe category of female genital mutilation.
Female genital
mutilation and the WHO
studies and discussion from the late nineteenth century and until the 1980s
referred to the customary ritual of some of the
practices in question as "female
circumcision"
From the late 1970s, support grew for the alternative expression "female genital
mutilation" to be used. The WHO has explained
that the term "mutilation" was
chosen to distinguish the practice from male circumcision, to emphasise the
gravity and harm of the
act and to reinforce the fact that the practice is a
violation of girls' and women's rights and thereby to promote advocacy for its
abandonment
1982, the WHO made a formal statement of its position to the United Nations
Commission on Human Rights, that governments should
adopt clear national
policies to abolish the practice of female genital mutilation and to educate the
public about its
harmfulness
By this time, four different types of the practice had been
In January 1994, the Executive Board of the WHO passed a resolution which
urged Member States to "establish national policies and
programmes that will
effectively, and with legal instruments, abolish female genital mutilation ...
and other harmful practices affecting
the health of women and
This resolution was later adopted by the Forty-seventh World Health
functions of the Family Law Council include advising and making recommendations
to the Commonwealth Attorney-General at the request
Attorney-General
In September 1993, the Attorney-General asked the Family Law Council to examine
the adequacy of existing Australian laws to deal
with the issue of female
The Family Law Council issued a discussion paper on 31 January 1994. Its
final report to the Attorney-General, the FLC Report,
is dated June 1994.
It described female genital mutilation as "the collective name" given to several
different traditional practices
that involve the cutting of female
It said that those who oppose the practice call it "genital mutilation". It
advised that the term "female genital mutilation"
is used in the report to
include all types of the practice where tissue damage
first form of female genital mutilation to which the FLC Report referred is the
least severe form, namely "ritualised circumcision",
which was referred to by
the Court of Criminal Appeal as the fourth category. The FLC Report explained
that "ritualised circumcision"
ranges from a wholly ritualised procedure to the
clitoris being "nicked" or scraped. This causes bleeding but may result in
mutilation or long term
The second form is "clitoral circumcision" or "sunna". It involves the removal
of the clitoral prepuce – the outer layer
of skin over the clitoris, which
is sometimes called the
The third form is "excision"
or "clitoridectomy", which usually involves
the removal of the entire clitoris and often parts of the labia minora as
fourth and most severe form is "infibulation", which involves removal of
virtually all of the external female genitalia and
the sewing together of the
edges of the labia
FLC Report advised that female genital mutilation mostly occurs when a female
child is between three and eight years of
not, the report stressed, a religious
The practice undoubtedly constitutes child
report identified a number of international instruments as relevant to the
practice of female genital mutilation, including
the Convention on the Rights of
Article 24(3) of the Convention requires State parties to take all
effective and appropriate measures with a view to abolishing
traditional
practices prejudicial to the health of children. Australia is a party to the
Convention, the FLC Report
it was not possible to ascertain with accuracy the incidence of the practice of
female genital mutilation in Australia,
the FLC Report concluded that even a low
incidence could not be disregarded and it might be expected that, with the
increase of migrants
to Australia, it would
The Family Law Council considered there to be a need for special legislation to
clarify the legal position relating to female genital
mutilation in Australia.
This was for reasons including that "[t]here should be no doubt in any person's
mind that all forms of
female genital mutilation are offences under Australian
concluded that there should be special legislation which makes it clear that the
practice is an offence in
recommended
that, to be fully effective, legislation should put beyond doubt "that female
genital mutilation, in all of its forms, is a criminal
offence" and that it
constitutes child abuse under Australian child protection
legislation
Explanatory Note and the Second Reading Speech
Explanatory Note which accompanied the
Crimes (Female Genital Mutilation)
Amendment Bill 1994
(NSW) referred to "[p]rocedures involving the incision,
and usually removal, of part or all of the external genitalia of young females"
as being practised as a matter of custom or
The object of the Bill was to make it an offence to mutilate external female
genitalia or to aid, abet, counsel or procure such
mutilation.
Second Reading Speech of the Bill was given in the Legislative Council of the
New South Wales Parliament on 4 May 1994. It refers
to the "detailed
report" of the Family Law Council and its recommendations with respect to the
practice of female genital mutilation.
It does not refer to the earlier
discussion paper. Although the published FLC Report bears the date
June 1994, it may be taken
as likely that advance copies were available to
those responsible for drafting the Bill and the Second Reading Speech.
Minister giving the Second Reading Speech said at the outset that "[f]emale
genital mutilation, or FGM, is the term used to describe
a number of practices
involving the mutilation of female genitals for traditional or ritual
He said that "[t]his bill will make the practice of female genital mutilation a
criminal offence in this State". The Minister
used the term "the practice"
throughout the speech to refer to female genital mutilation.
practice, he said, had been condemned at an international level and the WHO had
recommended that governments adopt clear national
policies to abolish it. Some
countries had already moved to prohibit it specifically, he observed. The
Family Law Council in its
"recently released ... detailed report ... strongly
recommended the introduction of legislation to make clear that FGM constitutes
criminal act and a form of child
The Bill, the Minister went on to say, "has its roots in the protection of
is the following description of the provisions of the Bill by the Minister which
was influential to the Court of Criminal Appeal's
reasoning. The Minister said
that "[i]t will be an offence for anyone to perform FGM in this
went on to say that "[t]he three forms of FGM in order of severity are
infibulation, clitoridectomy and
The Bill, he said, "seeks to prohibit all of these various methods of
point made by the respondents, and by the Court of Criminal Appeal, is that the
Minister did not expressly refer to ritualised
circumcision as the FLC Report
had done. The question is whether the words "or otherwise mutilates" can be
taken to refer to ritualised
circumcision.
the concluding remarks of the speech, the Minister stressed that in passing a
law against female genital mutilation, the Government
was not seeking to attack
the values of any particular group in the
However, the practice could not be tolerated, not least because it involved the
rights of young children. The Minister said that
"[a]s responsible members of
the community, we should place our condemnation of FGM beyond
Construction – method
issue in these appeals is the scope and operation of s 45(1) and in
particular whether the words "otherwise mutilates" may be
taken as intended to
encompass the procedure upon which the Crown case was based.
method to be applied in construing a statute to ascertain the intended meaning
of the words used is well settled. It commences
with a consideration of the
words of the provision itself, but it does not end there. A literal approach to
construction, which
requires the courts to obey the ordinary meaning or usage of
the words of a provision, even if the result is
has long been eschewed by this Court. It is now accepted that even words having
an apparently clear ordinary or grammatical meaning
may be ascribed a different
legal meaning after the process of construction is
This is because consideration of the context for the provision may point to
factors that tend against the ordinary usage of the
words of the
Consideration
of the context for the provision is undertaken at the first stage of the process
construction
Context is to be understood in its widest sense. It includes surrounding
statutory provisions, what may be drawn from other aspects
of the statute and
the statute as a whole. It extends to the mischief which it may be seen that
the statute is intended to
"Mischief" is an old
It may be understood to refer to a state of affairs which to date the law has
not addressed. It is in that sense a defect in the
law which is now sought to
The mischief may point most clearly to what it is that the statute seeks to
is not to suggest that a very general purpose of a statute will necessarily
provide much context for a particular provision
or that the words of the
provision should be lost sight of in the process of construction. These
considerations were emphasised
in the decisions of this Court upon which the
Court of Criminal Appeal placed some weight.
joint judgment in
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory
rejected an approach which paid no regard to the words of the provision and
sought to apply the general purpose of the statute, to
raise revenue, to derive
a very different meaning from that which could be drawn from the terms of the
provision. The general purpose
said nothing meaningful about the provision, the
text of which clearly enough conveyed its intended
Similarly, in
Saeed v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
the court below was held to have failed to consider the actual terms of the
section. A general purpose of the statute, to address
shortcomings identified
in an earlier decision of this Court, was not as useful as the intention
revealed by the terms of the statute
Baini v The
it was necessary to reiterate that the question of whether there had been a
"substantial miscarriage of justice" within the meaning
of the relevant
provision required consideration of the text of the provision, not resort to
paraphrases of the statutory language
in extrinsic materials, other cases and
different legislation.
cases serve to remind that the text of a statute is important, for it contains
the words being construed, and that a very general
purpose may not detract from
the meaning of those words. As always with statutory construction, much depends
upon the terms of the
particular statute and what may be drawn from the context
for and purpose of the provision.
of these cases suggest a return to a literal approach to construction. They do
not suggest that the text should not be read
in context and by reference to the
mischief to which the provision is
They do not deny the possibility, adverted to in
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club
that in a particular case, "if the apparently plain words of a provision are
read in the light of the mischief which the statute
was designed to overcome and
of the objects of the legislation, they may wear a very different appearance".
When a literal meaning
of words in a statute does not conform to the evident
purpose or policy of the particular provision, it is entirely appropriate for
the courts to depart from the literal
construction which promotes the purpose of a statute is to be
mischief and the purpose of s 45
was the first provision of its kind enacted in
Its terms reflect those of ss 1 and 2 of the
Prohibition of Female
Circumcision Act 1985
UK Act"). The side note (the use of which preceded that of section headings) of
s 1 was "Prohibition of female circumcision".
At the time that s 45
was passed there was no case law regarding the scope of those
s 45 picked up the words of ss 1 and 2 of the UK Act, neither the
title of the Act which introduced it nor the heading to
s 45 refers to the
older terminology, "female circumcision". The heading to s 45, and the
immediate context for the words "otherwise
mutilates", is "[p]rohibition of
female genital mutilation".
modern approach to statutory construction may take account of
Whilst headings of a provision are not always reliable and do not form part of a
and so may not govern what follows in the provision, headings may be used in a
similar way to extrinsic
They may point the way towards and be used to identify the mischief to which the
provision is directed and its purpose. The heading
of s 45 does just that.
possible gap or defect in the law which the Attorney-General had asked the
Family Law Council to consider was that relating to
female genital mutilation.
The term, it may be observed, by this time had acquired a broad and purposive
meaning in many of the
reports and discussions concerning the various practices
accounted for as female genital mutilation. But it is not necessary to
further than the meaning which the FLC Report gave to the term. It is that
meaning which identifies the mischief which needed
to be addressed by
legislation. The mischief is the practice of female genital mutilation in its
various forms.
FLC Report used the term "female genital mutilation" as a collective name to
refer to all ritual practices carried out on female
children which had no
medical benefit and involved tissue damage. It advised the Attorney-General
that there was a need for special
legislation to make it plain that female
genital mutilation, in all its forms, should be an offence.
Consistently
with its use of the term "female genital mutilation", the FLC Report referred to
its various forms collectively as "the
practice". The Second Reading Speech
adopted the terminology of the FLC Report. In the speech it was said that the
practice should
be condemned and the practice should not be tolerated. The
Second Reading Speech as a whole conveys acceptance of the FLC Report
intention to implement it.
understood, the mischief to which s 45 is directed is a gap in the law
concerning the practice of female genital mutilation in
all its forms which are
productive of injury. Its immediate purpose is to criminalise the carrying out
of that practice on female
children. Its wider purpose may be taken to be its
A narrower scope?
Court of Criminal
rejected an argument that "otherwise mutilates" should be read in the context of
the words preceding it ("excises" and "infibulates"),
so as to import a common
requirement of severe damage and injury of a high order. There is no notice of
contention which takes issue
with that approach. Nevertheless the Court of
Criminal Appeal considered that the words "otherwise mutilates" import a
requirement
that permanent disfigurement or obvious damage result from what is
Court of Criminal Appeal was of the opinion that the Minister's speech bears
this out: that the Minister can be understood to
say that it was intended to
prohibit the three most severe forms, but not the fourth, which involves a
lesser form of injury. The
problem with that approach is that it is
inexplicable and improbable. It is inexplicable given the obvious acceptance of
the recommendation
of the FLC Report to prohibit all four forms of female
genital mutilation there expressly identified. It is improbable because there
is nothing to suggest that a lesser form of injury to a child was considered to
be acceptable or, at the least, not warranting condemnation.
The Bill which
became the Act that introduced s 45, after all, was said by the Minister to
address what amounts to child abuse and
the FLC Report had said that female
genital mutilation in all its injurious forms was child abuse as understood in
child protection
Court of Criminal Appeal did not explain why the term "otherwise mutilates" may
have been intended to have a narrower, more literal
meaning, one which denies
its application to the cutting or nicking of a female child's clitoris.
Although the Court accepted that
cutting or nicking could in a particular case
amount to mutilation, on its construction of "mutilates" in s 45(1) as bearing
ordinary meaning that could only be where some lasting damage had been
Difficulties
would also attend this construction in practice. The medical evidence at trial
was that a superficial cut, or incision,
of the clitoris would heal well,
sometimes bearing little or no evidence of what had occurred. On the Court of
Criminal Appeal's
construction, it may be taken as intended that even if a child
might suffer a painful and distressing experience, no offence is committed
unless some defect or damage is apparent. This in turn might require the
prosecution to have been brought immediately.
respondents also contended that if "otherwise mutilates" has the extended
meaning provided by the term "female genital mutilation",
s 45(1) would
make it an offence to carry out a cosmetic procedure undertaken by some adult
women, such as that which involves the
piercing of the genitals. The answer to
the argument is that no such problem would arise if "otherwise mutilates" is
taken to refer
to practices to which female genital mutilation
Section 45(3)
respondents also pointed to s 45(3) in aid of the construction for which
they contended. Sub-section (3) provides, in relevant
part, that it is not
an offence against s 45(1) to perform a surgical operation if it is
necessary for the health of the person and
it is performed by a medical
practitioner. It is most clearly protective of beneficial medical procedures
such as may be necessary
during or following childbirth or to correct or repair
some of the effects of forms of female genital mutilation such as
infibulation.
point made by the respondents respecting s 45(3) is that it would be
redundant if the section proscribed the practice of female
genital mutilation,
which is necessarily for non-medical purposes. However, s 45(3),
commencing with the words "It is not an offence
against this section ...", is
properly read as a clarification inserted for the avoidance of doubt, and not as
an exception to s
Offence provisions
statutory offence provision is to be construed by reference to the ordinary
rules of construction. The old rule, that statutes
creating offences should be
strictly construed, has lost much of its
It is nevertheless accepted that offence provisions may have serious
consequences. This suggests the need for caution in accepting
any "loose"
construction of an offence
The language of a penal provision should not be unduly
Any real ambiguity as to meaning is to be resolved in favour of an accused. An
ambiguity which calls for such resolution is, however,
one which persists after
the application of the ordinary rules of
construction
meaning to be given to "otherwise mutilates", as referable to practices falling
within the umbrella term "female genital mutilation",
does not involve any
artificial or unexplained extension. There is no ambiguity as to its meaning
after it is considered in its
context and by reference to the mischief to which
it is directed and its purposes. The word "mutilates" in its ordinary usage is
simply displaced in order to give effect to the purpose of s 45, to
prohibit the practice of female genital mutilation on female
children in order
to achieve its cessation. So understood, "otherwise mutilates" is to be taken
to refer to female genital mutilation
in all its injurious forms.
Milne v The
do not avail the respondents. There, the construction for which the respondent
contended was not borne out by the text of the provision,
and its purpose,
evident from extrinsic materials, did not require it. In
SAS Trustee
Corporation v
it was said that a court should construe a statute according to its terms rather
than preconceptions about
here there is no question of any preconception. The policy of s 45 is
stark. The joint judgment in
Grajewski v Director of Public Prosecutions
adopted the ordinary meaning of the word "damage", but that was in large part
because there was no support for any other meaning
and the legislative history
did not support an extended
broad construction of an offence provision may be warranted in a particular
case. This may be when its purpose is protective.
McLachlin CJ of the Supreme Court of Canada construed offence provisions
relating to child pornography broadly in a number of respects.
interpreted the provisions in accordance with Parliament's main purpose in
creating those offences: to prevent harm
to children through sexual abuse. A
similar purposive approach was taken by the Court of Appeal of the Supreme Court
of Victoria
Clarkson v The
in rejecting an argument that "apparent or ostensible consent" could be a
mitigating factor in sexual offences relating to underage
construction which gives a broader scope to s 45 is consistent with its
wider purpose, to prohibit completely female genital mutilation
injurious to female children. That purpose is consistent with Australia's
obligations under the Convention on the Rights
of the Child, to which the FLC
Report drew attention.
which concerned the offence of slavery in s 270.3 of the
Criminal Code
(Cth), it was argued that the term "slavery" was confined in its meaning to
the exercise of powers consistent with rights of ownership,
or "chattel
slavery". Gleeson CJ observed that although the definition of slavery in
s 270.1 was not identical to that in the International
Convention to
Suppress the Slave Trade and Slavery of 1926, the s 270.1 definition was
clearly enough derived from the
The purpose, context and text of the Convention did not limit slavery to its de
jure status. The Convention was directed to "the
complete abolition of slavery
in all its forms", and reflected a purpose of bringing about the abolition of
the de facto condition
Accordingly, his Honour held that it would be inconsistent with the
considerations of purpose, context and text to read "slavery"
in ss 270.1 and
270.3 as limited to "chattel slavery".
purposive approach of this kind does not suggest that the language of a
statutory provision is to be ignored. It is rather that
a broader meaning of
the language is to be preferred over its ordinary or grammatical meaning. It is
necessary to do so to give
effect to the provision's purpose. That purpose is
evident from the use of the term "female genital mutilation" in the heading and
extrinsic materials. The word "mutilates" is to be understood as a term of
condemnation of any of the practices referred to in the
FLC Report injurious to
a female child. It follows that an injury such as cutting or nicking the
clitoris of a female child cannot
be said to be de
Injury – to any extent?
also follows that the trial judge did not misdirect the jury in summing up that
the word "'mutilate' in the context of female
genital mutilation means to injure
to any extent". The Court of Criminal Appeal, it will be recalled, considered
that those words
would convey to a jury that a de minimis injury would be
sufficient for the offence. But the trial judge's direction was legally
as consistent with the FLC Report and it provided the necessary explanation of
the issue before the jury.
function of a summing up is to provide information to a jury to assist it to
carry out its task having regard to the particular
circumstances of the
particular issue here in question was whether what occurred involved no injury
at all. It was the defence case that the khatna
ceremony was partly symbolic
and involved merely the placing of a surgical instrument on the vulva of the
complainants. It was described
as "skin sniffing the steel", and as involving
no nicking or cutting and therefore no damage or injury to the complainants.
Crown submitted that this concept was bizarre and implausible.
this background and in light of the defence submissions concerning the meaning
of "mutilates", it is apparent that the purpose
of the trial judge's direction
that injury "to any extent" was sufficient was to emphasise that some injury was
necessary but that
a threshold of serious injury was not required. His Honour,
correctly, was concerned to disabuse the jury of the notion that "mutilates"
bears its ordinary meaning.
Meaning of "clitoris"
indictment charged the respondents with the mutilation of the clitoris of each
of C1 and C2. The trial judge directed the jury
that "what the Crown has to
prove, for you to convict Kubra Magennis on this count, is that she performed an
act which mutilated
the clitoris. The clitoris ... includes the clitoral hood
or prepuce. So this charge is one that requires identification of a particular
part of the
defence had pointed to a number of dictionary definitions, including medical
dictionary definitions, which suggested that the
prepuce is part of the labia
The trial judge considered that the issue was capable of being moot to an
extent, given that the definitions and medical evidence
demonstrate that if the
prepuce is not part of the clitoris, it is part of the labia minora. But if
that were the case it might
have been necessary to amend the
Honour construed "clitoris" broadly, having regard to the context and purpose of
s 45(1). He observed that female genital mutilation
procedures are not
carried out by
Although the legislature had identified three particular areas and had not used
a broader term such as "genital area", his Honour
was satisfied that, as a
matter of construction, "the clitoris and the prepuce of the clitoris are so
closely interrelated that the
prepuce may be regarded as part of the clitoris
although, for technical purposes, it may also be regarded as part of the labia
does not appear to have been contended by the parties that the word "clitoris"
has a technical meaning which invites recourse
Nevertheless, the Crown adduced evidence from medical experts as to its meaning.
Dr Susan Marks, a specialist at the Westmead Children's
Hospital, gave
evidence that the clitoral anatomy includes its hood, because they are closely
physically related to each other, although
the clitoris and its hood are
different tissue. Professor Gregory Jenkins, a specialist gynaecologist, gave
evidence that he would
see the clitoris and prepuce as separate structures, but
observed that they are very close together. Professor Sonia Grover, the
director of the Department of Paediatric and Adolescent Gynaecology at the Royal
Children's Hospital, described the word "clitoris"
as a global term which
included structures such as the clitoral ridge, the clitoral hood, the shaft of
the clitoris, the clitoral
glans and the prepuce.
the medical evidence, the Court of Criminal Appeal observed that the fact that
Professor Jenkins considered the clitoris
and prepuce to be separate structures
"would not detract from the proposition that together they might be viewed as
forming part
of the clitoris as a
Nevertheless the Court found that the medical dictionary definitions
differentiated between the clitoris and prepuce. It said
that where the
legislature has identified separate anatomical parts of the genital area with
some precision it must be taken to be
distinguishing between them. It held that
"[g]iven that this is a penal statute, precision in identifying the relevant
The Court of Criminal Appeal concluded that the trial judge had been in error in
this aspect of his summing
approach of the trial judge to the construction of s 45(1)(a) is to be
preferred as one which promotes the purpose of
As explained above, that purpose was to prohibit all forms of injurious female
genital mutilation, procedures which, the FLC Report
are not generally carried out by surgeons or with any precision. This context
and purpose does not suggest an intention that any
narrow or technical meaning
be applied so as to exclude anatomical structures that are closely interrelated
with the labia majora,
labia minora or clitoris.
follows, in our view, that the appeals should be allowed. It remains to
determine the nature of the relief that is appropriate
circumstances.
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) provides that this Court, in its
appellate jurisdiction, may give such judgment as ought to have been given in
the first instance
and, if the cause is not pending in this Court, may remit the
cause to the court from which the appeal was brought. This directs
attention to
the powers of the Court of Criminal Appeal on the appeals to that Court, in
light of the judgment of this Court in these
to the proviso,
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW) ("the
") relevantly provides that the Court of Criminal Appeal shall allow an
appeal from a conviction on
where it is of the opinion that the verdict of the jury is "unreasonable, or
cannot be supported, having regard to the evidence,
or ... that on any other
ground whatsoever there was a miscarriage of justice".
Section 6(2)
governs the consequential orders.
Court of Criminal Appeal allowed the respondents' appeals against their
convictions on various grounds. The determination of
two of those grounds
depended upon the Court of Criminal Appeal's erroneous construction of
. Other successful grounds were,
however, independent of the substantive issues on these appeals. Those grounds
turned instead upon
conclusions that evidence had improperly been admitted at
the respondents'
that the trial judge had erred in ruling that C2 was competent to give sworn
and that there had been a miscarriage of justice on account of the absence from
the trial of medical evidence which, by the time
of the appeals, had become
first such error concerned the evidence of Dr X. The Crown tendered
evidence at trial through Dr X as to the practice of khatna
in the Dawoodi
Bohra community in India in a period up to 1991. Dr X's knowledge was
based on her personal experience of having
a procedure undertaken on her genital
area in 1950 or 1951, and on sociological studies based largely on anecdotal
accounts from
persons whom she interviewed. Her evidence was to the effect that
the practice of khatna is static and non-ritualistic.
Court of Criminal Appeal held that the evidence adduced from Dr X was
partly speculative and was not derived from any area of
specialised knowledge.
It was not admissible under
Evidence Act 1995
which relates to expert evidence, and should not have been
The appellant does not now challenge that conclusion.
third error concerned new medical evidence which was adduced before the Court of
Criminal Appeal. It is not necessary to detail
it. It had the effect of
excluding the possibility that the tip of the clitoral head or glans had in fact
been removed from C1 and
C2. That possibility had been left before the jury, in
light of the evidence of one of the expert medical witnesses that she could
see the clitoral glans of either C1 or C2 during her examinations of them.
Again, the appellant does not challenge the conclusion
of the Court of Criminal
Appeal that a potential miscarriage of justice thereby occurred.
light of those concessions the appellant also concedes that, if its appeals to
this Court are successful, this Court should leave
undisturbed the Court of
Criminal Appeal's orders allowing the respondents' appeals to that Court and
quashing their convictions.
But what the appellant did ask this Court to do if
its appeals were allowed was to set aside the Court of Criminal Appeal's
consequential
orders entering verdicts of acquittal and, in their place, order
that new trials be had. The respondents argued that, if the appeals
allowed, this Court should set aside the orders entering the verdicts of
acquittal and make no orders for new trials. In the
alternative, it was said to
be open to this Court to allow each appeal but leave undisturbed the Court of
Criminal Appeal's orders
entering verdicts of acquittal.
provides that if an appeal against conviction is allowed, the
Court of Criminal Appeal "shall ... quash the conviction and direct
and verdict of acquittal to be entered". The sub-section is subject to other
provisions of the
and, in particular,
, which provides that on an
appeal the Court may order a new trial if it considers that a miscarriage of
justice has occurred and
that, having regard to all the circumstances, the
miscarriage can be more adequately remedied by an order for a new trial than by
any other order which the Court is empowered to make. The orders sought by the
respondents seem contrary to the terms of
Here context provides
little assistance in the construction of
except that, taken with
, it appears to provide only a binary choice. The terms of
appear to require an order for entry of acquittal unless the Court's
other powers, such as that to order a retrial, are exercised.
The premise of
, in a case such as this, is that, if a retrial is not ordered, the
person whose conviction has been set aside is entitled to an acquittal.
may be observed that in
Jiminez v The
where it was not considered appropriate to order a retrial, this Court ordered
the entry of a verdict of acquittal. The reasons
discuss the option here suggested and no other decision of this Court appears to
have discussed the question in any detail.
In these circumstances the parties
provided further written submissions at the request of the Court.
their joint submissions the respondents argued that it is open to the Court to
quash the conviction and decline to make a further
order. They pointed to a
number of cases where this has occurred. None of these cases explains how this
choice was seen to be open
as a matter of the construction of
cases to which the respondents referred are explicable on another basis. Cases
Maher v The
stand for the proposition that there is no need to enter a verdict of acquittal
where it has been held that the trial itself is a
nullity, or where the
indictment is invalid. In
Simpson J pointed out that the inevitable consequence of allowing an appeal
is the quashing of the conviction. The dilemma, her
Honour noted, was how the
Court could then declare the trials to be a nullity – never to have taken
place – and yet order
new trials to be had. In that circumstance, her
Honour opined, the Court should merely quash the conviction. Whatever be the
approach in cases of this kind, these cases do not support the
proposition that it is open to the Court to quash a conviction but
not order a
retrial or enter a verdict of acquittal.
is true that there are some cases where this Court has simply made an order
but, as they do not contain any discussion of whether a verdict of acquittal
ought to be entered in circumstances where the Court
determined not to order a
retrial, the omission of an order entering a verdict of acquittal may have been
the product of oversight.
Gerakiteys v The
upon which the respondents relied, it was held that the applicant's conviction
on a broad conspiracy charge could not be supported
by the evidence and
therefore should be quashed. For the same reason, it was not considered to be
appropriate to order a retrial.
Gibbs CJ discussed whether it was appropriate
to order a retrial and
that the appropriate course was simply to quash the conviction and leave it to
the Crown to decide whether to prosecute in respect
of one or other of the more
limited conspiracies which could be supported by the evidence. His Honour did
not discuss the entry
of a verdict of acquittal. None was sought. Each of
expressed the view that the applicant was in the circumstances entitled to an
Ipp A-JA, referring to
(1), said that these provisions "do not
empower the court to order that no new trial should be held. Nor do they
empower the court
to quash the conviction and make no other order." The view
that these provisions present the only alternatives where an appeal against
conviction on indictment is allowed is consistent with statements by members of
this Court in
that "[t]he question is whether an order for a new trial is a more adequate
remedy for the flaws in that trial than an order for
an acquittal" and in
Spies v The
that "[i]f this Court were now to refuse to order a new trial of that charge,
the appellant would be acquitted of all charges".
follows in our view that it is not open to construe
as permitting the Court of Criminal Appeal in a case such as the present
to quash the respondents' convictions but neither order
a new trial nor enter
verdicts of acquittal. That is sufficient to dispose of the respondents'
primary contention.
A new trial?
to the respondents' alternative contention, unless the interests of justice
require the entry of a verdict of acquittal, an appellate
court would ordinarily
order a new trial where there is sufficient evidence to support a
is well settled that provisions such as
confer a discretion to order
There may be factors which suggest that such an order is not
appropriate
In the present case there are some such factors. C1 and C2 were children when
they were interviewed by police and when they gave
evidence at a trial which
took place in 2015. The trial judge, in considering whether C1 and C2 were
compellable to give evidence
against their mother, accepted that there was a
likelihood that psychological harm might be caused to them. There could be
doubt that a second trial would compound that distress. Unlike cases
involving sexual offences, C1 and C2 would be required to give
evidence at a new
trial. The provision of the
Criminal Procedure Act 1986
protects vulnerable
does not permit the tender of a complainant's original evidence at a retrial of
offences contrary to
Additionally, A2 and Ms Magennis have served the sentences imposed on them, and
Mr Vaziri served three months of his sentence in
full-time imprisonment and was
then subject to strict bail conditions for a period of more than
factors might be thought to point against an order for new trials. The dilemma
which it might create for a court is that a
verdict of acquittal does not seem
appropriate either. It was, in part, to this difficulty that the parties'
arguments concerning
ss 6(2) and
(1) were addressed. It seems to us that,
in the special circumstances of this case, there may be another course open. It
is to order
a new trial and leave the question whether one be had to the
discretion of the Crown.
is, however, a question which is necessarily antecedent to considerations of
this kind. It is that mentioned earlier, whether
there is sufficient evidence
to warrant an order for a new trial.
The test of
sufficiency
question of whether there is sufficient evidence to support a conviction is
ordinarily to be determined in accordance with the
Doney v The Queen
"[I]f there is evidence (even if
tenuous or inherently weak or vague) which can be taken into account by the jury
in its deliberations
and that evidence is capable of supporting a verdict of
guilty, the matter must be left to the jury for its decision. Or, to put
matter in more usual terms, a verdict of not guilty may be directed only if
there is a defect in the evidence such that, taken
at its highest, it will not
sustain a verdict of guilty."
stands in contrast to the test in
that is applied in the determination of whether a verdict is unreasonable or
unsafe and unsatisfactory:
"Where, notwithstanding that as a matter
of law there is evidence to sustain a verdict, a court of criminal appeal is
asked to conclude
that the verdict is unsafe or unsatisfactory, the question
which the court must ask itself is whether it thinks that upon the whole
evidence it was open to the jury to be satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that
the accused was guilty. But in answering that
question the court must not
disregard or discount either the consideration that the jury is the body
entrusted with the primary responsibility
of determining guilt or innocence, or
the consideration that the jury has had the benefit of having seen and heard the
On the contrary, the court must pay full regard to those
considerations."
consideration of the "interests of justice" may accommodate or require the
application of this more stringent standard of
at the first stage of the analysis consideration of the sufficiency of the
evidence invokes the lesser standard identified in
Peacock v The
the question as being whether the evidence is "capable of the inference of
guilt, albeit some other inference or theory be possible
[and, if so] it is for
the jury ... to say ... whether the inference ... overcomes all other inferences
or hypotheses, as to leave
no reasonable doubt of guilt in their minds". In
Director of Public Prosecutions (Nauru) v
Gibbs CJ, Murphy, Wilson, Dawson and Deane JJ posed the question in
terms of whether "the admissible evidence given at the original
sufficiently cogent to justify a conviction". In
Spies v The
Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Hayne JJ stated the test in terms of whether
"there is evidence to support the charge".
Application
test requires assessment of the sufficiency of the evidence
taking the prosecution evidence (including the answers of prosecution
to cross-examination) at its highest and drawing all inferences favourable to
the prosecution case that are reasonably
If the case is circumstantial, it is not to the point that the court may
consider an hypothesis consistent with innocence to be
reasonably open on the
The question is whether a jury, taking the evidence at its highest and drawing
all reasonably open inferences that are most favourable
to the Crown,
rationally exclude that
Subject to contrary statutory provision, the court does not need to consider
evidence that contradicts, qualifies or explains the
prosecution's case or that
supports the accused's
That requires consideration of the evidence.
The evidence
i) Admissions and matters not in dispute
trial, the respondents defended the charges on a narrow basis. They did not
dispute (and, in the case of A2 and Ms Magennis,
formally admitted in their
Notices of Defence Response) that A2 was present in a room with the complainants
on the relevant occasions
while Ms Magennis examined and made contact with the
complainants' genitalia during a "symbolic ceremony" that involved the placing
of forceps on the vulva (not the clitoris) of the complainants without cutting
them. This procedure was described as "skin sniffing
the steel". Though Mr
Vaziri was not present during the procedures, his defence was, in effect, common
to that of A2 and Ms Magennis,
because he did not dispute that he had assisted
in covering up their actions.
ii) C1's evidence
evidence was adduced in the form of a recorded interview conducted by two
members of the Joint Investigation Response Team ("the
JIRT") on 29 August
2012 and supplemented by her oral testimony at trial. During the interview, C1
was asked about "khatana [sic]".
When asked what the procedure involved, she
stated that "[w]ell, they give um, a little cut there", by which she meant "[i]n
private part". It is, as the Court of Criminal Appeal
to be observed that the concept of "cutting" was first introduced by the
interviewer, as was the concept of "cutting to the private
part". Nevertheless,
C1 explained that she knew what "khatana" was "[b]ecause it's happened to me".
She said that when she was
seven years old she had had her private part cut by
an unknown female at her grandmother's sister's house. She told investigators
that "my mum tells me not to go around telling everyone that much".
trial, C1 said that during the procedure she had seen a "silver toolish thing"
and that it looked a bit like scissors: "it had
sort of a point, a roundish
stick sort of thing and two finger-holes I think. I'm not sure." C1 drew the
implement and the drawing
was tendered on the trial as Exhibit B.
Thereafter,
C1 was told to close her eyes. Consequently, she did not see the procedure
occur. But she knew something had happened
because she felt "a bit of pain and
then a weird sort of feeling" in her private parts. She was unsure of the
nature of the pain,
describing it as like "a pinching or a cutting, I'm not
sure", and, in re-examination, she said that "I don't really think it was
pinching, it just felt a bit like it. ... I'm not completely sure if it was
cut, although it is most likely it was cut". There
was no lasting pain. She
saw no blood at that, or any other, time.
also stated that while the procedure was being performed there were a number of
women, including A2 (her mother), A5 (her paternal
grandmother), A3 (her
paternal grandaunt) and another unknown female (on the Crown case, Ms Magennis)
surrounding her to "calm [her]
iii) C2's evidence
C1, C2's evidence was adduced in the form of a recorded interview conducted by
the same two members of the JIRT on 29 August
2012 and supplemented by her oral
testimony at trial. C2 had an intellectual disability and, as we have observed,
on that and other
bases the Court of Criminal Appeal allowed a ground of appeal
alleging that she was not competent to give sworn
Nevertheless,
in her JIRT interview C2 was asked the (admittedly leading) question, "[w]e
heard that you had had a cut on your private
parts. Is that true?" C2
answered, "[y]es". When further questioned, C2 told the JIRT members that she
remembered an occasion
when she had been lying down on cushions in her parents'
C2 was unable to identify "the private part" on a "body sketch", tendered as
Exhibit C. The Court of Criminal Appeal described
the sketch as showing that
the words "tummy" and "knee" were written with an arrow pointing to those parts
of the body. This Court
has not been provided with a copy of that exhibit.
asked whether she knew what khatna was, C2 indicated that she did not know.
When asked who else was home during the procedure,
C2 said, "I don't want to
also provided some limited evidence regarding the alleged offence against C2.
She said that the last time she saw the woman who
had performed the procedure on
her was "when she had to do that thing to my sister".
of conversations recorded by listening device and telephone
was a large body of covertly recorded evidence of conversations between A2, Ms
Magennis, Mr Vaziri and other, uncharged persons
such as A2's husband (A1), A1's
aunt (A3), and a religious authority. In brief, it consisted of evidence that
was said to demonstrate
that the respondents had an awareness of the practice of
khatna and that they understood it to involve
and evidence said to demonstrate a consciousness of guilt (most notably
concerning the "Africa checking
and A2's admonishment of the complainants, following their interviews, for
revealing "a big secret"). It will be necessary to say
something more of that
evidence later in these reasons.
v) Medical evidence
noted earlier, expert medical evidence was given by Dr Marks, who clinically
examined C1 and C2 in 2012, and Professors Jenkins
and Grover, who interpreted
Dr Marks' clinical findings and made other relevant observations. In substance,
their evidence fell
into three broad categories: evidence interpreting Dr
Marks' inability to visualise the clitoral glans (the possibility of excision
the glans versus innocent possibilities, such as difficulty visualising the
glans for ordinary developmental
evidence regarding the degree of pain, bleeding and scarring one would
anticipate if the clitoris or prepuce had been cut; and evidence
regarding the
anatomy of the clitoris and, specifically, whether the prepuce forms a part of
the clitoris.
vi) The evidence of Dr X
X was a retired professor who had taught in Mumbai for 36 years in the areas of
psychology and women's studies. Her evidence
regarding the practice of female
genital mutilation within the Dawoodi Bohra community was based on a combination
of academic research,
interviews with participants in female genital mutilation
procedures, and personal knowledge derived from her membership of the Dawoodi
Bohra community and the experience of having been the victim of female genital
mutilation as a child. She gave evidence to the effect
that the practice of
khatna within the Dawoodi Bohra community in India involved the excision of a
part of the clitoris or prepuce
and that the practice within that community was
"static", in the sense that it neither changed over time nor varied depending on
the location of the community. As has been seen, the Court of Criminal Appeal
partially upheld a ground concerning the admissibility
of Dr X's evidence,
and the appellant did not seek to impugn that holding in this Court. That
eliminates the capacity of Dr X's
evidence to prove what procedure was
vii) Miscellaneous exculpatory evidence
Court of Criminal Appeal noted the existence of numerous items of, at least
arguably, exculpatory evidence. They included representations
recorded in the
surveillance material which were consistent with discussion by the respondents
of a symbolic ceremony; evidence of
A3, that on the day of C1's procedure A2 had
told her she wanted to conduct a "symbolic khatna" and that A3 had heard Ms
tell C1 words to the effect of, "it won't hurt you. I'm just going to
touch you"; and evidence of Ms Magennis, who positively asserted
the defence
hypothesis. In answer to C1's evidence of experiencing some transient pain
during the ceremony, Ms Magennis gave evidence
that she, Ms Magennis, was
an insulin-dependent diabetic, that she had performed the procedure when she had
not eaten, that she was,
therefore, probably hypoglycaemic, and that her hands
had been shaking, so as to suggest in effect that she, Ms Magennis, might have
pinched or pressed against C1's genital area, thereby causing pain
accidentally.
Evidence sufficient to convict
the prosecution cases in relation to C1 and C2 at their highest, and drawing all
inferences most favourable to the Crown,
the evidence supports inferences that
C1 and C2 were both subjected to a procedure that involved a cut or nick to
their clitoris
or closely interrelated tissue. A jury would be entitled to
accept C1's evidence that she felt pain and that the pain felt most
and did not feel like pinching. So, too, would the jury be entitled to accept
C2's evidence that she had experienced
pain and, despite her statement that the
pain was in her "bottom", to conclude that C2 was describing pain in her
genitals. That
arises as a rational inference from the combination of A2's and
Ms Magennis' admissions that an implement had been placed on that
and the evidence which demonstrated that C2's descriptions of her body parts
were imprecise.
would further be reasonably open to a jury to infer, on balance, that C1
recalled seeing a pair of scissors. Such an inference
would rationally be
supported by the description C1 gave of the implement in her interview ("a
silver toolish thing"); C1's subsequent
statement to A1 that "yes, once [the
interviewers] asked for scissors ... I saw scissor ... [t]hey do something with
scissors?";
and the fact that during the interview no reference had been made to
scissors. Those considerations permitted the inference that
C1's description
was unprompted by anything said by the investigators. If a jury inferred from
these or other matters that C1 recalled
seeing scissors, it would be rationally
open to the jury to accept that C1's recollection was correct.
Furthermore,
even if a jury were to take into account evidence which was exculpatory (and for
the purposes of this exercise that
possibility can be excluded), a rational jury
could discount the significance of the medical evidence that there was no
visible damage
to the relevant body parts on the basis of the medical evidence
that "the genital region heals rapidly and very well, typically without
a scar", and, therefore, that any injury caused by a cut or a nick might be "not
obvious at all". Similarly, a jury could
rationally conclude that it was
immaterial that neither complainant reported seeing blood: the blood might have
been overlooked.
would also be reasonably open to a jury, on balance, to infer from the body of
covertly recorded evidence, including, particularly,
the conversations between
A1 and A2, and between A1 and A2 and A1's mother and aunt (A5 and A3,
respectively), on 29 August 2012,
that A2 and A1 had an awareness of the
practice of khatna and that they understood that practice to involve
circumcision. It would
be open to a jury to infer from A2's response to A1's
questions on that day ("[i]n us do they cut skin? ... or do they cut the whole
clitoris?") that "[n]o they just do a little bit ... just little" that A2
understood circumcision in this context to involve the
cutting of the skin of,
or tissue closely related to, the clitoris. It would be open to infer from the
use of the word "us" that
this question and answer concerned, at least, the
practice in the local Dawoodi Bohra community, of which A2 and her family were
members, if not the practice within A1 and A2's immediate family.
a similar fashion, the covertly recorded telephone call between A2 and Ms
Magennis on 30 August 2012 would be rationally capable
of supporting the
inference that some minor injury was caused to the complainants' genitals. In
substance, that conversation was
that when told that the children were going to
be examined at Westmead Hospital, Ms Magennis said, "[n]o ... No... Because
I do no one knows even little bit." She later said, "[i]f they
asked. You can say kids are playing on swings, they play in the
can happen if they fall". On balance, it is open to infer from the
expression "the
I do" (compared to, say, "I didn't do anything"), as
well as the reference to a "graze", that Ms Magennis was describing a procedure
that involved some minor or transient injury to the genitals which should not be
apparent to the examining professionals but, if
it were, could be explained on
the basis of a playtime injury. Similarly, a jury might rationally conclude
that Ms Magennis' reference
to there being "no scar or anything there" was more
probably premised on an understanding that there had been some injury but that,
because of the "way" Ms Magennis had performed the procedure, the injury
would not have been long-lasting.
generally, the jury would be entitled to regard this body of evidence as tending
to prove, on balance, that the respondents
had lied to the police, encouraged
others to do so, or admonished one or other of the complainants for speaking
and, in particular, might infer on balance from the
evidence that it tended to prove that the respondents had lied regarding their
understanding of khatna as a practice that involves cutting, and that the
respondents were conscious that they were guilty
the procedures
had involved cutting or nicking.
as a whole, these intermediate findings, including, specifically, the fact that
C1 and C2 had experienced pain in their genital
areas; the fact that A2 had
requested that Ms Magennis perform the procedure and had been present during the
procedure; the fact
that A2 understood khatna "in us" to involve a "little" cut
to the clitoris; the evidence of lies, general and specific; and the
the recorded statements, which demonstrated A2's understanding of the nature of
the practice, occurred in the immediate
context of conversations regarding the
ongoing police investigation into procedures at that time suspected to have
been performed on C1 and C2
, would be capable of supporting the rational
conclusion beyond reasonable doubt that the procedure performed on C1 and C2
a cut or nick.
The matter should be remitted to the
Court of Criminal Appeal
the Court of Criminal Appeal, each of the respondents pressed grounds alleging
that the verdicts were unreasonable. Those grounds
were allowed but only on the
basis that the expression "otherwise mutilates" necessitates that the relevant
body part be rendered
"imperfect or irreparably damaged in some
and that the word "clitoris" does not include the prepuce. The Court of
Criminal Appeal
that, upon that construction of the legislation, the verdicts on the
counts were unreasonable or unsupported by the evidence.
the view which this Court takes of the meaning of "otherwise mutilates" and
"clitoris", it now remains to determine whether
the jury's verdict was, even so,
unreasonable according to the test in
M v The Queen
. That necessitates a
full review of the evidence led at trial, and, allowing for the advantages
enjoyed by the jury, the determination
of whether there is no reasonable
possibility that the complainants' clitorises (or any closely interrelated
tissue) were not injured
"to any extent".
judgment of the Court of Criminal Appeal implies that their Honours had doubts
the alternative counts. Read in
context, those doubts appear as directed to the physical element that an assault
charged under
occasioned "actual bodily
On the question of whether the alleged
had occurred, the Court of
Criminal Appeal
that "it would be open to a jury to reject the defence case that a 'skin
sniffing the steel' ritual was performed in this matter,
given the covertly
recorded conversations and the admitted lies told regarding the Africa checking
To so conclude, however, did not require application of the standard of review
identified in
M v The Queen
is neither practical nor appropriate for this Court to undertake a full review
of the evidence. It is not practical because this
Court does not have access to
the whole of the record. The only record of the evidence at trial is that which
is contained, in summary
form, in the judgments below; and, as has consistently
been held in this Court, it is not appropriate for this Court to consider
sufficiency of the evidence when that task has not been undertaken by the court
In those circumstances, the appropriate order is that each matter be remitted to
the Court of Criminal Appeal for determination
of Ground 2 of each
respondent's appeal to that Court in light of the proper construction of
s 45(1)(a).
appeals should be allowed and the orders of the Court of Criminal Appeal be set
aside. Each matter should be remitted to the
Court of Criminal Appeal for
determination of Ground 2 of each respondent's appeal to that Court according to
AND GAGELER JJ. The facts and procedural history are set out in the joint
reasons of Kiefel CJ and Keane J and need not be
repeated save to the extent
that is necessary to explain these reasons. The principal issue in the appeals
is the legal meaning
of the words "otherwise mutilates" in
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) ("the Act"). The s 45(1)(a) offences with
which the respondents were charged were alleged to have been committed between
October 2009 and 9 October 2012. At all material times, s 45(1)(a)
provided that "[a] person who ... excises, infibulates or otherwise
the whole or any part of the labia majora or labia minora or clitoris of another
person" is liable to imprisonment for
was the prosecution case that Kubra Magennis was the principal in the first
degree and A2 the principal in the second degree in
relation to each offence and
that Shabbir Vaziri was an accessory after the fact to each offence. The
indictment contained alternative
counts alleging the aggravated assault
occasioning actual bodily harm of C1 and
counts charging the s 45(1)(a) offences averred that A2 and Kubra Magennis
"mutilated the clitoris" of C1 and C2 respectively.
On the trial of each
respondent for the s 45(1)(a) offences, it was incumbent on the prosecution
to prove that Kubra Magennis' act
resulted in the mutilation of the clitoris of
C1 and C2, as the case may be.
jury was directed that:
"The word 'mutilate' in the context of
female genital mutilation means to injure to any extent. It is not necessary
for the Crown
to establish that serious injury resulted. In the context of this
trial, a nick or cut is capable of constituting mutilation for
the purpose of
this alleged offence."
upholding the respondents' challenge to this direction, the Court of Criminal
Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South Wales said
that the superficial
shedding of skin cells as the result of a nick or cut that leaves no visible
scarring, and that on medical examination
is not found to have occasioned damage
to the skin or nerve tissue, does not amount to mutilation of the clitoris
within the meaning
Their Honours held that, while a cut or nick might result in the mutilation of
the clitoris, the words "to any extent" wrongly conveyed
injury would suffice to establish the
evidence before the Court of Criminal Appeal established that C1's external
genitalia were normal and there was no evidence of
any scarring or previous
trauma to the clitoral glans or clitoral hood. The evidence with respect to C2
was to the same effect.
The Court of Criminal Appeal allowed the respondents'
appeals, quashed their convictions and entered verdicts of acquittal. For
reasons to be given, we consider that the Court of Criminal Appeal's
interpretation of the words "otherwise mutilates" in s 45(1)(a)
is correct and,
in light of the evidence, including the fresh evidence received on the appeals,
that the Court of Criminal Appeal
was right to enter verdicts of acquittal on
the s 45(1)(a) counts. (The appellant does not challenge the Court of
Criminal Appeal's
orders entering verdicts of acquittal on the alternative
counts). It follows that we would dismiss the appeals.
Section 45(1)(a)
of the Act is modelled on s 1(1)(a) of the
Prohibition of Female
Circumcision Act 1985
(UK), which made it an offence for any person to
"excise, infibulate or otherwise mutilate the whole or any part of the labia
or labia minora or clitoris of another person". Section 45 was inserted
into the Act by the
Crimes (Female Genital Mutilation) Amendment Act 1994
(NSW) ("the Amending Act"), the long title of which is "An Act to amend the
Crimes Act 1900
to prohibit female genital mutilation". The heading of
"Prohibition of female genital mutilation".
appellant accepts that, as a matter of ordinary English, the word "mutilates"
connotes "a higher level of injury" than an injury
"to any extent". The
appellant contends that the Court of Criminal Appeal erred in construing the
offence created by
by giving the verb "mutilates" its ordinary
In this statutory context, so the argument goes, the verb "mutilates" takes its
meaning from the collective phrase "female genital
mutilation" and, so
understood, extends to ritualised practices that occasion any transient damage
to the tissue of the clitoris,
labia majora or labia minora (collectively,
principles of interpretation were not in issue on the hearing of the appeals.
In assigning legal meaning to the words of a provision,
the court starts with
consideration of the ordinary and grammatical meaning of the words taking into
account both context and legislative
Consideration of context in its widest sense and the purpose of the statute
informs the interpretative task
That consideration, and the consequences of giving a provision its literal,
grammatical meaning, may lead the court to adopt a construction
that departs
from the ordinary meaning of the
Purposive construction, however, does not extend to expanding the scope of a
provision imposing criminal liability beyond its textual
is not a case in which the words of the provision accommodate a range of
meanings including the meaning for which the appellant
This Court is asked to depart from the ordinary meaning of the language of the
offence-creating provision and to extend its reach
by recourse to a collective
phrase used in the heading, which does not form part of the
The appellant maintains that, when regard is had to the extrinsic material, it
is clear that the object of enacting
was to prohibit the practice of
female genital mutilation in all its forms, including ritualised practices in
which the clitoris
is nicked leaving no scar or other detectable damage
("ritualised practices"). To give the words "otherwise mutilates" their
meaning on this analysis is to produce a result that is manifestly
unreasonable
The appellant's argument invokes
Interpretation Act 1987
(NSW), which requires the court to prefer a construction which promotes the
purpose or object of the Act.
Recognition
that the object of enacting s 45 was the prohibition of "female genital
mutilation" says nothing as to the conduct that
the legislature is to be taken
to have intended to fall within the scope of the prohibition. At least that is
so unless that collective
phrase can be said to have had a settled meaning at
the date the Amending Act was enacted. Critical to acceptance of the
appellant's
submission is the contention that, at that date, there could be no
doubt that the expression "female genital mutilation" had a meaning
included ritualised practices. The submission instances
Black's Law
"[F]rom 1979,
Black's Law Dictionary
contained a definition of 'female
genital mutilation' as follows: '1. Female circumcision. 2. The act of
cutting, or cutting off,
one or more female sexual organs.'"
reliance on Black is misconceived. The 5th edition of Black, published in 1979,
did not contain a definition of the collective
phrase "female genital
mutilation". In the 9th edition, published in 2009, the editors introduced a
convention of recording in parentheses
the date of the first known use of
defined terms. The 9th edition contained a definition of "female genital
mutilation" and recorded
in parentheses the first known use of the expression as
having been in 1979. It is likely that the reference is to a seminar held
association with the World Health Organization ("the WHO") in 1979 in Khartoum
("the Khartoum seminar") in which a session was
devoted to the topic of female
circumcision.
trial judge's analysis suffered from a similar misconception. His Honour said
that the word "mutilates" was to be understood
as taking its meaning from the
expression "female genital mutilation", which had "become a type of term of art
or catch-all term,
describing a range of conduct extending from ... cutting
(including a nick) to ... infibulation and clitoridectomy". His Honour
in this connection to the online version of the
Macquarie Dictionary
which defines "female genital mutilation" in terms that include a "ritualistic
nick". In the Court of Criminal Appeal, the appellant
acknowledged "that there
is some difficulty in relying on a dictionary definition that may not have been
in existence" at the date
of the enactment of s 45. The concession was
well made. It appears that a definition of the collective phrase "female
genital mutilation"
first appeared in the 2013 edition of the
this Court, the appellant's principal reliance is on references in the
Minister's second reading speech on the Bill for the Amending
Minister's speech") to the recommendations of the WHO and the Family Law Council
of Australia with respect to the prohibition
of the practice of female genital
In particular, the appellant relies on the definition of "female genital
mutilation" adopted by the Family Law Council as supporting
its contention that,
at the date of the enactment of the Amending Act, the collective phrase had the
settled meaning for which it
contends. As will appear, the contemporary
materials to which this Court was taken do not establish that this is so.
January 1994, the Family Law Council issued a Discussion Paper on the topic of
female genital mutilation ("the Discussion
The expression "female genital mutilation" was used in the Discussion Paper to
"embrace all types of circumcision, other than mere
ritual, where an incision is
made in the girl's genital
The practice of female genital mutilation was described as involving any one of
four procedures, in order from least to most severe,
as follows: (i) ritualised
circumcision, involving cleaning and/or application of substances around the
clitoris and, in some instances,
the scraping or nicking of the clitoris causing
bleeding but resulting in little mutilation or long-term
(ii) sunna, involving the removal of the clitoral
(iii) clitoridectomy, involving the removal of the glans of the clitoris
and, usually, the entire clitoris and often parts of the
and (iv) infibulation, involving the removal of virtually all of the
external female
will be observed that categories (ii), (iii) and (iv) involve injury to the
clitoris, or the labia, which, as a matter of ordinary
English, may be described
as mutilating the whole or part of those structures. By contrast, conduct
within category (i), involving
cleaning of, or the application of substances to,
the clitoris, or scraping or nicking the clitoris in circumstances in which the
scrape or nick does not result in any scarring or detectable damage, does not,
as a matter of ordinary English, amount to mutilating
the clitoris.
June 1994, the Family Law Council published its Report to the Attorney-General
on Female Genital Mutilation ("the
In the Report, the Family Law Council recommended that the Commonwealth
Parliament enact legislation to make clear that female genital
mutilation is a
criminal offence and that it constitutes child abuse under Australian child
protection laws. The Report adopted
the Discussion Paper's classification of
the four categories of female genital
The Report treated as within category (i) any practice that occasions tissue
damage to the female genitalia including bruising,
contusion or incision.
Minister's speech was made on 4 May 1994. Relevantly, the Minister
"This bill will make the practice of female genital mutilation a criminal
offence in this State. ...
The practice involves the excision or removal of
parts or all of the external female genitalia
. The procedure is usually
performed on girls of tender age. ...
Health Organisation has recommended that governments adopt clear national
policies to abolish the practice. ...
The Family Law Council of Australia recently released a detailed report on FGM.
The council strongly recommended the introduction
of legislation to make clear
that FGM constitutes a criminal act and a form of child abuse. ...
I turn to the provisions of the bill.
It will be an offence for anyone to
perform FGM in this State. The three forms of FGM in order of severity are
infibulation, clitoridectomy
and sunna. The bill seeks to prohibit all of these
various methods of FGM
. ... The bill follows legislation in place in the
United Kingdom and the United States which are careful not to interfere with
legitimate forms of surgery." (emphasis added)
the reasons of Kiefel CJ and Keane J note, the Minister's reference to the
Family Law Council's recommendation suggests that advance
copies of the Report
were available to the Parliament. Notably, despite the Family Law Council's
adoption of the classification
of four categories of female genital mutilation
including category (i), the Minister described "the practice" as involving the
or removal of parts of or all of the external genitalia, a description
that is confined to categories (ii), (iii) and (iv). And
the Minister
identified the object of the Bill as the prohibition of
female genital mutilation, namely, infibulation, clitoridectomy and sunna. The
stated intention to implement the recommendation
of the Family Law Council does
not support an inference that the mischief to which the Amending Act was
directed was the prohibition
of conduct falling within category (i).
Minister did not identify the source of the WHO recommendation that "governments
adopt clear national policies to abolish the
practice [of female genital
mutilation]". On the hearing of the appeals, the parties were given leave to
file supplementary submissions
outlining relevant recommendations of the WHO as
at May 1994. The appellant's submission set out "[a]ctions of [the WHO] in
to female genital mutilation". These commenced with the Khartoum
seminar in 1979, which had as its subject "traditional practices
affecting the
health of women and children". As earlier noted, one session was concerned with
"female circumcision". Two papers
were presented on this topic. The first
paper addressed female circumcision in Egypt, which was described as involving
three forms:
(a) sunna type, in which the clitoris is snipped; (b) second type,
in which the labia minora and part of the clitoris are removed;
and (c) total
removal of the clitoris and
The second paper addressed female circumcision in Somalia, which was described
as involving four forms: (a) mild sunna; (b) modified
sunna; (c) partial or
total clitoridectomy; and (d) infibulation (Pharaonic female
circumcision)
The Khartoum seminar resulted in a recommendation for the adoption of clear
national policies to abolish female circumcision.
may be accepted, as the appellant submits, that during the 1980s the WHO
endorsed the recommendation of the Khartoum seminar with
respect to female
circumcision. This acceptance does not shed light on the scope of the conduct
that was sought to be prohibited.
The appellant points to the resolution passed
at the 47th WHO Assembly, adopting a resolution recommended by the Executive
on 10 May 1994, urging member States to establish national policies and
programs to effectively abolish female genital mutilation.
acknowledgment of the WHO resolution does not assist in resolving the question
of the scope of the conduct that member States
were being urged to
1986, an article published under the auspices of the WHO made reference to
"three main types of female circumcision" of which
"[c]ircumcision proper, known
in Muslim countries as sunna ... is the mildest ... form", involving "the
removal only of the clitoral
The following year, the Inter-African Committee on Traditional Practices
Affecting the Health of Women and Children, in cooperation
with the WHO, offered
a definition of female circumcision as "the partial or complete removal of the
female external
In 1992, a further article authored by a Joint Task Force between the WHO and
the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
(FIGO) was published
The article described "female circumcision" as having three
"In its mildest form, female circumcision involves only the removal of the
foreskin of the clitoris. But in the majority of cases
the clitoris itself is
removed, together with all or part of the labia minora and in the most severe
form the labia majora."
the date of the Minister's speech, the WHO had not adopted a uniform definition
or classification of female genital mutilation.
In January 1994, the
Director-General of the WHO
genital mutilation is a collective name given to a series of traditional
surgical operations performed on female genitals
in several countries in the
world. ... Its physical and psychological effects on girls and women,
particularly on normal sexual
function, affect their reproductive health in a
way which lasts all their lives, since none of the procedures are reversible.
all types of female circumcision part or the whole of the clitoris is
than a year after the enactment of the Amending Act, a WHO Technical Working
Group met in Geneva with the object of recommending
the adoption of standard
definitions and a classification for the different types of female genital
mutilation. In its report, the
Technical Working Group noted that the
classification of female genital mutilation then in current use generally
distinguished three
main types: excision of the prepuce and clitoris; excision
of the prepuce, clitoris and labia minora; and infibulation. The Technical
Working Group recommended that "other practices involving the stretching,
pricking, piercing, cauterization, scraping or cutting
of any part of the
external genitalia or the insertion of herbs or any other substances ... should
also be included in the
classification"
extrinsic material does not support the appellant's contention that the
collective phrase "female genital mutilation" had acquired
encompassing ritualised practices at the date of the enactment of the Amending
Act. The Court of Criminal Appeal was correct
to hold that it is unclear that
it was the legislative intention that ritualised practices were to fall within
the proscription of
s 45(1)(a).
construction for which the appellant contends was squarely based on
demonstrating that "female genital mutilation" was understood
in each of the
four ways described in the Family Law Council's Report at the date the Amending
Act was enacted. Correctly, in our
view, the appellant did not invoke the
principle that a statute is "always speaking" in support of its argument. It is
to recognise that the application of a statutory word or phrase may
change over time, particularly in light in advances in science
and technology.
It is another thing to contemplate that the meaning of statutory language
creating an offence can expand etymologically
such that conduct that is not
proscribed at the date of the enactment of the offence may come to fall within
the proscription at
some undefined time thereafter. That is because, accepting
that the fixity or variability through time of the content of any statutory
language is a question of interpretation, statutory language which creates a
criminal offence is to be interpreted in light of the
fundamental principle that
a criminal norm should be certain and its reach ascertainable by those who are
do not read the joint reasons in
Aubrey v The
to suggest the contrary. The question in
was whether grievous
bodily harm may be
upon another person by the reckless
transmission of a sexual disease contrary to s 35(1)(b) of the Act. The
provision can be traced
to s 20 of the
Offences against the Person Act
(UK) ("the 1861 Act"). In
R v Clarence
, the Court for Crown
Cases Reserved, by majority, held that the infliction of grievous bodily harm
for the purposes of s 20 of the
1861 Act required proof of an assault or
battery productive of immediate physical
The joint reasons held that
R v Clarence
should no longer be
Consideration of the legislative history led their Honours to reject the
submission that "inflicts" in this statutory context has
a narrower meaning than
The rejection of each of these planks of Mr Aubrey's argument removed the
obstacle to finding that the reckless transmission of
the human immunodeficiency
virus to his sexual partner amounted to the infliction of grievous bodily harm
within the ordinary meaning
of the statutory language.
R v Ireland
, Lord Steyn described the 1861 Act as a statute of the
"always speaking"
The joint reasons in
commented that, if his Lordship meant by
this statement that the language of the 1861 Act was adaptable to new
circumstances, it
was an approach that accorded with the approach adopted in
Their Honours observed that there may be differing views as to
his Lordship's intended
noting that Mr Aubrey had not developed his argument on the "always
speaking" approach to statutory
construction
case in which the meaning of the word "reckless" in s 1(1) and (2) of the
Criminal Damage Act 1971
(UK) was the issue, Lord Bingham of
Cornhill explained the approach to construction in this way: "[s]ince a statute
is always speaking,
the context or application of a statutory expression may
change over time, but the meaning of the expression itself cannot
The starting point, his Lordship said, was what the Parliament meant by
"reckless" in
So, too, here the starting point is what the Parliament meant by its use of the
words "otherwise mutilates" in enacting s 45 in
45 of the Act creates a serious, indictable criminal offence. The choice to use
the words "otherwise mutilates", and not
a formulation such as "otherwise
injures", tells against finding that the objective legislative intention was to
include within the
reach of the prohibition conduct occasioning no more than
transient injury. Giving the words "otherwise mutilates" their ordinary
cannot be said to produce a result that is manifestly absurd or unreasonable;
these words serve to extend the prohibition
to conduct resulting in the
mutilation of the clitoris or labia in ways that may not involve the removal of
the whole or a part of
either structure (excision) or the stitching together of
the labia (infibulation). The command of
Interpretation Act
is to prefer a construction that promotes the purpose or object underlying the
statute over a construction that would not promote
that purpose or object. A
construction that gives the words "otherwise mutilates" their ordinary meaning
cannot be said to be one
that does not promote the purpose or object of the
The Court of Criminal Appeal did not err in finding that the words "otherwise
mutilates" in this statutory context bear their ordinary
meaning. It is a
conclusion that accords with the object of proscribing the three forms of female
genital mutilation that were identified
in the Minister's speech.
the respondents rightly submit, the prohibition in s 45(1)(a) is on conduct
in mutilation as distinct from the means by which any injury
is inflicted. It was for the jury, giving the word "mutilates" its
meaning, to determine whether Kubra Magennis' act resulted in the mutilation of
C1's or C2's clitoris. The Court of Criminal
Appeal was right to hold that
superficial tissue damage which leaves no visible scarring and which on medical
examination is not
shown to have caused any damage to the skin or nerve tissue
is not in law capable of amounting to mutilation for the purposes of
It follows that the evidence, including the fresh evidence adduced in the Court
of Criminal Appeal, was not capable of supporting
the respondents' convictions
for offences contrary to s 45(1)(a) of the Act. This conclusion makes it
unnecessary to address the
appellant's second ground of challenge.
these reasons we would dismiss the appeals.
AND GORDON JJ. We agree with the orders proposed by Kiefel CJ and Keane J and
agree generally with their reasons. We wish
to say something more, however,
Crimes Act 1900
was enacted in 1994 by the
Crimes (Female Genital Mutilation) Amendment
(NSW) ("the 1994 FGM Act"). The long title of that Act was "[a]n
Act to amend the
Crimes Act 1900
to prohibit female genital mutilation".
itself is headed "[p]rohibition of female genital mutilation" and, at
the relevant time, was in these terms:
"(1) A person who:
(a) excises, infibulates or
otherwise mutilates
the whole or any part of
the labia majora or labia minora or clitoris of another person, or
(b) aids, abets, counsels or procures a person to perform any of those acts on
another person,
is liable to imprisonment for 7 years.
(2) An offence is committed against this section even if one or more of the acts
constituting the offence occurred outside New South
Wales if the person
mutilated by or because of the acts is ordinarily resident in the State.
(3) It is not an offence against this section to perform a surgical operation if
that operation:
(a) is necessary for the health of the person on whom it is performed and is
performed by a medical practitioner ...
(4) In determining whether an operation is necessary for the health of a person
only matters relevant to the medical welfare of the
person are to be taken into
(5) It is not a defence to a charge under this section that the person mutilated
by or because of the acts alleged to have been committed
consented to the
(6) This section applies only to acts occurring after the commencement of the
..." (emphasis added)
issue in the Court of Criminal Appeal of the Supreme Court of New South Wales
was the meaning of the phrase "otherwise mutilates"
s 45(1)(a).
Court of Criminal Appeal interpreted the phrase as requiring the imposition of
some permanent impairment, injury or imperfection,
in the sense of irreparable
damage of the labia majora, labia minora or clitoris. Consistent with that
view, the Court held that
a superficial nick or a cut (which necessarily leads
to the destruction of those skin cells which are cut) could be a "mutilation"
the relevant body part, but only if some injury or imperfection is proved and
that injury or imperfection has some permanent quality.
these reasons will demonstrate, the phrase "otherwise mutilates" in
means any physical injury to the whole or any part of the labia
majora, labia minora or clitoris, which is done for non-medical reasons.
not necessary to demonstrate that the physical injury lasted beyond the time it
took for that immediate injury to heal or
that there was any permanent
disfigurement, alteration or loss of function, of the whole or any part of the
labia majora, labia minora
or clitoris.
starting point is the words of the offence created by
s 45(1)(a):
person who "excises, infibulates or
otherwise mutilates
the whole or
of the labia majora or labia minora or clitoris of another
person" is guilty of an offence (emphasis added). It is not: "excises,
infibulates or otherwise mutilates
by irreparably impairing or rendering
the whole or any part of the labia majora or labia minora or
clitoris of another person".
it is significant that, relevantly, the offence is "otherwise mutilates ...
of the ... clitoris" (emphasis added). It directs attention to
the clitoris, a sensitive organ – the mutilation of
any part of
is forbidden. It is a vanishingly subtle distinction between the
removal of a "lentil" sized amount from the clitoris, which the
Criminal Appeal would categorise as an "excision", and a "cut" or a "nick" to
the clitoris. There is no meaningful textual
basis to conclude that while the
former kind of conduct would be caught by the word "excises" in
a cut or nick, absent permanent damage, would not be caught by the phrase
"otherwise mutilates".
the phrase "otherwise mutilates ... any part
of" indicates that the
legislature intended to protect against any kind of invasive contact to the
labia majora, labia minora or clitoris.
That is reflected in the fact that
the provision gives examples of invasive conduct – excision and
infibulation – and
then uses the catch-all phrase "otherwise mutilates" to
capture other kinds of female genital mutilation involving invasive physical
of the provision would deprive the words "otherwise
mutilates" and "any part" of
any meaningful work to do.
construction of the provision is reinforced by the four categories of female
genital mutilation mentioned in the Family Law
Council Discussion
and in the subsequent Family Law Council
both of which Parliament had available to it at the time of the introduction of
the 1994 FGM
Three categories, namely, sunna or circumcision, involving removal of the
clitoral hood; clitoridectomy; and
infibulation
may be seen as covered by the words "excision" or "infibulation". The remaining
category mentioned in the Discussion Paper and
the Report was the least serious
form of female genital mutilation, "ritualised
circumcision"
The Discussion Paper came to the preliminary conclusion that "all types of
circumcision, other than mere ritual, where an incision
is made in the girl's
genital area" should be considered criminal
The Report recommended prohibiting "all types of the practice where tissue
That left that remaining category – ritualised circumcision where it
entails physical injury – to be captured by the
phrase "otherwise
mutilates". Thus, an intention
to prohibit that least severe form of
female genital mutilation should not be extrapolated from the second reading
speech which accompanied
the introduction of
That the legislature intended to prohibit any kind of physical injury to the
labia majora, labia minora or clitoris is further reinforced
of s 45 as well as the long title to the 1994 FGM Act, which inserted the
provision in the
importing a requirement of permanent impairment, injury or imperfection, the
Court of Criminal Appeal created an additional hurdle
which not only is not
sourced in the text of
but also fails to have regard to the nature and
function of the labia majora, the labia minora and the clitoris.
The evidence was
that the genital region heals rapidly and very well,
typically without scarring. For example, Dr Marks gave evidence that it
very common for the genital examination findings to be normal following past
injury to the genital region". Similarly, Dr Jenkins
gave evidence that in his
experience of adult women who had undergone female genital mutilation
procedures, any overt change in their
anatomy was "broadly speaking, not
obvious at all". Dr Marks also gave evidence that a cut to the clitoral
head could affect future
sexual function. If the cuts are inflicted upon
children, the effects on sexual function may not emerge until they start being
active, years later.
Furthermore,
the requirement that there be permanent impairment, injury or imperfection would
give rise to the odd result that whether
or not a procedure gives rise to
criminal liability under the "otherwise mutilates" limb of
depend on the extent to which the body part repaired itself and,
therefore, in some cases, the period of time that elapsed
before the person
subjected to the procedure, or someone else, reported the fact of the procedure.
The longer the period, the less
likely that liability would be established.
These are strong indicators that the phrase "otherwise mutilates" does not
require permanent
impairment, injury or imperfection.
does require is some form of female genital mutilation procedure
performed for non-medical
which inflicts physical injury to the whole or any part of the labia majora,
labia minora or clitoris. The nature of that physical
injury will, of course,
vary from case to case. And, given the passage of time, there may, on occasion,
be no direct physical evidence
of the physical injury sustained at the time of
the procedure. Nonetheless, there may be evidence capable of satisfying a jury
reasonable doubt that, at the relevant time, a procedure was carried out
on a person and that the procedure caused physical injury
to the whole or any
part of the labia majora or labia minora or clitoris of that person.
follows that the trial judge did not misdirect the jury about the proper
construction of "otherwise mutilates" in
s 45(1)(a).
The essential statutory meaning and application of
"Otherwise mutilates" means all other types of the practice of female
genital mutilation
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) carries the
"Prohibition of female genital mutilation". The offence is committed when any
person "excises, infibulates or otherwise mutilates
the whole or any part of the
labia majora or labia minora or clitoris of another
Sections 45(2)
(5), which clarify aspects of the operation of the
offence, speak of "the person mutilated".
Court of Criminal Appeal of New South Wales correctly noted that the breadth of
the dictionary definitions of "mutilate" meant
that dictionaries were of
assistance"
The Court of Criminal Appeal also observed that the verb "mutilates" "suggests
that more than the causing of an injury is
In contexts other than female genital mutilation this is often the case. But,
with respect, the context and purpose of
require that "mutilates" be given the meaning of the
female genital mutilation rather than the connotation of "mutilates" in other
respondents correctly point out that
says "otherwise mutilates"
and does not refer expressly to the practice of female genital mutilation. But
in light of the context
and purpose of
the words must reasonably be
understood to refer to that practice, thus having the meaning "otherwise engages
in the practice of
female genital mutilation". The most immediate matters of
context are the heading to the section, "Prohibition of female genital
mutilation", and the long title of the Act which inserted
"An Act to amend the
Crimes Act 1900
to prohibit female genital
mutilation". Other matters of context referred to in the other judgments
are the Explanatory Note, the
Second Reading Speech and the inutility of the
words "otherwise mutilates" unless the compound expression "excises, infibulates
otherwise mutilates" is understood as a reference to the practice of female
genital mutilation.
allow the context and purpose of a purely criminal provision to give a word a
meaning that it would not bear in other contexts
is no different from the role
that context and purpose play in the interpretation of statutes that concern
civil law, or both civil
and criminal law. In
Cooper Brookes (Wollongong)
Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
Mason and Wilson JJ observed that "[i]n earlier times" an anxiety about
judicial intrusion into the legislative sphere sometimes
led courts to adopt
literal constructions of provisions that diverged from the meaning that any
reasonable person would have understood
Parliament to have intended. But it is
well established that courts no longer interpret civil statutes that
Nor do courts employ a different regime of interpretation or construction of
statutory words merely because conduct is proscribed
In any instance of interpretation of intended meaning, the process "must begin
with a consideration of the text
but, since the intended meaning of words can never be acontextual, the process
must also "begin by examining the
this Court said in
Milne v The
that "[p]urposive construction does not justify expanding the scope of a
criminal offence beyond its textual limits" it was not suggesting
the existence
of a separate principle of interpretation for criminal statutes that
circumscribed the role of purpose or context to
operate only within the covers
of the dictionaries of the time. The point being made by this Court was
that once courts have interpreted
the meaning of the words of a provision they
cannot expand that meaning in an attempt to give the words a wider effect. It
open to courts, independently of their interpretation of the statutory
words, to "suppose the law-maker present, and that you have
asked him this
question: Did you intend to comprehend this
As McHugh J said in
Krakouer v The
a decision cited with approval in
conduct of a particular kind stands outside the [meaning of the] language of a
penal section, the fact that a Court takes the
view that it is through
inadvertence of the Legislature that it has not been included does not authorise
it to assume to remedy the
omission by giving the penal provision a wider scope
than [the meaning of] its language admits."
might sometimes be a fine line between asking: "In light of its legislative
purpose, what would Parliament have intended in
these circumstances?" and
asking: "Does the intended meaning of the words used by Parliament extend to
these circumstances?" But
the proper question to ask in statutory
interpretation is always the latter. Where the relevant meaning of the words of
concerns a criminal offence it is particularly important to respect
the difference between the two questions, lest the judiciary
create, and apply
retroactively, a new criminal offence. However, for the reasons above, an
interpretation of "otherwise mutilates"
to mean "otherwise engages in the
practice of female genital mutilation" is an interpretation of the meaning of
the words of
rather than an application of Parliament's purpose
beyond the meaning of the words used.
The essential meaning and
the application of the practice of female genital mutilation
the context and purpose of
reveal the intended meaning of its
words as a proscription of the practice of female genital mutilation, there
remain the questions
of what is the essential meaning, and what is encompassed
within the application, of the practice of female genital mutilation.
The respondents' submission was to interpret the meaning of the statutory
expression at a level of particularity that was designed
to freeze its
application only to those practices said to exist in 1994. The respondents
relied upon what they submitted were the
only three practices contemplated by
Parliament when the offence was enacted in
and derived a meaning from those practices requiring female genital mutilation
to involve "serious or significant damage to the
external female genitalia".
The respondents submitted that "[w]hat is being referred to throughout is the
practice in the invasive,
destructive sense that the Second Reading Speech began
with". The Second Reading Speech began as
bill will make the practice of female genital mutilation a criminal offence in
this State. Female genital mutilation, or FGM,
is the term used to describe a
number of practices involving the mutilation of female genitals for traditional
or ritual reasons.
The practice involves the excision or removal of parts or
all of the external female genitalia. The procedure is usually performed
on girls of tender age. It has been estimated that FGM occurs in more than
forty countries, and tradition is the major factor which
contributes to its
continuation. While the practice is often linked to certain religious
communities, this view is in fact mistaken.
The origins of the practice
pre-date most major religions."
the Second Reading Speech, the Minister also referred to three forms of female
genital mutilation, "in order of severity", as
"infibulation, clitoridectomy and
sunna" and then said that the "bill seeks to prohibit all of these various
Additionally, earlier articles published by the World Health
Organization
in 1986 and 1992 referred to these three forms of "female circumcision". These
three forms did not, and do not, encapsulate all
practices, "as a matter of
involving tissue damage to the external genitalia of young females. Relevantly
to these appeals, these three forms did not include
a "nick or a cut", which
might be argued, at the time of any trial, to involve no long-term physical
might be doubted whether the Minister's comments in the Second Reading Speech
should be best understood to have been suggesting
that the practice of female
genital mutilation in 1994 was limited only to these three forms. But even if
that were the Minister's
understanding, and even if it were also the earlier
understanding of the World Health Organization, those understandings of the
of the practice should not conclusively define the scope of
, which is not expressly confined to any particular forms of
female genital mutilation but appears, instead, by the catch-all "or
mutilates" to be intended to encompass any type of the practice.
legislation does not expressly delimit the scope of its application then its
scope is usually to be determined by the contemporary
application of its
essential meaning that will best give effect to the legislative purpose. This
is what is meant by statutes "always
speaking". In
Aubrey v The
this Court considered the meaning of the phrase "[w]hosoever maliciously by any
means ... inflicts grievous bodily harm" in
, as it was then. One submission in that case was that the reckless
transmission of sexual diseases did not, at the time that the
provision was
enacted, fall within the ordinary understanding of "inflicting" harm. In a
joint judgment, a majority of this Court
said that even if this were correct
(which it was
"subsequent
developments in knowledge of the aetiology and symptomology of infection have
been such that it now accords with ordinary
understanding to conceive of the
reckless transmission of sexual disease by sexual intercourse without disclosure
of the risk of
infection as the infliction of grievous bodily injury".
the generality of the language of
applied consistently with the legislative purpose that was particularly evident
in the use of the words "by any
required the word "inflicts" to be interpreted with an essential meaning cast at
a high level of generality. So even if the submission
understanding of "inflicts" in 1900 were correct, the Court would not have been
constrained by that limited understanding.
Instead, the essential meaning of
the provision was to be applied to give best effect to the purpose of the
provision consistently
with contemporary knowledge and understanding. The
essential meaning would not, and does not,
But its application can change. As Lord Bingham of Cornhill colourfully
expressed this
is, I think, no inconsistency between the rule that statutory language retains
the meaning it had when Parliament used it and
the rule that a statute is always
speaking. If Parliament, however long ago, passed an Act applicable to dogs, it
could not properly
be interpreted to apply to cats; but it could properly be
held to apply to animals which were not regarded as dogs when the Act was
but are so regarded now."
is, therefore, vital to express the essential meaning at the proper level of
generality, having regard to statutory purpose.
Properly characterised, the
essential meaning of the practice of female genital mutilation captured by the
words "otherwise mutilates"
in s 45(1)(a) is all actions involving a
practice of causing tissue damage to the genitals of female children. The
purpose of s
45(1)(a) was to proscribe any forms of that practice. It was
not to proscribe only some forms of the practice. Nor was it only
to proscribe
the particular forms of the practice that were best known in 1994. Indeed,
since 1982, the World Health Organization
had been advocating for governments to
"adopt clear national policies to abolish the practice of female genital
mutilation"
and was "committed to the abolition of all forms of female genital
mutilation"
The World Health Organization in 1998 adopted a classification that covered
all those forms including a type that it described as
"[u]nclassified: includes
pricking, piercing ... stretching ... cauterization by burning ... scraping of
Family Law Council Report, a draft of which was before Parliament at the time
Crimes (Female Genital Mutilation) Amendment Bill
was debated, had also recommended prohibition of all female genital mutilation,
describing it as involving "all types of the
practice where tissue damage
The Family Law Council had quoted from a report published in
New Scientist
reality the distinction between the types of circumcision is often irrelevant
since it depends on the sharpness of the instrument
used, the struggling of the
child, and the skill and eyesight of the operator".
this background, the Minister's remarks in the Second Reading Speech concerning
proscribing the practice, which "has no physical
benefits and is associated with
a number of health
are remarks that reveal a purpose extending beyond any particular or common
forms of the practice to any example of the practice
that involves tissue damage
to the genitals of female children. Whatever the understanding of the Minister
or others about the particular
existing forms of the practice of female genital
mutilation, and whether or not any new or unforeseen forms of the practice
the purpose of s 45(1)(a) was likewise intended to extend to every
form of the practice of female genital mutilation, namely any
actions which
result in tissue damage to the genitals of female children.
approach of the Court of Criminal Appeal implicitly, and correctly, recognised
that the practice of female genital mutilation,
described in s 45(1)(a) by
the verbs "excises", "infibulates", and "otherwise mutilates", was not confined
to the three categories
described by the Minister in the Second Reading Speech.
The Court of Criminal Appeal applied the meaning of female genital mutilation
encompassing any "injury or damage that is more than superficial and which
renders the body part in question imperfect or irreparably
damaged in some
With respect, however, this does not sufficiently apply the legislative purpose.
Instead, it confines the proscribed practices by
references to criteria that
might be difficult to apply, including thresholds of "superficial" and
"irreparable damage" or "imperfection".
To conform with the legislative
purpose, the prohibition on all forms of the practice of female genital
mutilation must extend to
all actions involving tissue damage to the genitals of
female children. The trial judge therefore did not err when directing the
that "mutilate" in s 45(1)(a) means "to injure to any
Can a conviction be quashed with no further order
agree with Kiefel CJ and Keane J, for the reasons that their Honours
that the appropriate order on these appeals is that each matter be remitted to
the Court of Criminal Appeal for determination of
Ground 2 of each
respondent's appeal to that Court according to law. Strictly, it is therefore
not necessary for this Court to resolve
the dispute between the parties about
the orders that can be made in the Court of Criminal Appeal in light of the
success of other
grounds of appeal in the Court of Criminal Appeal that were not
in issue in this Court. That dispute arose in this Court because
submitted that the Court of Criminal Appeal was confined to making either of two
sets of orders: (i) orders quashing the
conviction and directing a
judgment and verdict of acquittal to be entered, or (ii) orders quashing
the conviction and directing
that a new trial be had. In contrast, the
respondents submitted that another alternative was (iii) to quash the
conviction but to
make no further order.
it is not strictly necessary to determine this point, it is a point that is a
matter of considerable importance. It could
affect the orders of the Court of
Criminal Appeal on remitter. This Court has also previously made orders
quashing a conviction
without any further order on numerous occasions without
apparently considering whether it had power to do
is therefore appropriate to explain in detail why I have concluded that there is
no power for the Court of Criminal Appeal to
quash the conviction without either
directing a judgment and verdict of acquittal or ordering a new trial.
Crown's submission is based in the text of
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
(NSW). Each of those sub-sections is enlivened
where the Court of Criminal Appeal allows an appeal under
Section 6(2)
is a default provision because it is subject to "the special
provisions of this Act". If the appeal is allowed, the default provision
s 6(2) requires the Court to quash the conviction and to direct a judgment
and verdict of acquittal. However, one of the special
provisions to which
s 6(2) is subject is s 8(1), which permits the Court
"... order a new trial in such manner as it thinks fit, if the
court considers that a miscarriage of justice has occurred, and, that
regard to all the circumstances, such miscarriage of justice can be more
adequately remedied by an order for a new trial than
by any other order
the court is empowered to make
." (emphasis added)
question raised by the Crown's submission is therefore whether an order that the
conviction be quashed, without any further order,
is an order "which the court
is empowered to make". There is no express power to make only that order. Such
a power, if it exists,
must be an implied power, an inherent power in the sense
of part of "the well of undefined powers" beyond its
constitution
"inherited"
by the Supreme Court of New South Wales and which
preserves when the Supreme Court is constituted as the Court of
Criminal Appeal.
No implied power to quash a conviction without
further order
there is an implied power, upon which
relies, for an appellate court
to make an order quashing a conviction. An order quashing a conviction is
logically anterior to the
to order a retrial. But there is
no necessity to imply a power to make an order quashing the conviction without
either ordering
a retrial or ordering an acquittal. There are no gaps in the
remedial scheme of the
that would reasonably require such a
power. First, if a retrial is not appropriate then an order for acquittal can
be made even if
the appellate court considers that the appellant is probably
guilty. Secondly, a retrial can be ordered or an acquittal entered
even if the
conviction arose from a trial that might attract the description of a
to the first point,
Criminal Appeal Act
was modelled
on the relevantly identical s 4(2) of the
Criminal Appeal Act 1907
("the 1907 English
As Professor Kenny observed of the direction to enter a judgment and
verdict of acquittal in s 4(2) of the 1907 English Act, "a
unfortunately, cannot be ordered; even though the prisoner be obviously
Despite the contradiction involved in declaring a person who is believed to be
obviously guilty to be not guilty when the person's
conviction is quashed, the
purpose of the power was to vindicate the principle against multiple exposure to
Subject to statutory provisions to the contrary, this principle was vindicated
in a court of record by an order for acquittal, which
would permit a plea of
autrefois acquit in a subsequent prosecution of the accused for the same
a number of judgments of the Court of Criminal Appeal of England and Wales,
English judges lamented that after a miscarriage of
justice the acquittal of
those who might be guilty could mean that "crimes go
unpunished"
The Lord Chief Justice said that a power to order a new trial was
needed as a matter of "absolute
although he remarked in another case that such a power "would naturally be
perhaps reflecting a view held at that time that punishment of the guilty was
generally a lesser concern than successive exposures
of a person to the prospect
The gap that was perceived by the Court of Criminal Appeal of England and Wales
after the enactment of the 1907 English Act was
the lack of a power to order a
new trial. It was not the lack of a power to quash a conviction with no order
for acquittal. In
1912, in New South Wales, the
Criminal Appeal Act
filled that gap by including the power in s 8(1) to order a new trial,
paying heed to the lamentations of the Court of Criminal Appeal
of England and
Wales and also to the position in
to the second point, an implication of power to quash a conviction without
further order was considered necessary by the Supreme
Court of Canada in the
limited circumstance where the trial is found to have been a mistrial, so that
the trial was a "nullity".
Speaking of the provision applicable in Canada in
1923 empowering orders of acquittal or the grant of a new
Fateux J, with whom the rest of the Supreme Court of Canada agreed on this
there will be cases where the Court of Appeal will not order one or other of the
alternatives is certain. Thus a conviction
on an indictment signed by an
unauthorized person cannot be sustained and must be quashed. And in such a
case, an order, either
directing a verdict of acquittal to be entered or a new
trial, would be meaningless and senseless. It cannot, therefore, be stated
this further authority is given with respect to trials affected with such
complete and fatal nullity."
respect, the direction of a verdict of acquittal when a trial is found to be a
mistrial and a "nullity" is not necessarily meaningless
or senseless. Whatever
might be meant in this context by the concept of a "nullity", an issue
considered later in these reasons,
the trial was a real event and prior to the
quashing of the conviction there was nevertheless a conviction recorded.
The recorded
conviction was a fact which provided a sufficient basis for an
appeal to be
Equally, a recorded acquittal could be a meaningful fact, not least as
vindication to the appellant.
to statutory exceptions, one reason that a recorded acquittal is meaningful even
in cases of "nullity" is that a defence
of autrefois acquit should apply to
preclude a subsequent trial where an acquittal is entered by an appellate court.
Historically,
this defence was not available when the acquittal was entered by
the court at which the trial was a "nullity". This was said to
be based upon a
supposition that in hindsight the accused had "never been in actual
Yet, as Coleridge J recognised, notwithstanding any defect in the trial the
accused remained liable to a conviction, which, unless
reversed, would put him
"in so much jeopardy literally that punishment may be lawfully inflicted on
him". The other rationale was
that "[t]he judgment reversed is the same as no
reasoning that should apply to any conviction that is set aside, whether the
trial is characterised as a "nullity" or
Just as a conviction is sufficient to enable an appeal to be brought whether or
not the trial was a mistrial, an acquittal entered
by the appellate court after
setting aside the conviction should be sufficient for the purpose of raising a
defence of autrefois
acquit upon a subsequent prosecution whether or not the
trial was a
is also neither meaningless nor senseless for an order for a new trial to be
made even if the first trial might be described as
a "nullity". The power in
s 8(1) for the Court of Criminal Appeal to order a new trial "in such
manner as it thinks fit" might require
particular orders to be made such as that
the trial be on a new indictment or before a different judge.
inherent or inherited power to quash a conviction without further order
Crane v Director of Public
Prosecutions
the majority of the House of Lords held that a pre-existing power of the Court
of Crown Cases Reserved, preserved when the Court
of Criminal Appeal of England
and Wales was created, empowered the Court of Criminal Appeal to make orders for
a new trial where
the first trial was a mistrial or "nullity". This power to
order a venire de novo (a new
had been a power possessed by the Court of Crown Cases Reserved, which was
formally created in
The venire de novo was granted by the Court of Crown Cases Reserved only when
the first trial was found to be a "nullity". As
the King's Bench had described
the order, it was "not to be considered in the nature of a new trial, but the
first trial is to be
considered a mis-trial, and therefore a
power to order a venire de novo after a mistrial was inherited by Supreme Courts
in Australia. It was described in 1915 by Isaacs
J as "well established",
although Griffith CJ described it as "now almost
the majority of the House of Lords relied upon
s 20(4) of the 1907 English Act to hold that this power was vested in the
Criminal Appeal of England and
Section 20(4) vested in the Court of Criminal Appeal all the jurisdiction
that had been vested in the Court of Crown Cases Reserved
Crown Cases
House of Lords in
was concerned only with the existence of a power
which, upon a mistrial, permitted only the quashing of a conviction and order
a retrial. But the Court of Crown Cases Reserved also had the power to
quash a conviction and to make no further order. Indeed,
unlike the power to
grant a venire de novo, which was not expressly contained in the
Crown Cases
and whose existence had divided the members of the Court of Crown Cases
Crown Cases Act
had conferred an express power "to avoid
such Judgment, and to order an Entry to be made on the Record, that ... the
Party convicted
ought not to have been convicted". Hence, the Court of Criminal
Appeal of England and Wales also had power, after a mistrial, to
conviction and make no further
the powers of the Court of Crown Cases Reserved were also inherited by the Court
of Criminal Appeal in New South Wales as appeal
powers, due to being preserved
Criminal Appeal Act
then there would be a strong argument
that the power to quash a conviction without making any other order should be
generally applicable.
It would be difficult to see why that power, as part of a
generalised appellate power, should be confined only to mistrials.
confine the power in that way would treat as immutable the reception of
"a procedure which, with the exception of a few cases, has
not been in use for
over one hundred years and was probably never really understood even when it was
The distinction between mistrials where a conviction is quashed as a "nullity"
and other trials where a conviction is quashed, sometimes
described in contrast
as an "irregularity", has been attempted to be justified in different
None is satisfactory or
At best, "the line is very
with the older decisions on nullity perhaps seen today as comparable with some
instances of lack of authority and possibly also
some serious errors within
authority. At worst, it is not a principled distinction in the context of
an appeal from a trial in a
In both instances, the verdict and judgment will have been quashed by the Court
of Criminal Appeal, leaving them without effect:
"The effect of the reversal of
a conviction by proceedings in error has long been settled, and the same effect
is produced by quashing
it, or setting it aside upon a statutory
And in both instances, the orders are valid until set
the issue of whether a distinction should be drawn between powers concerning
mistrials and powers concerning irregularities
need not be resolved on these
appeals because in New South Wales the
Criminal Appeal Act
preserve, for appeals, the jurisdiction of the Court of Crown Cases Reserved to
quash a conviction without further order.
Like s 20 of the 1907 English
in New South Wales s 23 of the
Criminal Appeal Act
abolished "[w]rits of error, and the powers and practice now existing in the
Supreme Court in respect of motions for new trials, and
the granting thereof in
criminal cases". But the
Criminal Appeal Act
had, and has, no equivalent
to s 20(4) of the 1907 English Act,
upon which the majority of the
House of Lords in
relied for the preservation of the venire de novo
and associated powers.
Criminal Appeal Act
, entitled "Supplemental powers of the court",
provides in sub-s (1) that the Court of Criminal Appeal "may, if it thinks
it necessary
or expedient in the interests of justice", exercise specific
procedural powers and may also "exercise in relation to the proceedings
court any other powers which may for the time being be exercised by the Supreme
Court on appeals or applications in civil
matters". Section 12(1) is
similar to s 9 of the 1907 English Act. But it is not an acknowledgement
of any inherent jurisdiction
of the Court of Criminal Appeal, nor does it permit
a cross-pollination of the considerations concerning a venire de novo from civil
proceedings to criminal proceedings. As Dixon J said in
Grierson v The
conviction upon indictment than the statute
confers. The
Criminal Appeal Act
(NSW) is based upon the English Act of 1907. It does not
give a general appellate power in criminal cases exercisable on grounds
procedure discoverable from independent sources ... No considerations
controlling or affecting the conclusion to be deduced
from these provisions are
supplied by analogous civil proceedings."
New South Wales, the dissenting reasoning of Viscount Finlay in
must apply: "we must now look only to the provisions of the present Act if
there is anything that requires to be set
Indeed, the New South Wales Parliament was cognisant that this would be the
case. During debate, one member, Mr Garland KC, after
referring to
the power to grant a new trial after a mistrial, said that he supported "the
proposal that the Appeal Court in their
wisdom, when they consider justice would
be best served by granting a new trial, shall have power to grant
these reasons, in addition to those of Kiefel CJ and Keane J and those
of Nettle and Gordon JJ, I agree with the orders proposed
by Kiefel CJ
and Keane J.
Crimes Act 1900
Crimes Act 1900
A2 v The Queen
NSWCCA 174.
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
Criminal Appeal Act 1912
A2 v The Queen
R v A2 [No 2]
(2015) 253 A
Crim R 534 at 568 [242]-[244].
R v A2 [No 2]
(2015) 253 A
Crim R 534 at 569 [249]; Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: A
Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law Council
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
World Health Organization,
Female Genital Mutilation: An overview
(1998) at 2.
World Health Organization,
Eliminating Female genital mutilation: An interagency statement
at 22 (Annex 1: Note on terminology).
World Health Organization,
Female Genital Mutilation: An overview
(1998) at 59-60.
World Health Organization
(Regional Office for the Eastern Mediterranean),
Seminar on Traditional
Practices Affecting the Health of Women and Children: Khartoum, 10-15 February
(March 1979) at 14.
Executive Board of the World
Health Organization (Ninety-third Session),
Maternal and child health and
family planning: Current needs and future orientation: Traditional practices
harmful to the health
of women and children
(25 January 1994).
World Health Assembly
(Forty-seventh World Health Assembly),
Maternal and child health and family
planning: traditional practices harmful to the health of women and children
(10 May 1994).
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: Discussion Paper
(31 January 1994) at 3 [1.01].
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 6 [2.01].
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 6 [2.02].
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 6 [2.03].
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 7 [2.04].
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 7 [2.05].
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 7 [2.06].
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 9 [2.13].
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 9 [2.15].
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 50 [6.37].
And also the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of
Discrimination Against Women,
the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence
Against Women, and the 1951 Convention and 1967 Protocol relating to the Status
Refugees: Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: A Report to the
Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law Council
(June 1994).
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 29 [4.07].
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 18 [2.52].
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 50 [6.37].
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 52 [6.41].
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 63 [6.80].
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 63 [6.80].
New South Wales, Legislative
Crimes (Female Genital Mutilation) Amendment Bill 1994
Explanatory Note at 1.
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 4 May 1994 at 1859.
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 4 May 1994 at 1859.
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 4 May 1994 at 1860.
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 4 May 1994 at 1860.
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 4 May 1994 at 1860.
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 4 May 1994 at 1860.
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 4 May 1994 at 1860.
Amalgamated Society
of Engineers v Adelaide Steamship Co Ltd
Engineers' Case
[1920] HCA 54
; (1920) 28 CLR 129 at 162 per Higgins J;
[1920] HCA 54.
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384 at 408; [1997] HCA 2;
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR
355 at 381 [69];
[1998] HCA 28.
Interpretation
, 3rd ed (1997) at 343-344, referred to in
Project Blue Sky
Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355 at 384 [78].
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384 at 408;
Project Blue Sky
Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355 at 381 [69].
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384 at 408.
Heydon's Case
[1584] EngR 9
Co Rep 7a at 7b
ER 637 at 638].
Black-Clawson International
Ltd v Papierwerke Waldhof-Aschaffenburg
[1975] UKHL 2
; [1975] AC 591 at 614;
Developments Pty Ltd v Realty Developments Pty Ltd
[1978] HCA 30
; (1978) 140 CLR 503 at
[1978] HCA 30
Wacando v The Commonwealth
[1981] HCA 60
; (1981) 148 CLR 1 at
[1981] HCA 60.
[2009] HCA 41
; (2009) 239 CLR 27 at 46-47
[2009] HCA 41.
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
; (2009) 239 CLR 27 at 46-48
[2010] HCA 23
; (2010) 241 CLR 252 at 265
[2010] HCA 23.
[2012] HCA 59
; (2012) 246 CLR 469 at 476
[2012] HCA 59.
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty
Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
; (2009) 239 CLR 27
(1997) 187 CLR 384 at 408.
Cooper Brookes (Wollongong)
Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(1981) 147 CLR 297 at 321;
Interpretation Act 1987
Crimes (Amendment) Act
(No 3) 1995
(ACT), s 5;
Criminal Code Amendment Act (No 2) 1995
Statutes Amendment (Female Genital Mutilation and Child
Protection) Act 1995
Criminal Code Amendment Act 1995
Crimes (Female Genital Mutilation) Act 1996
(Vic), s 4;
Criminal Law Amendment Act 2000
(Qld), s 19;
Criminal Code Amendment Act 2004
(WA), s 22.
Which was later replaced by the
Female Genital Mutilation Act 2003
Re B and G (Children) [No
[2015] 1 FLR 905 was decided later, contains no detailed reasons and is
inconclusive on the matter.
Statutory Interpretation
, 5th ed (2008) at 745-747;
R v Montila
[2004] UKHL 50
; [2004] 1 WLR 3141; [2005] 1 All ER 113.
Interpretation Act 1987
Interpretation Act 1987
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
Beckwith v The Queen
[1976] HCA 55
; (1976) 135 CLR 569 at 576;
[1976] HCA 55.
Deming No 456 Pty Ltd v
Brisbane Unit Development Corporation Pty Ltd
(1983) 155 CLR 129 at 145;
[1983] HCA 44;
Waugh v Kippen
[1986] HCA 12
; (1986) 160 CLR 156 at 164;
Stevens v Kabushiki Kaisha
Sony Computer Entertainment
[2005] HCA 58
; (2005) 224 CLR 193 at 211
Allan v Quinlan; Ex parte
[1987] 1 Qd R 213 at 215, referred to in
Milne v The Queen
[2014] HCA 4
; (2014) 252 CLR 149 at 164
[2014] HCA 4.
Beckwith v The Queen
[1976] HCA 55
; (1976) 135 CLR 569 at 576.
Barker v The Queen
[1983] HCA 18
; (1983) 153 CLR 338 at 355;
[1983] HCA 18
Chew v The Queen
[1992] HCA 18
173 CLR 626 at 632;
[1992] HCA 18.
[2014] HCA 4
; (2014) 252 CLR 149.
(2018) 92 ALJR 1064; 361 ALR
[2018] HCA 55.
SAS Trustee Corporation v
[2018] HCA 55
; (2018) 92 ALJR 1064 at 1074
[2018] HCA 55
; 361 ALR 206 at 218.
(2019) 93 ALJR 405; 364 ALR
[2019] HCA 8.
Grajewski v Director of
Public Prosecutions (NSW)
[2019] HCA 8
; (2019) 93 ALJR 405 at 408
[2019] HCA 8
; 364 ALR 383 at
[2001] 1 SCR 45 at 77 [38], 79
[2011] VSCA 157
; (2011) 32 VR 361.
(2008) 237 CLR 1;
R v Wei Tang
[2008] HCA 39
; (2008) 237
CLR 1 at 16
R v Wei Tang
[2008] HCA 39
; (2008) 237
CLR 1 at 17-18
Alford v Magee
[1952] HCA 3
; (1952) 85
CLR 437 at 466;
[1952] HCA 3
Darkan v The Queen
[2006] HCA 34
; (2006) 227 CLR 373 at
[2006] HCA 34.
A2 v The Queen
R v A2 [No 2]
A Crim R 534 at 571-572 [263].
R v A2 [No 2]
A Crim R 534 at 572 [267].
R v A2 [No 2]
A Crim R 534 at 572 [268].
R v A2 [No 2]
A Crim R 534 at 573 [270].
The Australian Gas Light Co
v The Valuer-General
[1940] NSWStRp 9
; (1940) 40 SR (NSW) 126 at 137.
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
Interpretation Act 1987
Family Law Council,
Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 6 [2.01]-[2.02], 8 [2.11], 21 [3.02].
Brought pursuant to
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
(1992) 173 CLR 572;
(1987) 163 CLR 221;
[2004] NSWCCA 324
; (2004) 148 A Crim R 268;
[2005] NSWCCA 2
; (2005) 62 NSWLR 263;
R v Swansson
[2007] NSWCCA 67
; (2007) 69 NSWLR 406.
[2007] NSWCCA 67
; (2007) 69 NSWLR 406 at 435
Callaghan v The Queen
(1952) 87 CLR 115; [1952] HCA 55;
Croton v The Queen
(1967) 117 CLR 326;
[1967] HCA 48
Timbu Kolian v The Queen
(1968) 119 CLR 47;
[1968] HCA 66
Whitehorn v The Queen
(1983) 152 CLR 657;
[1983] HCA 42.
(1984) 153 CLR 317;
Gerakiteys v The Queen
[1984] HCA 8
; (1984) 153 CLR 317 at 321-322.
Gerakiteys v The Queen
[1984] HCA 8
; (1984) 153 CLR 317 at 322.
Gerakiteys v The Queen
[1984] HCA 8
; (1984) 153 CLR 317 at 336-337.
[2001] NSWCCA 66
; (2001) 123 A Crim R 1 at 11
[2007] HCA 11
; (2007) 228 CLR 232 at 255
[2007] HCA 11.
[2000] HCA 43
; (2000) 201 CLR 603 at 638
[2000] HCA 43.
Spies v The Queen
[2000] HCA 43
; (2000) 201 CLR 603 at 638
Peacock v The King
(1911) 13 CLR 619;
[1911] HCA 66
Director of Public Prosecutions (Nauru) v
[1984] HCA 48
; (1984) 154 CLR 627 at 630;
[1984] HCA 48.
Jiminez v The Queen
[1992] HCA 14
; (1992) 173 CLR 572 at 584-585, 590-591;
R v Taufahema
[2007] HCA 11
; (2007) 228 CLR 232
Section 306B(1).
[1990] HCA 51
; (1990) 171 CLR 207 at
[1990] HCA 51
; see also at 212-213, approving
23 SASR 161 at 162,
Attorney-General's Reference (No 1 of 1983)
[1983] VicRp 101
(1989) 18 NSWLR 74 at 77. See and compare
[1981] 1 WLR 1039 at 1042; [1981] 2 All ER 1060 at 1062.
(1994) 181 CLR 487;
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
181 CLR 487 at 493 (footnotes omitted).
JB v The Queen [No
[2016] NSWCCA 67
[1911] HCA 66
; (1911) 13 CLR 619.
Peacock v The King
[1911] HCA 66
; (1911) 13 CLR 619 at 651-652; see also at 675.
[1984] HCA 48
; (1984) 154 CLR 627 at
[2000] HCA 43
; (2000) 201 CLR 603 at 638
Doney v The Queen
[1990] HCA 51
; (1990) 171 CLR 207 at 213-214;
Attorney-General's Reference (No 1 of
[1983] VicRp 101
; [1983] 2 VR 410 at 415 and
(1989) 18 NSWLR 74 at 81, both
Haw Tua Tau v Public Prosecutor
[1982] AC 136 at 151.
Attorney-General's
Reference (No 1 of 1983)
[1983] VicRp 101
; [1983] 2 VR 410 at 415-416.
Director of Public
Prosecutions v Iliopoulos (Ruling No 3)
[2016] VSC 132
Doney v The Queen
[1990] HCA 51
; (1990) 171 CLR 207 at 214-215;
(1989) 18 NSWLR 74 at 81, 82;
see also Glass, "The Insufficiency of Evidence to Raise a Case to Answer" (1981)
Australian Law Journal
842 at 845-846.
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
The Court of Criminal Appeal
described the "high point" of this evidence to be a conversation between A1 and
A2 during the course
of which A1 asked "[i]n us do they cut skin ... or do they
cut the whole clitoris?" and A2 responded, "[n]o they just do a little
just little". There was debate as to whether this was a reference to what had
happened to C1 or C2, or what happened in
the wider Dawoodi Bohra community:
A2 v The Queen
[2018] NSWCCA 174
One recorded telephone
conversation tended to prove that Mr Vaziri had encouraged A1 to falsely tell
police that he and A2 had arranged
for Ms Magennis to attend and examine the
children out of a concern to ensure that they had not been circumcised on a
recent African
This evidence falls away in
view of the fresh evidence, admitted by the Court of Criminal Appeal, which
demonstrated that upon subsequent
examination the clitorises were capable of
being seen.
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
Given their Honours'
indication of the particulars of the alleged conduct against which they were to
judge the sufficiency of the
evidence, that conclusion appears to amount to an
acceptance that the evidence was sufficiently cogent as to enable a rational
to infer that there "had been a cut or nick to the clitoris".
Miller v The Queen
[2016] HCA 30
; (2016) 259 CLR 380 at 411
[2016] HCA 30
Cornwell v The
[2007] HCA 12
; (2007) 231 CLR 260 at 300
[2007] HCA 12
[2007] HCA 13
; (2007) 228 CLR 618 at 640
[2007] HCA 13.
The maximum penalty for the
offence was increased to 21 years by the
Crimes Amendment (Female Genital
Mutilation) Act
(NSW), Sch 1 [2].
Crimes Act 1900
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty
Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
; (2009) 239 CLR 27 at 46-47
Hayne, Heydon, Crennan and Kiefel JJ;
[2009] HCA 41
Australian Education
Union v Department of Education and Children's Services
(2012) 248 CLR 1;
[2012] HCA 3;
Roadshow Films Pty Ltd v iiNet Ltd [No 2]
(2012) 248 CLR
[2012] HCA 16.
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384 at 408 per Brennan CJ,
Dawson, Toohey and Gummow JJ; [1997] HCA 2.
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355 at 384 [78] per McHugh,
Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ;
[1998] HCA 28.
Milne v The Queen
[2014] HCA 4
; (2014) 252 CLR 149 at 164
per French CJ, Hayne, Bell, Gageler and Keane JJ;
[2014] HCA 4.
Taylor v Owners –
Strata Plan No 11564
(2014) 253 CLR 531 at 557 [66] per Gageler and Keane
JJ; [2014] HCA 9;
SAS Trustee Corporation v Miles
[2018] HCA 55
; (2018) 92 ALJR 1064 at
per Kiefel CJ, Bell and Nettle JJ;
[2018] HCA 55
; 361 ALR 206 at 215;
Interpretation Act
s 35(2)(a).
See also Bennion,
Interpretation
, 5th ed (2008) at 745-747.
Interpretation Act
s 34(1)(b)(ii).
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 4 May 1994 at 1859-1860.
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: Discussion Paper
(31 January 1994) at 6-7
[2.01]-[2.06].
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: Discussion Paper
(31 January 1994) at 6
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: Discussion Paper
(31 January 1994) at 6
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: Discussion Paper
(31 January 1994) at 7
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: Discussion Paper
(31 January 1994) at 7
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: Discussion Paper
(31 January 1994) at 7
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the
Family Law Council
(June 1994).
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the
Family Law Council
(June 1994) at 6-8 [2.01]-[2.06].
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 4 May 1994 at 1859-1860.
Dr Afaf Attia Salem,
Director, General Directorate Maternity and Child Health, Ministry of Health,
Cairo, "The Practice of Circumcision
in Egypt", in World Health Organization,
Seminar on Traditional Practices Affecting the Health of Women and
Khartoum, 10-15 February 1979
(1979) at 10.
Mrs Edna Ismail, WHO
Temporary Advisor and Director, Department of Training, Ministry of Health,
Somalia, "Female Circumcision –
Physical and Mental Complications", in
World Health Organization,
Seminar on Traditional Practices Affecting the
Health of Women and Children, Khartoum,
10-15 February 1979
World Health Organization,
"A traditional practice that threatens health – female circumcision"
(1986) 40(1)
WHO Chronicle
World Health Organization,
Report on the Regional Seminar on Traditional Practices Affecting the Health
of Women and Children in Africa, 6-10 April 1987, Addis
Ababa, Ethiopia
(1987) at 12.
Joint Task Force of the
World Health Organization and the International Federation of Gynecology and
Obstetrics (FIGO), "Female
circumcision" (1992) 45
European Journal of
Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology
153; Joint Task Force
of the World Health Organization and the International Federation of Gynecology
and Obstetrics (FIGO), "Female
Circumcision" (1992) 37
International Journal
of Gynecology & Obstetrics
Joint Task Force of the
World Health Organization and the International Federation of Gynecology and
Obstetrics (FIGO), "Female
circumcision" (1992) 45
European Journal of
Obstetrics & Gynecology and Reproductive Biology
153 at 153.
World Health Organization,
Maternal and Child Health and Family Planning: Current Needs and Future
Orientation
– Report by the Director-General
(12 January
1994) at 8 [21].
World Health Organization,
Female Genital Mutilation: Report of a WHO Technical Working Group,
17-19 July 1995
(1996) at 5.
Director of Public
Prosecutions (Cth) v Poniatowska
[2011] HCA 43
; (2011) 244 CLR 408 at 424
French CJ, Gummow, Kiefel and Bell JJ;
[2011] HCA 43
Director of
Public Prosecutions (Cth) v Keating
[2013] HCA 20
; (2013) 248 CLR 459 at 479
French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ;
(2017) 260 CLR 305; [2017]
(1888) 22 QBD 23 at 41 per
Aubrey v The Queen
(2017) 260 CLR 305 at 319 [18] per Kiefel CJ, Keane, Nettle and
Edelman JJ.
Aubrey v The Queen
(2017) 260 CLR 305 at 322-323 [31]-[32].
R v Ireland
[1997] UKHL 34
; [1998] AC
147 at 158.
Aubrey v The Queen
(2017) 260 CLR 305 at 322 [30] per Kiefel CJ, Keane, Nettle and
Edelman JJ, citing
R v Ireland
[1997] UKHL 34
; [1998] AC 147 at 158-159.
Aubrey v The Queen
(2017) 260 CLR 305 at 322 [30], noting, in fn 82,
Yemshaw v Hounslow London
Borough Council
[2011] UKSC 3
; [2011] 1 WLR 433 at 442-443
per Baroness Hale of
Richmond JSC, with whom Lords Hope of Craighead DPSC and Walker of
Gestingthorpe JSC agreed (Lord Rodger of
Earlsferry JSC agreeing
at 446 [38]);
[2011] UKSC 3
; [2011] 1 All ER 912 at 922-923, 926.
Aubrey v The Queen
(2017) 260 CLR 305 at 322 [30] per Kiefel CJ, Keane, Nettle and
Edelman JJ.
[2003] UKHL 50
; [2004] 1 AC 1034.
[2003] UKHL 50
; [2004] 1 AC
1034 at 1054
[2003] UKHL 50
; [2004] 1 AC
1034 at 1054
Chugg v Pacific Dunlop
[1990] HCA 41
; (1990) 170 CLR 249 at 262 per Dawson, Toohey and Gaudron JJ;
A2 v The Queen
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: Discussion Paper
(31 January 1994).
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: A
Report to the Attorney-General prepared
by the Family Law Council
(June 1994).
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 4 May 1994 at 1859-1860; New
South Wales, Legislative Council,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 10 May
1994 at 2145-2146, 2149.
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: Discussion Paper
(31 January 1994) at 7
[2.04]-[2.06]; Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation:
Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law
(June 1994) at 6-8 [2.04]-[2.06]. See reasons of Kiefel CJ and
Keane J at [21]-[24].
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: Discussion Paper
(31 January 1994) at 6
[2.03]; Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: A
the Attorney-General prepared by the Family Law Council
(June 1994) at 6
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: Discussion Paper
(31 January 1994) at 6
[2.01], 28 [5.22].
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the
Family Law Council
(June 1994) at 6 [2.02], 63 [6.80].
See reasons of Kiefel CJ and
Keane J at [45]-[46].
Interpretation Act 1987
Interpretation Act
Crimes Act 1900
s 45(1)(a).
A2 v The Queen
A2 v The Queen
Crimes (Female Genital
Mutilation) Amendment Act 1994
(1981) 147 CLR 297 at 319;
[1981] HCA 26.
Bropho v Western
[1990] HCA 24
; (1990) 171 CLR 1 at 20;
[1990] HCA 24
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384 at 408; [1997] HCA 2.
Aubrey v The Queen
(2017) 260 CLR 305 at 325-326 [39]; [2017] HCA 18. See also
[1935] HCA 62
; (1935) 53 CLR 563 at 567-568;
[1935] HCA 62
Beckwith v The Queen
[1976] HCA 55
; (1976) 135 CLR 569 at 576;
[1976] HCA 55
R v Lavender
[2005] HCA 37
; (2005) 222 CLR
67 at 96-97
[2005] HCA 37.
Alcan (NT) Alumina Pty
Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
; (2009) 239 CLR 27 at 46
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355 at 381 [69];
[1998] HCA 28.
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR 384 at 408.
[2014] HCA 4
; (2014) 252 CLR 149 at 164
[2014] HCA 4.
Krakouer v The Queen
[1998] HCA 43
; (1998) 194 CLR 202 at
[1998] HCA 43.
Riggs v Palmer
(1889) 22 NE 188 at 189.
[1998] HCA 43
; (1998) 194 CLR 202 at 223
Ex parte Fitzgerald; Re Gordon
[1945] NSWStRp 2
; (1945) 45 SR (NSW) 182 at
[2014] HCA 4
; (2014) 252 CLR 149 at 164
Crimes (Female Genital
Mutilation) Amendment Act 1994
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 4 May 1994 at 1859.
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 4 May 1994 at 1860.
World Health Organization,
"A traditional practice that threatens health – female circumcision"
(1986) 40(1)
WHO Chronicle
31 at 32; Joint Task Force of the World Health
Organization and the International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics
"Female circumcision" (1992) 45
European Journal of Obstetrics &
Gynecology and Reproductive Biology
153; republished as Joint Task Force of
the World Health Organization and the International Federation of Gynecology and
(FIGO), "Female Circumcision" (1992) 37
International Journal
of Gynecology & Obstetrics
New South Wales, Legislative
Crimes (Female Genital Mutilation) Amendment Bill 1994
Explanatory Note at 1.
(2017) 260 CLR 305.
(2017) 260 CLR 305 at 320
(2017) 260 CLR 305 at 326
(2017) 260 CLR 305 at
323-324 [34].
Hounslow London Borough Council
[2011] UKSC 3
; [2011] 1 WLR 433 at 443
[2011] UKSC 3
All ER 912 at 923.
R (Quintavalle) v
Secretary of State for Health
[2003] UKHL 13
; [2003] 2 AC 687 at 695
See World Health
Organization,
Female genital mutilation: An overview
World Health Organization,
Female genital mutilation: An overview
(1998) at 5.
World Health Organization,
Female genital mutilation: An overview
(1998) at 6.
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the
Family Law Council
(1994) at 6 [2.02]. See also Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: Discussion Paper
(1994) at 28 [5.22], 31
Family Law Council,
Female Genital Mutilation: A Report to the Attorney-General prepared by the
Family Law Council
(1994) at 6 [2.01], quoting Armstrong, "Female
circumcision: fighting a cruel tradition" (2 February 1991)
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 4 May 1994 at 1859.
A2 v The Queen
At [112]-[115].
Callaghan v The Queen
(1952) 87 CLR 115; [1952] HCA 55;
Croton v The Queen
(1967) 117 CLR
[1967] HCA 48
Timbu Kolian v The Queen
(1968) 119 CLR 47;
Calabria v The Queen
(1983) 151 CLR 670;
[1983] HCA 33
Whitehorn v The Queen
(1983) 152 CLR 657;
[1983] HCA 42
Gerakiteys v
(1984) 153 CLR 317;
[1984] HCA 8
Maher v The Queen
163 CLR 221;
[1987] HCA 31.
Grassby v The Queen
[1989] HCA 45
; (1989) 168 CLR 1 at 16;
[1989] HCA 45.
Dockray, "The Inherent
Law Quarterly
120 at 122. See also
R v Forbes; Ex parte Bevan
[1972] HCA 34
; (1972) 127
CLR 1 at 7, "the power which a court has simply because it is a court of a
particular description";
[1972] HCA 34.
Byrnes v The Queen
[1999] HCA 38
; (1999) 199 CLR 1 at 20
[1999] HCA 38
Pelechowski v Registrar,
Court of Appeal (NSW)
[1999] HCA 19
; (1999) 198 CLR 435 at 452
[1999] HCA 19.
7 Edw VII c 23.
Outlines of
Criminal Law
4th ed (1909) at 493, fn 1.
Gerakiteys v The Queen
[1984] HCA 8
; (1984) 153 CLR 317 at 322.
Pearce v The Queen
[1998] HCA 57
; (1998) 194 CLR 610 at 627-628
[1998] HCA 57
; see also at 617 [22]. See
Island Maritime Ltd v Filipowski
[2006] HCA 30
; (2006) 226 CLR 328 at 336
[2006] HCA 30.
(1908) 1 Cr App
R 142 at 143. See also
(1908) 1 Cr App R 212 at 213.
(1909) 2 Cr
App R 217 at 245.
(1908) 1 Cr App
R 142 at 143.
Pearce v The
[1998] HCA 57
; (1998) 194 CLR 610 at 614
Green v United States
[1957] USSC 148
; (1957) 355 US 184 at 187-188. Compare
R v Taufahema
[2007] HCA 11
; (2007) 228 CLR 232
[2007] HCA 11.
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 5 December 1911 at
An Act to amend the
Criminal Code
13-14 Geo V, c 41, s 9.
Welch v The King
[1950] SCR 412
Russell v Bates
[1927] ArgusLawRp 107
; (1927) 40 CLR 209 at 213-214;
[1927] HCA 56
Calvin v Carr
NSWLR 1 at 8-9. See also
Crane v Director of Public Prosecutions
2 AC 299 at 319.
The Third Part of
the Institutes of the Laws of England
(1644) at 214; Chitty,
A Practical
Treatise on the Criminal Law
(1816), vol 1 at 756. See also
Conway v The
(2002) 209 CLR 203 at 209-210 [9]; [2002] HCA 2.
[1848] EngR 362
Car & K 190 at 199
ER 516 at 520].
See also Friedland, "New
Trial after an Appeal from Conviction – Part II" (1968) 84
Quarterly Review
185 at 188-189.
Cooke, "Venire de Novo"
Law Quarterly Review
100 at 119-120.
[1921] 2 AC 299 at 319, 324,
330, 333. See also
R v Granberg
(1973) 11 CCC (2d) 117 at 121.
R v Yeadon and Birch
[1861] EngR 96
; (1861) Le & Ca 81 [169 ER 1312]. See also
[1858] EngR 84
Dears & B 468 [169 ER 1084].
Crown Cases Act 1848
(11 & 12 Vict c 78), s 2. Compare
R v Parry, Rea
[1837] EngR 232
; (1837) 7 Car & P 836 at 841
ER 364 at 367]. See also
Conway v The Queen
(2002) 209 CLR 203 at 210 [10], fn 38.
R v Fowler and Sexton
(1821) 4 B & Ald 273 at 276 [106 ER 937 at 939], quoted in
(2002) 209 CLR 203 at 209 [9].
[1915] HCA 90
; (1915) 20
CLR 315 at 324, 351;
[1915] HCA 90.
[1921] 2 AC 299 at 324, 332,
12 Vict c 78. The powers conferred by the
Crown Cases
had been transferred to the High Court of Justice by s 47 of the
Supreme Court of Judicature Act 1873
(36 & 37 Vict c 66)
[1858] EngR 84
Dears & B 468 [169 ER 1084].
(1915) 11 Cr
App R 79 at 80;
(1920) 15 Cr App R 13 at 14;
20 Cr App R 163 at 164;
(1933) 24 Cr App R 98 at 99;
(1942) 28 Cr App R 173 at 176;
(1943) 29 Cr App R 151 at 153;
[1951] 1 KB 29 at 30. See Cooke, "Venire de Novo" (1955) 71
Law Quarterly Review
100 at 118-120.
Friedland, "New Trial after
an Appeal from Conviction – Part I" (1968) 84
Law Quarterly Review
48 at 63 (footnote omitted).
Munday v Gill
[1930] HCA 20
44 CLR 38 at 60-62;
[1930] HCA 20
R v Middlesex Quarter Sessions (Chairman);
Ex parte Director of Public Prosecutions
[1952] 2 QB 758 at 769;
[1949] 2 KB 590 at 599;
In re Pritchard, decd
[1963] Ch 502 at
Strachan v The Gleaner Co Ltd
[2005] UKPC 33
; [2005] 1 WLR 3204 at 3211-3212
See Cooke, "Venire de Novo"
Law Quarterly Review
100; Friedland, "New Trial after an Appeal
from Conviction – Part I" (1968) 84
Law Quarterly Review
Plowman v Palmer
[1914] HCA 41
; (1914) 18 CLR 339 at 348;
[1914] HCA 41.
R v Swansson
[2007] NSWCCA 67
69 NSWLR 406 at 417
; see also at 420 [95], 424 [119]; compare at 435
[179]-[180], 437 [191]. See also
Deveigne v Askar
[2007] NSWCA 45
; (2007) 69 NSWLR 327 at
; see also at 331 [8].
Commissioner for Railways
(NSW) v Cavanough
[1935] HCA 45
; (1935) 53 CLR 220 at 225;
[1935] HCA 45.
New South Wales v
(2013) 252 CLR 118 at 129 [21]; [2013] HCA 26. See also
Bounds v The Queen
[2006] HCA 39
; (2006) 80 ALJR 1380 at 1383
[2006] HCA 39
; 228 ALR 190 at 193;
[2006] HCA 39.
[1938] HCA 45
; (1938) 60 CLR 431 at
[1938] HCA 45.
Crane v Director of
Public Prosecutions
[1921] 2 AC 299 at 318.
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 5 December 1911 at
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (735 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter