B v Insurer [2005] IOSPCC 1 (8 April 2005)
Ombudsman Service Limited (IOS)
Complaint Determination No. 1 of 2005
Cite as B v Insurer
[2005] IOSPCC 1
General Insurance Information Privacy Code
(the Code), clause
This determination relates to a complaint by the Complainant
registered by IOS under clause 3.13 of the
The Respondent to the
complaint is a signatory to the Code. It is alleged that certain acts of the
Respondent interfered with the
Complainant’s privacy.
The Insurance Ombudsman Service Limited Privacy Complaints
Committee (the Committee) decided to seek to resolve the complaint pursuant
clause 3.15 of the Code.
Background, allegations and remedies sought - the
Complainant’s Case
In correspondence to IOS dated 20 October 2004 and 21 December 2004
the Complainant identified the essential elements of her complaint
The Respondent had issued a travel insurance policy to
the Complainant prior to the Complainant travelling overseas. The Complainant
was assaulted in Mexico City and admitted to hospital on 11 June 2003 for a
period of 10 days due to a fractured skull and other
On 12 June 2003 the Complainant contacted the
Respondent’s overseas medical emergency assistance agency (the Agent),
Australia, requesting repatriation under the terms of the travel policy
and she was advised that a medical report would be required
to assess the
The Complainant acknowledged that on 17 June 2003 she
signed a medical authority form in the following format:
"I [Complainant] of [Complainant’s Australian address] hereby authorise
the [Agent] or its representative to approach any relevant
medical authorities
for information regarding my medical history. Please provide them with any
information they require including
details of medication prescribed and copies
of any reports or records they may request...
PLEASE NOTE: If the patient is unable to sign this authorisation it will be
acceptable for the next of kin to sign."
the Complainant said she does not recall signing the medical authority form. She
said that her signature was not witnessed
by a medically qualified person, and
as a result there was no-one to verify whether she was competent to sign it.
The Complainant said that she did not authorise the Agent or
the Respondent to discuss her mental health and her past medical history
her parents. The Complainant referred to a letter from the Respondent dated 15
September 2003 in which the Respondent stated
in part as follows:
"....In [the Complainant’s] case this included consideration of her past
history of depression and anxiety. It was determined
that because she had no
longer been taking medication for these conditions that it would be sufficient
to arrange for a non-medical
escort to accompany her on her return to
Australia...."
The Complainant referred to a
further letter from the Respondent, dated 30 September 2004, in response to her
which the Respondent stated in part as follows:
"....It is common practice for us to obtain additional information from the
regular doctor and relatives of a person who may be repatriated...."
The Complainant said that while the practice may
be common she did not authorise it and the information obtained from her parents
had no bearing on either her head injury or her repatriation. The Complainant
believes that the only reason this information was
sought was to establish
whether she had failed to disclose any relevant medical information at the time
she bought the travel insurance
policy from the Respondent.
further support her position the Complainant described the following
"[The Respondent’s] nurse, [name] telephoned my mother at home...when I
was in the [name] Hospital (Mexico City), asking her
how I coped with stress.
The way she reasoned this line of questioning to my mother was to be sure that I
would not have a mentally
adverse reaction on my repatriation, resulting in the
‘plane crashing into the ocean’."
Complainant said that the breaches of her privacy, particularly those involving
her family, have caused her intense stress and
she would like these matters
The Respondent’s Case
The Respondent said that the policy wording issued to the
Complainant included its Privacy Promise which stated in part as
"We are committed to safeguarding Your privacy and the confidentiality of Your
personal information. We will only collect personal
information from or about
You, which is relevant to Your application for insurance or Your insurance
policy, including claims made
by You. We will only use Your personal information
in a way You would reasonably expect.
Without this personal information We may not be able to issue insurance cover or
process Your claim."
On 17 June 2003 a telephone
conference was held involving the Complainant, her treating doctor and
representatives of the Respondent’s
Agent. The Respondent said that during
the telephone conference the Complainant’s treating doctor stated she was
fit" and it also received the Complainant’s signed medical
authority form. Further, there was communication between the Respondent,
Complainant’s parents and a friend of the Complainant, and this
communication continued until the Complainant arrived in
The Respondent said that it obtained details of the
Complainant’s medical history and communicated with her parents and friend
in order to determine whether the Complainant required assistance to return home
with an escort. The Respondent decided to repatriate
the Complainant and
arranged for her friend to fly to Mexico City and escort her home.
The Complainant wrote to the Respondent on 23 July 2003
stating that the Respondent had obtained her psychiatric history. The Respondent
said it was reasonable and necessary to do this for the following reasons:
• The Complainant’s request for repatriation was not supported by
medical evidence;
• The Complainant’s treating doctor described her as "shaky" and
suggested repatriation may be appropriate due her emotional
• The Respondent needed to be aware of any physical or emotional condition
that could affect its ability to repatriate the
Complainant;
• As a medical escort was not required, it was necessary for the
Respondent to identify the level of assistance that would
be required by the
Complainant during repatriation; and
• The Complainant’s emotional state and her history in this regard
were critical to the Respondent’s ability to
support a decision to
repatriate the Complainant on compassionate
In correspondence dated 15 September 2003
the Complainant noted that the Respondent had discussed the state of her mental
with her family. The Respondent said it believes the Complainant had
consented to this for the following reasons:
• The Complainant’s father was the first person to contact the
Respondent after the assault and he provided updates to
the Respondent
throughout this process about the Complainant’s state of health and her
• The Complainant’s father is a medical practitioner;
• The Complainant was aware from the first contact and throughout this
process that her father was acting on her behalf;
• The Respondent believes that the Complainant’s consent allowed the
Respondent to continue discussions with her father;
• If the Complainant was incapacitated as a result of the assault, General
Insurance Information Privacy Principle 2.4 expressly
permits the Respondent to
use her personal information to "provide appropriate care" or "for compassionate
reasons"; and
• The Complainant’s father continues to be authorised to act on her
behalf in her dealings with the Respondent.
letter to the Respondent dated 20 October 2003 the Complainant said:
"I was never cognitively assessed in Mexico City. I believe that I was confused
at the time, as when I returned home, I had no recollection
of sighting this
The Respondent believes it had the
Complainant’s informed consent to collect, use or disclose personal
information outside
what was authorised by the policy for the following
• The Complainant’s treating doctor advised that she was "medically
fit" the day she provided her consent;
• The information provided by the Complainant’s doctor, together
with her father’s representations and her own
conduct during this process
were consistent with her providing an informed consent at that time;
• The consent provided by the Complainant authorised the Respondent to
perform all necessary enquiries to ensure her treatment
and repatriation were
appropriate;
• It is not reasonable for the Complainant to dispute that informed
consent was provided by her given she did not raise the
issue of consent when
she first realised she could not remember signing the medical authority
While the Respondent apologised to the
Complainant for the distress experienced by her as a result of her privacy
concerns, the Respondent
remains of the view that it did not breach any aspect
of the Complainant’s privacy.
The Complainant’s further submission
The Complainant provided additional comments in response to the
Respondent’s submission as follows:
• "Medically fit" does not necessarily mean that she was cognitively
capable. She has not sighted any certification confirming
that she was medically
fit at the time and as stated previously, her signature on the medical authority
form was not witnessed. She
does not recall participating in the telephone
conference.
• If medical advice did not support repatriation why was it necessary for
the Respondent to be aware of any past condition
that could affect its ability
to repatriate her?
• If her emotional condition was critical to the Respondent’s
ability to justify repatriation, the treating doctor had
already recommended
repatriation in these circumstances. In addition, the treating doctor did not
ask for her past medical history.
• The Respondent’s submission does not support its statement that
her father remained in contact with the Respondent.
• The fact that her father is a medical practitioner is not relevant to
the issue of consent or whether her privacy has been
• While she was aware of her father’s concerns for her, she was not
aware that he was "acting on her behalf". The Respondent
has not provided an
authority to that effect and she does not believe that one was offered or
signed. As a result, her private medical
history which her parents were unaware
of previously was disclosed and this distressed her.
• To her knowledge, she did not provide consent to discuss anything other
than her repatriation with her parents.
• The Respondent is not a health care provider yet it seeks to rely on
Respondent’s interpretation of Privacy Principle 2.4 as stated in its
letter to her dated 30 September
2004 conflicts with its subsequent
interpretation in its submission dated 25 November 2004.
• Information was not obtained from her but covertly through a medical
practice where her treating doctor no longer
The General Insurance Information Privacy Principles (IPPs) in
Part 2 of the Code outline standards for handling personal information
legally bind organisations that have adopted the Code which was formally
approved by the Federal Privacy Commissioner on 17
April 2002. The Code
Principles replace the National Privacy Principles in the
the Insurance Ombudsman Service Limited Privacy Compliance Committee (The
Committee) is the Code Adjudicator under the Act.
information is defined in Appendix 1 of the Code as follows:
"information or an opinion (including information or an opinion forming part of
a database), whether true or not, and whether recorded
in a material form or
not, about an individual whose identity is apparent, or can reasonably be
ascertained, from the information
or opinion."
The principal question in this complaint is whether
personal information held by the Respondent was improperly disclosed to the
Complainant’s
family, in breach of IPP 2, having regard to the purposes
for which, and circumstances in which, it was collected.
deals with the use and disclosure of information. IPP 2 commences with the
2 Use and disclosure
We will only use or disclose information about you for the purpose that you
gave us the information or where a lawful exception applies
2.1 An organisation must only use or disclose personal information for the
primary purpose for which it was collected. Exceptions
to this rule are as
Use or disclosure for a related purpose
An organisation may use or disclose personal information for a
secondary purpose if the secondary purpose is related to the primary
purpose for
which it was collected and the individual would reasonably expect the
information to be used or disclosed for that secondary
In the case of sensitive personal information, use or disclosure for a secondary
purpose may only occur if the secondary purpose
is directly related to the
primary purpose for which the information was collected and the individual would
reasonably expect the
information to be used or disclosed for the secondary
Use or disclosure with consent
An organisation may use or disclose personal information for a
secondary purpose if the individual consents to the use or
disclosure."
The remaining provisions of IPP 2.1
deal with various other exceptions, none of which are relevant to this
complaint. However the
Committee notes that the Respondent appears to have been
somewhat ambivalent about the applicability of IPP 2.4. In the Committee’s
view IPP 2.4 was not relevant in this case, firstly because its operation is
only triggered by incapacity and secondly because by
the time the Respondent
sought information concerning the Complainant, it had already obtained her
In addition to the complaints about the use and
disclosure of information obtained by the Respondent, there is also the matter
the Complainant’s allegation that she believed that some information
obtained by the Respondent from her parents had no bearing
on either her injury
or the repatriation but was sought for the purpose of establishing whether she
had failed to disclose any relevant
medical condition at the time she bought the
travel insurance policy. This aspect of the complaint involves consideration of
1 which deals with the collection of information.
relevant provisions of IPP 1 are in the following terms:
"1 Collection
We will only collect information that is necessary for what we do
An organisation must not collect personal information unless the
information is necessary for one or more of its functions or
activities.
We will tell you who we are and what we intend to do with information about
At or before the time (or as soon as practicable after) an
organisation collects personal information from the individual concerned,
organisation must take reasonable steps to ensure that the individual is aware
identity of the organisation and how to contact it;
the fact that he or she is able
to gain access to the information;
the purposes for which the
information is collected; and
organisations (or the types of organisations) to which the organisation usually
discloses information of that kind;
any law that requires the
particular information to be collected;
the main consequences (if any)
for the individual if all or part of the information is not provided.
The application form and the policy
document set out the Respondent’s Privacy Promise which is in the
following terms:
"We are committed to safeguarding Your privacy and the confidentiality of Your
personal information. We will only collect personal
information from or about
You, which is relevant to Your application for insurance or Your insurance
policy, including claims made
by You. We will only use Your personal information
in a way You would reasonably expect.
Without this personal information We may not be able to issue insurance cover or
process Your claim.
We or Our authorised agent may disclose Your personal
information:
• To an investigator, assessor or State or Federal Authority (for the
purpose of investigating or assessing Your claim);
• To an airline, medical practitioner, treating doctor or emergency
assistance provider (to establish Your medical status and
• To a lawyer or recovery agent (for the purpose of defending an action by
a third party against You or for the purpose of
recovering Our costs including
Your excess);
• To another insurer (for the purpose of seeking recovery from them or to
assist them to assess insurance risks) or a reinsurer,
who may be located
• To an insurance reference bureau (for the purpose of recording any
claims You make upon Us).
Personal information may also be obtained about You from the above people or
organisations.
In addition We will;
• Give You the opportunity to correct Your personal information, or obtain
access to it (some restrictions and a fee may apply).
• Provide Our dispute resolution procedures to You in respect of any
complaint You may have regarding Your personal
information.
Further information about privacy can be obtained by contacting Our
Compliance Manager...
The Policy Promise makes it plain that personal
information collected concerning the insured will be confined to information
to the application for insurance, the Policy and claims made by the
insured. The Promise further explains that without that personal
information the
Respondent may not be able to issue cover or process a claim. It is standard
practice for insurers not to investigate
or go behind information provided on an
insurance application that is relevant to whether the application is within
underwriting
guidelines and/or the premium to be charged, until such time as a
claim is received. In the Committee’s view it would have
reasonable for the Respondent to have collected information from or concerning
the Complainant for the purposes of investigating
whether the circumstances of
the claim (including issues such as pre-existing conditions) were such as to
require the claim to be
admitted or declined.
Investigation process
As indicated above, both parties outlined their principal
positions in this matter during 2003 and 2004 in correspondence between
parties, and in correspondence with the Insurance Ombudsman Service Limited
(IOS) in the course of its investigations following
the referral of the
complaint to IOS by the Complainant.
The Committee does not doubt the sincerity or the genuineness of
the Complainant’s complaints, or that she was distressed by
the disclosure
of sensitive health information to her family. However, on the basis of the
material reviewed the consent was clearly
provided by the Complainant to obtain
personal information relevant to the processing of her claim. The collection of
this information
necessarily involved some disclosure. There is no evidence
suggesting that the Respondent had any reason to suspect that the
Complainant’s
consent was not given knowingly or voluntarily, or that it
would not apply to specific aspects of the Complainant’s medical
The Committee considers that in these circumstances the Respondent was entitled
to rely on the consent provided by the Complainant
and that it was reasonable
for it to disclose the information that it clearly considered relevant to the
issue of repatriation. The
Committee therefore concludes that there was no
breach of IPP 2.
The Committee is further of the opinion that
the collection of personal information in connection with the investigation of
did not constitute a breach of IPP 1.
Determination
For the reasons detailed above, the Committee determines pursuant
to Clause 3.42(a) of the Code that the complaints should be dismissed,
grounds that there has been no breach of the Code (Clause
In retrospect, the Respondent and Agent could have
been more alert to the potential differential sensitivity of the personal
information
involved in this case, and the Committee recommends that the
Respondent develops and promulgates guidelines for its staff and agents
collection and disclosure, with a view to minimising the chances of
inadvertently disclosing information which goes beyond what
is strictly required
for the processing of claims. The Committee understands that the Respondent has
already commenced action that
addresses this recommendation.
Right of appeal
In accordance with Clause 3.47 of the Code, the Committee advises
both the Complainant and the Respondent that they are entitled
to seek a review
of this Determination by the Federal Privacy Commissioner, who can be contacted
as follows:
Director, Compliance
Office of the Federal Privacy Commissioner
GPO Box 5218
SYDNEY NSW 2001.
Fax: (02) 9284 9666
Telephone: 1300 363 992, or e-mail
Insurance Ombudsman Service Limited Privacy
Compliance Committee
Dated 8 April 2005
RTF format (109 KB)
Signed PDF/A format