Reginald Thomas Underhill v Australian Postal Corporation - re Termination of employment - arbitration [2009] AIRC 949; (8 December 2009)
Note: An appeal pursuant to s.120 (C2009/11387) was lodged against this decision.
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
- Application for relief re (Harsh, Unjust or Unreasonable) termination of employment
Reginald Thomas Underhill
Australian Postal Corporation
(U2009/3617)
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SYDNEY, 8 DECEMBER 2009
Termination of employment – arbitration.
Introduction
This decision concerns an application made by Mr Reginald Underhill pursuant to
s 643(1)(a)
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(the Act). Mr Underhill alleges that the termination of his employment by Australian Postal Corporation (Australia Post) was harsh,
unjust or unreasonable.
Mr Underhill’s application was unable to be resolved through conciliation. A certificate pursuant to
of the Act was issued on 24 June 2009 and Mr Underhill elected to proceed to arbitration.
The application was the subject of hearings on 8, 9 October and 6 November 2009. At these hearings Mr Underhill was represented by
Mr P Coleman of counsel and Australia Post were represented by Ms R Bernasconi of counsel.
Mr Underhill was employed by Australia Post for a period of 16 years. At the time of his termination he was employed as a Postal
Delivery Coordinator Grade 1 at the Lismore Delivery Centre. In February 2009 Mr Underhill was transferred to the Lismore Delivery
Centre following a disciplinary inquiry conducted by Australia Post into allegations concerning dealings with employees and contractors.
Prior to this transfer, Mr Underhill was working as Delivery Manager at the Alstonville Delivery Centre.
Following the disciplinary inquiry Australia Post became aware of a number of other serious allegations against Mr Underhill concerning
breaches of safety; failure to follow procedures and possible fraud. Mr Underhill was stood down without pay whilst an investigation
was conducted into the allegations. Australia Post submits that each of the allegations, aside from one which was found to be proven
in part, were proven. It terminated Mr Underhill’s employment by letter dated 14 April 2009 on the ground of serious and wilful
misconduct.
Mr Underhill denies all of the allegations against him. He denies that he has breached Australia Post’s Code of Ethics and
denies that he has engaged in misconduct or any wrongdoing. Australia Post submits that its decision to terminate Mr Underhill’s
employment was based on the subsequent allegations against the background of the conduct subject to the first disciplinary investigation.
Evidence was led by both parties concerning all of the matters subject to the two investigations. In order to determine the application
it is necessary to consider the evidence in relation to both.
The First Investigation
The first investigation arose from allegations made by a contractor to Australia Post, Mr Peter Kalie. Nine specific allegations
were made concerning statements made by Mr Underhill to Mr Kalie, conduct in relation to a retired employee and contractor employee,
Mr Kevin Gray and behaviour towards staff and contractors generally.
The allegations were investigated by Ms Vicki Miles who found that the allegations were proven and constituted serious and wilful
misconduct. She recommended a transfer to another position at a larger operation where he would be subject to supervision.
The Acting NSW Country and ACT Manager, Mr David Whitehead found the allegation of breach of the Australia Post’s Code of Ethics
proven and accepted the recommendation to transfer Mr Underhill. He was transferred to the Lismore Delivery Centre and directed to
undertake anger management counselling.
Evidence in relation to these allegations was given by Mr Underhill, Mr Kalie, Mr Gray, Ms Miles, Mr Michael Willemsen, Mr Craig
Ponton, Mr Peter Hickey, Ms Karin Brown, Mr Keith Brown and Mr Peter Wilson.
There was considerable antipathy between Mr Underhill and Mr Kalie. Their accounts of the conversation subject to Mr Kalie’s
complaint were generally consistent in terms of the content, but differed with respect to the level of aggression demonstrated by
Mr Underhill. I have viewed the evidence of both participants with some caution. In my view, even on the account of Mr Underhill,
his conduct towards Mr Kalie was threatening, abusive and inappropriate. However in my view, considered on its own, it was not such
as to warrant termination of employment. It was open to Australia Post to take disciplinary action against Mr Underhill as a result
of this conduct.
The evidence of Mr Gray appears to be inconsistent with Mr Gray’s comments to Mr Willemsen when they spoke during the course
of the investigation. As a result the conduct of Mr Underhill may have been less serious than Australia Post was led to believe at
the time. The more serious allegations however concerned Mr Kalie and even on Mr Underhill’s own account, his behaviour was
out of line.
The Second Investigation
The second investigation concerned allegations that Mr Underhill:
failed to have a postal delivery officer (PDO) observe him undertake his pre-ride motorcycle checks and initialled the relevant documentation
failed to conduct pre-ride observation checks of PDOs as prescribed,
purchased a pair of motor cycle gloves without authority and not in accordance with the Australia Post procurement policy,
purchased alcohol and prawns for a staff Christmas gathering and did not make all of the purchases available to staff.
These allegations were investigated by Mr Adam Lowe who produced a report on 30 March 2009. Mr Lowe found each of the allegations
proven. He found that the conduct amounted to serious and wilful misconduct, breached Australia Post’s Code of Ethics and was
dishonest and inexcusable.
The Manager, NSW Country and ACT, Mr Robert Maciejewski received the second investigation report on 31 March 2009. He subsequently
received a telephone call from Mr Underhill and a faxed statement concerning the fourth allegation. He accepted the information and
modified the findings of the investigation report accordingly. He considered the behaviour disclosed in the two investigations. In
his view it involved serious breaches of Australia Post’s Code of Ethics, Violence in the Workplace Policy and Occupational
Health and Safety procedures. He formed the conclusion that dismissal was the appropriate action to take.
Evidence in relation to these matters was given by Mr Underhill, Mr Lowe, Mr Maciejewski, Mr Willemsen, Ms Wendy Gerrard, Ms Kyleen
Allen and Mr Hickey.
In my view the evidence establishes that Mr Underhill had an off-hand approach to Occupational Health and Safety matters. I find
that he failed to follow procedures for pre-ride checks. In my view this is a serious matter. His approach of conducting inspections
in his own way and with a much lesser level of scrutiny than required by the procedures was inappropriate for a person in a supervisory
role. The absence of accepting responsibility for enforcing and adhering to procedures adds to the concern at his behaviour.
The failure to follow Australia Post procurement policies in purchasing gloves for himself is also a matter of concern. I do not
however regard the allegations concerning purchases for the staff Christmas party as of real significance.
Was the Termination Harsh, Unjust and Unreasonable?
The Commission is required to have regard to the factors set out in s 652(3) of the Act in determining whether the termination was
harsh, unjust or unreasonable. I propose to consider each factor in turn to the extent that it may be relevant in the circumstances
of this case.
Valid Reason
In my view Australia Post had a valid reason to terminate the employment of Mr Underhill arising from the conduct of Mr Underhill
to Mr Kalie and his approach to company procedures including important Occupational, Health and Safety requirements. The reasons
were not fanciful. They were based on ample evidence of their occurrence and they concerned serious matters. The failure of Mr Underhill
to accept responsibility for his conduct did not assist his case. In my view it demonstrated an ongoing reluctance to accept the
requirements of the employer.
Notification of reason
Australia Post adopted a detailed investigative procedure which clearly complied with its obligation to notify Mr Underhill of the
reason for termination.
Opportunity to Respond
The investigative processes adopted by Australia Post clearly provided Mr Underhill with ample opportunities for him to give his
account of the events and respond to the allegations against him.
As the conduct of Mr Underhill was more relevant to the reasons for dismissal than his performance, this factor does not have great
significance in this case. Nevertheless, as an employee of long standing Mr Underhill had sufficient knowledge of company processes
and the consequences of not adhering to processes and policies. He had previously been warned about such matters.
Resources of the Employer
There are no circumstances which bear on the ability of Australia Post to adopt fair and comprehensive investigation and termination
Other Matters
I have considered all of the circumstances of the matter. In my view the case is complicated by the two sets of investigations and
the ultimate termination decision being taken by a Manager who was not directly involved in the first investigation. Mr Maciejewski’s
reliance on the earlier findings was open to him, but as I have found, the reports and correspondence tended to paint his behaviour
in a more serious light than was warranted. If viewed in a direct manner I believe they would have been considered with greater perspective.
The circumstances of the matter also disclose considerable tension and animosity between Mr Underhill and fellow employees and contractors.
I have taken this factor into account with respect to the complaints against him and the evidence before me.
As I have indicated above I find it curious that Mr Underhill should consider that he has not conducted himself inappropriately in
any way, except for a very guarded concession in relation to his conversation with Mr Kalie. Where compliance with company policies
and procedures is involved, such an approach taken throughout the investigation and in the evidence before me, tends to confirm the
concerns of the employer.
Ultimately I consider that this case depends on an assessment of the gravity of the conduct which led to Mr Underhill’s termination.
Inappropriate conduct clearly occurred. Was it sufficient to justify termination of employment?
In my view Mr Underhill’s termination was harsh and unreasonable. His conduct clearly justified disciplinary action. However
the matters raised were not sufficiently serious to lead to termination. Properly considered, including a realistic perspective of
the circumstances should have led to a more sympathetic view of his case. Having said that, it should also be said that in denying
all culpability, Mr Underhill did not contribute to a more realistic perspective.
Further, Mr Underhill’s long employment history and his apparent satisfactory performance in other respects should have carried
more weight than they did.
In my view Australia Post should have reached an alternative conclusion on the nature of the disciplinary action to be taken. It
was unreasonable to find termination as the appropriate action. In these circumstances the termination was harsh.
I have considered each of the factors in s 654 of the Act relevant to the remedy in this matter. I do not consider in all of the
circumstances that reinstatement is appropriate. The tension with other employees, the fault of Mr Underhill in his conduct, the
nature of that conduct as it relates to company policies and his failure to accept responsibility for his actions all contribute
to this conclusion.
Having regard to the matters set out in s 654(8) of the Act I consider that 12 weeks pay should be paid to Mr Underhill in lieu of
reinstatement. The most significant factors I have had regard to in the circumstances of this matter are his length of service and
the conduct of Mr Underhill which justified disciplinary action.
BY THE COMMISSION:
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
Appearances
Mr P Coleman
of counsel for Reginald Thomas Underhill
Ms R Bernasconi
of counsel for Australian Postal Corporation
Hearing details:
October 8, 9
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR991558>
No downloadable files available