Chalmers v Deakin University [2000] IRCA 2 (20 June 2000)
INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COURT OF
Chalmers v Deakin University
[2000] IRCA 2
INDUSTRIAL LAW
review sought of decision of a judicial registrar of the Industrial Relations
Court of Australia to dismiss an application
for relief in relation to
termination of employment – where applicant totally and permanently
incapacitated and incapable of
performing duties – whether termination for
valid reason or reasons.
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
substantive hearing of application in Industrial Relations Court had begun by
the “transfer day” defined
in Schedule 16, item 62 of the
Workplace Relations and Other Legislation Amendment Act 1996
whether Federal Court has jurisdiction to deal with application –
whether judge of Industrial Relations Court should extend
time for review of
decision of a judicial registrar.
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Industrial Relations Act 1988
s 170DE, s 170EA, s
Industrial Relations Court Rules
Relations and Other Legislation Amendment Act 1996
Universities and Post Compulsory Academic Conditions Award 1995
Victorian Post-Compulsory and Higher Education Academic and Teaching Staff
(Conditions of Employment) Interim Award 1900
Association of New South Wales v Dodson
[1999] FCA 439
v The Commonwealth
(1996) 187 CLR 416 cited
Cosco Holdings Pty Ltd v
(1997) 150 ALR 127
Qantas Airways Ltd v Cornwall
ALAN DOUGLAS CHALMERS v DEAKIN
VI 1908 OF 1996
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
VICTORIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
VI 1908 OF 1996
ALAN DOUGLAS CHALMERS
DEAKIN UNIVERSITY
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
The application be
Judicial Registrar
Murphy’s order of 16 April 1997 as to costs be set
The respondents file and
serve any submissions for costs within seven (7)
The applicants file and serve
any submissions in response within a further seven (7)
IN THE INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
VICTORIA DISTRICT REGISTRY
VI 1908 OF 1996
ALAN DOUGLAS
BRISBANE (Heard in Melbourne)
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
1 This is an application pursuant to the former
Relations Act 1996
The applicant, Alan Douglas Chalmers, seeks a review of
the decision of Judicial Registrar Murphy given on 16 April 1997 to dismiss
application brought by Mr Chalmers under s 170EA of the then
Relations Act 1988
for relief in relation to unlawful termination of his
employment.
2 So to state the nature of the application is to conceal significant aspects
of the history of this litigation, as what follows will
illuminate.
3 Mr Chalmers commenced employment with Victoria College, a predecessor
of Deakin University, in 1973. In its employment of Mr Chalmers
lecturer, the university was bound by its obligations as a party to the
Universities and Post Compulsory Academic Conditions Award
1995 (the 1995 Award)
and the Victorian Post-Compulsory and Higher Education Academic and Teaching
Staff (Conditions of Employment)
Interim Award 1990 (the 1990 Award). Both
awards were federal awards. Mr Chalmers’ employment with Victoria
College was the
subject of printed terms and conditions. In 1992 the University
became the successor to Victoria College.
4 Mr Chalmers last worked as a lecturer on 23 March 1992, subsequent to
which he was totally incapacitated for work. At least by
8 September 1994 it is
agreed by both the university and Mr Chalmers that his incapacity for work
was total and permanent. Between
23 March 1992 and 7 June 1996 Mr Chalmers
did not work.
5 The university forwarded a letter dated 13 April 1994 to Mr Chalmers
requiring him to undergo a medical examination relevant to
his capacity for
work. Mr Chalmers refused to undertake a medical examination. In 1995,
particularly, there was a large volume
of correspondence between Mr Chalmers and
various officers of the university concerning, amongst other things,
Mr Chalmers’
entitlements under the
State Superannuation Act 1988
Accident Compensation Act 1985
as well as the
position of Mr Chalmers’ accrued sick leave.
6 By letter dated 8 December 1995 the university gave Mr Chalmers notice
of the termination of his employment, to take effect from
the close of business
on 7 June 1996. Clause 16 of the 1995 Award provided that the Chief Executive
Officer could terminate employment
by giving six months notice where a medical
examination revealed that an employee
“is unable to perform his or her
duties and is unlikely to be able to resume them within a reasonable period,
being not less
than 12 months ...”
7 On 3 June 1996, Mr Chalmers lodged with the Australian Industrial
Relations Commission (the Commission) an application in Form R28
for relief in
respect of termination of employment, referring to s 170EA of the
Relations Act 1988
(Cth). In that application Mr Chalmers indicated
that he received written notice of his termination (the letter of 8 December
on 27 December 1995, and that he sought reinstatement. In relation to
compensation, he indicated that, as he was seeking reinstatement,
“...at this juncture, not seeking compensation in lieu of
reinstatement”
, but that consistent with
“requests for
compensation in the form of a disability settlement”
he enclosed
figures which as at 23 June 1995 totalled $534,624, and in addition he sought
damages. On 3 June 1996 Commissioner Whelan
of the Commission granted
Mr Chalmers an extension of time within which to lodge that
application.
8 Judicial Registrar Murphy heard the application of Mr Chalmers on 16
April 1997. Mr Chalmers gave evidence and was represented
by his then
solicitor, Mr Keith Elliott. Judicial Registrar Murphy decided that the
university has discharged its onus of proving
that it had a valid reason for the
termination of Mr Chalmers’ employment being, in essence,
Mr Chalmers’ total and permanent
inability to perform his duties.
The judicial registrar ordered Mr Chalmers to pay the university’s
costs of the application,
which he considered had been
as, on Mr Chalmers’ own version of the facts, he had been
unable to work at all times from 1992.
9 On 13 June 1997 Mr Chalmers forwarded a letter to Wilcox CJ of the
Industrial Relations Court of Australia (the Industrial Relations
Court), giving
formal written notice of his intention
“to complain extensively
“a review and/or appeal”
JR’s decision. Wilcox CJ’s associate replied by way of letter dated
18 June 1997 informing him of his right
of review and further indicating that a
motion seeking review was ordinarily required to be filed within twenty-one days
of the decision
and that leave of a judge would be required to file a motion for
review outside the normal time limit.
10 On 1 July 1997 Mr Chalmers consulted with Maurice Blackburn & Co,
who on 3 July 1997 filed a notice of motion on Mr Chalmers’
applying for review of the judicial registrar’s decision and for leave to
file the motion out of time. That motion
was filed in the Victorian registry of
the Federal Court of Australia (the Federal Court). On 11 August 1997 Marshall
J dismissed
Mr Chalmers’ notice of motion and refused to extend the
time within which Mr Chalmers could obtain a review of the judicial
registrar’s decision. That judgment and the reasons for it indicate that
Marshall J was purporting to exercise jurisdiction
as a Federal Court judge.
11 On 11 August 1997 Mr Chalmers did not apply orally to Marshall J for
leave to appeal, pursuant to O 52 r 2B of the Industrial Relations
Court Rules, from his Honour’s refusal of his application, nor did he file
a notice of motion seeking leave to appeal from
a single judge or a Full Court
within twenty-one days of the date of judgment, 11 August 1997, as required by
O 52 rr 3, 4 and 5
of the Industrial Relations Court Rules. On 28
August 1997 Mr Chalmers filed in the Victorian registry of the Federal
Court of Australia
a document entitled
“Notice of Appeal”
seeking that Marshall J’s order of 11 August 1997 be set aside, that
Murphy JR’s decision be reviewed, that the award
of costs ordered by
Murphy JR be set aside or stayed, and that leave be granted to file a notice of
appeal outside the normal time
limit. The document styled
was accompanied by a detailed statement of grounds of
12 On 12 November 1997 the university filed in the Federal Court’s
Victorian registry, and served, a notice of motion seeking
orders that
Mr Chalmers’ proceeding be dismissed or stayed and that
Mr Chalmers pay the costs of the application. On 17 November
1997, Chief
Justice Black of the Federal Court refused to dismiss Mr Chalmers’ appeal
as incompetent, and ordered that all
issues be determined by the Full Court on
appeal. On 23 September 1998, a Full Court of the Federal Court, constituted by
Olney and North JJ, ordered that Mr Chalmers be granted an extension
of time within which to seek leave to appeal; that leave to
appeal be granted;
that the appeal from the judgment of Marshall J be allowed; and that
Mr Chalmers be granted an extension of time
within which to seek a review
of the decision of Murphy JR. The court further ordered that the
appellant’s application for
review be remitted for hearing by a single
13 It was as a consequence of those Full Court orders that the application to
review the decision of Judicial Registrar Murphy commenced
in the Federal Court
before me on 24 May 1999. In the course of that hearing, I raised the question
whether in fact the application
for relief in respect of unlawful termination,
which commenced by the filing of the application in the Industrial Relations
on 7 June 1996, was a proceeding for review in respect of which the
Federal Court had no jurisdiction, as a consequence of the provisions
Workplace Relations and Other Legislation Amendment Act 1996
(the WRAOLA
Act), being Act 60 of 1996 (Cth).
14 On Thursday 27 May 1999, I informed the parties of my view that the
purported review by the Federal Court of the decision of Murphy
contemplated by the order of the Full Court of the Federal Court of 23 September
1998, by remittal to a single judge of the
Federal Court was not competent; that
Marshall J, as a judge of the Federal Court, had no jurisdiction to entertain
the application
for an extension of time within which to have the decision of
the Judicial Registrar reviewed; and that the Full Court of the Federal
Australia had no jurisdiction to entertain an application for leave to appeal
from the order of Marshall J.
15 I will state below my reasons for those views but, in the light of that
conclusion, I indicated that it was competent for me, as
a judge of the
Industrial Relations Court, to entertain an application for an extension of time
for the review of the decision of
Murphy JR pursuant to O 74 r 3 of
the Industrial Relations Court Rules; that I would grant leave for the extension
of such time to
28 January 1998, being the date of the filing by
Mr Chalmers of the notice of motion seeking leave to appeal from Marshall
refusal of an extension of time; that I would treat that notice of
motion as an application pursuant to O 74 r 3 of the Industrial
Relations Court Rules for an extension of time for an application to review the
decision of Murphy JR to be allowed by a judge of
the Industrial Relations
16 For the reasons which were expressed by the Full Court of the Federal
Court in its reasons for judgment of 23 September 1998, I
thought it right to
grant such extension.
17 On 27 May 1997 the parties agreed to treat the evidence that had been
adduced before me on 24 May 1997 as the evidence on the application
by a judge of the Industrial Relations Court, the decision of Murphy JR of 16
April 1997. That evidence included the
evidence that had been given before
Judicial Registrar Murphy. The parties further agreed that the submissions that
had been made
in relation to that evidence would be the submissions in respect
of the review.
18 The reason for the course above described that I adopted is as
19 Schedule 16 of the
dealt with the transfer of
63(1) and (2) of Schedule
16 provided:
“(1) This item applies to jurisdiction and powers vested in or
exercisable by the Industrial Relations Court or a Judge of that
immediately before the transfer day in relation to an act or omission occurring
before the transfer day, except in relation
to matters for
(a) the Industrial Relations Court had begun the substantive hearing in
proceedings in that Court; or
(b) proceedings had been completed in the Industrial Relations Court before
(2) On and after the transfer day, the jurisdiction and powers to which this
item applies:
(a) cease to be vested in or exercisable by the Industrial Relations Court or
a Judge of that Court; and
(b) are, subject to subitem (3), vested in the Federal
20 Item 62 of Schedule 16 defines the terms
“proceeding” and transfer day”:
means a proceeding in a court, whether or not
between parties, and includes:
(a) an incidental proceeding in the course of, or in connection with, a
proceeding; and
(b) an appeal.
transfer day
means the day on which the Federal Court is
invested with jurisdiction under Division 2 of this Part, being the day on which
1 of this Schedule commences.”
21 Section (2) of the
dealt with commencement.
Section 2(1) provided that:
“Subject to this section, this Act commences on the day on which it
receives the Royal Assent.”
That day was 25 November 1996.
22 Section 2(2) and (3) provided:
“(2) Subject to subsection (3), the items of the Schedules, other than
Schedule 5, item 1 of Schedule 9, item 90 of Schedule
16 and the items of
Schedules 12 and 19, commence on a day or days to be fixed by
Proclamation.
(3) If an item of a Schedule does not commence under subsection (2) within
the period of 6 months beginning on the day on which this
Act receives the Royal
Assent, it commences on the first day after the end of that
23 No relevant item of Schedule 16 commenced under s 2(2). It
follows that those items commenced on the first day after the end of
of six months beginning on the day on which the Act received the Royal Assent.
The six months period beginning on 25
November 1996 expires on 24 May 1997, so
that the commencement day for the items in Schedule 16 was 25 May 1997. That is
“the transfer day”
24 The effect of Item 64 of Schedule 16 is to transfer proceedings commenced
in the Industrial Relations Court, in respect of which
the Industrial Relations
Court had not begun the substantive hearing before the transfer day, to the
Federal Court. If jurisdiction
in a matter is not so divested the Industrial
Relations Court remains the court empowered to resolve the controversy that
constitutes
the matter.
25 In this case there is no question that as at 25 May 1997 the substantive
hearing in the proceedings commenced in the Industrial
Relations Court had
begun. The judicial registrar had heard the respective cases of the parties and
had announced his judgment on
16 May 1997. That determination by Judicial
Registrar Murphy was the exercise of judicial power, delegated by the Court
to s 376(3) of the
Industrial Relations Act 1998
26 The Full Court of the Federal Court, constituted by Lee, Hill and Merkel
Autistic Association of New South Wales v Dodson
[1999] FCA 439
concluded that the Federal Court lacked jurisdiction to entertain a review of a
determination by a judicial registrar of an application
in respect of unlawful
termination which had been commenced prior to the transfer day. It accordingly
held that an appeal from a
review of a judge of the Federal Court of Australia
of that determination by a judicial registrar was incompetent and should be
The Court said, at paras 25 and 26:
“Pursuant to s 376(4) delegated power exercised by a Judicial Registrar
is taken to have been exercised by the Court. It follows
that unless, or until,
a Judicial Registrar’s decision is set aside upon review by a Judge under
s 377 of the Act it is an
order of the Industrial Relations Court and ‘as
much an exercise of the Court’s jurisdiction as a decision of a
Shackley v Australian Croation Club Ltd
per Wilcox CJ at 741.) The fact that a decision of a Judicial Registrar
may be reviewed by a Judge does not make the hearing conducted
by the Judicial
Registrar, or the decision of the Judicial Registrar, any less a hearing, or
exercise of judicial power, by the Industrial
Relations Court.
If a proceeding for review of a Judicial Registrar’s decision is
initiated, that proceeding does not define a new matter but
is a further
proceeding in proceedings which seek resolution of the one matter, namely,
determination of a controversy as to the
lawfulness of the termination of the
employment of Ms Dodson by the Association. (See:
per Wilcox CJ
27 In my opinion, the application seeking an extension of time
within which to have a review of a judicial registrar’s decision
application contemplated by O 74 r 3 of the Industrial Relations Court
Rules) is part of the proceeding as defined in Item 62
of Part 3 of Schedule 16
. It follows that it was not competent for the Federal
Court to entertain that application and, in my respectful opinion, the appeal
the Full Court of the Federal Court from the decision by the Federal Court on
that application was also incompetent.
28 Order 74 r 3 of the Industrial Relations Court Rules provides:
“For the purposes of section 377(1) of the Act, the time prescribed in
relation to an application to review the exercise of
a power by a Judicial
Registrar is 21 days or such further time as is allowed by the Court or a Judge
for special reasons upon application
at any time.”
29 Pursuant to that rule it is competent for a judge of the
Industrial Relations Court to entertain an application to extend the time
review the exercise of a judicial registrar’s power to make orders on an
application for unlawful termination and, notwithstanding
the time that has
elapsed since the filing of a notice of motion on 28 January 1998, having regard
to the matters the subject of
the reasons of the Full Court of the Federal Court
of 23 September 1998, it is appropriate that the Industrial Relations Court
the time to review the decision of Judicial Registrar Murphy of 16 April
30 What follows then are my reasons for judgment on the review pursuant to
Workplace Relations Act 1996
as it applied
immediately before the transfer day.
31 The material on which this review is based is all of the evidence that was
before Judicial Registrar Murphy, the affidavits which
have subsequently been
filed in these proceedings by Mr Chalmers and on behalf of the university, and
the oral evidence given to
the Federal Court on the review.
32 The case for Deakin University is short. The university says that Mr
Chalmers was employed as a lecturer by Deakin University.
He was totally and
permanently incapacitated for work because of his heart condition. His
employment was terminated on 7 June 1996
because of his incapacity. In respect
of s 170DE of the then
Industrial Relations Act 1988
the High Court held
Victoria v The Commonwealth
(1996) 187 CLR 416 that s 170DE(2) was
constitutionally invalid. As a consequence, Mr Chalmers can rely only on s
170DE(1) which
“An employer must not terminate an employee’s employment unless
there is a valid reason or valid reasons connected with
the employee’s
capacity or conduct or based on the operational requirements of the undertaking,
establishment or service.”
33 The university submits that Mr Chalmers conceded that he was
totally and permanently incapacitated. The university therefore
submits that
the university had a valid reason to terminate his employment.
34 The onus, of course, is on the university to establish that it had a valid
reason for terminating Mr Chalmers’ employment;
that is, its reason for
terminating his employment was sound, defensible and well founded: C
Holdings Pty Ltd v Do
(1997) 150 ALR 127
Qantas Airways Ltd v
(1988) 83 IR 102
35 It is not clear what precisely is the basis on which Mr Chalmers
challenges the entitlement of the university to terminate his
pursuant to s 170DE of the
Industrial Relations Act 1988
as I can understand it, Mr Chalmers claims:
“As it suffered no financial or organisational/operational harm, by
continuing to employ me, then under Section 170DE of the
Industrial Relations
, Deakin University had no valid reason to dismiss me but, in so doing,
deprived me of considerable financial entitlements.”
36 This, the primary contention of Mr Chalmers, seems to be
premised on the consideration that unless there is some financial or
organisational harm suffered by an employer, there can be no valid reason to
dismiss an employee.
37 Mr Chalmers submitted, as he did to Wilcox CJ on 13 June 1997, that:
“... the punitive and discriminatory way in which the manner/process of
dismissal, undertaken by my employer, not only cut across
ongoing negotiations
but was also clearly an unjust and unfair attempt to deprive me of financial
entitlements ...”
38 The essence of Mr Chalmers’ complaint is:
“My employment was terminated on 7.6.96 on the grounds of my ill
health, while I was a then current Totally and Permanently
‘seriously ill Workcover benefit recipient’, that is, I was on
statutory sick leave – itself a fact which
clearly distinguishes my
situation from those circumstances conventionally the target of the award
provisions used against me ...
One can only speculate but if I had not been a
Workcover benefit recipient, I would presumably have, in simplistic terms,
through my sick leave on full pay and then become a superannuation
disability pensioner.”
39 Mr Chalmers submitted that the termination provisions in the
award which applied to him were not intended to be used in cases where
employee was a current workers compensation benefit recipient. The primary
argument for Mr Chalmers was that, because he was
receiving compensation on the
basis that he was totally and permanently incapable of performing his duties, he
was not able to be
dismissed on that very ground.
40 That contention, however, does not do full justice to his complaints. He
asserts that the process on which the university embarked
had the effect of
depriving him of benefits by way of various entitlements to which he says he was
entitled and would otherwise have
received, had not the university proceeded as
it did. The essence of his claim is contained in his affidavit filed 3 May
he asserted that he was:
“...able to establish that the University suffered no financial or
operational/ organisational harm as the result of my not
working, since 23/3/93.
It could replace me, it contributed nothing to my weekly benefits which were
paid in full by Workcover, and
it therefore incurred no salary oncosts .
In fact, by dismissing me, the Respondent was able to deprive me of
accumulated sick leave, shortpay my accrued annual and long service
deprive me of, or endanger, other financial entitlements.”
41 He submitted:
“... my disability pension will remain at risk while ever the valid
dismissal order of Murphy JR remains on the books. Only
a reversal, to invalid
dismissal, and its replacement with disability retirement, as part of my claims
settlement against the Respondents
will ensure future pension
42 In the context of those submissions it is important to note
some facts. First, the university does not dispute that its obligations
towards Mr Chalmers are determined by the 1990 and 1995 Awards. I refer in
particular to clause 16 of the 1995 Award, dealing with
termination of
employment on the grounds of ill health, and to sub-clauses (a), (b), (e) and
(h). I refer also to the 1990 Award,
which provides in clause 10.6:
“Where an employee resigns or retires or is dismissed or otherwise
terminated from employment, the employee shall receive in
lieu of recreational
leave accrued but not taken ...”
And further in that clause:
“In all instances payment in lieu shall be for all recreational leave
accrued for each completed year of service, plus a pro
rata amount for the
current year of service calculated on a daily basis.”
I note also clause 11.1 to 11.2, dealing with sick leave.
43 It is necessary to have regard, in relation to the claims by Mr Chalmers,
to some aspects of the chronology of his relationship
with the university. On 11
March 1993 an officer concerned with occupational health and safety at the
university wrote to Mr Chalmers
stating that as at 24 March 1993 he would have
been off work for a total of 52 weeks as a result of compensable injury. On 8
1993 Professor John Hay, then Vice-Chancellor of Deakin University, wrote
to Mr Wotherspoon, an officer of the university, indicating
that under the terms
of the award governing the employment of members of academic staff, the
Vice-Chancellor wished to proceed with
an investigation into Mr Chalmers’
ability to continue to carry out his duties and responsibilities, as set out in
“Termination of employment on grounds of ill-health”.
44 On 13 April 1994, a letter written on behalf of Mr Wotherspoon, who was
Director of Personnel at Deakin University, and signed
by Dr Sue Gould, was sent
to Mr Chalmers stating that the university was concerned about his state of
health, and had reached a point
where it was necessary to investigate the
termination of his employment on the grounds of ill health. The letter stated
accordance with the award provisions concerning the employment of
academic staff, Mr Wotherspoon required Mr Chalmers to undertake
examination to determine his fitness to undertake his duties.
45 On 25 May 1994, Mr Chalmers wrote in a letter to Dr Gould that he objected
in the strongest possible terms to her invoking the
process of terminating his
employment on the grounds of ill health; he asked her to explain why the current
initiative was not in
contravention of the Workcover legislation, and why he was
not entitled to his accrued sick leave which exceeded 300 working days.
stated that he would not be attending what he considered to be
premature and ‘illegal’/contrived [medical] appointment.”
46 There were a number of discussions following this correspondence.
Towards the end of 1994, there was a discussion in which Mr
Wotherspoon
suggested to Mr Chalmers that the university might consider a payment equivalent
or approximately equivalent to his accrued
sick leave, which would extinguish
his sick leave and enable him to accept a disability pension. That suggestion
was not accepted
by Mr Chalmers. There were also other proposals made, none of
which was acceptable to Mr Chalmers.
47 On 22 February 1995 Mr Wotherspoon wrote to Mr Chalmers referring to a
letter which Mr Chalmers had sent to the Vice-Chancellor
on 1 February 1995, in
which Mr Chalmers had indicated that he was totally and permanently disabled and
that Mr Wotherspoon was
“only prepared to make an oral offer of one
year’s salary”
on behalf of the university. In the letter of
22 February 1995, Mr Wotherspoon said that since Mr Chalmers had declined to
the university’s offer of settlement, and since the university was
unable to vary that offer, the most appropriate course was
to maintain the
status quo, thus continuing the Workcover benefits.
48 Notwithstanding Mr Chalmers’ protestation that this offer had not in
fact been made to him, I am satisfied that it was.
49 On 2 June 1995 there was a letter from Mr Elliott, the Vice-President,
Administration, to Mr Chalmers referring to the history
of the matter and to an
offer by the university of a lump-sum payment of one year’s salary in
order to resolve the matter.
50 Mr Chalmers rejected that offer. Subsequent to that time there was a host
of correspondence between officers of the university
and Mr Chalmers concerning
the basis on which his employment might be terminated. In late 1995, the
university made a decision
to terminate Mr Chalmers’ employment on the
grounds of ill health. The reason for that decision was that, because of his
health, he could not work. The understanding of the university and the basis
on which the decision was made was that Mr Chalmers
had a total and permanent
incapacity classification from Workcover; he had also been accepted on the basis
of a permanent disability
entitlement from the Superannuation Board and was
therefore eligible for an ongoing disability benefit which was not a temporary
disability benefit.
51 The evidence admits of no other conclusion than that Mr Chalmers was
incapable of performing his duties as a lecturer. It was
common ground that Mr
Chalmers was totally and permanently incapacitated. In my view it is
uncontestable that the university had
a valid reason to terminate the employment
of Mr Chalmers. I do not accept that there was any conspiracy to deprive Mr
of his legal entitlements. In fact, a review of the history of the
negotiations and the correspondence leads me to conclude that,
if anything, the
university was tender in its consideration of Mr Chalmers’ position.
52 I am quite satisfied that the university had a valid reason to terminate
Mr Chalmers’ employment. That reason was his incapacity
to perform his
duties as a lecturer. He has, since the termination of his employment,
continued to receive Workcover benefits.
The fact that there is a dispute
concerning the quantum of the sick leave and long service leave and other
entitlements, while
genuinely entertained by Mr Chalmers, is in my view not
material to the determination of his present application.
53 As to the specific complaints by Mr Chalmers, I deal with them in turn.
The primary contention was that, notwithstanding the
acceptance that he was
totally and permanently incapable of carrying out his duties as a lecturer on
the grounds of ill health, the
university could not terminate his employment
because he was at that time receiving Workcover payments. The short point is
clause 16 of the 1995 Award permitted the university to terminate Mr
Chalmers’ employment on that basis. The provision of
clause 16(h) of
that Award, preserving entitlements under Workcare and Workcover and other
provisions, does not affect the entitlement
of the university to terminate his
employment . The termination had no effect on Mr Chalmers’ entitlement to
Workcover payments,
and there was nothing in the
Accident Compensation Act
which prevented the university from terminating his employment on the
basis of the ground contemplated by clause 16 of the 1995 Award.
54 Deakin University concedes that Mr Chalmers did not receive six months
notice of termination. He received, on the facts, some
two and a half weeks
less than the six months notice to which he was entitled. However, I find that
he suffered no loss as a result
of the failure by the university to give the six
months notice.
55 As to the complaint that the university refused to allow Mr Chalmers to
use his sick leave, and that as a result of the termination
by the university he
lost his accrued sick leave, the short conclusion is that the university was not
obliged to allow Mr Chalmers
to use his accrued sick leave. His entitlement in
the circumstances was entirely determined by clauses 29 and 30 of the 1990 Award
and clause 16 of the 1995 Award. But
, it seems to me
that whether there was any loss of accrued sick leave as a result of the
decision by the university to terminate
him for incapacity, that consideration
is not relevant to whether the university had a valid reason to terminate his
employment.
In my judgment, the university had such a reason.
56 It was also the subject of complaint by Mr Chalmers that a letter of 22
August 1995 constituted an undertaking or an offer by the
university to ensure
that Mr Chalmers received 95% of his salary if he accepted a disability pension
from the State Superannuation
Board. Whether or not such letter constituted
such an offer or undertaking, the fact is that Mr Chalmers did not accept
57 There is a further complaint that the superannuation disability pension of
Mr Chalmers was at risk because Deakin University had
originally stated that Mr
Chalmers had resigned. That error was subsequently corrected by the university
which advised the Superannuation
Board that the reason for the cessation of Mr
Chalmers’ employment was “disability retirement”. As a
consequence,
Mr Chalmers received and continued to receive his disability
58 I am also satisfied that the further complaint by Mr Chalmers, that upon
his termination by the university paid his accrued recreation
leave and long
service leave at an incorrect rate of salary, is not correct. There has been a
considerable body of evidence directed
to the minutiae of the correctness of the
payout to Mr Chalmers and, in particular, in respect of his accrued recreation
long service leave. It is unnecessary to refer in detail to the
evidence touching on that question, but that on the evidence, as
I understand
it, I am satisfied that Mr Chalmers was paid the correct amounts for accrued
recreation leave and long service leave
upon the termination of his
employment.
59 It follows that I am satisfied that there was a valid reason for the
university to terminate Mr Chalmers’ employment, and
that his application
based on unlawful termination of employment must fail.
60 I indicated at the hearing of oral submissions in this matter that I would
hear the parties on the question of costs. I am conscious
that Judicial
Registrar Murphy was of the view that the application was doomed to fail, and
that he awarded costs to the university
of the hearing before him, which costs
he fixed. There is, of course, power pursuant to
Relations Act 1996
for the Court to award costs, but my present view is that
notwithstanding the view of Judicial Registrar Murphy, the Court should
invoke the special course open to it pursuant to that section to award costs
against this unsuccessful applicant. Given the
history of the matter, and in
particular the view which the Full Court expressed that the prospects of success
of Mr Chalmers on
his application were
“not inconsiderable”
my present view is that the Court ought not make any order against him in
respect of his constitutional right of review of the decision
of Judicial
Registrar Murphy.
61 For the reasons which I have expressed above, the application should be
dismissed. I set aside the order of Murphy JR as to costs.
While my present
view is that there should be no order as to costs, in accordance with my
instruction that the respondent should
have an opportunity to be heard on costs,
any submissions by the university for a costs order should be filed and served
within seven
(7) days, and Mr Chalmers should file and serve any submissions in
response within a further seven (7) days.
I certify that the preceding sixty-one (61) numbered paragraphs are a true
copy of the Reasons for Judgment herein of the Honourable
Justice Spender
Dated: 20 June 2000
The applicant appeared in person
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Arthur Robinson & Hedderwicks
Date of Hearing:
24 and 27 May 1999
Date of Judgment:
RTF format (106 KB)
Signed PDF/A format