Review Applicant: Tam Thanh Nguyen Visa Applicant: Khac Yen Tu Do IRT Reference: N98/00974 #number 13387 [1999] IRTA 13387 (27 January 1999)
IMMIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND
REASONS FOR DECISION
IRT REFERENCE: N98/00974 13387.doc
REVIEW APPLICANT: Tam Thanh NGUYEN
VISA APPLICANT: Khac Yen Tu DO
TRIBUNAL: Harry ALEVIZOS
Presiding Member
DATE: 27 January 1999
PLACE: Adelaide, South Australia
DECISION: The Tribunal pursuant to
section 349(2)(c)
Migration Act
, remits this application for reconsideration with the direction that
the visa applicant has satisfied all the prescribed criteria
for a (Migrant)
(Class BC) Subclass 100 (spouse) visa with the exception of public interest
criteria and criterion requiring an assurance
of support.
REASONS FOR DECISION
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
On 12 May 1998, Mr Tam Thanh Nguyen (the review applicant) applied to this
Tribunal for a review of a decision made by a delegate
of the Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (the Minister) at the Australian
Consul-General in Ho Chi Minh City, on
4 December 1996, to refuse his spouse Ms
Khac Yen Tu Do (the visa applicant), a (Migrant) (Class BC) Subclass 100
(spouse) visa to
enable her to migrate to Australia. This decision was
affirmed by the Migration Internal Review Office (MIRO) on 26 March 1998.
Ms Khac Yen Tu Do (the visa applicant) was born in Vietnam on 29 March 1976,
and is a citizen of that country. Her mother (father
deceased) and three
married sisters reside in Vietnam, her other two married sisters reside in
Australia. On 24 June 1995, the visa
applicant and the review applicant were
married. On 28 August 1995, the visa applicant lodged, at the Australian
Consulate General
in Ho Chi Minh City, a completed form (Form 47) to migrate to
Australia as the spouse of an Australian citizen, she applied for a
100 (Spouse) visa. Mr Tam Thanh Nguyen, her spouse and nominator signed the
relevant sponsorship form (Form 40) on 18 August
On 4 December 1996 a decision (primary decision) was made at the Australian
Consulate General in Ho Chi Minh City to refuse the visa
applicant's
application for migration to Australia as the marriage was not considered to be
'genuine and continuing'
. The primary decision maker in reasons stated
in part as follows:
'...In assessing your application I took into account information provided by
you and your spouse and information you provided at
interview of 21/11/96. On
the basis of this information I am not satisfied that you are in genuine and
continuing relationship with
your sponsor. In reaching this finding I have
taken account of the following factors:
Your account of the development of your relationship with your sponsor differed
from his in significant ways. In particular, you
gave a markedly different
account of your meeting with your sponsor saying that you had met on your
arrival at Saigon's Ton Son Nhat
Airport while he stated in a statutory
declaration dated 18/8/95 that he was introduced to you by friends.
You were unable to explain satisfactorily why your wedding was held in Saigon
with 20 people present when most of your and your sponsor's
families lived in
Kien Giang Province and could not attend the wedding. In addition, you were
only able to present 4 photographs
of your wedding party which seems very few
considering the relative importance of the occasion.
You stated that you would hold a larger wedding party once you reached
Australia, however, you were unable to explain the merits
of this idea
considering that most of your and your sponsor's families lived in Vietnam.
All the letters you presented as evidence of contact between you and your
sponsor took the form of brief notes that essentially exchanged
greetings and
made enquiries about your migration application. You claimed that your phone
is far more superficial than I would
expect to see from a couple who was as emotionally bonded as you and your
sponsor claimed to
You had only a cursory knowledge of your sponsor and of your life prospects in
On the basis of the above factors I harbour some doubts about the veracity of
your account of the development of your relationship
with your sponsor...'
The decision was affirmed by MIRO on 26 March 1997, essentially for the same
Subsequently, the review applicant sought review of the primary decision by
making an application to the Immigration Review Tribunal
at its Sydney registry
on 12 May 1998.
LEGISLATION
In Class BC there is only one subclass, namely Subclass 100 (Spouse). The
criteria for a Spouse (Migrant) Class BC, Subclass 100
visa, are found in
Schedule 2 of the Migration Regulations (1994). There have been a number of
legislative amendments in respect
to a Subclass 100 (Spouse) visa. As the
application was lodged before 3 July 1996, the application is to be considered
provisions of Schedule 2 to the Migration Regulations as in force on
30 September 1996 continue to apply (see regulation 145 of SR
211 of 1996).
The relevant criteria are reproduced below:
Subclass 100 - Spouse
100.1 Interpretation
100.11 In this part:
'Intended spouse' means the Australian citizen, Australian permanent resident
or eligible New Zealand citizen referred to in subclause
100.211(3).
[Note 'eligible New Zealand citizen', 'guardian' 'parent' and 'spouse' are
defined in regulation 1.03]
100.2 Primary Criteria
[Note: The primary criteria must be satisfied by at least one member of a
family unit. The other members of the family unit who
are applicants for a
visa of this subclass need satisfy only the secondary criteria.]
100.21 Criteria to be satisfied at time of application
100.211 (1) The applicant meets the requirements of subclause (2) or (3).
(2) The applicant is the spouse of:
(a) an Australian citizen; or
(b) an Australian permanent resident; or
(c) an eligible New Zealand citizen.
[Note: 'Spouse' includes a de facto spouse - see the definition of 'spouse' in
regulation 1.03].
100.22 Criteria to be satisfied at time of decision
100.221 The applicant continues to satisfy the criterion in clause 100.211.
100.222 The sponsorship referred to in clause 100.212 has been approved by the
Minister and is still in force.
100.224 (1) In the case of an applicant who meets the requirements of subclause
100.211(2), the applicant continues to be the spouse
of the Australian citizen,
Australian permanent resident or eligible New Zealand citizen who was the
applicant's spouse at the time
of the application.
100.225 The applicant satisfies public interest criteria 4001, 4003, 4004, 4007
100.227 If so requested by the Minister, an assurance of support in relation to
the applicant has been given, and has been accepted
by the Minister.'
Regulation 1.03 states that the term
has the meaning set out in
Regulation 1.15A. regulation 1.15A provides as follows:
For the purposes of these Regulations, a person is the
spouse of another person if:
(a) the 2 persons are:
(i) married to each other under a marriage that is recognised as valid for
the purposes of the Act; or
(ii) de facto spouses of each other, as set out in subregulation (2); and
(b) the Minister is satisfied that:
(i) the 2 persons have a mutual commitment to a shared life as husband and
wife to the exclusion of all others; and
(ii) the relationship between the 2 persons is genuine and continuing; and
(c) the Minister is satisfied that the 2 persons are:
(i) living together; or
(ii) not living separately and apart on a permanent basis.
A person is the de facto spouse of another person:
(a) if the persons:
(i) are of opposite sexes; and
(ii) are not married to each other under a marriage that is recognised as
valid for the purposes of the Act; and
(iii) are not within a relationship that is a prohibited relationship for the
purposes of
subsection 23B(2)
Marriage Act 1961
(i) either of the persons is domiciled in Australia - both of them have
turned 18; or
(ii) neither of the persons is domiciled in Australia - both of them have
In forming an opinion for the purposes of paragraph (1) (b) or (c)
in relation to an application for a visa of subclass 100, 801,
820 or 831, the
Minister must have regard to all the circumstances of the relationship,
including, in particular:
(a) the financial aspects of the relationship, including:
(i) any joint ownership of real estate or other major assets; and
(ii) any joint liabilities; and
(iii) the extent of any pooling of financial resources, especially in
relation to major financial commitments; and
(iv) whether one party to the relationship owes any legal obligation s in
respect of the other; and
(v) the basis of any sharing of day-to-day household expenses;
(b) the nature of the household including:
(i) any joint responsibility for care and support of children, if any; and
(ii) the parties' living arrangements; and
(iii) any sharing of responsibility for housework;
(c) the social aspects of the relationship, including:
(i) whether the persons represent themselves to other people as being married
or in a de facto relationship with each other;
(ii) the opinion of the persons' friends and acquaintances about the nature
of the relationship; and
(iii) any basis on which the persons plan and undertake joint social
activities;
(d) the nature of the persons' commitment to each other, including:
(i) the duration of the relationship; and
(ii) the length of time during which the persons have lived together; and
(iii) the degree of companionship and emotional support that the persons draw
from each other; and
(iv) whether the persons see the relationship as a long-term one.
In forming an opinion for the purposes of paragraph (1) (b) or (c)
in relation to an application for a visa of a subclass other than
100, 801, 820
or 831, the Minister may have regard to any of the factors set out in
subregulation (3).
If a person has been living with another person for 6 months or
longer, that fact is to be taken to be strong evidence that the relationship
genuine and continuing, but a relationship of shorter duration is not to be
taken not to be genuine and continuing only for that
EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS
The Tribunal gave consideration to documentation submitted as part of the
application in this matter, it also had available to it
the Departmental file
which was forwarded. These files form part of the evidence considered by the
Tribunal in this matter. Further,
a hearing was convened in the Sydney
Registry on 11 September 1998, at which the review applicant and his witnesses
gave sworn evidence
with the assistance of an interpreter. His solicitor, a
registered migration agent was present to assist the parties.
Further material, including translated letters, certified copies of money
transfers from the review applicant to his wife in Vietnam,
in support of the
genuineness of the marriage and other matters were produced to the Tribunal
including a submission from the legal
adviser dated 11 September 1998. Further
material requested by the Tribunal namely the review applicant's father's
attendance and
discharge from hospital was submitted to the Tribunal on 6
October 1998.
Mr Tam Thanh Nguyen (the review applicant) gave evidence. He confirmed that he
was born in Vietnam on 28 August 1964. He told the
Tribunal he arrived in
Australia on 17 September 1985 as a refugee, and has been an Australian citizen
since 3 October 1991.
Mr Nguyen told the Tribunal he has no immediate family in Australia, his mother
and seven siblings continue to reside in Vietnam.
He told the Tribunal his
father passed away recently. Mr Nguyen is employed as a tiling contractor and
has lived with the same
Vietnamese family for approximately seven years, and
pays $70 a week for board.
The review applicant told the Tribunal that prior to his marriage, he had
sought to find a suitable partner in Australia with little
success. While
working with a colleague, Mr Tran (the visa applicant's brother-in-law) he was
shown a photograph of his spouse.
He subsequently went to Mr Tan's house where
he viewed more photographs of his spouse. He told the Tribunal the photographs
his spouse appealed to him and
'no discussion of marriage or prospective
marriage were entered into by me or Mr Tran and his wife'.
He stated prior
to returning to Vietnam in 1995, Mr Tran and his wife gave me gifts to take my
spouse's family. I left Australia
on 25 May 1995,
'to visit my family'
When I arrived at the airport in Vietnam I was greeted by my mother, father, my
spouse and her mother.
'She did not know what I looked like, however I knew
her from her pictures'.
The review applicant told the Tribunal they returned to Kien Giang Province
'my wife and her mother went to their village which is a further 30
kilometres from our house'
'It was not until several days later that I went to my wife's
village with the gifts. I met her at her house, we talked and subsequently
returned to the village the next day and invited her out. After going out with
her a further four or five times, namely two weeks
later I felt that I wanted
to be more than just friends with her. She is not like other girls, she is not
demanding like Vietnamese
girls in Australia. I found her very attractive, she
is kind, knows how to care for family. I proposed to her, she didn't accept
straight away, she told me she would have to discuss it with her family. It
was about one week after my proposal that she accepted.'
Mr Nguyen told the Tribunal that after she accepted his proposal, they went to
buy goods in Kien Giang City and Han Tien for the
marriage, rings, earings and
material. The date was set, namely 24 June 1995, for the wedding to take place
in Kien Giang, however
his father took ill a few days before the selected date.
'My sister and I took him to hospital, his eyes were worse and he had a
cataract operation'
. Hospital certificate verifies the review applicant's
father was admitted to hospital on 20 June 1995 and discharged on 25 June
Mr Nguyen told the Tribunal
'when the date came near, I telephoned my spouse
and asked her to come to Saigon (Ho Chi Minh City) we were married there, there
only a few people that were invited. Several days later we had another
wedding ceremony in Kien Giang when all our respective families
attended. We lived as husband and wife for about one and a half months until I
returned to Australia in August 1995.'
Mr Nguyen told the Tribunal his wife lives with her mother and
'we continue
to communicate by letters as telephone calls are expensive'
. The review
applicant told the Tribunal he returned to Australia and within a week of his
return, began to send money to her. He
estimated that since 1995 he has sent
her approximately $6,000.
Mr Nam Van Tran gave evidence separately. He told the Tribunal he arrived in
Australia as a refugee in 1988. He is married, his
wife and the visa applicant
are sisters. He told the Tribunal he has known the review applicant for
approximately five years, and
'we are close friends'
. Mr Tran told the
Tribunal that he informed his sister-in-law in Vietnam about Mr Nguyen and told
her that he would shortly be visiting
'I told her to go to the
airport as we were sending gifts for her and the family. We found out later
when we, that is my mother-in-law
telephoned us to say they met each other and
were compatible and were planning to marry'
He told the Tribunal Mr Nguyen comes to his house regularly and has frequently
expressed concerns about being separated from his
wife. Mr Tran told the
Tribunal that Mr Nguyen is a good person, he works hard to save money to send
his wife and to save for their
Ms Khac Yen Tu Do, the visa applicant gave evidence by telephone. She
confirmed that she met her husband at the airport and that
she and her mother
travelled back to Kien Giang with her spouse, his mother and father. She
'my sister and brother-in-law told me that he was coming and
suggested I meet him at the airport to receive gifts that they had
Ms Tran in evidence taken separately confirmed details provided earlier by her
spouse, namely that after some time they went out
with each other, he proposed
to her, and a favourable date for the wedding was set, namely 24 June 1995.
She told the Tribunal they
planned to marry in Kien Giang however due to her
father-in-law being admitted to hospital, they kept to the favourable date
for their marriage, and subsequently married in Ho Chi Minh City. She
told the Tribunal they had another ceremony when they returned
to Kien Giang.
Ms Do stated
'when I went for interview I had to go by myself to Ho Chi Minh
City I was frightened and couldn't provide all the details'
. She told the
Tribunal she is committed to her marriage and has been ever since her husband
proposed to her.
The central issue before the Tribunal in this instance is whether Mr Nguyen and
Ms Do entered into a marriage which is genuine and
continuing, and whether the
two have a mutual commitment to a shared life as husband and wife to the
exclusion of all others (see
regulation 1.15A above).
In previous decisions the Tribunal has adopted the statement by the Full Court
of the Federal Court in
Minister of Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v
(Full Court of the Federal Court, 8 May 1992, unreported) regarding
the test for a genuine and continuing marriage. The Court stated
'It is not necessarily inconsistent with a genuine marriage relationship that
it was entered into by one or both parties with a view
to material benefit or
advancement, as for example with the hope of becoming eligible to reside in a
particular country. The true
test, we would suggest the only test, is whether
at the time at which the matter has to be decided it can be said that the
have a mutual commitment to a shared life together as husband and wife
to the exclusion of others.
The Tribunal also notes that the Federal Court in
Bretag v Immigration
Review Tribunal
(Federal Court, O'Loughlin J, 29 November 1991, unreported)
indicated that the Tribunal may have regard to the subsequent history
matter, in determining a question of fact at the time of application, so long
tends logically to show the existence or non-existence of facts
relevant to the issue to be determined
, quoting from
Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Pochi
[1980] FCA 85
(1980) 4 ALD 139
Furthermore regulation 1.15A refers to a
for the purposes of
the Regulations.
Although the parties are presently residing in separate countries, this is not
in itself conclusive of the fact that they are living
separately and apart from
one another. The Tribunal needs to have regard to the whole of the
circumstances and facts relating to
a couple's situation and relationship to
ascertain whether it is a genuine and continuing marriage relationship that
satisfies the
migration legislation (see
Re. Hajj-Hassan
IRT Decision
327, 19 September 1991).
In the matter of
(IRT Decision 3621, 31 March 1994), the
Tribunal was presented with circumstances amounting to an allegedly arranged
marriage involving
a middle-east couple. In assessing these facts, the
Tribunal made the following comments which are instructive:
However I would also state that I would accept as feasible the explanation
given in evidence that Ms Dachto was unable to positively
identify certain
aspects of her fiancee's life in Australia because she apparently knew little
of them..... It is not at all surprising
that the principal would confess to a
lack of knowledge, uncertainty, or even display confusion about her fiancee's
life, and particularly
where she is relatively inexperienced in dealing with a
form of rigorous interrogation in unfamiliar circumstances'.
The Tribunal concluded in that case that the seemingly inconsistent and
uncertain information provided during interview was not sufficient
the credibility of the couple, or expose the relationship to considerable doubt
as to its genuineness.
This was followed by the Tribunal in the more recent matters of
Re Harpreet
(IRT Decision 3256, 28 January 1994),
(IRT Decision
3255, 19 January 1994), and
Re Kamla Wati-Boyd
(IRT Decision 3250, 18
January 1994).
In providing evidence to the Tribunal the review applicant and witnesses stated
separately and unambiguously that the marriage was
arranged with the support of
the parties respective families. The favourable date namely 24 June 1995 was
selected, and preparations
were made for the wedding ceremony in Kien Giang.
The review applicant's father prior to the marriage was admitted to hospital in
Ho Chi Minh City on 20 June 1995. The review applicant and his sister
accompanied him to hospital and stayed in Ho Chi Minh City.
applicant while attending to his father subsequently informed his wife that
they would keep to the favourable date selected
for their marriage, and
informed her to come to Ho Chi Minh City where they married. They subsequently
returned to Kien Giang where
another ceremony was conducted as most of their
family could not attend on short notice the ceremony at Ho Chi Minh City. The
thereafter resided as husband and wife in Kien Giang until August 1995
when the review applicant returned to Australia.
Given the evidence and authorities referred to above, it is apparent the
Tribunal nonetheless must proceed to make firm findings
of fact in respect of
the issue to be determined here, and it must do so on the basis of the evidence
considered. Appropriate weight
must be accorded to that evidence, in light of
this responsibility. Again, it seems to the Tribunal that previous findings
in respect to this matter have been at best, speculative. The ultimate
result in that instance was that the decision-makers elected
to find the
necessary evidential burden had not been discharged. In the Tribunal's view,
in order to achieve this result, the efforts
were made, based on such
speculation, to impugn the credibility of the parties, were not properly drawn.
The Tribunal has not been
able to find anything solid in the evidence that it
has considered in this matter to which it could grant sufficient weight to
the party's credibility. It therefore, on balance, and on the basis of
such evidence, elects to accept the claims made by the review
applicant and
witnesses. In all the circumstances therefore, the Tribunal is able to find
that the relationship entered into by
the review applicant and his spouse, and
their subsequent marriage on 24 June 1995 is genuine and ongoing.
Therefore, in the circumstances, the Tribunal is satisfied, on balance that
this is a genuine and continuing marriage, and that the
parties have a mutual
commitment to a shared life together for the purposes of the Migration
legislation. The visa applicant thereby
satisfies the definition of a
in regulation 1.15A of the Regulations. The visa applicant
satisfies clause 100.221 of the Regulations. The visa applicant is sponsored
by her husband an Australian citizen who will provide accommodation for his
spouse and for financial support for the time referred
to in sponsorship. The
visa applicant continues to be the spouse of Mr Nguyen, and was his wife at the
time of the application on
28 August 1995, clause 100.224 of the Regulations is
Clause 100.227 provides that an
'assurance of support'
may be required
in relation to an applicant. In the circumstances, the Tribunal is of the view
that an assurance of support be required
in relation to this matter. The visa
applicant needs to satisfy the relevant public interest criteria referred to in
clause 100.225
of the Regulations.
The Tribunal notes that Division 1.4B of the Regulations came into effect and
is applicable to applications for visas made on or
after 1 November 1996. The
application in this matter was lodged on 28 August 1995.
In accordance with usual practice, the Tribunal will remit this matter to the
Department for further reconsideration and processing.
The Tribunal pursuant to
section 349(2)(c)
Migration Act 1958
remits this application for reconsideration with the direction that the visa
applicant has satisfied all the prescribed criteria
for a (Migrant) (Class BC)
Subclass 100 (spouse) visa with the exception of public interest criteria and
criterion requiring an assurance
of support.
I certify this and the preceding 12 pages are a true copy of the Statement of
Decision and Reasons for Decision of Harry Alevizos,
Presiding Member of the
For DEPUTY REGISTRAR
Harry Alevizos
Presiding Member
RTF format (56.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format