Review Applicant: Tahlan Kim Koh Visa Applicant: Lin Lu IRT Reference: V97/02010 #number 13381 [1999] IRTA 13381 (29 January 1999)
IMMIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND
REASONS FOR DECISION
IRT REFERENCE: V97/02010 13381.doc
REVIEW APPLICANT: Tahlan Kim KOH
VISA APPLICANT: Lin LU
TRIBUNAL: Harry ALEVIZOS
Presiding Member
DATE: 29 January 1999
PLACE: Adelaide, South Australia
DECISION: In accordance with
Section 349(2)(c)
Migration Act
, the Tribunal remits this application for reconsideration with the
direction that the visa applicant has satisfied all the prescribed
criteria for
a (Temporary) (Class TO) (Subclass 300) (Prospective Marriage) visa with the
exception of the public interest criteria
for himself and his son.
REASONS FOR DECISION
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
On 2 December 1997, Ms Tahlan Kim Koh (review applicant) applied to this
Tribunal for a review of a decision made by a delegate of
the Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (the Minister) at the Australian
Consulate-General in Shanghai, on 12 February
1997, to refuse her fiance Mr Lin
Lu (visa applicant), a (Temporary) (Class TO) Subclass 300 (Prospective
Marriage) visa to enable
him to migrate to Australia. This decision was
affirmed by the Migration Internal Review Office (MIRO) on 7 November 1997.
Mr Lin Lu (visa applicant) was born in The People's Republic of China (PRC) on
18 January 1959, and is a citizen of that country.
His parents reside in the
PRC, his brother resides in Australia and his sister resides in New Zealand.
On 28 October 1996, the visa
applicant lodged a completed application form
(Form 47), to migrate to Australia as the prospective spouse of an Australian
included in his application was his 14 year old son. Ms Tahlan Kim
Koh, his prospective spouse signed the relevant sponsorship form
(Form 40), on
12 September 1996.
On 12 February 1997, a decision (primary decision) was made at the Australian
Consulate-General, Shanghai to refuse the visa applicant's
application for
migration to Australia. In refusing the application, the primary
decision-maker stated in part as follows:
'...It is a requirement of subregulation 300.214 that, at the time of
application,:-
"Unless the marriage has been arranged in accordance with traditional customs
observed by the families of either or both of the parties,
the parties are
known to each other personally."
Further guidance on this matter is set down in PAM 3 ... which states:-
"1. In the strictest sense, this means that THE PARTIES MUST HAVE MET unless
the marriage has been arranged in accordance with traditional
However, it is policy that the parties may also be regarded as 'known to each
other personally' if they satisfy the decision-maker
they have corresponded reasonable frequently over a long period (policy
envisages this to be approximately 12 months or more);
there are exceptional reasons (for example, resulting from extenuating
circumstances) why the parties have never met)."
At the time of lodgement of this application, 28 October 1996, Mr Lu and his
sponsor, Ms Koh Tahlan Kim, had not met in person.
Letters forwarded by the
applicant and the sponsor are at folios 73-75 detailing reasons why the visa
should be granted albeit the
couple have not met. The claims may be summarised
as the sponsor is too busy in her current business to travel to China to meet
the applicant.
There is no information before me that suggests that the couple's engagement
has been arranged in accordance with traditional customs
observed by either of
the families. In order to determine then, that the couple may be considered
'known to each other personally',
I have relied on the PAM guidelines set out
Mr Lu has submitted correspondence (cards and letters) sent to him by the
sponsor over the course of their relationship. I accept
that the couple have
corresponded since October 1995 and that this assessed as not being 'a
reasonably period of time'.
Also, I do not consider that the couple have substantiated that there are
'exceptional reasons' why they have never met. I do not
accept the sponsor
could not have allowed some period of time to travel to China to meet the
applicant from the October 1995 until
the date of application...'
The decision was affirmed by MIRO on 7 November 1997. The MIRO review officer
in statement of reasons, stated in part, as follows:
'...The sponsor and applicant were introduced through the applicant's brother,
who is a friend of the sponsor. After two years of
video contact, phone calls,
and written correspondence, the applicant and sponsor decided to get married,
before meeting each other
One of the criteria which must be met
at the time of application for a
is Clause 300.214, which states:
"Unless the marriage has been arranged in accordance with traditional custom
observed by the family of either or both of the parties,
the parties are known
to each other personally."
At the time that the application for migration was made, this above clause was
not met, as the applicant and sponsor were not personally
known, and the
marriage was not arranged in accordance with any traditional custom observed by
either party. As a result, the application
was refused.
I am satisfied that the applicant and sponsor have now met. However, as the
meeting between sponsor and applicant did not occur
until after the visa
application was already made (and in fact decided), clause 300.214 was not met
at the time of application
as required by law, and therefore
can not be satisfied in this review application.
I have some sympathy for the situation in which the applicant and sponsor find
themselves. However, as requirements which must be
met at time of application
for the visa cannot be satisfied at a later time, I have no option but to find
that the requirement is
Given that clause 300.214 is not met, I have not considered other criteria
which must also be met in order for a visa to be granted....'
Subsequently, the review applicant sought review of the previous decisions by
making an application to the Immigration Review Tribunal
at its Melbourne
registry on 2 December 1997.
LEGISLATION
The law covering this application can be found in the
Migration Act 1958
(the Act) and the Migration (1994) Regulations (the Regulations). Schedule 1
of the Migration Regulations sets out the various prescribed
classes of visa
'specific ways in which a non citizen applies for a visa of a
particular class'
. Under each class is one or more subclasses. In this
instance, under Prospective Marriage (Temporary) (Class TO) (Item 1215 in
Schedule 1 to the Regulations is subclass 300 (Prospective Marriage)). Under
Regulation 1.07 of the Regulations the relevant criteria
which needs to be
satisfied before the visa may be granted are set out in that part of Schedule 2
which bears the same name as the
The prescribed criteria so far as they are relevant are:
SUBCLASS 300 - PROSPECTIVE MARRIAGE
TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS AFFECTING THIS SUBCLASS
300.1 INTERPRETATION
300.111 In this Part:
"prospective spouse" means the Australian citizen, Australian permanent
resident or eligible New Zealand citizen referred to in
clause 300.211;
"the parties" means the applicant and the prospective spouse.
: "eligible New Zealand citizen", "guardian" and "parent" are
defined in regulation 1.03.]
300.2 PRIMARY CRITERIA
[NOTE: The primary criteria must be satisfied by at least one member of a
family unit. The other members of the family unit who are
applicants for a visa
of this subclass need satisfy only the secondary criteria.]
300.21 Criteria to be satisfied at time of application
300.211 The applicant intends to marry a person who is:
(a) an Australian citizen; or
(b) an Australian permanent resident; or
(c) an eligible New Zealand citizen.
[300.212 was omitted by SR 376 of 1994]
300.213 The applicant is sponsored by:
(a) if the prospective spouse has turned 18 - the prospective spouse; or
(b) if the prospective spouse has not turned 18 - a person who:
(A) an Australian citizen; or
(B) an Australian permanent resident; or
(C) an eligible New Zealand citizen; and
(ii) is a parent or guardian of the prospective spouse; and
(iii) has turned 18.
300.214 Unless the marriage has been arranged in accordance with traditional
custom observed by the family of either or both of the
parties, the parties are
known to each other personally.
300.215 The applicant establishes:
(a) that the parties genuinely intend to marry; and
(b) that the marriage is intended by the parties to take place within the visa
300.216 The Minister is satisfied that the parties genuinely intend to live
together as spouses.
Statutory Rules 1996 No. 211 omitted clause 300.214 as it reads above,
replacing it with the following:
'300.214 The parties have met and are known to each personally.
However for the purposes of this review, the regulations as they stood at time
of application and set out above, will apply.
At the time of decision the visa applicant must continue to satisfy the
requirements in the above criteria together with public interest
criteria and
the requirements that there be no impediment to the marriage under Australian
'Spouse' is defined in regulation 1.03 as having the meaning set out in 1.15A.
Amongst other requirements, the Minister must be satisfied
that two persons who
claim to be spouses or prospective spouses 'have a mutual commitment to a
shared life as husband and wife to
the exclusion of all others'.
A number of mandatory conditions are imposed on the grant of a prospective
marriage visa. These include condition 8515 which requires,
in effect, that
the applicant, if he is granted this visa, must not marry before entering
Australia and condition 8519, which requires
that if the applicant is granted
the visa, he must enter into a marriage with the spouse within the visa period
which he would be
In reaching its decision the Tribunal is bound by the Act and Regulations and
applies relevant government policy. (See generally
Re Drake and Minister
for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(No. 2)(1979)
[1979] AATA 179
2 ALD 634).
government's policy is found in the Department's
Policy Advice Manual
which provides:
"Unless the marriage has been arranged in accordance with
traditional custom ... the parties are known to each other
personally"
1. In its strictest sense, this means that the parties must have met unless
the marriage has been arranged in accordance with traditional
custom. However,
it is policy that the parties may also be regarded as "known to each other
personally" if they satisfy the decision
* they have corresponded reasonably frequently over a long period (policy
envisages this to be approximately 12 months or more); and
* there is exceptional reason (for example, resulting from extenuating
circumstances) why the parties have never met.
"The applicant establishes:
(a) that the parties genuinely intend to marry; and
(b) that the marriage is intended by the parties to take place within the
visa period"
1. The guidelines which follow reflect practice that officers assess an
applicant's ability to satisfy these criteria at time of decision
provided for by 300.221 provision.
2. In brief, under policy,
* (generally) documentary evidence of intention to marry is required (see
below); and
* the applicant must otherwise satisfy the decision maker as to the parties'
intention to marry. Officers may take into account all
information held at
time of decision.
3. A decision to refuse a visa 300 on the grounds that the applicant does
not satisfy 300.215 criteria should not be taken without
first giving the
applicant (and, if considered appropriate, the prospective spouse) an
opportunity to be interviewed:
* as both parties must genuinely intend to marry, either or both may be
interviewed to establish that the intention of each to marry
the other is
genuine (see Further Guidelines section 4.1 below).
* documentary evidence of marriage intention [as described in 300.215(a)
guideline below] should not be given undue weight in assessing
the genuineness
of the parties' intention to marry.
"the parties genuinely intend to marry
Documentary evidence of intention to marry
1. In support of claims that the parties genuinely intend to marry, all
applicants should provide evidence that arrangements have
been made for the
marriage ceremony to take place in Australia.
2. In all cases, the form of evidence required is a signed and dated letter
(on letterhead) from the (authorised) marriage celebrant
who will conduct the
3. The letter must include:
* in all cases, the date and venue of the marriage ceremony;
* in most cases (see paragraphs 5 and 6 below), confirmation that a Notice
of Intended Marriage (NOIM) in respect of the parties has
been lodged with the
To marry within the visa period
4. Visas 300 are granted to have effect for 9 months (see 300.511
provision). However, for the purposes of establishing a genuine
intention to
marry, policy still requires that the date of the marriage ceremony indicated
in the celebrant's letter come within
* where both parties will be of Australian marriageable age at the time of
- the (six month) validity of the NOIM: or
- where evidence that a NOIM has been lodged is not required (see paragraph
5), six months of the date of the celebrant's letter;
* where one party will not be of Australian marriageable age at time of
marriage the (three month) validity of the Australian court
order in respect of
the intended marriage.
If the date does not fall within the appropriate period described above,
300.215(a) criterion should not be considered satisfied.
5. As well as the above evidence as to the date of the marriage ceremony,
the celebrant's letter should confirm that a NOIM has been
lodged. Officers
may consider waiving this requirement only where both parties will be of
Australian marriageable age at the date
of marriage and only if satisfied that
it is not reasonably possible for the evidence to be provided (eg where both
parties are outside
Australia and the celebrant has declined to accept a NOIM
without first interviewing both parties.)
6. The celebrant's statement that a NOIM has been lodged is sufficient. A
copy of the NOIM is not required. (Under no circumstances
should officers ask
for the actual NOIM itself to be provided.)
7. Where doubt arises as to, for example, the authenticity of a document,
the existence of a NOIM or whether the celebrant is an
authorised celebrant,
officers may, as appropriate
* ask the relevant DIEA office in Australia to make further enquiries eg if
and as appropriate, interview the prospective spouse regarding
the document or
verify through the State/Territory Registry of Births, Deaths and Marriages
that the celebrant is an authorised celebrant;
* have documents examined by the Document Examination Unit, Movement
Analysis Section, Entry Facilitation Branch, DIEA CO.
8. It is important, too, that officers never regard a NOIM as proof that
there is no impediment to the marriage.
"the parties genuinely intend to live together as
Genuineness of the relationship
1. The following guidelines reflect practice that officers assess an
applicant's ability to satisfy this criterion at time of decision
provided for by clause 300.221.
2. It is for the applicant to satisfy the decision maker that both parties
intend to live together as "spouses" (see regulation 1.15A).
3. Either or both parties may be interviewed to establish the intentions of
each. Generally, both parties should be interviewed where
* the parties have not met (and claim extenuating circumstances exist as to
why they have not met); or
* the marriage has been "arranged in accordance with traditional custom"
(see the corresponding 300.214 guidelines above).
4. It is policy that officers assess the parties' intention to live
together as spouses by having regard to, as far as practicable,
the definition
of "spouse" in regulation 1.15A and to PAM3: Div1.2/reg1.15A.
5. A decision to refuse a visa 300 on the grounds that the applicant does
not satisfy 300.216 criterion should not be taken without
first giving the
applicant (and, if considered appropriate, the prospective spouse) an
opportunity to be interviewed (see Further
Guidelines section 4.1
(Where an applicant claims such circumstances exist, officers are expected
to investigate why the parties have not met.)
The date of this application and primary decision mean that Migration Series
Instructions (MSI's) 160 and 161 are also relevant.
The salient issues for the Tribunal in this case arise under clause 300.214,
300.215 and 300.216, that is, whether the marriage has
been arranged according
to custom observed by families of both parties. Whether the parties genuinely
intend to marry, and the intended
marriage is to take place within the visa
period, and whether the parties genuinely intend to live together as spouses,
continues to be the issue before this Tribunal.
EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS
The Tribunal gave consideration to documentation submitted as part of the
application in this matter, it also had available to it
the Departmental file
which was forwarded. These files form part of the evidence considered by the
Tribunal in this matter. Further,
a hearing was convened at the Melbourne
registry on 28 May 1998, at which the review applicant and witness gave sworn
evidence separately.
The review applicant was assisted by a solicitor, Frank
Ms Tahlan Kim Koh (review applicant) gave evidence. She confirmed that she was
born in Victoria on 12 March 1946. Ms Koh told the
Tribunal she is a divorcee,
she married Keng Ann Lim in 1982, they separated in 1992 and subsequently were
divorced in 1994 (Decree
Absolute 12 August 1994). Since separation, she told
the Tribunal she only had one boyfriend for approximately six months in the
first half of 1994. Ms Koh told the Tribunal she was not close to her natural
mother as she stated
'...my birth mum was very cruel to me, I was close to
my father and a Chinese lady Ms Kim Koh (whose name I adopted) as she looked
after me since I was a young girl, I called her Ma'.
Ms Koh told the
Tribunal as a consequence from an early age she had many Chinese friends.
The review applicant told the Tribunal that she first met Bin Lu (brother of
the visa applicant) at a Chinese New Year's party in
1993, and over a period of
over two years they became very close friends. Ms Koh stated
'...Bin and I
are more like sister and brother'
'Bin was always concerned about me
being lonely, and asked me, if I was interested, he would introduce me to his
brother. I originally
pulled back at the suggestion, I was frightened at first
and I did not want to get hurt'
Ms Koh told the Tribunal that after thinking about Bin's suggestion and after
further enquiries she wrote to her fiance at some time
in October 1995. The
review applicant told the Tribunal that initially Bin assisted her and his
brother (the visa applicant) to
communicate.
'I knew some Mandarin and Lin
knew some English, we knew enough to communicate with each other'
told the Tribunal they telephoned each other regularly and over a short period
'...I had a really deep feeling for him, and I believe he had a
strong feeling towards me'
. In describing the visa applicant to the
Tribunal, Ms Koh stated
'...He is a romantic, he is a kind, loving and
gentle person'
. Ms Koh told the Tribunal the visa applicant proposed
marriage to her in May 1996, and she accepted his proposal. The Tribunal
the primary decision-maker, in assessment with regards to correspondence
between the parties, stated as follows.
'...Mr Lu submitted correspondence (cards and letters) sent to him by the
sponsor over the course of their relationship. I accept
that the couple have
corresponded since October 1995 and that this assessed as not being "a
reasonable period of time".'
Ms Koh told the Tribunal her impressions of her fiance were confirmed after she
travelled to China in April 1997 to meet him. She
told the Tribunal she stayed
with him, his son and his parents while in China for approximately two weeks,
and their relationship
grew stronger. Ms Koh told the Tribunal she got on very
well with his son Wei Dong and was privileged that he called her 'mother'.
Ms Koh told the Tribunal her fiance had been previously married, and that his
wife had left him and her son for another man. She
told the Tribunal her
fiance lived with his parents, and they helped him raise his son Wei Dong.
Ms Koh submitted two albums containing 15 letters from the visa applicant
dating from 15 June 1997 until 20 May 1998 which the Tribunal
In answer to the Tribunal's question as to why she had not travelled to the PRC
to meet her fiance, she replied
'...I practiced alternative Asian medicine
and had many elderly people to look after, there was no one else to whom I
could refer
these people. Also, I couldn't afford to travel to China at that
. She subsequently told the Tribunal that Bin paid for her return air
fare to China in April 1997, and by this time she had ceased
her practice in
alternative medicine.
Mr Bin Lu, a 37 year old national of the PRC and citizen of Australia, gave
evidence separately. He told the Tribunal he was born
in the PRC on 13
February 1961, and arrived in Australia to study English in 1989. He
subsequently enrolled in further studies and
is currently studying at La Trobe
University. Mr Bin Lu told the Tribunal his wife arrived in Australia in 1991.
He obtained permanent
residence in 1994 and subsequently became an Australian
citizen in early 1997. He confirmed that the visa applicant is his brother.
Mr Bin Lu told the Tribunal he first met Ms Koh in 1993 shortly after his son
David was born at a friend's party where he and his
wife went to celebrate the
Chinese New Year. He found that Ms Koh and he had mutual friends and within a
year, he and Ms Koh were
very close friends.
Mr Bin Lu told the Tribunal his brother's first wife left him for another man.
Mr Lu confirmed that he asked Ms Koh if she was interested
in being introduced
to his brother. He stated
'...I thought very carefully about asking her as
she is a very close friend'
. He recalled that Ms Koh
'...was quite
scared at beginning a relationship, she is not like me, she is shy, when she
agreed, I then discussed the matter with
my brother and my parents. I knew
that my brother was not happy and wanted to remarry, however it is difficult
for a man with a
dependent son to find a suitable partner in China. Knowing
Tahlan and my brother, I knew that both had been hurt in the past, both
caring people and in need of a person with similar traits to themselves'.
Mr Bin Lu told the Tribunal his parents were at first hesitant about his
suggestion, however he explained that Ms Koh had good knowledge
culture. He told the Tribunal after they wrote to each other, his brother, his
parents and Ms Koh were more relaxed and
the relationship developed quickly.
Mr Bin Lu told the Tribunal he paid for Ms Koh's recent trip to China
they could meet personally'
. Mr Bin Lu told the Tribunal
that at no stage did he ever think the relationship between Ms Koh and his
brother would not succeed.
The central issues to be determined by the Tribunal in this instance is whether
or not the relationship entered into by Ms Tahlan
Kim Koh and her fiance Mr Lin
Lu is such that the parties genuinely intend to marry within the specified
period upon Mr Lu's arrival,
and that the parties genuinely intend to live
together as spouses (see 300.215 and 300.216). (The Tribunal notes that the
decision-makers did not make any findings in this regard). Also,
'unless the marriage has been arranged in accordance with traditional
... the parties are known to each' (see 300.214). The Tribunal will first
consider whether the parties genuinely intend to
marry and live together as
A decision maker, in deciding whether the relationship between prospective
spouses is a genuine and continuing relationship, must,
of necessity, have due
regard to the parties' intentions at the time of entering into the marriage or
in this case prospective marriage.
The test to be applied is that applicable in
civil proceedings, that is, whether on balance of probabilities, and having
the whole of the circumstances, the relationship between the
prospective spouses is genuine and continuing.
In assessing this application it is important to remember that the application
is in a sense provisional. It is not designed to
authorise permanent entry to
Australia, its purpose is in effect to facilitate a future event, namely the
marriage to take place.
The heart of the requirement is that there is an
intention by the visa applicant to marry a person who is an Australian citizen
and that the Minister (Tribunal) is satisfied that the intention of the parties
is to live in a genuine and continuing marital relationship.
Such an inquiry
does not, of course, mean that the relationship either at the time of
application or at the time of decision must
be a genuine and continuing marital
relationship. Nor, provided the intention is genuine, does the requirement
oblige a deep inquiry
into the basis for that intention.
The issue of genuineness in respect of a marital relationship has been
discussed at length by the Tribunal in numerous matters, including
( IRT Decision 238, 29 July 1991), and on appeal,
Immigration Review Tribunal and Another,
(Federal Court, O'Loughlin J 29
November 1991, unreported) and
Re Williams
(IRT Decision 2630, 23
September 1993). In these matters, the Tribunal relied on the evidence
provided by the parties themselves
in attempting to determine whether mutual
commitment to a shared life as husband and wife to the exclusion of others
existed at the
relevant time.
The Tribunal cited evidence of subsequent communications between the parties
following the refusal of the visa until the date of
the Tribunal's hearing.
The Tribunal is entitled to have regard to evidence of subsequent events,
frequency of communication and
financial support, provided that the evidence
tends logically to show the existence or non-existence of facts relevant to the
to be determined (see
above) and (per Dean J in
for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs v Pochi
[1980] FCA 85
In assessing the question of what is a genuine and continuing spouse
relationship, the Tribunal is guided by the Federal Court case
Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs v Dhillon"
Full Court of the Federal Court, 8 May 1990, unreported), at pages 10-11, where
the Full Court in determining whether a marriage
was genuine stated:
'People enter marriages for a variety of purposes and motives, hopes and
anticipations so that it is not possible to classify some
purposes etc as
according to what may be described as community expectations. It is not
necessarily inconsistent with the genuine
marriage relationship that it was
entered into by one or both parties with a view to material benefit or
advancement, as for example,
with the hope of becoming eligible to reside in a
particular country. The true test, we would suggest the only test, is whether
at the time at which the matter has to be decided it can be said that the
parties have a mutual commitment to a shared life together
as husband and wife
to the exclusion of others'.
Given the above authority a migration motive is not necessarily inconsistent
with a genuine intention to marry. However, in this
case, the Tribunal
considers from the oral evidence and evidence cited by the Tribunal of ongoing
correspondence, the contents of
which consists mainly of declarations of love
and affection, information about the visa applicant's son's progress at school,
frustration with the delay in the process as well as other personal issues,
that the parties genuinely intend to live together as
spouses. Accordingly,
the Tribunal finds that clause 300.216 is satisfied.
The Tribunal notes that neither the review applicant nor the visa applicant
were interviewed. Of particular importance in the decision
of the primary
decision-maker was the fact that the parties had not met personally. While
accepting that correspondence was entered
into by the parties since October
1995 (12 months prior to the date of application), the primary decision-maker
concluded that this
did not constitute 'a reasonable period of time'. The
decision-maker applied Departmental policy in arriving at this conclusion.
review officer in reasons, although finding 'applicant and sponsor have now
met. However meeting did not occur until after
visa application made'.
Accordingly, the review officer found that at date of application the criteria
of regulation 300.214 had
not been met.
Both previous decision-makers applied policy and found that the parties were
not personally known to each other and no exceptional
circumstances existed.
They did not place weight on the exchange of correspondence which was accepted
as taking place 12 months prior
to the date of application, a period suggested
by policy as being reasonable for parties to be known to each other. For them
important indicator of the genuineness of the relationship was absent due to
the review applicant not travelling to the PRC to meet
the visa applicant.
The review applicant told the Tribunal that she had elderly patients to care
for in her alternative Asian medicine business, and
as she could not find
alternative carers for them, she was unable to leave Australia. She was also
unable to travel due to financial
reasons. When her business was wound down
and with the assistance of Bin Lu (visa applicant's brother), who purchased the
ticket for her, she was able to visit her fiance in April 1997 for
approximately two weeks. The Tribunal finds that these factors
are compelling
in the circumstances.
On the evidence presented and for the above reasons, the Tribunal finds that
the parties were at time of application and decision
known to each other
personally, and satisfy regulation 300.214. The regulation requires that they
be known to each other personally
and policy cannot override those words and
introduce additional criteria. It guides a decision-maker in applying the
The parties corresponded with each other since October 1995, and this continues
to be the case. Ms Koh was unable for reasons the
Tribunal accepts to travel
to the PRC (see above), prior to lodgement of the application. She has now
done so. Since neither party
was interviewed, the evidence on the issue comes
primarily from the application forms and statements of the parties and their
On balance, the Tribunal is satisfied that sufficient material has
been presented to justify this finding. There were extenuating
circumstances
why they had not met. Evidence obtained since the application leaves the
Tribunal with no doubt that they are at time
of decision, known to each other
personally.
With regard to the remainder of the relevant criteria, the Tribunal accepts the
sponsorship requirements have been met, according
to clause 300.213 is
satisfied. Both parties are single and over 18 years of age and there is no
impediment to the marriage in Australian
law, hence clause 300.221A is
The Tribunal notes that the visa applicant included his 14 year old son, Wei
Dong Lu as a
'dependent'
, and that his son is dependent within the
meaning of that definition in the Regulations.
Accordingly, the Tribunal is satisfied that the visa applicant has met the
relevant prescribed criteria for the grant of a visa of
this class. The only
outstanding matters now relate to the public interest criteria, and the file
shall be returned to the Department
for this purpose.
In accordance with
Section 349(2)(c)
Migration Act 1958
Tribunal remits this application for reconsideration with the direction that
the visa applicant has satisfied all the prescribed
criteria for a (Temporary)
(Class TO) (Subclass 300) (Prospective Marriage) visa with the exception of the
public interest criteria
for himself and his son.
Harry Alevizos
Presiding Member
I certify this and the preceding 15 pages are a true copy of the Statement of
Decision and Reasons for Decision of Harry Alevizos,
Presiding Member of the
for Deputy Registrar
RTF format (63.1 KB)
Signed PDF/A format