Strahan & Strahan [2021] FamCAFC 167 (31 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Strahan & Strahan
[2021] FamCAFC 167
Appeal from:
Strahan & Strahan
[2021] FamCA 97
Appeal number(s):
SOA 14 of 2021
File number(s):
ADF 228 of 2005
Judgment of:
AINSLIE-WALLACE, ALDRIDGE & WATTS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – Where the
primary judge ordered that $2 million be paid into the Family Court of Australia
Litigants Fund –
Where the primary judge granted leave to two firms of
solicitors to intervene in the proceedings as between the husband and wife
the payment of the $2 million – Where the solicitors claimed a lien over
part of the fund – Where the primary judge
dismissed the solicitors’
claims over the fund – Where the husband made an application for
enforcement of costs orders
to be paid from the fund – Where the primary
judge ordered that the wife pay the costs orders from the $2 million before the
fund was released to her – Where the wife appealed those orders - Where
the appeal is dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) Ch 19,
, rr 1.10, 19.08, 20.07(d)
Cases cited:
Strahan & Strahan (No 4)
[2017] FamCA
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Sydney (via video link)
Counsel for the Appellant
Mr Handran QC
Solicitors for the Appellant
McInnes Wilson Lawyers
Counsel for the First Respondent
Solicitors for the First Respondent
Kennedy Partners
Counsel for the Second Respondents
Mr Stratton-Smith
Solicitor for the Second Respondents
Counsel for the Third Respondent
Mr Anderson
Solicitors for the Third Respondent
ADF 228 of 2005
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
First Respondent
PP LAWYERS PTY LTD AND MS PP
Respondents
Third Respondent
AINSLIE-WALLACE, ALDRIDGE & WATTS JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The appeal be dismissed.
2. Within 28 days of the making of this order, the appellant pay the costs of
each of the respondents fixed in the following amounts:
(a) To the First Respondent $10,339.20;
(b) To the Second Respondent $11,886.59; and
(c) To the Third Respondent $4,450.96.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Strahan & Strahan
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
AINSLIE-WALLACE, ALDRIDGE & WATTS JJ:
INTRODUCTION
1 On 23 November 2017 a judge of the Family Court of
Australia made final property orders as between Ms Strahan (“the
and Mr Strahan (“the husband”) in what has been a
marathon dispute between the husband and wife over property settlement
commenced in 2005. As will become apparent, the November 2017 orders did not
bring an end to the dispute between the parties.
2 The orders of 23 November 2017 provided that the wife receive property and
assets to the value of $11.6 million, which the judge
observed was in addition
to the $20 million already received by her (
Strahan & Strahan (No 4)
[2017] FamCA 949
and [149]). Up until the time of the final
orders, and pursuant to an order made on 24 April 2012, the husband paid to the
$26,021 each month by way of interim spousal maintenance. As part of the
property settlement order, the judge noting that on making
the final orders,
that interim order would no longer apply, ordered in addition to the property
and assets to which the wife was
entitled ($9.6 million), that the husband
immediately pay $2 million to the wife to enable her to re-establish
3 Unsurprisingly given the history of this matter, a dispute arose between
the parties about how and to whom that money would be paid.
In the first place,
the husband tendered the $2 million by cheque to the wife’s then
solicitors. The wife objected to that
course and in October 2018 the wife
sought orders that the husband pay directly to her the $2 million plus $99,452
interest. The
husband responded and sought that the wife’s application be
dismissed. The wife’s application was set down for hearing.
interim, two firms of solicitors who had previously acted for the wife, PP
Lawyers and Ms PP and NF Pty Ltd (“the intervenors”),
intervene in the proceedings, each asserting a lien over part of that sum on
account of unpaid professional fees.
4 On 24 January 2020 the primary judge ordered that the $2 million be paid
into the Family Court of Australia Litigants Fund (“the
“... in full and final satisfaction of the husband’s
” ordered on 23 November 2017. The primary judge further
granted leave to the two firms of solicitors (to the extent that was
to intervene in the proceedings as between the husband and wife over the payment
of the $2 million. The determination
of the solicitors’ claims to liens
over part of that Fund was set down for a separate hearing which took place on
11 May 2020.
5 The position at that time was that the Fund was the property of the wife
alone, subject to the claims by the lawyers that they held
a charge over it.
6 On 21 February 2020 the husband filed an application for enforcement of
costs orders made against the wife resulting from various
litigious skirmishes
conducted after the making of the 23 November 2017 orders. He sought an order
that those costs be paid from
the wife’s interest in the Fund.
7 On 5 March 2021 the primary judge dismissed the solicitors’ claims to
liens over some or all of the Fund, finding neither
had established a sufficient
causal link between the sum paid into Court and their efforts on the
wife’s behalf.
8 Her Honour then moved to consider the husband’s application for
enforcement of the costs orders and ordered that the wife
pay those costs from
the $2 million before the balance was released to her. The primary judge fixed
those costs including interest
in the sum of $167,347.
9 The wife appealed her Honour’s orders contending that she erred in
ordering the husband’s costs to be paid from the
sum held by the Court
(Ground 1) and secondly in failing to make orders for costs against the
solicitors in relation to their unsuccessfully
claimed liens (Ground 3).
Ground 2 was abandoned.
10 Neither ground of appeal is made out and the appeal will be dismissed.
Our reasons for that conclusion will be in short form pursuant
to s 94(2A)
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”) which
provides that this Court is entitled to give its reasons in short form in the
event that an appeal
is to be dismissed and if, in the opinion of the Full
Court, the appeal does not raise any question of general principle. Those
conditions are met here.
The challenge to the enforcement order
11 The thrust of this
challenge is that the primary judge erred in ordering the satisfaction of the
husband’s costs from the
Fund without giving consideration to a number of
matters, all of which concern the purpose for which the money was paid into the
Fund. In essence, it was argued that since it was not contemplated that the
money paid into the Fund would be used for a purpose
other than that identified
when the order was made, the primary judge erred in having recourse to that sum
to satisfy an “unsecured
debt” of the husband.
12 The flaw in the argument is that it fails to take into account the nature
of the husband’s application for enforcement of
his ordered costs.
Payment was sought from a fund which was an asset of the wife and which had
become so on it being paid into the
Fund. The wife filed no response to this
enforcement application.
Section 105
of the Act provides the power to enforce all decrees made
under the Act. The section is expressed to be “[s]ubject to... the
applicable Rules of Court”.
Rule 20.07(d)
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) (“the Rules”) is the power under which the husband’s
application was brought seeking enforcement of a financial
obligation. Indeed,
the Family Court exclusively has the jurisdiction to enforce decrees made under
the Act (see s 4(1)(f) and s
8(1)(a) of the Act). Under r 20.07(d) the
court may make an order for payment from funds held on behalf of the wife, being
in aid of “enforcement of an obligation”. The process is
akin to the issue of a Third Party Debt Notice
of the Rules) but simply
more direct.
14 True it is that the husband, like the intervening solicitors was a
creditor of the wife. He, however sought enforcement of the
obligation to him under the Act. The solicitors sought enforcement of a charge.
Having dismissed the solicitors’
claimed charges, the primary judge
considered the other application before her, that of the husband seeking
enforcement and made
an unremarkable order for payment. Her Honour made no
error in doing so.
15 This challenge is not made out.
Failure to make an order for costs against the
Intervenors
16 It was argued that the primary judge erred in
failing to make a costs order against the unsuccessful intervenors and in
to advert to the existence of the discretion to make such an order.
17 Again, the argument is flawed, and fatally so. The costs power,
of the Act, is subject to the applicable Rules of the Court. The rules in
respect of costs are contained in Chapter 19.
of the Rules provides
may apply for an order that another person pay costs. No
application for costs was made by the wife against the intervenors. Although
senior counsel for the wife correctly noted, r 1.10 of the Rules provides that
the Court may make an order in relation to any
matter referred to in the Rules
whether in response to an application or of its own initiative. In the Family
Court as in other civil
courts, it is the parties that determine the metes and
bounds of the dispute for the court to determine and consequently the court
entitled to assume that issues not raised by the parties do not require
determination. Accordingly, it was not an error by the
primary judge to fail to
do so on her Honour’s own initiative and Ground 3 is not made out.
18 All three respondents sought costs orders against
the wife in the event that the appeal failed. Senior counsel for the wife
conceded that he could neither argue against costs orders nor against
the quantum of costs claimed by each respondent and orders
will be made
accordingly, save in respect of the first and second respondent’s claim
for costs of drawing the costs schedule
which we will not allow as a reasonable
cost necessary to the appeal
I certify that the preceding eighteen (18)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Ainslie-Wallace, Aldridge &
Dated: 31 August 2021
RTF format (372 KB)
Signed PDF/A format