CDB Goldair Australia Pty Ltd v SharkNinja Operating LLC [2025] APO 35 (10 October 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT
CDB Goldair Australia Pty Ltd v SharkNinja Operating
[2025] APO 35
Patent Application: 2022252800
Title: COOKING DEVICE AND COMPONENTS THEREOF
Patent Applicant: SharkNinja Operating LLC
Opponent: CDB Goldair Australia Pty Ltd
Delegate: M. Umehara
Decision Date: 10 October 2025
Hearing Date: 24 September 2025
Catchwords:
– extension of time to file evidence in
answer – regulation 5.9 – settlement negotiation during
opposition proceedings
– communication error – miscalculation of
stay – failing to prepare evidence during evidentiary period and stay
not all reasonable efforts to comply with filing requirements – prompt and
diligent action not established – exceptional
circumstances not
established – extension refused.
Representation: Counsel for the applicant: Joe Petry
Patent attorney for the applicant: Corrs Chambers Westgarth
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Patent Application: 2022252800
Title: COOKING DEVICE AND COMPONENTS THEREOF
Patent Applicant: SharkNinja Operating LLC
Date of Decision: 10 October 2025
Extension of time to file evidence in answer
REASONS FOR DECISION
application 2022252800 (the
Application
) was filed in the name of
SharkNinja Operating LLC (the
) on 13 October 2022 as a
divisional of 2020314733 (the
Parent Application
). Acceptance of the
Application was advertised on 7 March 2024. A Notice of Opposition was timely
filed by CDB Goldair Australia
Pty Ltd (the
) on 7 June 2024.
Statement of Grounds and Particulars (
) as well as the Evidence in
) were duly filed on 9 September 2024 and 9 December 2024,
respectively. The Evidence in Answer (
) was therefore due on 10 March
decision concerns the request for an extension of time under Regulation 5.9 to
file the EIA. I note that the opponent did not
seek to be heard in this matter.
14 February 2025, the Opponent submitted a request on behalf of both parties for
a stay of the S59 Opposition for a period of one
month to facilitate settlement
negotiations. With the letter of 18 February 2025, a Delegate of the
Commissioner allowed the stay
and the following directions were
the opposition to 2022252800 under s59 of the Act is stayed for a period of
one (1) month
from 14 February 2025; and
evidence in answer is due to be filed
two (2) weeks
after the expiry of
31 March 2025, the Commissioner issued a letter noting the absence of any EIA
and requesting both parties to confirm that a hearing
on the s59 matter was
still required. On 7 April 2025, the Opponent confirmed that the matter should
be set for a hearing. On 11
April 2025, the Commissioner issued a letter
requesting suitable hearing dates to be provided within 4 weeks. The Applicant
on 28 April 2025, requesting for an extension of time of 3 months for
the EIA to be filed and for the Commissioner to refrain from
allocating a date
for the hearing of the s59 Opposition. This request was received from a new
agent acting for the Applicant.
request for an extension of time for filing the EIA was accompanied by a
declaration by Grant Fisher (the new agent) dated 26
April 2025 (
). A Delegate of the Commissioner requested further information with their
letter of 23 May 2025. The Applicant’s letter of
6 June 2025 confirmed
that the request for extension of time was being made under reg 5.9(2)(a). The
letter was accompanied by the
proposed EIA in the form of a declaration by Bill
Hunter dated 5 June 2025 and a further declaration by Grant Fisher dated 6 June
). Subsequently, on 18 June 2025, the Delegate issued a
letter indicating an intention to refuse the request for extension of time
reg 5.9(2)(a). On 25 June 2025, the Applicant requested to be heard and filed a
further declaration by Grant Fisher (
the hearing, the Applicant expanded their submissions to include a request for
extension of time under Regulation 5.9(2)(b) as
well as 5.9(2)(a).
extension of time to file evidence during an opposition is governed by reg 5.9.
Subregulation 5.9(1) gives the Commissioner the
power to extend the evidentiary
time periods:
The Commissioner may extend an evidentiary period mentioned in reg 5.8:
(a) if requested in writing by a party; or
(b) on the Commissioner's own initiative.
power to extend time is a discretion, as evidenced by the use of the word
“may”. This power is qualified by subregulation
5.9(2), which
(2) The Commissioner may extend the period only if the Commissioner is
satisfied that:
(a) the party who intended to file evidence in the period:
(i) has made all reasonable efforts to comply with all relevant filing
requirements under this Chapter; and
(ii) despite acting promptly and diligently at all times to ensure the
appropriate evidence is filed within the period, is unable
to do so; or
(b) there are exceptional circumstances that warrant the extension.
Exceptional
circumstances are defined in subregulation 5.9(5):
In this regulation:
exceptional circumstances
includes the following:
(a) a circumstance beyond the control of a party that prevents the party from
complying with a filing requirement under this Chapter;
(b) an error or omission by the Commissioner that prevents a party from
complying with a filing requirement under this Chapter;
(c) an order of a court, or a direction by the Commissioner, that the opposition
be stayed pending the completion of a related proceeding
or action under the
provisions have previously been considered by the
Commissioner
and it is unnecessary
to repeat that analysis here. A useful summary of the requirements of reg 5.9
is as follows:
“It follows that I need to ask myself the following questions:
the party (and their attorney or agent) made all reasonable efforts to comply
with all relevant filing requirements?
the failure to file the evidence in time despite the party (and their attorney
or agent) acting promptly and diligently at all
times to ensure the evidence is
filed in time?
there exceptional circumstances that warrant the extension?
extend the time for filing evidence
if I am satisfied that the
answer to questions 1 and 2 is YES, or if I am satisfied that the answer to
question 3 is YES. If I am
so satisfied, then I must consider whether there are
any discretionary reasons why the extension should not be
(emphasis in
requirements for reasonableness, promptness and diligence were introduced in the
Raising the Bar
amendments to the
Patents Regulations
specifically in order to
address the then problem of protracted opposition proceedings due to the
Commissioner’s narrowed discretion
to disallow extensions under the
previous regulatory scheme. In particular, the
Explanatory Statement
pointed to situations where the Commissioner will not be required to give
extensions of time delays due to lack of promptness and
diligence; difficulties
in obtaining expert evidence that could have been anticipated and acted on; or
attempts to settle
proceedings.
is understood that “reasonable efforts” applies to the conduct
across the whole opposition, whilst “promptly
and diligently”
relates to the specific period for filing the evidence
the similar wording of
Trade Marks Regulation
5.15 to the
5.9, the Applicant relied on the consideration of
“exceptional circumstances” by Besanko J in relation to a Trade Mark
matter, where Besanko J is said to have:
“(a) determined ‘that a combination of factors may constitute
exceptional circumstances and, therefore, the circumstances
must be considered
as a whole (or in aggregate), as well as individually’ (at [45]);
(b) approved of (at [43]) Lord Bingham of Cornhill CJ’s statement
concerning the meaning of this term in
R v Kelly (Edward)
We must construe ‘exceptional’ as an ordinary, familiar English
adjective, and not as a term of art. It describes a circumstance
which is such
as to form an exception, which is out of the ordinary course, or unusual, or
special, or uncommon.
To be exceptional a circumstance
need not be
unique, or unprecedented, or very rare; but it cannot be
one that is
regularly, or routinely, or normally encountered.
(c) approved of (at [42]) Kiefel J’s decision in
, including where her Honour said (at [50]): ‘The
words “exceptional circumstances” may apply to a variety of
circumstances
and no definition which limits their application should be
adopted, unless the limitation appears from the words of the relevant
provision’.”
in original, citations omitted)
matters that are specified as “exceptional circumstances” in the
Patents Regulations
circumstances beyond the
control of a party, an error or omission by the Commissioner, an order of a
court and directions by the
Commissioner. Inclusive lists help clarify and
expand on the ordinary meaning of a concept without limiting the full scope of
rule. Consequently, the examples of reg 5.9(5) give an indication of what
is included within the scope of exceptional circumstances
and out of the
ordinary in the context of patent oppositions. Given that the need for an
extension under reg 5.9 in and of itself
indicates that the evidentiary process
has not been regular, routine or normal for the party making the request, I do
not consider
that every deviation or exception from an ideal evidentiary period
can be considered “exceptional” under reg 5.9(2)(b).
Exceptional
circumstances have been said to be those that are not only outside the control
of the party, but also outside the normal
evidentiary
For example, in
Aquatron Robotic Technology LTD v Zodiac Pool Care Europe
[2016] APO 88
), the delegate found that delays relating to a notice to
produce an article required for evidence were not exceptional circumstances,
although they were taken into account when establishing promptness and
On the other hand, in
QIP Nominees Pty Ltd v Delinia, Inc.
[2021] APO 24
), the delegate found that a system error leading to the
destruction of emails to the applicant from their agent led to an exceptional
circumstance where the applicant was unaware of an opposition even being on foot
up until 1 month before the due
The delegate further noted
that it was unreasonable to require the applicant to prepare evidence in 1 month
where 3 months is ordinarily
provided for the
Extension of time request and chronology
Originally,
the EIA was due to be filed by the Applicant on or before 10 March 2025. The
stay of the
Opposition requested on 14 February was for a period of one
month. The Delegate’s letter of 18 February 2025 directed that
due to be filed two weeks after the expiry of the stay. The EIA was therefore
due to be filed by 28 March 2025. There
was no EIA filed on 28 March 2025. A
month later, following two letters from the Commissioner concerning the
opposition, the Applicant
requested an extension of time for a period of three
months to file EIA under reg 5.9(2)(a).
evidence provided in relation to this matter consists of declarations by Mr
Fisher, the new agent engaged after the expiration
of the evidentiary period.
Mr Fisher’s declarations are compilations of his discussions with: Mr
Crooks, the original agent;
and Ms Lisa Adams, the US Representative for the
declaration, Fisher 3, was filed with the request to be heard and was not
available to the Delegate during their consideration
of the matter.
will summarise the chronology of events.
to the present Application being opposed on 7 June 2024, the Parent Application
had undergone an opposition process. The decision
for the parent opposition was
appealed to the Federal Court on 24 June 2024. Following successful settlement
negotiations between
the parties the Parent Application was withdrawn and the
appeal was discontinued on 12 September 2024. While the appeal of the
in the parent case to the Federal Court is not directly relevant to
the present matter, it provides some context for the Applicant’s
days before the parent appeal being discontinued, the Opponent filed the SGP on
9 September 2024. Around this time, the Applicant
is said to have been
“occupied with the resolution of the Appeal and the withdrawal of the
[Parent] Application.”
the filing of EIS on 9 December 2024, the Applicant and their agent at the time
are said to have undertaken a “thorough
review” of the evidence
through to early February 2025.
Part of the strategy arrived at was the use of a declaration from the earlier
matter in relation to the Parent Application to save
Between January and early
February 2025, their focus was on negotiating a settlement of the present
opposition with the Opponent
following the discontinuation of the appeal to the
Federal Court.
noted previously, on 14 February 2025, the Opponent, on behalf of both parties,
filed a request for a stay to the proceedings for
a period of one month. A
Delegate of the Commissioner directed the stay as requested and allowed a period
of two weeks following
the conclusion of the stay for the EIA to be filed. The
new deadline for the EIA was therefore 28 March 2025.
was Mr Fisher’s understanding that Mr Crooks was involved in other matters
between the dates of 10-21 February 2025 and “[Mr
Crooks] believed that
the IP Australia correspondence in relation to the stay had been referred to
Lisa Adams by either one of his
colleagues or his assistant but it is now
apparent that this did not
Mr Fisher was
further informed by Mr Crooks that “[Mr Crooks] mistakenly believed that
the evidence deadline had been extended
by one month ie to 10 April
Fisher was informed that Mr Crooks believed the parties were still in
negotiation discussions at the end of March 2025 but given
his mistaken
calculation of the stay period, “[Mr Crooks] did not consider it unusual
that he did not yet have further instruction
in relation to the filing of
Upon receiving
the Commissioner’s letter of 31 March 2025, Mr Crooks realised that the
evidentiary period had already
Mr Fisher was also
informed by Ms Adams that she and the Applicant were not advised of the new
evidence deadline or that an extension
of time would be required if more time
was needed to prepare the EIA and that the extension would be
conditional.
realising that the stay had expired and the evidentiary period with it, Mr
Crooks and Ms Adams completed claim charts and analyses
that would be considered
for the EIA.
Following his
appointment on 24 April 2025, Mr Fisher took steps to expedite the preparation
of the EIA and worked diligently in
relation to further considering the
opposition grounds and evidence.
The declaration for the EIA was completed in six
is a timeline of events discussed in the provided declarations:
Action/event
Acceptance of Application advertised
Notice of opposition filed
Parent decision appealed to Federal Court
Parent Application withdrawn
Parent appeal to Federal Court discontinued
December 2024 – early February 2025
Applicant reviewing EIS
January 2025 – early February 2025
Discussions between parties negotiating settlement
10-21 February 2025
Original agent involved in other matters
Request to stay the
Opposition for 1 month
Stay allowed
EIA originally due
EIA due after stay
Correspondence requesting confirmation of continued relevance of the
Opposition issued
US Representative informed that the stay had expired
Opponent confirmed
Opposition hearing required
Commissioner requested suitable hearing dates
New agent contacted by US Representative
Before 24 April 2025
Original agent and Applicant completed claim charts and analyses for the
New agent received instructions to act for the Applicant
After 24 April 2025
Opposition grounds and EIS, preparation of EIA
Extension of time to file EIA requested
Proposed EIA filed
The Delegate’s initial considerations
original request for an extension of time to file evidence was made under reg
5.9(2)(a) alone.
his letter of 23 May 2025, the Delegate raised some initial concerns regarding
the request for an extension of time in regard to
whether the applicant had
acted promptly and diligently at all times. In particular, it was noted that
the list of work provided
in Fisher 1 indicated that the Applicant had not begun
to prepare their EIA before the expiry of the evidentiary
declarations Fisher 1 and Fisher 2 available to the Delegate explained that Ms
Adams, the US Representative, and consequently
the Applicant, had been unaware
of the end of the expiry period until Mr Crooks, the original agent, had
forwarded her the Commissioner’s
letter of 31 March 2025. These
declarations also detail the plans to prepare the EIA and actions completed at
the time of their
preparation.
delegate was not satisfied that reg 5.9(2)(a) could be enlivened based on the
evidence made available to him, which only detailed
the actions of the second
the relevant date.
submissions
Applicant pressed both regs 5.9(2)(a) and 5.9(2)(b) at the hearing. The
Applicant further added that “There are no discretionary
factors why the
extension sought should not be
the hearing, the Applicant focused on reg 5.9(2)(b) but noted that the same
submissions were equally applicable to reg 5.9(2)(a).
In particular, 3 points
- Combinations
of circumstances could be exceptional in their totality;
- No limitation
should be read into “exceptional circumstances”; and
- “exceptional
circumstances” should be given an ordinary meaning.
Applicant submitted that the following constitutes the combination of
circumstances, which in their totality are exceptional:
, the Patentee [sic] had determined at an early stage, and
intended at all times, to brief Bill Hunter as its expert and to use the
2023 Hunter Declaration as the base for his evidence, given the substantial
overlap in issues between the 733 proceeding and
the present proceeding. This
is not a case where the Patentee [sic] delayed turning its mind, until a late
stage, to the kind of
evidence it would lead.
, the parties were
negotiating prior to the evidence deadline.
, the parties quite
properly approached the Commissioner for a stay which was granted.
, it should be inferred that the extension to the evidence deadline
granted – two weeks, from 14 to 28 March 2025 – was
less than the
parties had implicitly sought the Commissioner grant. It is apparent the parties
desired a one month stay to the deadline.
, the Patentee [sic],
because of failures by POF, was left in the dark about whether the proceeding
remained stayed (presumably proceeding
on the basis that the desired one month
stay was in place), when the new evidence deadline was, and the risks with not
its evidence while the proceeding was
(italics in
Applicant noted that, within the totality, problems began when the request for
the stay in proceedings was allowed. It is their
submission that the parties
had intended for an extension of one month to the EIA deadline (that is, to 10
April 2025) to be the
outcome of the request. When the original Australian
agent failed to pass on the Delegate’s letter of 18 February 2025, the
Applicant was left in the dark about the new evidence deadline being earlier
than they had expected.
Applicant referred to
QIP Nominees
as a useful example where an extension
of time under reg 5.9(2)(b) was granted despite there being actions that
have been taken to avoid missing the deadline. According to the
Applicant, “[t]here is no material difference between the
circumstances of
that case and this case, where the Patentee [sic] was left in the dark about the
duration of the stay and the new
evidence deadline until the deadline
for reg 5.9(2)(a), the Applicant submitted as follows:
“Having regard to the facts relied on in paragraphs 16 and 17 above,
the Commissioner should also be satisfied that reg 5.2(a)
[sic] is met. The
evidence demonstrates that the Patentee [sic] made all reasonable efforts to
comply with all relevant filing requirements,
and despite acting promptly and
diligently at all times to ensure the appropriate evidence was filed within the
permitted period,
was unable to do
the hearing, I also asked whether there were any particular points for me to
consider specifically in relation to exercising my
discretion to allow the
extension, if I was satisfied that the requirements of reg 5.9(2)(a) and/or reg
5.9(2)(b) were met. To this,
the Applicant replied that the declaration of Bill
Hunter was already filed with the office in June and there would be no prejudice
to the Opponent.
Considerations
the Applicant’s lead, I will address the extension under reg 5.9(2)(b)
the outset, I agree with the Applicant’s first proposition that
combinations of circumstances could be exceptional in their
totality. However,
I disagree with the subsequent two propositions that no limitation should be
read into “exceptional circumstances”
and that it should be given an
ordinary meaning. I have explained this above with the relevant law.
, a Delegate observed that “While request for a Notice to
Produce may not often be sought from the Commissioner, this does not
such a request is to be regarded as exceptional circumstance for the purposes of
filing evidence.”
delays to the preparation of the evidence stemming from the request for a notice
to produce, and the applicant’s handling
of the situation, were considered
relevant under reg 5.9(2)(a) but not under reg 5.9(2)(b).
Analogously,
in the present case, there were settlement negotiations during the period
between the filing of the EIS and the EIA and
a request for a stay was made.
The requested stay was allowed by a Delegate of the Commissioner. A direction
by the Commissioner
that an opposition be stayed pending the completion of a
related action is one of the expressly listed “exceptional
circumstances”
under reg 5.9(5). In recognition of this, the
Delegate’s letter of 18 February 2025 also gave a 2-week extension to file
EIA after the expiration of the stay.
QIP Nominees
, an extension to file evidence in answer was granted when an
applicant was not aware of an opposition being filed against the acceptance
their application until one month before their evidence was
Their agent had duly sent
the notice of opposition, statement of grounds and particulars and evidence in
support to the applicant
via email but newly implemented security measures in
the applicant’s email system had wrongly identified these documents as
cyber-attack threats and destroyed
The Delegate concluded
that it would be unreasonable to expect the applicant to complete their evidence
in the time left when the
prescribed period is 3
my mind, there is an important distinction between
QIP Nominees
present case. In
QIP Nominees
, the applicant was unaware of the fact
that there was an opposition to their application. If an applicant is not aware
being an opposition to their application, it is unreasonable to expect
them to be preparing evidence.
contrast, in the present case, the Applicant knew they were in opposition. The
Applicant had received the notice of opposition,
SGP and EIS for the present
application. The Applicant also knew their EIA was due on 10 March 2025.
Having expected the settlement
negotiations with the Opponent to continue past
the EIA due date, a 1-month stay was requested on 14 February 2025. Such a
does not reflect the actions of parties who were unaware of the
evidentiary process.
the hearing, I asked about this distinction. The Applicant responded that the
applicants in
QIP Nominees
had demonstrated just as much lack of
attention as they had and there could be no distinction. The Applicant went on
to submit that
where the Delegate in
QIP Nominees
intentionally
overlooked what
been done in hindsight, they were in a
similar position where various people involved
checked dates
and communications but did not. The Applicant further submitted that the
applicant in
QIP Nominees
was in fact less attentive than themselves as
the applicant in that case should have confirmed grant of their application
than assuming no news was good news.
the routine course of events after acceptance is grant and patentees generally
have little to action on patents after acceptance.
When opposition to the grant
of their application is filed, applicants have a significant number of key
activities to action. Where
the Applicant knew their original EIA deadline,
ignoring this significant milestone is not reasonable.
Applicant submitted that their agent had failed to advise them of the duration
of the stay, the new evidence deadline and where
the proceeding was up
This presents one major
hurdle in my mind. If the Applicant did not know of the duration of the stay or
the new evidence deadline,
then they also could not have been aware of the stay
having been given. The Delegate allowed the stay in the same letter that
its duration and extension of time to file the EIA. Consequently, if
it was unreasonable for the Applicant to work towards the new
deadline, albeit
shorter than assumed, it was also unreasonable for the Applicant to assume a
stay had been allowed at all. However,
the Applicant made no effort to have the
EIA ready on 10 March 2025, 28 March 2025 or even 10 April 2025.
with the opposition process and formulating a strategy for preparing evidence at
an early stage of the proceedings was commendable.
There was clearly a
communication breakdown between the Applicant and their agent during the
evidentiary period when the Applicant
should have been preparing their EIA.
However, the factors flagged by the
, individually or in
their totality, do not amount to exceptional circumstances. While the
evidentiary period did not go smoothly
and included elements not encountered in
every case, none of the events nor their totality amount to circumstances where
have been unreasonable to insist on the Applicant filing their EIA on
time or at least by the later due date.
can accept that there was an exceptional circumstance during the evidentiary
period, that being the direction of a stay. Due to
this exceptional
circumstance, as recognised in the
Regulations
, the Delegate’s
letter of 18 February 2025 allowed an extension of time of 2 weeks after the
expiry of the stay for the EIA
to be filed. However, based on the evidence in
front of me, it is not apparent that this was causal of the failure to file the
in answer by the extended due date.
I am not satisfied that there were further exceptional circumstances that
warrant extending the time to file the EIA again.
I am not satisfied that any
of the matters identified by the Applicant represent exceptional circumstances.
Nor does the totality
of these matters represent an exceptional circumstance.
An extension under reg 5.9(2)(b) is therefore not enlivened.
now to the consideration under reg 5.9(2)(a), despite having formulated a
strategy early, the Applicant had not actually begun
preparing the EIA when the
stay and the associated extension expired.
on the declarations provided, the Applicant had undertaken “a thorough
review of the evidence in
during the period
of December 2024 to early February 2025, further analyses and claim charts were
drawn up in April 2025 with the
then the S59 Opposition
grounds and EIS were considered again with the new agent before the preparation
of the EIA actually commenced.
According to the new agent, “Having undertaken an initial review, I expect
that the Opponent [sic] will require a significant
period of time to complete
its evidence in answer.”
After listing a series of tasks to be carried out in preparing the EIA, the new
agent initially estimated that 3 months would be
required for the
prescribed period for evidence in answer is 3 months. The estimated requirement
of 3 additional months suggests to me that little
to no work towards the
finalisation of the EIA had actually been carried out. I accept that Mr Crooks
failed to pass on the Delegate’s
letter of 18 February 2025 to the
Applicant or to their US Representative. However, if that was the case, a
reasonable and diligent
applicant should have been working towards preparing
their EIA as originally scheduled, or at least with a view to their estimated
new deadline. Similarly, a reasonable and diligent applicant would have engaged
their expert well before the evidence is due, so
as to be prompt with their
filing obligations.
Applicant stressed that Mr Crooks had failed not only in passing on the
Delegate’s letter of 18 February 2025 but also failed
to inform them of
the risks associated with not preparing the EIA while the proceeding was
During the hearing, I
asked whether this meant that there was an expectation that the evidentiary
period would continue to be pushed
back until the Applicant was ready. The
Applicant responded instead that they were engaged with the evidentiary process
to their agent’s failure, they did not know what was to happen
next or when.
am not satisfied that the Applicant acted reasonably where they failed to work
towards any deadline at all. Even if the stay had
been given to 10 April 2025
as predicted by the Applicant, according to the declarations, the Applicant was
still drawing up claims
charts and analysing the EIS at this time. They did not
act reasonably by not progressing the evidence with a view to their predicted
new deadline for the EIA. Despite the expeditious efforts made by the new agent
after the fact, I am not satisfied that the Applicant
acted promptly or
diligently during the actual evidentiary period. An extension under reg
5.9(2)(a) is therefore not enlivened.
follows that I cannot extend the time for filing the EIA under reg 5.9(2)(b) or
reg 5.9(2)(a).
Commissioner only has discretion under reg 5.9(2) when he is satisfied that the
party has made all reasonable efforts to comply
with the filing requirements and
they have acted promptly and diligently at all times or there were exceptional
circumstances. I
am not so satisfied and I therefore have no discretion to
allow an extension of time.
refuse the extension of time.
declaration by Bill Hunter dated 5 June 2025 and annexures thereto that was
filed on 6 June 2025 does not form part of the EIA.
The Applicant may make a
request under reg 5.23 for the Commissioner to consult the declaration for the
purposes of the S59 Opposition.
However, that is a separate consideration.
Delegate of the Commissioner of Patents
TRED Design Pty
Ltd v Julie-Anne McCarthy and Bradley McCarthy
TRED Design Pty Ltd v
Julie-Anne McCarthy and Bradley McCarthy
[2013] APO 57
Intellectual
Property Legislation Amendment (Raising the Bar) Regulation
Intellectual Property
Legislation Amendment (Raising the Bar) Regulation
2013 (No. 1) at page
TRED Design Pty Ltd v
Julie-Anne McCarthy and Bradley McCarthy
[2013] APO 57
Applicant submissions at
TRED Design Pty Ltd v
Julie-Anne McCarthy and Bradley McCarthy
[2013] APO 57
Aquatron Robotic
Technology LTD v Zodiac Pool Care Europe
[2016] APO 88
QIP Nominees Pty
Ltd v Delinia, Inc.
[2021] APO 24
QIP Nominees Pty Ltd v
Delinia, Inc.
[2021] APO 24
Fisher 3 at [5].
Fisher 3 at
Fisher 3 at
Fisher 3 at [18].
Fisher 3 at [19].
Fisher 3 at
Fisher 3 at
Fisher 3 at
Fisher 3 at
Fisher 3 at
Fisher 3 at [24].
Fisher 3 at
Fisher 3 at
Applicant submissions
submissions at [16].
Applicant submissions at [22].
Applicant submissions at
Aquatron Robotic
Technology LTD v Zodiac Pool Care Europe
[2016] APO 88
QIP Nominees Pty
Ltd v Delinia, Inc
[2021] APO 24
QIP Nominees Pty
Ltd v Delinia, Inc.
[2021] APO 24
QIP Nominees
Pty Ltd v Delinia, Inc.
[2021] APO 24
Applicant submissions
submissions at [16].
Fisher 3 at
Fisher 3 at
Fisher 2 at
Fisher 1 at
Applicant submissions
at [16]; Fisher 3 at [23].
RTF format (453 KB)
Signed PDF/A format