RePipe Pty Ltd and Attorney-General's Department (Freedom of information) [2025] AICmr 166 (12 September 2025)
RePipe Pty Ltd and Attorney-General’s Department (Freedom of
information)
[2025] AICmr 166
(12 September 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of
Rocelle Ago, General
Manager Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian
Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
RePipe Pty Ltd
Attorney-General’s Department
Decision date
Freedom of Information — Legal professional privilege — Whether
documents contain deliberative matter prepared for deliberative
— Whether disclosure of personal information is unreasonable —
Whether contrary to public interest to release
conditionally exempt documents
Freedom of Information Act 1982
s 55K of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I set aside
the decision of the Attorney-General’s Department (the Department) of 28
June 2021, as varied on
11 July 2022 and 25 July 2025. I substitute my decision
as follows:
the material
that the Department maintains is exempt under s 42 of the FOI Act is exempt
under that provision
the material
that the Department maintains is conditionally exempt under s 47F of the
FOI Act is conditionally exempt under that provision,
and its disclosure would
be contrary to the public interest at this time, and
the material
that the Department maintains is conditionally exempt under s 47C of the
FOI Act is conditionally exempt under that provision,
but its disclosure would
not be contrary to the public interest at this time.
28 days of this decision:
the Department
must provide the applicant with a copy of the documents, edited under s 22 of
the FOI Act only to the extent necessary
to delete exempt and irrelevant
material, and
the Department
must advise whether it has fully implemented my decision or whether it will be
seeking review of the decision by the
Administrative Review
decision discusses the application of ss 11A(5), 42, 47C and 47F of the FOI Act
to documents concerning an application for legal
financial assistance under the
Commonwealth Public Interest and Test Cases Scheme (CPITCS). It upholds the
deletion of legally privileged
material and personal information from the
documents. However, it finds that disclosure of deliberative material would not
be contrary
to the public interest at this time.
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
applicant had made an application for a grant of legal financial assistance
under the CPITCS on 19 March 2021. Following the Department’s
with respect to the CPITCS application, the applicant applied to the Department
for access to all documents that were provided
to and relied upon by the
decision maker in making the CPITCS decision.
28 June 2021, the Department identified 53 documents relevant to the request.
The applicant was granted access to 32 documents
in full, and seven documents in
part. Access to the remaining 14 documents was refused in full. In making its
decision, the Department
relied on the legal professional privilege exemption (s
42) and the deliberative processes exemption (s 47C). The Department also
considered some material to be irrelevant to the applicant’s request (s
applicant subsequently sought (Information Commissioner) IC review of the
Department’s decision.
14 July 2022, the Department decided to make a revised decision under s 55G of
the FOI Act and provided the applicant with access
to additional material in the
documents. In making its decision, the Department again relied on the exemptions
in ss 42 and 47C of
the FOI Act. The Department also deleted material that it
considered to be irrelevant under s 22 of the FOI Act.
Department made a further revised decision on 25 July 2025, where it provided
the applicant with access to additional information
comprising the names of
agency staff that had previously been disclosed to the applicant. With respect
to the surnames and contact
details of agency staff that had not been previously
disclosed to the applicant, the Department found that this material is
conditionally
exempt under the personal privacy exemption (s 47F) and that
disclosure of this material would be contrary to the public interest.
Department also maintained its exemption claims with respect to material that it
previously withheld under ss 42 and 47C of the
applicant confirmed that it wished to continue with the IC review and clarified
that although it was seeking access to the names
of individuals, it was not
seeking access to the contact details of individuals. Accordingly, information
comprising the contact
details of individuals is therefore irrelevant to the
applicant’s request and may be deleted in accordance with s 22 of the
Act. I have not considered the information comprising the contact details of
individuals further in this decision.
Accordingly,
the issues to be decided in this IC review are whether:
the material
that the Department maintains is exempt under s 42 is exempt under that
the material
that the Department maintains is conditionally exempt under ss 47C and 47F
of the FOI Act is conditionally exempt under
these provisions, and if so,
whether giving the applicant access to the conditionally exempt material at this
time would, on balance,
be contrary to the public interest
(s 11A(5)).
an IC review of an access refusal decision, the agency bears the onus of
establishing that its decision is justified or that I
should give a decision
adverse to the applicant.
making my decision, I have had regard to the following:
Department’s decisions of 28 June 2021, 11 June 2022 and 25 July 2025 and
its reasons for those decisions
the documents at
the Guidelines
issued by the Australian Information Commissioner under s 93A of the FOI
to which agencies must have
regard in performing a function or exercising a power under the FOI
parties’ submissions.
Legal professional privilege exemption (s 42)
document will be exempt under s 42 if it is of such a nature that it would be
privileged from production in legal proceedings on
the ground of legal
professional privilege (s 42(1)) and privilege has not been waived (s
term ‘legal professional privilege’ is not defined in the FOI Act.
Instead, common law concepts of legal professional
privilege are to be applied
in determining whether s 42 of the FOI Act applies to a
issue of whether legal professional privilege can apply to advice or
communications to or from lawyers working within an agency
has been examined in
various decisions.
established that an independent legal adviser-client relationship can exist
between an agency’s in-house lawyers
and other staff of the
Whether a true legal
adviser-client relationship exists will be a question of fact, to be determined
by reference to:
the nature of
the lawyer’s involvement and the content and circumstances of the
communication,
the substance of
the communications, subjective intentions of those making them, and objective
conclusions that can be drawn from
Department explained that the exemption in s 42 applied to the relevant material
adviser-client relationship existed between the Department and its lawyers
communication was for the purpose of giving or receiving legal advice
provided was independent, and
provided was confidential.
Department further explained that the legal advice is known only to employees
involved in the assessment of the application for
legal financial assistance,
and privilege over the relevant advice has not been waived.
response to the Department’s contentions, the applicant submits that the
legal advice received by the Department likely relates
to paragraph 5.15 of the
Commonwealth Guidelines for Legal Financial Assistance 2012, and that this
advice was not independent or
confidential. The applicant further submits that
the passage of time likely has lessened any real harm that may flow from
disclosure.
have considered the parties’ submissions together with the documents, and
I am satisfied that the relevant material is exempt
under s 42 of the FOI Act.
relevant material comprises information and summaries of information created for
the dominant purpose of giving or receiving legal
advice. The relevant advice
was provided by the Department’s in-house lawyers in their capacity as
legal advisers and in no
other capacity. Accordingly, I accept that the advice
was provided in the context of a legal adviser-client relationship. Having
regard to the nature and content of the relevant material, I also accept that
the advice provided was independent and confidential.
the applicant holds a belief as to the nature of the advice, this does not
preclude the application of legal professional
privilege to the documents. With
respect to the applicant’s contentions regarding the passage of time and
the harm that might
from flow from disclosure, the Department’s decision
with respect to the ‘real harm test’ is not an issue that
considered in an IC review.
considering whether legal professional privilege has been waived (s 42(2)), I
have examined the relevant material, the evidence
and the parties’
submissions. There is nothing before me which indicates that privilege has been
waived. Accordingly, I do
not consider that privilege has been waived in this
Finding (s 42)
material that the Department found to be exempt under s 42 is exempt under this
Deliberative processes exemption (s 47C)
document is conditionally exempt under s 47C if its disclosure would disclose
deliberative matter
) in the nature of, or relating to, opinion,
advice or recommendation obtained, prepared or recorded, or consultation or
deliberation
that has taken place, in the course of, or for the purposes of, the
deliberative processes involved in the functions of an agency,
Minister or the
Government of the Commonwealth.
President Forgie explained in
Wood; Secretary, Department of Prime Minister
and Cabinet (Freedom of information)
[2015] AATA 945
that the words
‘opinion’, ‘advice’, and recommendations’ in s
47C(1) of the FOI Act all involve consideration,
followed by the formation of a
view either about a certain subject or a course of action, and the subsequent
transmission of that
view. Similarly, the words ‘consultation’ and
‘deliberation’ both involve the notion of consideration but
necessarily lead to the formation of an opinion, advice, or recommendation.
Department submits that the material that it withheld under s 47C comprises
deliberative matter that was prepared for the deliberative
purpose of assessing
an application for internal review of the Department’s earlier legal
financial assistance decision. The
Department further explained that some of
this material comprises draft text that was removed from the final version of
the documents
that were subsequently provided to and considered by the CPITCS
decision maker. The Department also contended that the material that
it withheld
under s 47C contains opinions, advice or recommendations, and does not relate to
reports, formal statements of reasons
or operational information.
Department explained that although parts of the conditionally exempt material in
documents 38 and 48 include purely factual material,
this material forms an
integral part of the Department’s deliberations.
applicant did not make any submissions that directly addressed the
Department’s application of s 47C. Rather, the applicant’s
submissions centred around their contention that disclosure of the relevant
material would not be contrary to the public interest.
I will discuss this
further below.
on my examination of the documents, I accept the Department’s
characterisation of the relevant material. It is apparent
that the relevant
material comprises internal opinions, advice and recommendations with respect to
matters concerning or arising
from the CPITCS application.
some of the material comprises purely factual material, I accept that this
material forms an integral part of the deliberative
matter, such that s 47C(2)
of the FOI Act does not apply.
Finding (s 47C)
the reasons set out above, I find that the material that the Department found to
be conditionally exempt under s 47C is conditionally
exempt under this
Personal privacy exemption (s 47F)
Department contends that the surnames and contact details of some of its staff
members are exempt under s 47F. As I have discussed
above, the applicant has
excluded the contact details of agency staff from the scope of its request.
Accordingly, I have only considered
the Department’s application of the
exemption in s 47F to the surnames of agency staff.
document or material will be exempt under this conditional exemption if it
contains ‘personal information’ and disclosure
in response to the
applicant’s FOI request would be ‘unreasonable’ (s
Whether the material is personal information
information’ under the FOI Act has the same meaning as the equivalent term
That definition is set out in
is apparent that the Department has already provided the applicant access with
the first names and position titles of the individuals
the relevant material comprises the surnames of agency staff, I am satisfied
that the material, when combined with information
that has already been
disclosed to the applicant, identifies those individuals and is ‘personal
information’ for the
purposes of s 47F(1) of the FOI Act.
Whether disclosure would involve an unreasonable disclosure of
personal information
Department contends that information comprising the personal information of its
junior public servants and their involvement in
the subject matter of the
documents is not generally well known.
Department further explained that disclosure of the surnames of agency staff
would not shed any particular light on the workings
of the government or enhance
accountability or transparency.
response, the applicant contends that disclosure of the surnames would not be
unreasonable as it would provide clarity with respect
to the identities of those
involved in the provision of advice to the CPITCS decision maker.
have considered the documents and the parties’ submissions together with
the mandatory factors in s 47F(2).
I accept that disclosure of the surnames of agency staff would promote the
public interest in transparency and integrity
by revealing the identities of the
individuals, it is apparent that the identities of these individuals are not
well known or publicly
available. Similarly, it does not appear that these
individuals are known to be associated with the subject matter of the documents
more broadly. I consider that these factors weigh moderately against
disclosure.
this basis, I am satisfied that disclosure of the surnames of the agency staff
would, on balance, involve an unreasonable disclosure
of personal information.
Finding (s 47F)
am satisfied that the information comprising the surnames of agency staff is
conditionally exempt under s 47F of the FOI Act.
Whether access would be contrary to the public interest (s
found material to be conditionally exempt under ss 47C and 47F of the FOI Act, I
am required to consider whether it would be
contrary to the public interest to
give the applicant access to conditionally exempt material at this time. The
requirements of the
public interest test are set out at
have considered the relevant mandatory factors listed in s 11B(3) of the FOI
Act. I have not considered the irrelevant factors as
set out in s 11B(4) of the
In considering the
public interest, I have had regard to the parties’ submissions.
The personal information of agency staff
applicant submits that the individuals involved had a direct impact on the
outcome of the CPITCS application and that there is
a public interest in
ensuring that the assessment is undertaken by officers of appropriate seniority
and expertise.
Department also acknowledged that disclosure of material comprising the surnames
of agency staff would promote the objects of
the FOI Act.
against this factor in favour of disclosure, the Department contends that
disclosure of this personal information could reasonably
be expected to
prejudice the privacy of the individuals involved.
Determining
whether the disclosure of conditionally exempt material is contrary to the
public interest requires the balancing of the
public interest (and value) in the
information being disclosed and any identifiable harm that could reasonably be
expected to follow
from disclosure.
accept that disclosure of the material comprising the surnames of agency staff
would generally promote the objects of the FOI Act.
However, I am not persuaded
that significant weight should be given to this public interest consideration.
As I have explained above
personal information of the individuals is not well known or publicly available,
nor are they known to be associated with the
subject matter of the documents
more broadly.
Relevantly,
in the decision of
‘ADM’ and Services Australia (No. 3) (Freedom
of information)
[2023] AICmr 40
‘ADM’ No. 3)
Freedom of Information Commissioner Hardiman also considered the application of
the exemption in s 47F to surnames of agency
staff. In considering the public
interest, Commissioner Hardiman found that disclosure of information comprising
the surnames of
agency staff would not add any further context or information to
the parts of the documents that have already been disclosed to the
with the reasoning in
‘ADM’ No. 3
, I find that in
circumstances where the Department has provided the applicant with access to the
first names and position titles
of the individuals concerned, disclosure of the
surnames of the individuals would not reveal any further information about the
decision, nor would it enhance the scrutiny of government decision-making
in a meaningful way. Similarly, I do not consider that
disclosure of the
surnames would enable effective oversight of public expenditure, nor does this
information relate to matters of
public importance.
these reasons, in balancing the public interest considerations, I am satisfied
that greater weight should be given to the privacy
considerations of the
individuals. Accordingly, I find that the factors against disclosure outweigh
the factor in favour of disclosure
in this case.
material comprising the surnames of agency staff is exempt, as its disclosure
would be contrary to the public interest at this
Deliberative material
Department explained that disclosure of the relevant material would promote the
objects of the FOI Act, including by:
informing the
community of the Government’s operations
revealing the
reason for a government decision
enhancing the
scrutiny of government decision making, and
effective oversight of public expenditure.
Department also identified that disclosure of the relevant material would allow
the applicant access to information that concerns
regard to the nature of the relevant material, I accept that these factors in
favour of disclosure apply in this case.
in relation to the factors against disclosure, the Department explained that
disclosure of the material that it withheld
under s 47C comprises draft text
which was subsequently removed from the final recommendation note.
Department further explained that the material contains the preliminary
opinions, advice and drafting of junior departmental officers,
and while it
formed part of the Department’s deliberative process, it was not
considered by the decision-maker. The Department
submits that disclosure of this
material would not reveal the reasons for its CPITCS decision, nor would it
increase scrutiny, or
promote effective oversight of expenditure of public
Department contends that disclosure of draft material and preliminary
deliberations could reasonably be expected to undermine
the confidence of junior
officers of the Department to actively engage in the Department’s
deliberative processes. The Department
submits that disclosure of this
information could reasonably be expected to prejudice its ability to consider
and make deliberations
on CPITCS applications in the future.
response to the Department’s contentions, the applicant submits that
disclosure of the relevant material would do nothing
more than mirror the final
outcomes which have already been provided to them, and that disclosure would not
be contrary to the public
Determining
whether the disclosure of conditionally exempt material is contrary to the
public interest requires the balancing of the
public interest in the information
being disclosed and any identifiable harm that could reasonably be expected to
follow from the
disclosure.
characterised by the Department, the relevant material comprises preliminary
drafts and early stage deliberations prepared by junior
officers within the
Department. The Department’s contention that disclosure could reasonably
be expected to have the effect
of eroding the confidence of the
Department’s junior officers in engaging in deliberative processes
primarily concerns a frankness
and candour claim.
FOI Guidelines relevantly explain that although frankness and candour claims may
be relevant in considering deliberative material
and weighing the public
interest, agencies would generally have to demonstrate that the circumstances
are special and specific in
order for such a claim to be
successful.
Further, agencies
should start with the assumption that public servants are obliged by their
position to provide robust and frank
advice at all times and that obligation
would not be diminished by transparency of government
activities.
Relevantly,
in the decision of
Peter Timmins and Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
(Freedom of information)
[2024] AICmr 258
, Freedom of Information
Commissioner Pirani also considered the application of frankness and candour
claims in relation to draft
briefing papers. Commissioner Pirani found that no
weight should be given to the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade’s
frankness and candour claim, as there were no special and specific circumstances
that would merit a conclusion that disclosure of
the documents would undermine
the Department’s ability to provide confidential, candid and sensitive
information and/or analysis.
the present case, I have considered the Department’s contentions, and I
find that other than a general assertion that disclosure
would erode the
confidence of junior officers engaging in the Department’s deliberative
processes, the Department has not provided
sufficient evidence to establish that
such an effect could reasonably be expected to occur. Similarly, the Department
has not adequately
explained why the circumstances in this case warrants a
departure from the assumption that public servants are obliged to provide
and frank advice at all times.
on my consideration of the parties’ submissions together with the
documents, I am not satisfied that the Department has
established that the
circumstances in this case supports a finding that significant weight should be
given to the Department’s
frankness and candour claim. Accordingly, I
consider that only limited weight should be given to this factor against
disclosure.
Department also submits that the relevant material did not form part of the
final recommendation provided to the CPITCS decision
maker and the applicant had
already been provided the reasons underlying the Department’s decision. On
this basis, the Department
contends that any public interest in disclosure of
the relevant material is limited.
I accept that the applicant has been provided with the reasons underlying the
CPITCS decision, it is apparent that the relevant
material pertains to a
decision that affects the applicant. Having regard to this context and the
nature of the relevant material,
I consider that disclosure of the relevant
material would provide further insight into the considerations underlying the
advice and recommendations to the CPITCS decision maker,
notwithstanding the respondent’s contention that this material was
before the CPITCS decision maker for their consideration. This is because the
relevant material formed part of the author’s
deliberations and would
have, in my view, contributed to the development of advice and recommendations
that were subsequently provided
to the CPITCS decision maker.
balancing the factors for and against disclosure, I am satisfied that the public
interest factors in favour of disclosure outweigh
the factors against
disclosure.
these reasons, disclosure of the material that I have found to be conditionally
exempt under s 47C would not be contrary to the
public interest at this time.
The relevant material is not exempt.
Rocelle Ago
Manager Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian
Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
Relevant provisions of the FOI Act, FOI Guidelines, and
Section 11A(4) of the FOI
Act states the agency or Minister is not required by this Act to give
the person access to the document
at a particular time if, at that
time, the document is an exempt document.
Legal professional privilege (s 42)
discussed in the FOI Guidelines and in IC review
a document will be exempt
under s 42 if it is of such a nature that it would be privileged from production
in legal proceedings on
the ground of legal professional privilege (s 42(1)) and
privilege has not been waived (s 42(2)).
Legal professional privilege protects confidential communications between a
lawyer and a client from compulsory production. The FOI
Guidelines relevantly
explain that, at common law, determining whether a communication is privileged
requires consideration of the
whether there is
a legal adviser-client relationship
whether the
communication was for the dominant purpose of giving or receiving legal advice,
or use in connection with actual or anticipated
whether the
advice given is independent, and
whether the
advice given is
confidential.
FOI Guidelines explain that a communication may have been brought into existence
for more than one purpose but will be privileged
if the main purpose of its
creation was for giving or receiving legal advice (legal advice privilege), or
for use in connection with
actual or anticipated litigation (litigation
privilege).
Also, they note that
when legal advice is received from an independent external legal adviser,
establishing the existence of the
requisite legal adviser-client relationship is
usually straightforward. A typical example in a government context is advice
by an agency from a law firm that is on an authorised list of panel
firms (including the Australian Government
Solicitor).
In relation to whether a legal adviser client relationship exists, the FOI
Guidelines relevantly explain:
A legal adviser-client relationship exists where a client retains the services
of a lawyer for the purpose of obtaining professional
advice. If the advice is
received from an independent external legal adviser, establishing the existence
of the relationship is usually
straightforward.
The FOI Guidelines further explain that the following factors are relevant to
establishing whether a legal adviser-client relationship
adviser must be acting in their capacity as a professional legal adviser
the dominant
purpose test must be satisfied
the giving of
the advice must be attended by the necessary degree of independence
the advice must
be confidential
the fact that
the advice arose out of a statutory duty does not preclude the privilege from
whether the
lawyer is subject to professional standards can be
communications were confidential communications between a professional legal
adviser and client for the dominant purpose of
giving or receiving legal advice,
they will attract the
Deliberative processes (s 47C)
Section 47C of the FOI Act states:
(1) A document is conditionally exempt if its disclosure under
this Act would disclose matter (
deliberative matter
) in the nature
of, or relating to, opinion, advice or recommendation obtained, prepared or
recorded, or consultation or deliberation
that has taken place, in the course
of, or for the purposes of, the deliberative processes involved in the functions
(a) an agency; or
(b) a Minister; or
(c) the Government of the Commonwealth.
Section 47C(2) of the FOI Act declares that deliberative matter does not
include operational information (defined in section 8A of
the FOI Act) or purely
factual material.
Section 47C(3) of the FOI Act states:
(3) This section does not apply to any of the following:
(a) reports (including reports concerning the results of
studies, surveys or tests) of scientific or technical experts, whether
within an agency or not, including reports expressing the opinions of such
experts on scientific or technical matters;
(b) reports of a body or organisation, prescribed by the
regulations, that is established within an agency;
(c) the record of, or a formal statement of the reasons for,
a final decision given in the exercise of a power or of an adjudicative
Note: Access must generally be given to a
conditionally exempt document unless it would be contrary to the public interest
(see section
As discussed in the FOI Guidelines, a decision maker must be satisfied of 3
requirements for this conditional exemption to apply:
Firstly, the decision maker must be satisfied that information within the scope
of the request includes deliberative matter. Secondly,
if the decision maker is
satisfied, they are then required to be satisfied that the deliberative matter
was obtained, prepared or
recorded in the course of, or for the purposes of,
deliberative processes. Thirdly, the decision maker must be satisfied that the
deliberative processes were involved in the functions exercised by or intended
to be exercised by an Australian Government agency
The FOI Guidelines further explain that:
Deliberative matter is content that is in the nature of, or relating to
• an opinion, advice or recommendation that has been obtained, prepared
or recorded or
• a consultation or deliberation that has taken place, in the course
of, or for the purposes of, a deliberative process of the
government, an agency
or minister (s 47C(1)).
‘Deliberative matter’ does not include operational information or
purely factual material (s 47C(2)). ‘Operational
information’ is
defined in s 8A and is information that an agency must publish under the
Information Publication Scheme (see
Part 13 of the FOI
Guidelines).
The FOI Guidelines state that the conditional exemption does not apply
(a) reports (including reports concerning the results of studies, surveys or
tests) of scientific or technical experts, whether employed
within an agency or
not, including reports expressing the opinions of such experts on scientific or
technical matters (see [6.73]
– [6.72] below)
(b) reports of a body or organisation, prescribed by the regulations, that is
established within an agency (currently none are prescribed)
(c) the record of, or a formal statement of the reasons for, a final decision
given in the exercise of a power or of an adjudicative
function (s
The FOI Guidelines provide:
Agencies and ministers should only claim this conditional exemption in
clearly applicable circumstances, noting that s 47C is subject
to an overriding
public interest test that is weighted toward disclosure. Not every document
generated or held by a policy area of
an agency is ‘deliberative’ in
the sense used in this provision, even if it appears to deal with the
development or implementation
of a policy. This is reinforced by the language of
the FOI Act which describes what does not constitute ‘deliberative
A decision maker should ensure that the content of a document
strictly conforms with the criteria for identifying ‘deliberative
matter’ prepared or recorded for the purposes of a ‘deliberative
process’ before claiming this conditional exemption
(see [6.46] above and
[6.59] – [6.58] below).
In relation to assessing ‘deliberative matter’ the FOI Guidelines
The presence or
absence of particular words or phrases is not a reliable indication of whether a
document includes deliberative matter.
The agency should assess the substance
and content of the document before concluding it includes deliberative matter.
the format or class of the document, such as a ministerial brief or
submission, or the document being a draft version of a later
document does not
automatically designate the content as deliberative matter.
Material that is not deliberative matter, where not already excluded as
operational information, purely factual material or a scientific
report, would
• content that is merely descriptive
• incidental administrative content
• procedural or day to day content
• the decision or conclusion reached at the end of the deliberative
• matter that was not obtained, prepared or recorded in the course of, or
for the purposes of, a deliberative
Guidelines explain that a deliberative process involves the exercise of
judgement in developing and making a selection from
different options:
The action of deliberating, in common understanding, involves the weighing up or
evaluation of competing arguments or considerations
that may have a bearing upon
one’s course of action. In short, the deliberative processes involved in
the functions of an agency
are its thinking processes – the processes of
reflection, for example, upon the wisdom and expediency of a proposal, a
decision or a course of action.
It is not enough for the purposes of s 47C(1) that an opinion, advice or
recommendation is merely obtained, prepared or recorded;
it must be obtained,
prepared or recorded in the course of, or for the purposes of, the deliberative
processes involved in the functions
of the agency, minister or government.
The functions of an agency are usually found in the Administrative Arrangements
Orders or the instrument or Act that established
the agency. For the purposes of
the FOI Act, the functions include both policy making and the processes
undertaken in administering
or implementing a policy. The functions also extend
to the development of policies in respect of matters that arise in the course
administering a program. The non-policy decision making processes required when
carrying out agency, ministerial or governmental
functions, such as code of
conduct investigations, may also be deliberative processes.
An opinion or recommendation does not need to be prepared for the sole purpose
of a deliberative process. However, it is not sufficient
that an agency or
minister merely has a document in its possession that contains information
referring to matters for which the agency
or minister has
responsibility.
In relation to ‘purely factual material’, the FOI
Guidelines explain:
'Purely factual material’ does not extend to factual material that is an
integral part of the deliberative content and purpose
of a document, or is
embedded in or intertwined with the deliberative content such that it is
impractical to excise it.
Where a decision maker finds it difficult to separate the purely factual
material from the deliberative matter, both the elements
may be exempt. If the 2
elements can be separated, the decision maker should consider giving the
applicant a copy with deletions
under s 22 to provide access to the purely
factual material.
Personal privacy exemption (s 47F)
Section 47F of the FOI Act states
‘A document is conditionally exempt if its disclosure
under this Act would involve the unreasonable
disclosure of
information
any person (including a deceased person).’
Section 4(1) of the FOI Act states ‘personal information’ has the
same meaning as the
, which provides:
personal information
means information or an opinion about an
identified individual, or an individual who is reasonably identifiable:
(a) whether the information or opinion is true or not; and
(b) whether the information or opinion is recorded in a material form or
Section 47F(2) of the FOI Act states that in
determining whether the disclosure of the document would involve the
unreasonable disclosure
of personal information, an agency or Minister
decision maker must have regard to the following matters:
the extent to
which the information is well known
whether the
person to whom the information relates is known to be (or to have been)
associated with the matters dealt with in the
the availability
of the information from publicly available sources, and
matters that the agency or Minister considers relevant.
As discussed
in the FOI Guidelines and IC review
the main requirements of
this public interest conditional exemption are that a document contains
‘personal information;’
disclosure in response to the
applicant’s FOI request would be ‘unreasonable’ (s 47(1)); and
it would be ‘contrary
to the public interest’ to release the
material at the time of the decision (s 11A(5)).
The FOI Guidelines explain that the test of ‘unreasonableness’ in
s 47F ‘implies a need to balance the public interest
in disclosure of
government-held information and the private interest in the privacy of
individuals’.
In addition to the mandatory factors outlined at s 47F(2) of the FOI Act, the
FOI Guidelines explain that other relevant factors include:
a) the author of the document is identifiable
b) the document contains third party personal information
c) release of the document would cause stress to the third party
d) no public purpose would be achieved through release.
the nature, age
and current relevance of the information
any detriment
that disclosure may cause o the person to whom the information relates
any opposition
to disclosure expressed or likely to be held by that person
circumstances of an agency’s or minister’s collection and use of the
information
the fact that
the FOI Act does not control or restrict any subsequent use or dissemination of
information released under the FOI Act
any submission
an FOI applicant chooses to make in support of their request as to their reasons
for seeking access and their intended
or likely use or dissemination of the
information and
disclosure of the information might advance the public interest in government
transparency and
last-mentioned factor – the public interest in government transparency and
integrity – is to be balanced with all
other relevant factors arising in
the particular case, including the private interest that third party individuals
may have in maintaining
information.
Public interest test
Section 11A(5)of the FOI Act states the agency
or Minister must give the person access to the document if it is
conditionally exempt
at a particular time unless (in the circumstances)
access to the document at that time would, on balance, be contrary to the public
Section 11B(3) of the FOI Act sets out a non-exhaustive list of public
interest factors favouring disclosure for consideration, those
factors being
where disclosure of the document would do any of the following:
(a) promote the objects of the FOI Act
(b) inform debate on a matter of public importance
(c) promote effective oversight of public expenditure
(d) allow a person access to their personal information.
Section 11B(4) of the FOI Act also lists the following irrelevant factors
that must not be taken into consideration when deciding
whether access would, on
balance, be contrary to the public interest:
(a) access to the document could result in embarrassment to the Commonwealth
Government, or cause a loss of confidence in the Commonwealth
(b) access to the document could result in any person misinterpreting or
misunderstanding the document
(c) the author of the document was (or is) of high seniority in the agency to
which the request for access to the document was made
(d) access to the document could result in confusion or unnecessary
In addition to the factors set out at s 11B(3) of the FOI Act, the FOI
Guidelines set out a further non-exhaustive list of public
interest factors in
favour of disclosure, as well as public interest factors against
disclosure.
The FOI Guidelines explain:
To conclude that, on balance, disclosure of a document would be contrary to
the public interest is to conclude that the benefit to
the public resulting from
disclosure is outweighed by the benefit to the public of withholding the
information. The decision maker
must analyse, in each case, where on balance the
public interest lies based on the particular facts at the time the decision is
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
FOI Act s 55D(1).
Section 11A, 42, 47C and 47F as
set out in Annexure A.
See, Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner
, Guidelines issued by the Australian Information
Commissioner under
Information Act 1982
(FOI Guidelines).
Set out in Annexure A.
FOI Guidelines [5.145].
Ransley and Commissioner of Taxation
(Freedom of information)
[2015] AATA 728
'AEE' and Department of Defence
(Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 69
'ADM' and Services Australia
(No.7) (Freedom of information)
and ‘ACV’ and Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Authority
(Freedom of information)
Waterford v
Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1986) 163 CLR 54.
and Commissioner of Taxation (Freedom of information)
[2015] AATA 728
'AEE' and Department of Defence
(Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 69
'ADM' and Services Australia (No.
7) (Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 66
and Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Authority (Freedom of
information)
[2023] AICmr 3
Rudd and Civil Aviation
Safety Authority
[2013] AICmr 56
Philip Morris Ltd and Prime
[2011] AATA 556
FOI Guidelines at [5.178]
footnoting s 55L(2) of the FOI Act. However, agencies are not bound to refuse
access to material exempt
under s 42 of the FOI Act: FOI Guidelines at [5.179]
‘ACV’ and Tertiary Education Quality and Standards
Agency (Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 3
Wood; Secretary,
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet and (Freedom of
information)
[2015] AATA 945
Listed in Annexure A.
FOI Guidelines at
FOI Guidelines at
Generally, see FOI
Guidelines at [5.144] – [5.182];
‘VO’ and Northern
Australia Infrastructure Facility (Freedom of information)
[2020] AICmr 47
VH’ and Australian
Taxation Office (Freedom of information)
[2020] AICmr 43
‘PQ’ and Australian
Taxation Office
(Freedom of information
[2019] AICmr 1
‘PO’ and Australian
Federal Police (Freedom of information)
[2018] AICmr 72
hris Lewis and Australian National
University (Freedom of information
[2018] AICmr 63
Rex Bashford and Department of
Jobs and Small Business (Freedom of information
[2018] AICmr 55
Department of Home Affairs (Freedom of information)
[2018] AICmr 36
FOI Guidelines
FOI Guidelines
FOI Guidelines
FOI Guidelines
FOI Guidelines
[5.154] (footnotes omitted).
AWB v Cole (No. 5)
[2006] FCA 1234
(2006) 155 FCR 30
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1986) 163 CLR 54
FOI Guidelines at
FOI Guidelines at [6.48].
FOI Guidelines at
FOI Guidelines at [6.52].
FOI Guidelines at [6.61]
– [6.62] (footnotes omitted).
FOI Guidelines at [6.54]
– [6.58] (footnotes omitted)
FOI Guidelines at [6.70]
– [6.71] (footnotes omitted).
Section 6(1)
(Cth) (emphasis in original).
Generally, see FOI
[6.119] – [6.155];
‘AEE’ and Department of Defence (Freedom of information)
‘AED’ and Australian Criminal Intelligence
Commission (Freedom of information)
'OE' and Australian Taxation Office (Freedom of
information)
[2018] AICmr 29
FOI Guidelines at
FOI Guidelines at [6.137]
– [6.138] (footnotes omitted).
at [6.139].
FOI Guidelines at [6.229]
FOI Guidelines at [6.238]
(footnote omitted).
RTF format (22.3 MB)
Signed PDF/A format