Voight & Zunino [2025] FedCFamC1A 201 (7 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1) APPELLATE
Voight & Zunino
[2025] FedCFamC1A 201
Appeal from:
Voight & Zunino
[2025] FedCFamC1F 311
Appeal number:
NAA 312 of 2025
File number:
MLC 6754 of 2022
Judgment of:
AUSTIN, SCHONELL & CURRAN JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – PROPERTY
– DE FACTO RELATIONSHIP – Where the primary judge dismissed the
appellant’s financial
claim under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) – Where the primary judge wrongly conceptualised the decision
for de facto financial relief as a choice between either
granting the
application in the form proposed by the appellant or dismissing the application
– Where the primary judge failed
to consider the justice and equity of
making some property adjustment order – Where a previous judge made a
interlocutory order
for the lump sum payment of $300,000 by the respondent to
the appellant – Where the characterisation of the lump sum payment
left to the primary judge – Where the order was not made by reference to
any head of power and is invalid – Where
the characterisation by the
primary judge of the lump sum payment was not open – Appeal allowed
– Re-exercise of discretion.
Legislation:
Fair Work Act 2009
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Amendment Act 2024
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
Cases cited:
Gabel v Yardley
(2008) FLC 93-386
FamCAFC 162
Harris v Caladine
(1991) 172 CLR 84
[1991] HCA 9
Kennon v Kennon
(1997) FLC 92-757
[1997] FamCA 27
Marchant & Marchant
(2012) FLC 93-520
[2012] FamCAFC 181
Nguyen v Nguyen
(1990) 169 CLR 245
[1990] HCA 9
R v Cook; Ex parte Twigg
(1980) 147 CLR 15
[1980] HCA 36
Strahan & Strahan (Interim Property Orders)
(2011) FLC 93-466
[2009] FamCAFC 166
Waters v Jurek
(1995) FLC 92-635
[1995] FamCA 101
(2002) 211 CLR 238
[2002] HCA 36
Zschokke & Zschokke
(1996) FLC 92-693
[1996] FamCA 79
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr Robinson
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Cosgriff Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms Vohra SC with Mr Chislett
Solicitor for the Respondent:
MLC 6754 of 2022
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
DIVISION 1 APPELLATE JURISDICTION
AUSTIN, SCHONELL & CURRAN JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appeal is allowed.
1 made on 28 June 2023 is set aside.
dismissal order made on 5 June 2025 is set aside.
to Pt VIIIAB of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), it is ordered
(a) The respondent shall pay the appellant $131,113 within 28 days; and
(b) Otherwise:
(i) each party is declared the sole legal and beneficial owner of all other
assets in their respective possession and, for that purpose,
bank accounts and
superannuation interests are deemed in the possession of the account holder;
(ii) each party shall be solely liable for and shall indemnify the other against
any debts attaching or relating to the property
in their respective possession
and any debts in their respective sole names; and
(iii) any outstanding applications for financial relief under the
(Cth) are dismissed.
appellant is granted a costs certificate pursuant to
Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
(Cth), being a certificate that, in the opinion
of the Court, it would be appropriate for the Attorney-General to authorise a
under that Act to the appellant in respect of the costs incurred by her
in the appeal.
respondent is granted a costs certificate pursuant to
Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
(Cth), being a certificate that, in the opinion
of the Court, it would be appropriate for the Attorney-General to authorise a
under that Act to the respondent in respect of the costs incurred by him
in the appeal.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Voight & Zunino
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
AUSTIN, SCHONELL & CURRAN JJ:
appeal is brought from an order made on 5 June 2025 by a judge of the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division
1) dismissing the
appellant’s application for de facto financial relief under
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”).
the following reasons, the appeal is allowed and discretion under
the Act is re-exercised.
parties met in 2012 and cohabited between March 2013 and November 2020. They did
not marry. For the period of their cohabitation,
the parties lived and worked
upon the respondent’s farming property.
their separation, the appellant commenced two separate proceedings against the
respondent.
September 2021, the appellant sued the respondent under the
Fair Work Act
(Cth), claiming unpaid farm wages, which suit the respondent resisted
(at [15]–[18]).
in June 2022, the appellant brought proceedings against the respondent under
of the Act, claiming financial relief in the form of property adjustment
orders, which claim the respondent also resisted.
workplace proceedings were later stayed in March 2023 so the appellant could
prosecute her de facto financial claim (at [15]).
April 2023, the appellant sought interlocutory relief in the form of periodic
and lump sum interim (or alternatively urgent) de
facto spousal maintenance,
together with the respondent’s payment of two cash lump sums approximating
$364,000. Her application
was resolved by interim consent orders, made in June
2023, requiring the respondent to pay the appellant the sum of $300,000, which
sum was to be “characterised by the trial judge”. The interlocutory
application was otherwise dismissed.
trial of the de facto financial cause was first heard over two days in December
2023 by a judge of the Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division
2) and judgment was then reserved. About 16 months later in April 2025, while
judgment was still reserved,
the Chief Judge transferred the unresolved
financial proceeding to the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 1).
The primary judge then seized control of the proceeding, re-listed
it and, with the parties’ consent, resumed the trial by
taking further
submissions on two days in April and June 2025. No further evidence was
elicited. Judgment was then promptly delivered
by the primary judge on 5 June
Honour dismissed the appellant’s financial claim by an order made in these
UPON HANDING DOWN
reasons for judgment in [
Voigt & Zunino
[2025] FedCFamC1F 311
I ORDER THAT
the [appellant’s] s 90SM
application filed 30 August 2023 is dismissed.
trial was conducted on the premise that the parties’ assets were
collectively worth just over $17 million (almost entirely
comprised by the
respondent’s farm, plant and equipment), their liabilities were
collectively worth about $1.7 million, and
their superannuation interests were
collectively worth about $3.8 million (at [49]).
appellant’s application comprised a claim for a cash payment by the
respondent to her of $3,035,141 and her retention of
certain personal property,
which she calculated to represent about 17.5 per cent of the available assets in
her Case Outline document.
Although the appellant sought quite specific
adjustment orders, in the reasons for judgment the primary judge inaccurately
she sought a percentage outcome and then inconsistently quantified her
claims at 17.5 and 12.5 per cent of the parties’ property
(at [52] and
Conversely,
the respondent proposed the appellant keep the $300,000 he had already paid her,
that the parties retain the property
and chattels in their respective
possession, that they bear their own debts, and that the appellant’s
application be otherwise
dismissed. He contended there was no principled reason
to interfere with the parties’ existing property rights (at [54(e)]
primary judge signalled agreement with the respondent’s submission that no
property adjustment order of any sort was justified
(at [75]) but then went on
to explain why the specific property adjustment order sought by the appellant
was unjustified (at [83]–[85]).
appellant appealed from the dismissal order on 2 July 2025.
appellant prosecuted the Amended Notice of Appeal filed on 23 September 2025,
within which 14 grounds assert various overlapping
errors of law, fact and
discretion.
judgment is vitiated by errors, but it is simpler to discuss the specific errors
rather than the 14 grounds of appeal.
Misconceiving the justiciable issue
the primary judge noted the existence of two separate enquiries under Pt VIIIAB
of the Act: first, whether it was just
and equitable to make any property
adjustment order at all and, if so; secondly, the nature of the property
adjustment order it would
be just and equitable to make (at [1],
[57]–[64], [74] and [83]).
primary judge also correctly observed the two enquiries could not be conflated
(at [57]). His Honour said the appellant wrongly
conflated the enquiries (at
[83]), but then so apparently did his Honour, because the reasons for judgment
are quite unclear as to
whether the appellant’s application was dismissed
for lack of satisfaction it would be just and equitable to make
adjustment order, or alternatively, it was dismissed because the orders proposed
by the appellant would not reflect a just and equitable
to the first enquiry, the primary judge relevantly said this:
s 90SM application for orders altering property interests in a de facto
relationship raised issues central to the
ratio decidendi
of the High
Stanford v Stanford
. Specifically, the issues to be determined
included whether the making of any order altering property interests of the
just and equitable in the circumstances of the case.
SHOULD AN ORDER ALTERING PROPERTY INTERESTS BE MADE AT ALL?
the question became whether an order was appropriately made under s 90SM of [the
pursuant to which the rights of the parties in property were to be
altered. The respondent submitted that no such order should be
made. In reliance
Stanford v Stanford
at paragraph 39 of the court’s reasons for
judgment, the respondent contended that questions between the [appellant] and
respondent about ownership of property were to be decided according to the
same scheme of legal titles and equitable principles that
govern the rights of
any two persons who are not spouses. Underpinning his contentions in that regard
was the recognition that –
(a) the [appellant] performed work and labour at the farm in accordance with a
contract of employment for which she was to be, and
was in fact, remunerated in
the manner provided for in the contract of employment; and
(b) by reason of her performing tasks under her contract of employment the
[appellant] did not thereby acquire some entitlement to
maintain a claim to the
respondent’s property interests in his overall wealth.
75. To my way of thinking, there is considerable validity in those
contentions.
However, in the process of addressing and advocating for those discrete
components in s 79(4), [the appellant] conflates the notion
that it is, as a
stated fact, just and equitable to make an order under s 79(2) without
separately engaging in the deductive analysis
required by
Stanford v Stanford
as has been surveyed above ...
(Footnotes omitted)
despite seemingly determining the application should be dismissed at the first
step because no property adjustment order of any
sort was warranted, in apparent
reference to the next enquiry, his Honour then said this about the justice and
equity of the property
adjustment order sought by the appellant:
these reasons reveal, I am of the view that the making of an order for the
payment of the sum sought by the [appellant] ($3,000,000
or thereabouts) is not
just and equitable having regard to the nature of the parties’
relationship, the duration of the relationship
and the contributions performed
... Yet in the face of that reality, the [appellant] argued that she wanted the
court to make orders altering property interests
of the parties in such manner
that $3,000,000 was paid to the [appellant]. Such a result is not just and
equitable. I refuse to make
such an order.
[appellant] has had $300,000 and superannuation. She was salaried while working
for the respondent. It is not just and equitable
for her to be paid anything
dismiss [the appellant’s] s 90SM application.
ostensible conflation of the two enquiries was likely attributable to his Honour
wrongly conceptualising the decision as being
a choice between only two
alternatives: either the grant of the application in the form proposed by the
appellant or, alternatively,
the dismissal of her application altogether.
Approaching
the dispute in that limited way meant his Honour only decided between whether
the appellant was to be left with only what
she already owned, or alternatively,
that she instead acquire from the respondent property worth more than $3
million. So stated,
the choice was between two very stark options. His Honour
evidently failed to consider the justice and equity of making a property
adjustment order of some form within that broad range, though of less magnitude
than that sought by the appellant.
observations should be made in passing. First, his Honour referred repeatedly to
provisions of Pt VIII of the Act, though the
parties were not married and the
statutory references should have been to the counterpart provisions in Pt VIIIAB
of the Act. Secondly,
the provisions of Pt VIIIAB of the Act were amended with
effect from 10 June 2025 and so the provisions are now numbered differently
when his Honour heard the trial, which concluded on 4 June 2025.
determining any financial cause of action under the Act, the Court may make such
order it considers “appropriate”
(s 90SM(1)) but may not make any
order unless satisfied in all the circumstances the order is “just and
equitable” (s
90SM(3) – but now s 90SM(2)). The statutory imperative
did and still does require the Court to consider all the relevant circumstances
of the parties’ dispute, which entails more than merely considering the
effect of their competing proposals, as neither proposal
may be deemed just and
equitable. The Court is not precluded from making a just and equitable
adjustment order merely because neither
party seeks orders which can be
characterised as being just and equitable. The very wide statutory discretion
exercised under the
Act is not confined by the litigants’ specific
proposals, either in parenting proceedings (
[2002] HCA 36
(2002) 211 CLR 238
, [92]–[95] and [169]–[175]) or in financial proceedings.
the primary judge quantified the appellant’s claim at either 12.5 or 17.5
per cent of the parties’ net property,
which “result” his
Honour determined was “not just and equitable” (at [83]), but then
failed to consider
whether a more modest adjustment outcome within the range
between zero and $3 million (or the equivalent percentage) would be just
error was significant, given the appellant made contributions which were
relevant to the enquiries under Pt VIIIAB of the Act.
The primary judge observed
in the reasons for judgment how the respondent’s counsel properly
acknowledged the appellant made
contributions during the relationship which
would be recognised under s 90SM(4) of the Act (at [24]–[27]), which
contributions
his Honour found were “no doubt” made by the appellant
way in which the primary judge wrongly conceptualised the decision caused the
appellant to lose the opportunity of a property
adjustment remedy which fell
somewhere in the very wide range between the outright dismissal of her
application and the grant of
her application in the specific terms
The prospect of inconsistent orders
primary judge’s erroneous conceptualisation of the decision was seemingly
compounded by an interlocutory order made in the
April 2023, the appellant filed an Application in a Proceeding seeking interim
financial relief from the respondent in three separate
forms: first, the payment
of interim (or urgent) de facto spousal maintenance; secondly, “litigation
funding” in the
lump sum of $264,027; and thirdly, “interim property
distribution” of $100,000.
application was resolved by interim consent orders made on 28 June 2023 in this
Respondent pay to the [appellant] via her solicitors within 7 days the sum of
$300,000, with such sum to be characterised by the
2. The Application in a Proceeding filed on 3 April 2023 is dismissed.
questions of costs are reserved to trial, including as to the recovery by the
Respondent of such party payment in paragraph 1
as is applied by the [appellant]
to her legal costs.
IT BEING NOTED
the payment in paragraph 1 is made without prejudice to
each party’s applications for final relief.
the trial resumed before the primary judge in 2025, his Honour was cognisant of
the interim orders made in 2023, with the issue
addressed this way in the
reasons for judgment:
I am also of the view that the [appellant], having received a payment of
$300,000, has been provided with an amount that in all
the circumstances means
that no further amount is due ...
[appellant] conceded that pursuant to a consent order, she received the sum of
$300,000, such sum to be characterised after the
that must be added that pursuant to orders made by a judge of Division 2 of this
court, the sum (by consent) of $300,000 was ordered
to be paid by the respondent
to the [appellant], its proper characterisation being a matter for me. It is
important to observe that
the sum of $300,000 was not described in the relevant
order as a part property settlement. In final addresses, [King’s Counsel]
on behalf of the respondent described the sum of $300,000 as an add back on
account of legal fees, thereby enlivening the application
of the principle in
cases that include
. The use to which the $300,000 was applied
was different to the characterisation of that sum. It seems inescapable that the
order for the payment of $300,000 was made and that the [appellant]
benefitted from such payments. Whether it makes a difference
to categorise the
payment as part property settlement was not the subject of debate.
debate on 4 June 2025 (upon my requesting the parties to appear for the purpose
of debating the legal significance and character
of the $300,000 paid) [Counsel
for the respondent] submitted that the $300,000 payment was not a part property
payment but was instead
a gift or a payment of costs in the nature of litigation
funding. [Counsel for the appellant] submitted that the characterisation
sum of $300,000 depended on the wording of the application in a proceeding
pursuant to which it was paid. The order did not
state that the payment was as
to costs or as to any other basis as claimed. In those circumstances
derived little assistance in ascertaining how the sum of $300,000 was to be
characterised
. It was not characterised as a part property order, however.
To my way of thinking the payment of $300,000 was likely a gift or the
payment of sunk costs
(Footnotes omitted) (Emphasis added)
there were problems with the terms of the interim orders and the primary
judge’s conclusions in relation thereto.
lump sum payment of $300,000 made by the respondent to the appellant could only
have been made in one of four forms: as an interim
distribution of property; as
the payment of lump sum de facto spousal maintenance; as costs; or pursuant to
an interim mandatory
injunction (
Strahan & Strahan (Interim Property
[2011] FamCAFC 126
(2011) FLC 93-466
Zschokke & Zschokke
[1996] FamCA 79
(1996) FLC 92-693
at 83,215).
order compelling the payment of money by one party to another cannot be made
until the source of power to make the order is identified
and the pre-conditions
to the exercise of such power are then fulfilled (
Strahan & Strahan
at [86]–[91], [116]–[119] and [208]–[210]). It was
therefore impossible for the interim orders not to have been
characterised by
the first judge at the time they were made in June 2023. The parties’
consent to the orders in the indiscriminate
form they were made does not
validate them, as the Court must operate within the limit of its power, which
power cannot be expanded
by the parties’ consent (
Harris v Caladine
[1991] HCA 9
(1991) 172 CLR 84
R v Cook; Ex parte Twigg
[1980] HCA 36
(1980) 147 CLR 15
first judge who made the interim orders did not refer within the text of the
order to the source of power used to make it and,
since the order was made
consensually, nor were any reasons published to reveal the source of such power.
At the parties’ request,
the first judge ordered the cash payment of
$300,000 would be “characterised” later by the trial judge. While
that practice
might not be uncommon, it would be better for it to cease because
it is liable to cause problems, as this case eloquently demonstrates.
original payment had to be characterised by the judge who made the order as
falling within one of the recognised classes of interim
order – either
property division, spousal maintenance, costs, or mandatory injunction –
otherwise it could not have been
validly made, because the test for the
engagement of each head of power is different. Once made, it is illogical for
the original
characterisation of the order to be then changed
retrospectively.
is an unexceptional proposition that interim orders made in financial causes can
later be “varied” or “reversed”
up until the point at
which the power to make such orders is “spent” or
“exhausted” (
Gabel v Yardley
[2008] FamCAFC 162
(2008) FLC 93-386
–[77] and [125]–[126]), but we do not regard such power of
variation or reversal as being the same thing as a licence
to later arbitrarily
re-classify the nature of the order originally made.
illustrate the point, if the interim order made in this instance was originally
made as an interim property distribution, it seems
paradoxical for the primary
judge at the trial to permissibly pretend it was made in some other guise, such
as a costs order. The
primary judge would be deductively bound to consistently
treat the interlocutory order as an interim property distribution but, because
the power to make final property orders had still not been spent, his Honour
could have varied the order (for example, by ordering
the appellant to pay some
of it back) or reversed the order (for example, by ordering the appellant to pay
it all back).
Full Court has formerly ventured the view that interim orders may later be
characterised at the final trial (
Marchant & Marchant
[2012] FamCAFC 181
Zschokke & Zschokke
at 83,215), but we are
respectfully impelled to say that relatively isolated and tentative view is
incorrect as a broad proposition
Nguyen v Nguyen
(1990) 169 CLR 245
Zschokke & Zschokke
, the Full Court spoke only of a “general
rule” of determining at trial the manner of treatment of earlier paid
which in that case had been paid under interim orders made pursuant to Pt
VIII of the Act either in the guise of property adjustment
maintenance. In that specific context, the Full Court said only this (at
Accordingly, in our view, the question of the manner in which funds provided by
one party to the other for the purpose of allowing
the other to conduct his or
her case pursuant to an order under s 80(1)(h) should, at least as a general
rule be determined, at the
time the final orders for property settlement are
proposition was not endorsed by the Full Court in
Strahan & Strahan
or any subsequent appellate authority, save for
Marchant & Marchant
it was accepted the interim orders were initially
made in the guise of interim property adjustment orders pursuant to s 79 and s
80(1)(h) of the Act. The Full Court found the interim orders were vitiated for
want of power to make them because they purported
to operate on property which
did not then exist. In discourse, the Full Court observed how the retrospective
characterisation of
interim orders was an ordinary incident of the power to vary
or reverse interim orders, with which assumption we respectfully disagree.
subsequent variation or reversal of an interim order made and consummated in one
particular legal form is a quite different forensic
process from, on the other
hand, not varying the original order at all but instead re-designating it as
being an order of unlike
legal form.
unlike the situation in both
Zschokke & Zschokke
, the former judge did not characterise the interim order
requiring the respondent to pay the appellant $300,000 (at [38] and [76])
the primary judge then took the terms of the interim orders at face value and
sought to characterise the interim payment retrospectively.
The parties were
given the chance to make submissions on the point and, unsurprisingly, they
advanced incompatible arguments because
the issue was not the subject of any
earlier critical thought, let alone concurrence. Hence, the primary judge
“derived little
assistance” from their submissions (at [77]).
Surveillance
of the evidence and submissions reveals a series of arbitrary guesses about the
characterisation of the original payment
by the respondent to the
Significantly,
the respondent referred to the payment as being a “partial property
settlement” in the Amended Response
he filed in November 2023 just in
advance of the trial, so it was quite inconsistent for him to later contend, as
he did, the payment
was something else.
appellant’s counsel opened the trial in December 2023 indicating the
payment should be attributed, at least in part, to
de facto spousal maintenance.
cross-examination, the appellant deposed how $250,000 of the money paid to her
was being held in trust and was ear-marked for the
payment of her legal costs,
she had spent $19,000 on living expenses, and the remaining $31,000 was still
saved in her bank account.
submissions made in December 2023, the respondent’s counsel submitted the
money was for legal fees and de facto spousal maintenance,
[King’s Counsel for the respondent]: ... I don’t advance a case that
the 300,000 needs to be characterised. But what
the parties have done is to
characterise it as an add-back of paid legal fees, and money that is still
sitting in the bank, spent
on spousal maintenance. But it’s simply the
reality – I agree with my friend that if the court were to make the order,
it would have to rely upon a head of power, but this is simply part of the
holistic circumstances of these parties, that a payment
of $300,000 has found
its way from the [respondent] to the [appellant]. And your Honour doesn’t
need to go further than that,
in the absence of an application to formally
characterise it, which is not in dispute in any event ...
(Transcript 12 December 2023, p.169 lines 5–14)
the trial was re-listed in June 2025, the respondent’s counsel instead
told the primary judge the payment of $300,000 to
the appellant was “to
cover her health issues”, but then opportunistically embraced the primary
judge’s idea that
the payment could have been either a gift or the payment
discourse with counsel, the primary judge said this:
HIS HONOUR: Okay. But
the evidence on the point is completely equivocal
It doesn’t really go in one direction or another. That’s why
I’m raising the point. And that’s the only
impediment between now
and handing down judgment ...
(Transcript 4 June 2025, p. 5, lines 23–25) (Emphasis added)
Notwithstanding
the primary judge’s admission about the equivocality of the evidence, when
judgment was pronounced, his Honour
concluded this in the reasons:
To my way of thinking the payment of $300,000 was likely a gift or the payment
of sunk costs.
conclusion was not open. First, it was just idle conjecture that the payment
could have been one of two incompatible things,
so it was not a definitive
finding at all. Secondly, the payment made by the respondent to the appellant
could not possibly have
been a “gift” when it was paid under the
compulsion of a Court order. Thirdly, the alternative characterisation of the
payment as “sunk costs” was speculative and lacked any proper
evidentiary foundation. Merely because the appellant may
have afterwards chosen
to spend some of the money on legal costs did not mean she received the interim
payment in that guise. The
evidence did reveal some of the money was ear-marked
to pay for future legal costs, but there was no evidence at all about what
the appellant actually spent on legal costs. The evidence showed a
good proportion of the money certainly was not expended on legal
primary judge concluded the hearing in April 2025 and reserved judgment. The
only reason for re-listing the hearing in June 2025
was to give the parties the
opportunity to be heard about how the payment of $300,000 should be treated. As
his Honour stated, the
characterisation of the payment was the only
“impediment” to the pronouncement of judgment, so his Honour
the elusive answer to the conundrum importantly bore upon the final
reason for his Honour’s characterisation of the payment as either a gift
or the payment of legal costs may be inferred from
the transcript. His Honour
evidently realised the inconsistency of finally determining that no property
adjustment orders at all
should be made if an interlocutory property adjustment
order had already been made between the parties. His Honour expressed to counsel
the impossibility of characterising the interlocutory payment as an interim
property distribution if ultimately persuaded of the
respondent’s argument
it would not be just and equitable to make
property adjustment
orders. These exchanges with counsel during argument appear in the
transcript:
HIS HONOUR: ... is it not inconsistent for you to be contending that the
$300,000 is an add-back because that would suggest that
you concede that all the
principles associated with Stanford apply?
HIS HONOUR: That becomes the sequitur argument. Because how could [the
appellant] enforce that order unless the proceeding is properly
characterised as
a 79 or 90SM application to which Stanford principles apply?
HIS HONOUR: ... If it turns out that I find that there’s merit in [counsel
for the respondent’s] arguments, how can I
conclude that the $300,000 is a
part property when Stanford doesn’t apply?
[Counsel for the appellant]: Your Honour may well find it on that basis.
HIS HONOUR: But if that’s the case, what is the construction and
what’s the characterisation, which I’ve been asked
to determine, of
the $300,000? It seems to be one of two things. Either it’s a part
property, but if I don’t find that,
it’s a gift, isn’t it?
(Transcript 4 June 2025, p.2 lines 20–22; p.7 lines 28–30; p.10
lines 39 to p.11 line 2)
inference most readily drawn is that the primary judge deliberately avoided
characterising the interlocutory order as an interim
property adjustment order
just to avert the foreseen inconsistency of finally concluding that no property
adjustment order should
be made between the parties. In other words, the
conclusion was seemingly reached to fit the ultimate outcome, which process
proper legal rigour.
RE-EXERCISE OF DISCRETION
allowance of the appeal was foreshadowed, the parties agreed this Court should
not remit the proceedings for re-hearing at first
instance, but rather
re-exercise the discretion under Pt VIIIAB of the Act.
party wanted to adduce updated evidence. Both were content for the re-exercise
of discretion to be accomplished on their submissions,
the existing body of
evidence, and the findings made by the primary judge (to the extent they were
not impugned in the appeal).
Legal principles
re-hearing of the financial cause is occurring after 10 June 2025 and so the
amendments to the Act wrought by the
Family Law Amendment Act 2024
accordance with the new provisions of
of the Act, it is first
necessary to establish the existing property interests and liabilities of the
parties (s 90SM(3)), which
then illuminates whether it is just and equitable to
make any property adjustment order at all (s 90SM(2)).
a property adjustment order is warranted, when deciding what order to make, the
Court must consider the parties’ respective
contributions (s 90SM(3)(b)(i)
and s 90SM(4)) and their current and future circumstances (s 90SM(3)(b)(ii) and
s 90SM(5)).
are no companion animals to consider here (ss 90SM(1), 90SM(6) and 90SM(7)).
Existing property interests
parties agreed the respondent has assets and superannuation interests with a net
value of $18,697,132.
parties agreed the appellant has assets and superannuation interests with a net
value of $165,883, which includes $31,106 of the
$300,000 paid to her by the
respondent in 2023.
existing assets and superannuation are therefore valued at a net total of
$18,863,015.
Should any adjustment order be made?
parties were in a de facto relationship for over seven years, during which each
party worked hard on the farm for their mutual
economic advancement. The
respondent’s senior counsel described their efforts in submissions as a
“joint venture”,
which apt description we adopt.
the parties do not own any asset jointly and are not jointly or severally liable
for any debt, the nature of their overall
contributions in the joint farming
venture renders it incongruent for the appellant to now hold so few assets.
$300,000 paid by the respondent to the appellant in 2023 was sought by the
appellant under the provisions of
of the Act, in the form of interim
property adjustment and spousal maintenance. The respondent later admitted
paying the cash to
the appellant in the form of “partial property
settlement” and ought not now be permitted to depart from that admission.
The corollary is the parties agreed in the original proceedings that it would be
just and equitable to make some form of property
adjustment order.
are satisfied s 90SM(2) of the Act is engaged and it is just and equitable to
make a property adjustment order.
Contributions
capital contributions to the relationship were overwhelmingly those of the
respondent.
parties did not intermingle ownership of their assets or jointly incur debts,
though they each worked to their potential to maintain
and improve their assets
and to increase the wealth of their household.
appellant was paid a modest wage for farm duties she performed, but she spent
much of that income for the benefit of the joint
appellant performed many other duties on the farm and within the household on
weekends and on weekdays at hours of the day which
fell beyond the confines of
her employment duties, not covered by her award wage. The respondent did not
seem to dispute the appellant’s
contention that she performed the greater
proportion of household duties for the parties.
appellant claimed a contribution-based entitlement to property of 10 per cent,
which is rejected as being excessive. Conversely,
the respondent’s
submissions that there should be no alteration of property interests at all is
also rejected. The appellant’s
entitlement should instead be measured at
three per cent.
appellant sought an adjustment of five per cent in her favour under the
provisions of s 90SM(3)(b)(ii) and s 90SM(5) of the Act,
which is rejected. An
adjustment is warranted, but in favour of the respondent.
appellant’s claims of being victimised by the respondent were rejected (at
[80]–[82]), which findings are not successfully
challenged in the appeal
(s 90SM(5)(a)).
appellant is 66 years of age and the respondent is 76 years of age (s
90SM(5)(b)). The appellant contended for some ill health,
but she is not
demonstrably any worse off than the respondent due to his age. The respondent
has much greater capital wealth with
which to support himself, but the
adjustment process under s 90SM(5) is not legitimately used to socially engineer
a satisfying outcome
by evening up the parties’ financial positions
Kennon v Kennon
[1997] FamCA 27
(1997) FLC 92-757
at 84,303).
should be an adjustment under s 90SM(5)(n) to recognise the payment of $300,000
already made by the respondent to the appellant.
As $31,106 of this payment
forms part of the existing property of the appellant, there should be an
adjustment to the respondent
of the difference, being $268,894. An adjustment by
a monetary sum rather than a percentage accords with established jurisprudence
Waters v Jurek
[1995] FamCA 101
(1995) FLC 92-635
at 82,387–82,388).
appellant’s three per cent contribution-based share of $18,863,015
computes to $565,890 (to the nearest dollar). Adjusting
for $268,894 back to the
respondent under s 90SM(5) would mean the appellant should hold property with a
net value of $296,996.
What order is just and equitable?
the appellant retains property worth $165,883, she is due to be paid another
$131,113. The respondent has the financial capacity
to readily pay that sum by
selling some of his shares or personal property and by resort to his bank
order is made for the respondent to pay the appellant the sum of $131,113 within
28 days. Otherwise, they shall each retain the
property in their possession and
bear exclusive responsibility for their own debts.
DISPOSITION
appeal is allowed.
dismissal order made by the primary judge on 5 June 2025 is set aside.
as described above are made in substitution.
1 made on 28 June 2023 is also discharged because, as earlier explained, the
order was not made by reference to any head of
power. The discharge of that
invalid order is empowered even though it was not the subject of the appeal
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
(Cth)). Of course, the discharge of the order does not mean the
respondent’s payment of $300,000 to the appellant is ignored.
parties are both granted costs certificates under the
Federal Proceedings
(Costs) Act 1981
(Cth) for the appeal, which succeeds for errors of
I certify that the preceding eighty-six (86)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Austin, Schonell &
Dated: 7 November 2025
RTF format (508 KB)
Signed PDF/A format