Isentia Pty Limited v Copyright Agency Limited (Release of Implied Undertaking) [2022] ACopyT 5 (8 September 2022)
Isentia Pty Limited v Copyright Agency
Limited (Release of Implied Undertaking)
[2022] ACopyT 5
File numbers:
CT 2 of 2017
CT 2 of 2018
CT 1 of 2018
The Tribunal:
(ACTING PRESIDENT)
Date of decision:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
application for release of implied undertaking – whether confidentiality
regime applies to four documents –
where documents not in evidence in
present application – where documents part of affidavit evidence in prior
where document not read in prior hearing
Legislation:
Limitation Act 1969
Cases cited:
Application by Isentia Pty Limited
Ashby v Slipper (No 2)
[2016] FCA 550
343 ALR 351
Halcon International Inc v Shell Transport and Trading Co
Hearne v Street
[2008] HCA 36
235 CLR 125
Mann v Medical Defence Union Limited
[1997] FCA 45
Otter Gold Mines Ltd v McDonald
[1997] FCA 694
(1997) 76 FCR 467
Paino v Hofbauer
(1988) 13 NSWLR 193
Perdaman Chemicals & Fertilisers Pty Ltd v Griffin Coal Mining
Company Pty Ltd [No 2]
[2011] WASC 189
Royal ExpressPty Ltd (Receivers and Managers Appointed)(Administrator
Appointed) v Huang (No.5)
[2021] FCA 1302
Springfield Nominees Pty Ltd v Bridgelands Securities Ltd
Treasury Wine Estates Ltd v Maurice Blackburn Pty Ltd
[2020] FCAFC
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr C Moore SC and Ms L Thomas
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for the Applicant:
Ms F St John
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Baker McKenzie
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr C Dimitriadis SC and Ms S Ross
Solicitor for the Respondent:
MinterEllison
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 2 of 2018
ISENTIA PTY LIMITED (ABN 11 002 533
PERRAM J (ACTING PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
(1) To the extent necessary, release the implied undertaking in respect of each
of the four documents to permit them to be put before
the Tribunal on the
present application.
(2) Vary the orders of 18 July 2019 and the undertakings given under them
sufficiently to permit Isentia to place the four documents
into evidence before
the Tribunal.
(3) Stand the matter over to Monday, 12 September 2022 to permit Isentia to
tender the documents.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 2 of 2017
MELTWATER AUSTRALIA PTY LTD (ABN 91 121 849 769)
PERRAM J (ACTING PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
the extent necessary, release the implied undertaking in respect of each of the
four documents to permit them to be put before
the Tribunal on the present
application.
the orders of 18 July 2019 and the undertakings given under them sufficiently to
permit Isentia to place the four documents into
evidence before the
the matter over to Monday, 12 September 2022 to permit Isentia to tender the
CT 1 of 2018
STREEM PTY LIMITED (ACN 600 621 627) V COPYRIGHT AGENCY LIMITED (ABN 53
001 228 799)
ORDER MADE BY:
PERRAM J (ACTING PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
the extent necessary, release the implied undertaking in respect of each of the
four documents to permit them to be put before
the Tribunal on the present
application.
the orders of 18 July 2019 and the undertakings given under them sufficiently to
permit Isentia to place the four documents into
evidence before the
the matter over to Monday, 12 September 2022 to permit Isentia to tender the
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
PERRAM J (ACTING PRESIDENT):
INTRODUCTION
are two questions. First, should Isentia Pty Limited (‘Isentia’) be
released from its implied undertaking not to
use four documents apparently
obtained through the processes of this Tribunal other than for the purposes of
the Tribunal’s
proceedings? Secondly, should its advisors be released
from an undertaking they have given not to use the four documents other than
the purposes of the Tribunal’s proceedings?
FORMALITIES
were three proceedings before the Tribunal. These were Application by Meltwater
Australia Pty Ltd (CT 2 of 2017), Application
by Streem Pty Ltd (CT 1 of 2018)
and Application by Isentia Pty Limited (CT 2 of 2018). They were heard together
and evidence in
one was evidence in the other. Isentia applies by interlocutory
application in the Meltwater and Isentia proceedings. Both applications
dated 17 August 2022. On the hearing of the applications, Isentia read two
affidavits of Mr Timothy Webb, the solicitor for
Isentia. These were dated 17
and 31 August 2022 respectively. The second affidavit had two exhibits, TBW-13
and TBW-14, which were
received in evidence. The Copyright Agency Limited
(‘CA’) read an affidavit of Mr John Fairbairn, the solicitor for
dated 31 August 2022 which was accompanied by exhibit JIF-18 which was also
received in evidence. There were no objections or
cross-examination. During the
hearing, it became apparent that orders would need to be made in the Streem
proceeding. Streem Pty
Ltd was notified of this but, other than to indicate its
opposition, it did not take part in the hearing.
to the first question, it was not in dispute that the implied undertaking will
apply if the documents were produced under the Tribunal’s
Otter Gold Mines Ltd v McDonald
[1997] FCA 694
(1997) 76 FCR 467
Sundberg J (‘
Otter Gold Mines
Otter Gold Mines
concerned with the position of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, but there is
no relevant distinction between that Tribunal
and this Tribunal.
is also not in dispute that where one party to litigation is compelled, whether
by reason of a rule of court or by reason of a
specific order of the court, or
otherwise, to disclose documents or information, the party obtaining the
disclosure cannot, without
the leave of the court, use it for any purpose other
than that for which it was given unless it was received into evidence:
[2008] HCA 36
235 CLR 125
per Hayne, Heydon and Crennan JJ
’). The rationale underlying the principle is to
ensure that privacy and confidentiality are not invaded more than is necessary
for the purpose of doing justice:
principle applies to tribunals which have compulsory powers and in such cases
the implied undertaking and the power to release
a party from that undertaking
are to be seen as incidental to the power of compulsion to which they attach:
Otter Gold Mines
per Sundberg J at 473. An affidavit which is filed
pursuant to a direction that it should be filed is, relevantly, produced under
compulsion. This is a proposition which I doubt where the relevant order is
permissive in nature. However, it was not in contest
in this hearing.
it is true that the implied undertaking does not apply where the document in
question is received in evidence, the undertaking
will continue to apply where
its reception into evidence has not resulted in the document entering the public
domain and the Court
makes orders which prevent the publication of that
Treasury Wine Estates Ltd v Maurice Blackburn Pty Ltd
, [83(2)] (‘
Treasury Wine
THE THREE PROCEEDINGS IN THIS TRIBUNAL
of Isentia, Meltwater Australia Pty Ltd (‘Meltwater’) and Streem Pty
Limited are businesses which provide media monitoring
services, for example,
press clippings. CA, on the other hand, represents, inter alia, the interests
of the owners of the copyright
in the press clippings. Each of Isentia,
Meltwater and Streem require a licence from CA in order to conduct their
businesses since
the communication or copying of news articles is a right
comprised in the copyright conferred by
(Cth). Where agreement cannot be reached, this Tribunal has the power
to determine the terms on which such a licence is to be granted.
each of Isentia, Meltwater and Streem had prior consensual agreements with CA,
during the course of 2017 and 2018, it became
clear that each was unable to
conclude new licence agreements with CA. Litigation in this Tribunal ensued.
There were three proceedings:
(a) Isentia Pty Limited v Copyright Agency Limited (CT 2 of 2018);
(b) Meltwater Australia Pty Ltd v Copyright Agency Limited (CT 2 of 2017);
(c) Streem Pty Limited v Copyright Agency Limited (CT 1 of 2018).
18 July 2019, the Tribunal ordered that the Isentia, Meltwater and Streem
proceedings be heard together and that evidence in each
be evidence in the
others (the Streem Proceeding was subsequently resolved consensually). On the
same day that the Tribunal ordered
that the three proceedings be heard together,
it also made orders by consent providing for a confidentiality regime in each of
proceedings.
the final determination of these claims, interim determinations were
CHARGING OF DIFFERENT RATES
charging of different rates to Isentia, Meltwater and Streem might result in an
uneven playing field. Isentia’s concern
to avoid this was reflected in cl
6.10 of a licence agreement with CA dated 8 April 2016 (‘the Isentia
Licence’). The
Isentia Licence was to be effective from 1 July 2016.
Clause 6.10 of the Isentia Licence provided:
providing equivalent rights on these or similar terms
to any other organisation
providing similar services for a more favourable licence fee unless Copyright
Agency has first offered
a licence fee at that lower rate.
present debate has arisen because documents produced in the course of the three
proceedings have engendered in Isentia the suspicion
that CA may not have
complied with this clause in as much as that it may have given better terms to
Streem and Meltwater. However,
the implied undertaking (if it applies) and the
express undertakings given by its advisors presently prevent the use of the four
documents for any purpose extraneous to the purposes of the three proceedings.
Consideration of whether to pursue CA for breach
of contract and, indeed,
pursuit of CA in such a contract suit is a purpose extraneous to the three
proceedings.
there are potentially two sets of undertakings involved it is useful to begin
with the express regime which applies to Isentia’s
THE CONFIDENTIALITY REGIME
regime was put in place by orders made in each of the proceedings on 18 July
2019. There are four aspects of the regime which
should be noted.
the regime was self-nominating in that a party could make a claim for various
levels of confidentiality by marking a document
‘Restricted Access’,
‘Highly Confidential’ and ‘Confidential’ (collectively
referred to as ‘confidential
documents’) whereupon different
confidentiality obligations would arise. Unless the claim was challenged, its
validity did
not need to be determined.
documents marked ‘Restricted access’ could only be accessed by the
Tribunal, Australian counsel and external
solicitors retained for the three
proceedings (and their support staff), and anyone with the consent of the party
which claims confidentiality
in the specified information. Documents that were
marked ‘Confidential’ or ‘Highly Confidential’ could
be accessed by external lawyers, up to three in-house counsel and four
instructing executives each of whom had to sign a confidentiality
undertaking.
The terms of the confidentiality undertaking were specified in an attachment to
the orders. Paragraph 2 of the draft
confidentiality undertaking provided
I will use the Confidential Documents, Highly Confidential Documents, Restricted
Access Documents and the Information only for the
purposes of the Proceedings.
persons who have had access to the confidential documents in all three
proceedings have given this undertaking. Quite apart from
the implied
undertaking, these undertakings prevent the persons who have given them from
using any confidential document other than
for the purposes of the three
proceedings.
although the Streem Proceeding has been finalised, the confidentiality regime in
it remains in place, as do each of the undertakings
which have been given.
During the course of the hearing, Isentia expanded its application to extend to
the Streem proceeding. As
I have already mentioned, Streem was given notice of
this and afforded an opportunity to appear to oppose it but it did not take
the confidentiality orders of 18 July 2019 did not make any provision for what
was to occur where a document subject to
it was introduced into evidence. It is
unclear on the evidence before me what occurred when a document subject to the
confidentiality
regime was tendered or annexed to an affidavit. There was no
evidence on the present application that the Tribunal made suppression
this circumstance although it would appear that, from time to time, the
Tribunal’s proceedings were conducted in
camera. I raised this with the
parties subsequent to the hearing. Their joint position was that all parties had
conducted themselves
on the basis that the regime had the effect of preventing
publication of any document subject to it even if introduced into evidence.
is not my reading of what the orders say. However, I do accept that, as a matter
of fact, the documents have remained undisclosed
to the public. Further, I also
accept that it would be appropriate for an appropriate suppression order now to
be made and that the
order should be retroactive to 18 July 2019.
the regime contained an explicit entitlement for any party to apply to vary the
operation of the regime. This was contained
in order 9:
On 3 days’ notice to the Confidentiality Claimant, CA or the MMOs have
liberty to apply for a direction seeking access to Confidential
Information or a
direction that a document that has been marked as ‘Restricted
Access’, ‘Highly Confidential’
or ‘Confidential’
be reclassified or declassified. The relevant Confidentiality Claimant will be
provided with an opportunity
to be heard before the Confidential Information is
disclosed to any person other than as permitted by these Orders.
will be seen that this has two limbs. Under the first limb, access may be
sought without declassification whilst under the second,
a document may be
declassified.
any event, I am satisfied that Isentia’s advisors are bound by the
undertakings they have given under the confidentiality
regime not to use the
four documents for the purpose of advising on whether to pursue CA for breach of
THE FOUR DOCUMENTS
it is useful to identify the four documents in respect of which Isentia makes
its application. In doing this, it is necessary,
in fact, to refer to five
documents. These are:
The Meltwater Licence
12 October 2015, Meltwater and CA entered into a licence agreement entitled
‘Press Clipping Service Licence Newspapers and
Magazines: Copying and
Communication Rights’ (‘the Meltwater Licence’). The
Meltwater Licence was not before the
Tribunal on the present
application.
The 5 October 2016 Letter
a case management hearing held by the Tribunal on 19 December 2018, it emerged
that the rates being invoiced to Meltwater by CA
were less than the rate
specified in the Meltwater Licence. Although the Meltwater Licence had by then
expired, the Tribunal, in
an earlier interim determination of 23 May 2018, had
ordered that the rates payable to CA should be the same as those specified in
the Meltwater Licence. At the case management hearing, Meltwater raised that it
expected to be invoiced by CA at this lower rate.
In the course of this
discussion reference was made to an arrangement which suggested that an
agreement as to the lower rates was
to be found in a letter dated 5 October 2016
(‘the 5 October 2016 Letter’). The 5 October 2016 Letter was not in
on the present application.
The Scraping Licence and the Variation Agreement
1 December 2014, Meltwater and CA entered into agreement known as the
‘Scraping Licence’. This was varied by an agreement
of 7 October
2016. I will refer to this variation agreement as the ‘Variation
Agreement’. As with the Meltwater Licence,
the rates in the Scraping
Licence and the Variation Agreement were implemented by the Tribunal in its
interim determination of 23
May 2018. These agreements were not in evidence on
the present application.
The Streem Licence
1 March 2017, but with effect from July 2017, Streem and CA entered into an
agreement entitled ‘Press Monitoring and Online
Monitoring Licence’.
The Tribunal made an interim determination in the Streem Proceeding based on
this agreement.
then to Isentia’s application.
ISENTIA’S APPLICATION
seeks to be released from the implied undertaking and the confidentiality regime
in relation to:
(a) the Variation Agreement;
(b) the 5 October 2016 Letter;
(c) the Meltwater Licence; and
(d) the Streem Licence.
respect of each document, three factual questions need to be determined. The
first is whether the confidentiality regime applies
to the document. The second
is whether the document was produced as a result of the exercise of a compulsory
power by the Tribunal.
The third is whether the document was introduced into
evidence and, if it was, whether it became publicly available.
with the four (not five) documents involved in the above order:
The Variation Agreement
Webb gave evidence about the how the Variation Agreement came to be in his
possession as the solicitor for Isentia. Mr Webb set
out a table which details
the procedural history of each of the four documents. It is not clear to me
from Mr Webb’s otherwise
‘Scraping Licence’ Mr Webb was referring to the original Scraping
Licence and
with it the Variation Agreement or whether he was referring only to
the Variation Agreement. My confusion arises from the interplay
§24(a) and §22 of his first affidavit. Since, however, it is clear
that Isentia is only applying in relation to
the Variation Agreement, I will
proceed on the basis that Mr Webb intended in his table to refer to the
Variation Agreement.
Variation Agreement was marked confidential which enlivened the confidentiality
regime. It was attached to an affidavit of Mr
Andrew Stewart dated 14 March
2018. That affidavit was filed in the Meltwater Proceeding pursuant to orders
made by the Tribunal
on 27 February 2018. Isentia accepted that the affidavit
and the Variation Agreement was produced to the Tribunal as a result of
compulsion so that the implied undertaking applied to it. Mr Stewart’s
affidavit was read, however, for the reasons I have
given, I am satisfied that
the Variation Agreement has not become publicly available.
therefore accept that the Variation Agreement is subject to both the
confidentiality regime and the implied undertaking.
The Meltwater Licence
Meltwater Licence was marked confidential which enlivened the confidentiality
regime. It was attached, inter alia, to Mr Stewart’s
affidavit. It was
filed in the Meltwater Proceeding. That affidavit had been filed pursuant to
orders made by the Tribunal on 27
February 2018 and was read. There is no
evidence of a suppression order having been in relation to the affidavit.
However, for the
reasons I have given, I am satisfied that the Meltwater Licence
has not become publicly available. .
The 5 October 2016 Letter
letter was attached to an affidavit of CA’s solicitor, Mr Fairbairn, dated
18 December 2018 and filed in the Meltwater Proceeding,
and an affidavit of Mr
Adam Suckling dated 24 September 2020 and filed in the Isentia and Meltwater
Proceedings. It was marked ‘Highly
Confidential’ so far as Isentia
is concerned. Consequently, it is subject to the confidentiality regime.
letter was in possession of CA as one of the parties to the letter. CA did not
obtain it by compulsory production and in its
hands it was not subject to the
implied undertaking.
Fairbairn’s affidavit was filed to correct previous evidence and does not
appear to have been the result of any order made
by the Tribunal. This was the
understanding of Mr Webb and Mr Fairbairn did not suggest otherwise in his
it cannot be said that the provision of letter to Isentia by the service of Mr
Fairbairn’s affidavit was the result of
the compulsory processes of the
Tribunal in the Meltwater Proceeding. It was the voluntary act of CA in
deciding to correct its
evidence by providing further evidence. I do not accept
therefore that Isentia is bound by the implied undertaking only to use it
the purposes of the Tribunal’s proceedings.
it happens, Mr Fairbairn’s affidavit was not read. However, this does not
matter where the implied undertaking did not attach
in the first place. On the
other hand, I am satisfied that this copy of the letter continued to be subject
to the confidentiality
regime in all three proceedings.
was another copy of the letter attached to Mr Suckling’s affidavit. The
status of this letter does not matter given the
above conclusion.
Streem Licence
was attached to an affidavit of Mr Suckling which had been filed pursuant to
orders of the Tribunal and was read in the Isentia
and Meltwater proceedings.
For the reasons already given, I conclude that it is subject to both the
confidentiality regime and the
implied undertaking.
RELEASE FROM THE IMPLIED UNDERTAKING
the view I take of the facts, three of the documents are subject to the implied
undertaking. In the case of the fourth document,
the 5 October 2016 Letter, it
was never subject to the implied undertaking since: (a) it was already in
CA’s possession; and
(b) Mr Fairbairn’s affidavit was not filed
pursuant to an order of the Tribunal. Despite that conclusion, I will consider
the status of the letter in assessing whether the undertaking should be
released. If I reach the conclusion that the undertaking
should be released (if
it had been subject to the undertaking) then the form of order I will use will
release the undertaking ‘to
the extent necessary’: cf.
Express Pty Ltd (Receivers and Managers Appointed)(Administrator Appointed) v
Huang (No.5)
[2021] FCA 1302
case law requires the existence of special circumstances but that requirement
has been interpreted to mean that some good reason
must be show why the
obligation should be released. Some matters relevant to the exercise of the
discretion were set out by Wilcox
Springfield Nominees Pty Ltd v
Bridgelands Securities Ltd
(1992) 38 FCR 217
It is neither possible nor desirable to propound an exhaustive list of those
factors. But plainly they include the nature of the
document, the circumstances
under which it came into existence, the attitude of the author of the document
and any prejudice the
author may sustain, whether the document pre-existed
litigation or was created for that purpose and therefore expected to enter the
public domain, the nature of the information in the document (in particular
whether it contains personal data or commercially sensitive
information), the
circumstances in which the document came into the hands of the applicant for
leave and, perhaps most important
of all, the likely contribution of the
document to achieving justice in the second proceeding.
accept that the parties to each of the four documents did not expect them to
come to light or into the possession of Isentia and
that CA, in particular,
suffers prejudice if it comes to light that it has breached cl 6.10 of the
Isentia Licence. This is the prejudice
in being exposed to a potential suit for
breach of contract which it otherwise will not have to face. I also accept that
the information
contained within the four documents is commercially sensitive.
The documents have come into the possession of Isentia only because
the Tribunal
was required to make interim orders and this required some attention to be given
to what the arrangements which had
actually been in place had been with
Meltwater and Streem.
is not possible to judge directly what the likely contribution of the four
documents to any breach of contract suit will be. This
is because they are not
in evidence. Isentia did not put them in evidence because it was concerned that
to do so would be a breach
of the implied undertaking. I would for myself think
this unlikely but I accept that Isentia’s advisors were actuated by
caution. Were it relevant for the future, I would regard the purpose
of seeking leave to be released from the implied undertaking
as being a purpose
of the proceeding in which the undertaking exists. This is illustrated by the
fact that leave may be refused.
The contrary view leads to a degree of
complexity in the bringing of the application which serves no underlying purpose
and creates
a great deal of practical inconvenience. It also leads to the
unhelpful situation on the present application where the body which
is asked to
release the undertaking is not able to see the documents in question even though
the case law requires it to assess their
significance. A path of legal
reasoning which leads to this place has taken a wrong turn.
also chose not to put them in evidence for which it, too, cannot be
criticised.
makes any assessment of the value of the documents necessarily indirect. What
occurred at the case management hearing on 19
December 2018 satisfies me that,
at least in the case of Meltwater, CA was charging it a lower rate than what
appeared from the Meltwater
Licence. This is also apparent from [218] of the
Tribunal reason’s where it referred to evidence of Meltwater’s Mr
to the effect that Isentia’s 2016 licence fee was a significant
price increase over what Meltwater had been paying:
Application by Isentia
Pty Limited
[2021] ACopyT 2.
does not answer the question posed by cl 6.10 because it is possible that the
rights conferred were not the same. To ascertain
whether a breach of cl 6.10
has occurred it would be necessary to take account not only of the rates charged
but also of the rights
conferred. Consequently, I am unable to ascertain the
significance of the Meltwater Licence, the 5 October 2016 Letter or the
relation to Streem, there is no evidence one way or the other. As such, I am
unable to assess the significance of the Streem Licence.
do not accept that it is enough to justify the release of the implied
undertaking that the documents will show one way or the other
whether cl 6.10
was breached.
Consequently,
on the state of the evidence I would not at this stage release the undertaking
since I have not been shown the documents.
I would, however, release the
undertaking sufficiently to permit Isentia to put them into evidence on the
present application.
RELEASE FROM THE CONFIDENTIALITY REGIME
9 explicitly entitles Isentia to apply to have access to a confidential
document. Isentia’s application to be released
from the confidentiality
regime falls within what the regime itself contemplates. The only question is
whether the application under
order 9 should be acceded to. This is not a case
therefore where a party seeks to vary consent orders. Were I satisfied that the
implied undertaking should be released I would also be satisfied that the
confidentiality regime should be varied. The same interests
underpin both sets
of undertakings and the facts, matters and circumstances warranting the release
of one equally warrant the release
of the other.
I am wrong in my interpretation of order 9, then the Tribunal would have the
power in any event provided exceptional circumstances
were demonstrated:
Paino v Hofbauer
(1988) 13 NSWLR 193
at 198 per McHugh JA. At this stage
exceptional circumstances have not been demonstrated. However, this does not
matter in light
of my reading of order 9.
presently advised, I would vary the confidentiality undertakings sufficiently
for the Tribunal to be shown the four documents and
release the implied
undertaking to the same extent.
CA’S SUBMISSIONS AS TO WHY THE IMPLIED UNDERTAKING SHOULD
NOT BE DISCHARGED
made a number of submissions as to why the implied undertaking should not be
released. None were persuasive.
I do not accept that it is necessary for Isentia to show that there is a
reasonable or close relationship between its potential
contract claims and the
claims it makes in the Tribunal. In his oral submissions, Mr Dimitriadis for CA
identified this principle
as being located in the authorities at footnote 20 of
his written submissions. These were, first,
Perdaman Chemicals &
Fertilisers Pty Ltd v Griffin Coal Mining Company Pty Ltd [No 2]
[2011] WASC
and [24] (‘
’). In that case, Beech J
concluded that the proposed claim was ‘closely connected’ to the
claim which was already
before the court: at [24]. He did not, however, apply
that as the relevant standard. The standard his Honour applied was the standard
at [17]-[10] which was the ordinary ‘special circumstances’
is therefore not authority for the proposition that
it is necessary to show that there is a reasonable or close connection.
the context in which the question arose concerned an amendment to a case already
before the court. This is quite different
to the situation in the present case
where the Tribunal lacks any jurisdiction over the proposed contract suit.
second authority CA relied upon was what said to be an unreported decision of
the Federal Court of Australia,
Mann v Medical Defence Union Limited
which in fact appears at
[1997] FCA 45.
it was concerned
with an attempt to add a claim to an existing claim. It does not bear on the
current situation.
I were wrong in that conclusion of law, I am satisfied that there is in any
event just such a relationship. A central question
in the Tribunal proceedings
is whether the Isentia, Meltwater and Streem should each be charged the same
rate by CA. That issue
is the subject matter of cl. 6.10.
whilst I accept CA’s submission there was an inconsistency between the
purpose for which the four documents were produced
and the proposed purpose for
which Isentia now seeks to use them, I do not see that as providing a reason not
to grant leave. There
will always be an inconsistency of this kind on an
application such as the present.
I do not accept that the fact that the confidentiality regime was agreed
consensually is a matter which ought to be afforded
much weight. The regime
included order 9 which contemplated that a party could apply to be released from
it. It is not to the point
therefore that the parties have conducted themselves
in accordance with that regime for several years.
I do not accept that the position of any third parties, apart from Streem, under
the confidentiality regime is shown to
be relevant. In the case of Streem, I am
satisfied that it is on notice of the present application. Apart from
communicating the
fact that it did not consent, it took no part in the
application. I accept that there is prejudice to Streem (and Meltwater) in
Isentia will learn the rates they have been paying to CA. However, it already
knows that. What is to change is that it will
be able to use that knowledge
against CA. CA did not explain what risk Meltwater and Streem faced if CA were
sued by Isentia for
breach of cl 6.10. To that may be added the fact that the
documents in question are historical having expired and having been superseded
by the Tribunal’s decision.
I do not accept that delay is relevant on the present application. CA submitted
that it had been held that where release
from the undertaking was sought after
the event, delay was relevant. Accepting that to be so, CA did not identify any
decision in
which delay had been held relevant to the prospective release of the
undertaking. I do not accept that delay is relevant in that
circumstance. If I
were wrong in that and that the equitable notion of delay is relevant, I would
conclude that it would be necessary
for CA to demonstrate some prejudice arising
from the delay. There is no evidence of any such prejudice. If I were wrong in
and CA did not need to identify any prejudice, I would conclude that there
was no relevant delay. Isentia has been aware of the
circumstances since the
evidence was served on it in 2018. Since 2018, Isentia has been locked in the
litigation before this Tribunal
and more recently the Full Court. I do not
think it was required during that period to address this satellite issue
particularly
where CA is protected by
Limitation Act 1969
I do not accept that there is principle that it is not sufficient for the
release of the undertaking that the proposed proceeding
serves only some private
interest. CA referred to a statement by Whitford J in
Halcon International
Inc v Shell Transport and Trading Co
[1979] RPC 97
to the effect that
‘furtherance of a private interest could not justify the grant of leave to
use discovered documents for
the purpose of other proceedings and that some
overriding public interest would normally be required’. There is no
of this principle being applied in Australia and it is inconsistent with
the outcome in
Treasury Wine
. It does not reflect the state of
Australian law. The most that can be said is that the Federal Court has
accepted that the existence
of such public considerations is itself a positive
reason to release the undertaking:
Ashby v Slipper (No 2)
[2016] FCA 550
343 ALR 351
per Flick J. However, it is not possible to fashion from
that proposition the quite different one that such public considerations
present for the undertaking to be released.
whilst I accept that Isentia could obtain the documents through a preliminary
discovery application, this would appear
to be a cumbersome procedure when it
already has them.
this stage, in relation to each of the four documents I would, to the extent
necessary, release the implied undertaking and vary
the confidentiality regime
sufficiently for them to be placed before the Tribunal. The documents may be
tendered at 9.30am next
Monday. At that time, the parties should present an
appropriate retroactive suppression order. At this stage, the orders I will make
the extent necessary, release the implied undertaking in respect of each of the
four documents to permit them to be put before
the Tribunal on the present
application.
the orders of 18 July 2019 and the undertakings given under them sufficiently to
permit Isentia to place the four documents into
evidence before the
the matter over to Monday, 12 September 2022 to permit Isentia to tender the
I certify that the preceding sixty-seven (67)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 8 September 2022
RTF format (478 KB)
Signed PDF/A format