Marial and Minister for Immigration and Citizenship (Migration) [2025] ARTA 2399 (12 November 2025)
Marial and Minister for Immigration and Citizenship (Migration) [2025]
ARTA 2399 (12 November 2025)
Applicant: Chom Ayom Marial
Respondent: Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
Tribunal Number: 2025/5026
Tribunal: General Member J Cipolla
Place: Sydney
Date: 12 November 2025
The Tribunal does not have jurisdiction to review the
application. The application is dismissed under
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
...................[SGD].....................................................
General Member J Cipolla
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– jurisdiction – migration – visa refusal – nine day
time limit to apply for merits
review – whether application for review
lodged within time – application not lodged within time – no
to extend time to lodge review application – no jurisdiction
– application dismissed
Legislation
Administrative Review
Tribunal Act 2024
Migration Act 1958
Regulations 1994
Virapornsawun v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
Statement of
23 February 2004, the Applicant was granted a Refugee (Class XB) (Subclass 200)
On 14 February 2025, the Applicant’s visa was cancelled under
Migration Act
(the Act). The Applicant was invited to make submissions to
the Minister with respect to revocation of the cancellation decision.
evidence indicates that the Applicant made representations within the period and
in the manner specified.
4 September 2025, a delegate of the Minister decided, under
Act, not to revoke the cancellation decision.
evidence indicates that on 6 March 2025 that the Applicant’s then
representative Mr Michael Doyle of Morning Star Legal
& Migration Services
Pty Ltd provided to the Minister a Form 956 appointment of a registered
migration agent, a legal practitioner
or exempt person form. It was signed by
both the Applicant and by Mr Doyle and it duly authorised Mr Doyle to be the
Applicant’s
legal practitioner and the authorised recipient to receive
written communication on behalf of the Applicant from the Department in
to the cancellation of the Applicant’s visa.
Applicant was notified of the decision not to revoke the cancellation of his
visa on 8 September 2025 via an email sent by the
Department to Mr Doyle. The
e-mail contained details of the Applicant’s review rights and the time
limits with respect to seeking
SUBMISSIONS
Applicant was not represented in the proceedings before the Tribunal.
Respondent provided the Tribunal with a written submission in support of the
Minister’s position dated 7 November 2025 which
has been duly
considered.
HEARING 12 NOVEMBER 2025
the Applicant was not represented and had not furnished any submission with
respect to the review the Tribunal explained the application
of the relevant law
to the Applicant and the contents of the Ministers submission which referenced
the legal position with regards
to the jurisdiction question in this case. The
Applicant advised that he understood that there was no capacity for the Tribunal
conduct merits review in the circumstances of the Applicant where the
application for review was received outside the statutory timeframe
to seek such
a review. The Applicant acknowledged that his former representative failed to
lodge the review within the strict statutory
timeframe to do so and that the
review application was received by the Tribunal 4 days out of time.
Tribunal suggested that it was in the Applicant’s best interests to obtain
independent legal advice with respect to his
current predicament. The Tribunal
advised that a Registry Officer would send him a list of where he may be able to
obtain that advice
to his e-mail address.
RELEVANT LEGISLATION
is enlivened by s 105 of the ART Act and s 500(1)(b) of the Act.
500(6B) of the Act provides the following:
If a decision under section 501 of this Act, or a decision under
subsection 501CA(4) of this Act not to revoke a decision to cancel
relates to a person in the migration zone, an application to the ART for a
review of the decision must be lodged with the
ART within 9 days after the day
on which the person was notified of the decision in accordance with
subsection 501G(1). Accordingly,
sections 18 and 19 of the ART Act do
not apply to the application.
500(6B) of the Act relevantly provides that where a decision is made under s 501
of the Act, an application for review of
the decision must be lodged with the
Tribunal within 9 days after the day on which the person was notified of the
decision in accordance
with subsection 501G(1). Section 500(6B) expressly
provides that
sections 18
Administrative Review Tribunal Act
(Cth) (‘the ART Act’) (which deal with applications for
extension of time) do not apply to the application.
Applicant was notified of the visa refusal decision on 8 September 2025.
Therefore, the 9-day application period expired on 17
September 2025. The
Applicant filed his application with the Tribunal on 21 September 2025, which is
outside the 9-day time period.
The Tribunal does not have the power to extend
the appeal period set down by s 500(6B) of the Act.
Tribunal finds that the notification was addressed to the Applicant’s
authorised recipient Mr Michael Doyle of Morning Star
Legal & Migration
Services Pty Ltd and contained details of the Applicant’s review rights.
The notification was compliant
with the requirements of the Act and was given to
the Applicant in the prescribed way.
Tribunal has no discretion to waive the requirements of the Act. The Applicant
had until 17 September 2025 to lodge his review
application, but did not do so
until 21 September 2025, 4 days out of time.
follows that the Tribunal, through operation of law, has no jurisdiction with
respect to this application.
Tribunal has no jurisdiction in this matter and the application for review is
accordingly dismissed under
Administrative Review Tribunal Act
Date of hearing:
Self-Represented
for the Respondent
Mr Aaron Taverniti
Sparke Helmore Lawyers
RTF format (12.7 MB)
Signed PDF/A format