Darrin Rupecht v Australian Trade College North Brisbane, Christine Zechowski and Jason Allen [2025] FWC 3406 (12 November 2025)
[2025] FWC 3406
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—Dispute resolution
Australian Trade College North Brisbane, Christine
Zechowski and Jason Allen
(C2025/9784)
COMMISSIONER DURHAM
BRISBANE, 12 NOVEMBER 2025
Alleged dispute about any matters arising under the enterprise agreement
and the NES;[s186(6)] – applicant seeks to resolve
dispute under
enterprise agreement – applicant not covered by agreement – no
October 2025, Mr Darrin Ruprecht (the Applicant) applied to the Fair Work
Commission under
Fair Work Act 2009
for the Commission to deal with
a dispute with his employer’s host and related entity, Australian Trade
College North Brisbane
(the Respondent). Mr Rupecht is employed by MRAEL
dispute was brought under the
Australian Trade College - North Brisbane Staff
Enterprise Agreement 2019
which was superseded by the
Australian Trade
College - North Brisbane Staff Enterprise Agreement 2025
(the Agreements).
The Applicant alleges the Respondent failed to comply with several clauses of
the Agreement in changing the work
he was responsible for.
decision concerns whether or not the Commission has the jurisdiction to further
consider Mr Rupecht’s application, on the
grounds that he is not an
employee covered by the Agreement. For reasons outlined below I have found that
it does not, and subsequently,
that Mr Rupecht’s application is
issued directions for the Respondent to file a response to the application which
was subsequently filed on 23 October 2025. The
Respondent objected to the
application on the basis that Industry Liaison Officers, including the
Applicant, are employed by MRAEL
Ltd and not the Respondent, and as such the
Applicant is not covered by the Agreements.
parties were invited to confirm what industrial instrument applied. The
Applicant contacted Chambers on 25 and 27 October 2025
with further material
relating to merits but did not provide information regarding the relevant
instrument for consideration. The
Respondent provided that the Agreements’
coverage clauses do not cover Industrial Liaison Officers and do not cover
of MRAEL Ltd.
Applicant was provided a further opportunity to respond. On 27 October 2025, my
Associate sent the following email to parties:
“Dear Applicant,
The Commission previously sought your views regarding whether the ATCNB
Agreement 2025 applies to your employment. The employer has
since provided their
position, contending that the agreement does not extend to cover you.
The Commissioner’s preliminary view is that the ATCNB Agreement 2025
does not appear to apply to your employment. If that is
the case, the dispute
proceed, as the Fair Work Commission does not have jurisdiction to
deal disputes more generally. The Commission may only deal with
a with dispute
that arises under a modern award or an enterprise agreement that applies to the
employee, and only to the extent allowed
by the disputes provision of the
relevant dispute provision.
Should you wish to provide a contrary view or make any further submissions on
this issue, please do so by
close of business, Tuesday, 28 October
November 2025, the Applicant provided their employment contract, which confirmed
that they were employed by MRAEL Ltd.
593 provides that the Commission is not required to hold a hearing except as
provided by the Act. I consider the parties were
provided ample opportunity to
provide any submissions relating to the dispute at hand, including with respect
to my preliminary view
that the Commission did not have jurisdiction to
determine this matter, and that I may move to dismiss the application per
587. As such, this matter has been determined on the
Consideration
Rupecht’s submissions in large part focus on his allegations that the
Agreement had not been complied with. The only material
relating to coverage
that Mr Rupecht provided, the employment contract, leads to the conclusion that
Mr Rupecht was not covered.
Does the Commission have
Agreements have largely similar coverage clauses, and the 2025 Agreement’s
clause 1.2 provides:
“This Agreement shall apply to the Australian Trade College North Brisbane
(the College and/or the Employer) Ltd ACN 117 167
307/ABN 54 117 167 307 and its
employees for whom classifications and wage rates are included in this Agreement
and to the Independent
Education Union of Australia, Queensland and Northern
Territory Branch, signatory to this Agreement.”
Applicant was not employed by the Respondent, and was not covered by the
Should the application be dismissed?
587 of the Act provides as follows:s
“587 Dismissing applications
(1) Without limiting when the FWC may dismiss an application, the FWC may
dismiss an application if:
(a) the application is not made in accordance with this Act; or
(b) the application is frivolous or vexatious; or
(c) the application has no reasonable prospects of success.
Note: For another power of the FWC to dismiss an application for a remedy for
unfair dismissal made under Division 5 of Part 3 2,
see section 399A.
(2) Despite paragraphs (1)(b) and (c), the FWC must not dismiss an
application under section 365, 536LU or 773, or an application
section 527F that does not consist solely of an application for a stop
sexual harassment order, on the ground that the application:
(a) is frivolous or vexatious; or
(b) has no reasonable prospects of success.
(3) The FWC may dismiss an application:
(a) on its own initiative; or
(b) on application.”
this case, the Respondent has sought that the application be dismissed. I note
that the power to dismiss a substantive application
should only be exercised
cautiously, not hastily, and where there is a clear basis for doing
Such a decision results in the
extinguishment of a party’s application, which has been made in order to
seek some relief from
a beneficial statutory
I have therefore had
regard to all of the facts and circumstances of this matter when considering the
Respondent’s request.
Rupecht is not an employee of the Respondent, and I have found that he is not
covered by the Agreement. Consequently, the Commission
does not have
application has no reasonable prospect of
that section 587(1)(c) provides that the Commission may dismiss an application
that has no reasonable prospects of success,
I am persuaded that I should
exercise my discretion under section 587(3) and dismiss Mr Rupecht’s
application.
order to that effect will issue with this decision.
COMMISSIONER
General Steel Industries Inc
v Commissioner for Railways (NSW)
[1964] HCA 69
(1964) 112 CLR 125
Nick Williams v Sydney Gay
& Lesbian Business Association
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government
RTF format (353 KB)
Signed PDF/A format