Review Applicant: Mr Issa Ablahad Visa Applicant: Mr Samowil Ablahad IRT Reference: A98/01845 #number 13396 [1999] IRTA 13396 (28 January 1999)
IMMIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
STATEMENT OF DECISION
AND REASONS FOR DECISION
IRT REFERENCE:
A98/01845 13396.doc
REVIEW APPLICANT:
Mr Issa ABLAHAD
VISA APPLICANT:
Mr Samowil ABLAHAD
Steve KARAS
Presiding Member
January 1999
DECISION: The Tribunal pursuant to section 349(2) of the Migration Act remits
this application for reconsideration with the direction
that the Visa Applicant
has achieved the qualifying score for a Concessional Family (Migrant) (Class
AJ) Subclass 105 visa now called
a Skilled - Australian Linked (Migrant) (Class
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
On 28 May 1997, the Tribunal received an application from Mr Issa Ablahad for a
review of a decision made on 22 December 1996, by
a delegate of the Minister of
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (the Minister) at the Australian Embassy
in Beirut, Lebanon to
refuse his brother, Mr Samowil Ablahad (the Visa
Applicant) and his family, a Concessional Family (Migrant) (Class AJ) Subclass
(Concessional Family) visa to enable them to migrate to Australia. Since 1
July 1997 this visa is now called a Skilled - Australian
Linked (Migrant)
(Class AJ) Subclass 105 (Skilled - Australian Linked) visa The decision
to refuse the application was affirmed
by the Migration Internal Review Office
(MIRO) on 8 May 1997.
The Tribunal remitted the matter for further processing by the Department of
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs (the Department)
on 13 October 1997 with
the direction that the Visa Applicant
"had received the qualifying score
when assessed in relation to the visa under Subdivision B of Division 3 of
Migration Act 1958
IRT Decision 13 October
1997). This decision was appealed to the Federal Court of Australia by the
Minister. The matter was remitted
28 November 1997 with the consent of the parties
"for consideration
according to law"
. Reconsideration by this Tribunal is therefore a de novo
reconsideration of the original application by the Visa Applicant for a
Subclass 105 visa.
The Visa Applicant was born in Syria on 19 August 1951 and is a citizen of that
country. He is married with four children. His
parents and 6 siblings reside
in Sweden and his remaining siblings reside in Australia. His wife's parents
and siblings reside in
On 1 May 1995, the Visa Applicant lodged a completed application Form 47
seeking to migrate to Australia in the concessional family
visa category with
his family.
The Visa Applicant was sponsored for migration to Australia by his brother,
Issa Ablahad who signed the relevant sponsorship form
on 4 April 1995. He has
been an Australian citizen since 3 February 1982.
At the time of the application to migrate to Australia the Visa Applicant was
aged 43 and his wife was 37 years of age. In the application
form the Visa
Applicant stated he had completed 9 years schooling in Syria. He stated in the
application form that his usual occupation
was that of a
"Tailor (1st
He had worked as a
in Syria since 1975. He had
"certificate of profession"
for that trade in 1970. The Visa
Applicant was interviewed by Department officers in Damascus on 3 November
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
On 22 December 1996, a delegate of the Minister at the Australian Embassy in
Beirut rejected the Visa Applicant's application for
a Concessional Family
(Migrant) (Class AJ) visa on the basis that he had failed to attain the minimum
points required for further
processing - 90 points. The primary decision maker
awarded the Visa Applicant the following point score:
Language 00
Relationship 10
Citizenship 10
Settlement 10
The primary decision maker found the Visa Applicant's usual occupation to be
"shopkeeper"
classified at code 1501-11 of the Australian
Standard Classification of Occupations (ASCO). The decision maker noted that
this occupation
in Australia required
"no formal qualifications"
Further details regarding the Visa Applicant's employment and other material
were submitted to the Department for further consideration.
The decision to refuse the application was affirmed by MIRO on 8 May 1997. The
MIRO review officer allocated the Visa Applicant
a points score of 65 points on
the same basis as the primary decision maker except that 25 points were awarded
for the employment
qualification. The MIRO review officer found the Visa
Applicant's usual occupation to be a
the Visa Applicant's qualifications were not recognised as the equivalent of a
trade certificate in Australia he was allocated
25 points under the
qualification by MIRO.
The Visa Applicant's wife was found to have no
"usual occupation"
she was also allocated no points for the employment qualification and was given
a total of 45 points by the MIRO review officer.
She received the same
allocation of points as those given by the primary decision maker.
As the Visa Applicant and his wife had not scored 90 points the application was
refused. Both the MIRO review officer and the primary
decision maker noted
that the Visa Applicant was unable to satisfy the requirements for a Subclass
106 visa as well.
The Tribunal notes that both the primary decision maker and the MIRO review
officer referred to 90 points as being the points score
required to enable the
application to be processed further. However the initial points assessment was
made on 22 December 1996 when
in fact the pool entry score and the passmark
score in the points test had risen to 110 and 115 points respectively since 1
1996 (see Commonwealth Government Gazette dated 7 August 1996).
LEGISLATIVE REQUIREMENTS
Schedule 1 of the Migration Regulations (1994) (the Regulations) sets out the
classes of visas that can be applied for and how a
valid application is made.
For example, they include reference to the prescribed application form to be
lodged; the fee to be paid
and the subclass or subclasses of visa that
stipulate the criteria that need to be met.
Schedule 2 of the Regulations sets out in numerical order, the subclasses
referred to in Schedule 1 and the criteria which must be
satisfied before a
Visa Applicant can be granted a visa.
In this case, the Visa Applicant applied for a Concessional Family ( Migrant)
(Class AJ) visa. At the time of the application there
was only one subclass
within this class of visa, listed at clause 1110(4) of Schedule 1 of the
Regulations, that is subclass 105
(Concessional family).
The relevant criteria to be satisfied for subclass 105 were set out in clauses
105.21 and 105.22 of Schedule 2 of the Regulations
and are as follows:
105.21 Criteria to be satisfied at time of application
105.211 The applicant:
(a) is a brother, sister, nephew, niece or parent; or
(b) a natural or adopted child(other than a dependent child);
of a person (in this clause called "the sponsor") who has turned 18 and who
is an Australian citizen, an Australian permanent
resident or an eligible New
Zealand citizen.
105.212 The applicant is sponsored by the sponsor.
105.213 The applicant is of working age.
105.22 Criteria to be satisfied at time of decision
105.221 The sponsorship referred to in clause 105.212 has been approved by the
Minister and is still in force.
105.222 The applicant has the qualifying score when assessed in relation to the
visa under Subdivision B of Division 3 of Part 2
of the Act...
105.225 The applicant satisfies public interest criteria 4001, 4002, 4003,
4004, 4005, 4009 and 4010.
105.226 If the applicant has previously been in Australia, the applicant
satisfies special return criteria 5001, 5003, 5005 and 5007
105.227 If so requested by the Minister, an assurance of support in relation to
the applicant has been given, and has been accepted
by the Minister.
105.228 (1) Each member of the family unit of the applicant who is an applicant
for a subclass 105 visa is a person who:
(a) satisfies public interest criteria 4001, 4002, 4003, 4004, 4005, 4009 and
(b) if he or she has previously been in Australia, satisfies special return
criteria 5001, 5003, 5005 and 5007 to 5010.
(2) Each member of the family unit of the applicant who is not an applicant for
a subclass 105 visa is a person who:
(a) satisfies public interest criteria 4001 to 4004; and
(b) satisfies public interest criterion 4005, unless the Minister is satisfied
that it would be unreasonable to require the person
to undergo assessment in
relation to that criterion.
105.229 If either:
(a) the family unit of the applicant includes a dependent child who made a
combined application with the applicant; or
(b) a child who:
(i) is usually resident with the applicant; and
(ii) has not turned 18; and
made a combined application with the applicant;
the Minister is satisfied that the grant of a subclass 105 visa to the child as
a member of the family unit of the applicant would
not prejudice the rights and
interests of any other person who has custody or guardianship of, or access to,
105.230 Approval of the application would not result in either:
(a) the number of subclass 105 visas granted in a financial year exceeding
the maximum number of subclass 105 visas, as determined
by Gazette Notice,
that may be granted in that financial year; or
(b) the number of visas of particular classes (including subclass 105)
granted in a financial year exceeding the maximum number of
visas of those
classes, as determined by Gazette Notice, that may be granted in a financial
Therefore, one of the requirements that must be satisfied is that the Visa
Applicant achieve a qualifying point score when assessed
under Subdivision B of
Division 3 of Part 2 of the Act. Consequently it is not necessary at this
stage to consider the other requirements
for the grant of the visa as the Visa
Applicant needs to satisfy the
"points assessment"
. To achieve a points
score the Visa Applicant is allocated a certain number of points in relation to
the particular
"qualifications
" set out in clause 2.26 of the
Regulations.
If the Visa Applicant is able to achieve the qualifying points score then the
matter will proceed to further processing. In making
the points assessment the
Tribunal is able to consider the Regulations in force at the date of the
primary assessment or at the date
of the Tribunal's assessment whichever is the
more advantageous to the Visa Applicant (see section 350 of the Act).
Schedule 6 of the Regulations sets out the qualifications and maximum points
that may be allocated for each qualification with respect
to an application for
a Subclass 105 (Concessional Family) visa. The relevant qualifications at the
time of the primary assessment
Employment,
Relationship,
Citizenship,
Settlement of sponsor, and
Location of sponsor.
The Act and Regulations do not permit a decision maker to consider other
factors such as compassionate or humanitarian grounds, a
job offer in
Australia, the family's situation in Australia and other extraneous
considerations when determining a Subclass 105 visa
application. As regards
the relevant qualifications little exercise of discretion is required in order
to assess a person's point
score except for the
"Employment
qualification"
The points that can be allocated for the
"Employment qualification"
contained in Part 1 of Schedule 6. Basically Part 1 of Schedule 6 of the
Regulations comprises a number of paragraphs ranking
occupations according to
the minimum Australian standards or requirements for entry to the
occupation.
Firstly however, a Visa Applicant's "
usual occupation"
ascertained.
"usual occupation"
is defined in regulation 2.26(5) as:
... an occupation that the Applicant has engaged in for gain or reward for a
continuous period of at least 6 months during the period
of 2 years immediately
preceding the relevant application for a visa.
Once a person's usual occupation has been determined, the Australian
requirements for that occupation are ascertained. The Australian
Classification of Occupations (ASCO), which is published by the Australian
Bureau of Statistics is generally referred to
in order to ascertain the
Australian Standards or requirements for an applicant's
occupation"
. Qualifications obtained overseas are variously assessed by
the National Office of Overseas Skills Recognition (NOOSR); or another
authorised by NOOSR to carry out such assessments, the Commonwealth Department
of Industrial Relations or equivalent Departments
in the States. If the
circumstances preclude the above bodies from making an assessment, the Minister
may then make an assessment.
The Visa Applicant's qualifications and/or
experience can then be measured against the above referred to standards in Part
Schedule 6 and the appropriate allocation of points determined.
The essential submission in this case, concerns the points to be awarded for
the employment qualification and the language qualification
of the points test.
The Tribunal will now proceed to make its points assessment in this matter.
EVIDENCE AND FINDINGS
The Department's file in this matter has been made available to the Tribunal.
It contains in part the Visa Applicant's application
and supporting
A hearing of this matter was held in Melbourne on 22 September 1998. Sworn
evidence was given to the Tribunal by the Visa Applicant's
brother and an aunt.
Their legal representative a registered migration agent also attended the
The Visa Applicant's sponsor brother Issa Ablahad confirmed he and his wife had
not received any social security benefits. The Visa
Applicant worked as a
tailor in his shop in Syria.
Reference was made to the Visa Applicant's schooling and languages spoken and
how the Visa Applicant is fluent in Syrian and Arabic.
The Visa Applicant's aunt confirmed the Visa Applicant is fluent in the Syriac
and Arabic languages which are different. The Visa
Applicant's English is not
fluent and he is
in that language. Reference was made to the
family makeup of the Visa Applicant and his wife and their whereabouts.
Further material was made available and an application was made to State
Training Board of Victoria to assess the Visa Applicant's
qualifications and
experience as a
. That Board delegated the Council of Textile
and Fashion Industries of Australia to advise on and accredit garment
tradespersons.
Therefore the Council is the
"relevant Australian
to assess the qualifications or experience of the Visa Applicant
On 5 September 1997 the Skills Assessor from the
Council advised that the Visa Applicant satisfied the Australian standards for
Employment Qualification
The Tribunal notes that the Visa Applicant stated that he worked as a
for a number of years. In the earlier Tribunal decision and
the MIRO decision it was found that his
"usual occupation"
. A person's
"usual occupation"
is a question of fact to
be determined by the Tribunal.
Having regard to all of the evidence and material before it, the Tribunal finds
that his usual occupation is that of a
. This occupation
appears to usually require a formal qualification or trade certificate in
Australia (see ASCO 4911-11 (1st Ed.)
and ASCO 4941-13 (2nd Ed.).
Given the findings of the Council of Textile and Fashion Industries of
Australia, the Tribunal finds that the Visa Applicant's qualifications
experience meet the Australian standards or requirements for his
occupation"
that requires a trade certificate or AQF
Certificate III in Australia.
In the circumstances the Tribunal finds on balance that the Visa Applicant
satisfies the requirements for his '
usual occupation in Australia'
Tribunal allocates the Visa Applicant 70 points for this qualification pursuant
to paragraph 6102 of Part 1 of Schedule 6 of
the Regulations.
Age Qualification
At the time of the application the Visa Applicant was 43 years of age.
Consequently, he is allocated 15 points for this qualification
pursuant to Part
2 of Schedule 6 of the Regulations.
Language Skill Qualification
The Tribunal notes that on the application Form 47 the Visa Applicant indicated
that he spoke and wrote the Syrian and Kurdish languages
fluently. His main
language was Arabic.
Advice from the National Accreditation Authority of Translators and
Interpreters (NAATI) confirms that those languages are recognised
different languages. Material was produced indicating that the Visa Applicant
had studied and was fluent in the
"Syrian and Arabic languages"
Consequently he is entitled to 5 points for this qualification at the time of
this assessment pursuant to item 6316 of Part 3 of
Schedule 6 of the
Regulations.
Relationship Qualification
The Visa Applicant was sponsored by his brother and 10 points are allocated to
him for this qualification, pursuant to clause 6402
of Part 4 of Schedule 6 of
the Regulations.
Citizenship Qualification
As the Visa Applicant's sponsor has been an Australian citizen for more than 5
years at the time the primary application was lodged,
the Visa Applicant is
allocated 10 points for this qualification, pursuant to Part 5 of Schedule 6 of
the Regulations.
Settlement of Sponsor Qualification
As the Visa Applicant's sponsor was resident in Australia for two years
immediately before the lodgement of the primary application
and did not receive
any relevant government benefits in that time, the Visa Applicant is awarded 10
points under this qualification,
pursuant to clause 6601 of Part 6 of Schedule
6 of the Regulations.
Location of Sponsor Qualification
No points are allocated to the Visa Applicant under this qualification as his
sponsor satisfies Part 7 of Schedule 6 of the Regulations.
To summarise the Visa Applicant is allocated the following points score at the
time of this assessment:
Employment Qualification 70
Age Qualification 15
Language Qualification 05
Relationship Qualification 10
Citizenship Qualification 10
Settlement Qualification 10
Location Qualification 00
Therefore, as the Visa Applicant has attained a score of 120 points, which is
more than the qualifying score of 115 points at the
date of this assessment the
application will be remitted to the Department for further processing with the
direction that the Visa
Applicant has attained the qualifying score when
assessed in relation to the visa under Subdivision B of division 3 of Part 2 of
the Act and therefore satisfies clause 105.222 under the Regulations.
The Tribunal pursuant to
section 349(2)
Migration Act
remits this
application for reconsideration with the direction that the Visa Applicant has
achieved the qualifying score for a Concessional
Family (Migrant) ( Class AJ)
visa now called a Skilled Australian Linked (Migrant) (Class AJ) visa.
I certify that this and the 12 preceeding pages are a true copy of the Decision
and Reasons for Decision of Steve Karas.
Tribunal Officer
Date: 28 January 1999
RTF format (36.8 KB)
Signed PDF/A format