URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/FamCA/2007/1339.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 14:51:23
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Jarvis & Weston [2007] FamCA 1339 (1 November 2007)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
JARVIS & WESTON
[2007] FamCA 1339
FAMILY LAW – CHILDREN – agreement 11
year old son now to live predominantly with mother – decisions required
when the change in the child’s arrangements would commence [now or
beginning of 2008 school year], which school he would attend,
and the time he
would spend with father during school terms – After decisions made issue
arose about delivery of the child’s
dog [stay with father or go to
mother’s] and issue raised in passing about the court’s jurisdiction
to make order about
Family Law Act 1975
RESPONDENT:
DATE DELIVERED:
1 November 2007
PLACE DELIVERED:
JUDGMENT OF:
Justice Moore
HEARING DATE:
11 December 2006, 19 January, 12 October, 31 October & 1 November
REPRESENTATION
COUNSEL FOR THE APPLICANT:
SOLICITOR FOR THE APPLICANT:
Scanlan’s Lawyers
SOLICITOR FOR THE
RESPONDENT:
Mr Cumming appeared as agent for Selman Jowett
are made according to the document headed ‘Minute of Orders’
paragraphs 1-15 inclusive dated 1 November 2007.
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the
Jarvis & Weston
is approved pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA AT SYDNEY
FILE NUMBER: SYF624 of 2001
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
parents agreed about certain aspects of the future living arrangements for their
son, aged 11, but there remained several areas
of dispute. In summary, they
were these:
(i) whether the agreement that he will now live
primarily with his mother rather than his father should be implemented now or at
beginning of the 2008 school year; and
(ii) whether he should attend school from then in C near to the
mother’s home or in G where the father works;
(iii) if he attends school in C -
proposes he spend Friday 5pm to Monday before school every second weekend with
his father, to be collected by his father
from a venue in C and returned to
school on Monday morning;
proposes he spend from Thursday 5pm to Monday before school two weeks out of
three with him, to be collected by him from
a venue in C and returned to school
on Monday morning;
(iv) if he attends school in G –
proposes the same arrangement;
proposes he spend every second week with him from after school Wednesday to
before school Monday.
some brief evidence and submissions from their legal representatives, I
determined that the child’s arrangements would
be implemented now and not
delayed, that he would attend the C school, and he would spend every second
weekend with his father from
Friday after school until Monday before school.
Reasons for these decisions, which need not be extensive given the scope of the
submissions, follow.
Jarvis (40) and Mr Weston (52) began living together in 1992, their only child,
a son, was born on ... May 1996, they married in
November 1996, and they
separated in July 2000 while living at V.
is a history of court proceedings stretching back to 2001, not only in this
Court but also in the Local Court, which determined
from time to time the
child’s time between his parents, amongst other things. But it will
suffice to say now that for the
past several years the child has lived with his
father and during school terms he has spent three weekends out of four with his
[Friday afternoon to Sunday afternoon] as well as block periods during
school holidays. These arrangements have been implemented,
at least during
school terms, by his mother collecting him from school on Friday afternoons and
his father collecting him from C
Post Office on Sundays.
relationship between the parents is fraught with conflict and there is no
doubting the change from the care of one to the other
when contact between them
has been necessary is a tense and anxious event for their son.
mother lives at near C, with her partner, Mr H, who is a farmer. She has a son,
R (16), from a previous relationship and she
and Mr H have a son, N (2). She is
not in paid work but is undertaking a TAFE course in G which she anticipates
will continue for
another couple of years.
father lives at V. He has not re-partnered. He works full time in the public
service operating out of premises in G although
the area he covers is wide and
includes the Southern Highlands. He has some flexibility in his work
arrangements so that he can
plan to be in G on occasions rather than further
afield out in the area of his responsibility.
drive from G to C takes around 45 minutes (father) or longer (mother) and the
drive to her residence on the other side of C takes
a further 10 – 15
minutes or thereabouts. The drive from V to G takes about 45 minutes (mother)
or 55 minutes (father). The
upshot is that the drive from V through G to C is a
journey of 1 ¾ to 2 hours.
Family Report was prepared initially from interviews conducted in late March
this year. There was an order made for an update to
be prepared in preparation
for the hearing in light of argument about changes in the child’s wishes
over the intervening months.
A reading of those reports points unequivocally in
the direction of implementing the new arrangements without further delay so as
to release the child from the palpable anxiety of being caught between his
parents in their conflict centred on all manner of facets
related to his care.
The damage to the child of this acrimony and finger pointing is clear from the
reports and the sooner the arrangements
are implement the better chance he has
of getting out from under the burden and distress and sense of responsibility he
the seemingly endless maelstrom going on around him. Being settled is
a major need for him at this stage and there is no sound reason
whatever not to
implement forthwith what has been agreed and ordered so that he might get on
with making whatever adjustment may
be necessary to his new setting and routine.
saying that I am mindful of the father’s resistance to it and his proposal
to defer introducing the change in arrangements
until the beginning of next
year. True it is that the child will have to change schools with only some 6 or
7 weeks until the end
of term, but in my assessment that disruption is a
relatively minor consideration compared to the potentially unsettling
consequences
of not making the move now and thus leaving him, in all likelihood,
with a sense that nothing has changed.
father and Mr Cumming said all that was possible in putting the argument for the
child’s attendance at school in G, but
the weight in favour of C is
overwhelming. His mother’s home, from where he will be going to school
most of days on any view
of how his time will be apportioned between his
parents, is 10 – 15 minutes from the C school. He has another year at
school and then a number of years at secondary school still ahead of
him. To commit him over these many years to travelling by two
busses for over
an hour in the morning and again in the afternoon to go to and from school in G
is unwarranted, more so in the absence
of any suggestion that the schools at C,
primary and secondary, are not equipped in some measure to meet his educational
his father works out of G is acknowledged and the ease and convenience that
provides of collecting the child from school and
returning him to school in G is
obvious. But it would fall to the child to wear the consequence: travel for at
least two hours via
two busses to get to and from school each school day, save
for those days he was to be collected or returned to school by his father.
burden this represents for him vastly outstrips the ease and convenience factor
that would obviously accrue to his father.
decision about the child’s time, as with the other decisions just
discussed, must have his best interests as the paramount
consideration.
of the Act lists those matters, primary and additional considerations,
which must be taken into account in determining best interests.
To some extent
many of those factors fall away from active consideration because of the
agreement that the child will now spend
more time with his mother than with his
father, at least during school terms, though of course in as much as there is
evidence, albeit
untested, regard is had to it.
particularly for present purposes, the child’s views are set out in the
earlier report and they are the subject of the
more recent report. The
reporter’s description of the child at this point as burdened and
troubled, appearing cautious not
to be seen as making a choice but also
extremely emotionally fragile, is poignant. It is regrettable that a further
meeting with
the reporter became necessary, but it was so as to limit the scope
for foreshadowed argument about the change in the child’s
views since the
earlier report. The child is attached to both of his parents and his
relationship with each is close. What changes,
if any, the future will bring to
the state of his relationship with each of his parents remains to be seen if the
acrimony between
them continues. Both parents can be taken to have provided for
him and each can be taken to have the capacity to adequately meet
subject to the significant shortcoming of their failure to address their own
role in exposing their son to their conflicted
relationship and their apparently
diminished appreciation of the extremely detrimental impact that has had on the
child, as discussed
by the reporter.
Cumming pointed out in his submissions, having regard to the child’s
attendance at C school, a number of relevant considerations
and benefits the
child might derive from adoption of his father’s proposal for extended
time to commence Thursdays for two
weekends out of three. The submissions
acknowledge the extra travel involved for the child to go between C and V, but
it is pointed
out that he is now 11, he is getting older and the situation
[travel] is not unknown to him. It is said that such an arrangement
enable the child to continue as much as possible with Rugby Union, which he has
the ambition to play at a representative level,
and maintain his involvement
with other activities such as touch football as well as keep contact with his
friends. Primary amongst
the considerations, however, is the opportunity to
spend more time with his father. It is also pointed out that the father’s
proposal is bolstered by the reporter’s recommendation in the first report
that the child spends
‘no less than’
alternate weekends and
half the school holidays with his father.
opportunity for a child to spend time with the parent with whom that child does
not primarily live is particularly important,
as the whole thrust of the
provisions of
of the Act post 1 July 2006 make apparent. The primary
consideration of the benefit to the child having a meaningful relationship
both parents underscores that and due regard is had to it here.
this case it is also necessary to consider the likely effect of any changes in
the child’s circumstances including the likely
effect of any separation
from either parent [s60CC(3)(d)]. The changes to the child’s
circumstances agreed by the parents
will inevitably mean he will spend less time
with his father, whatever time proposal is adopted. It is very likely that will
an effect on the child, to which he will have to adjust; nonetheless, the
evidence more particularly from the reporter points solidly
in the direction of
the child making that transition and adjustment.
is also necessary to consider the practical difficulty for a child of spending
time with a parent and whether that will substantially
affect the child’s
right to maintain personal relations and direct contact with both parents on a
regular basis [s60CC(3)(e)
– see also 65DAA(5)]. It has to be recognised
that the distance and road travel involved for the child between V and C to get
to and from school represent a real and practical difficulty with the adoption
of the father’s proposal. It is in the child’s
interests to be
spending regular time with his father, but it is not in his interests to be
undertaking the extent of road travel
involved as frequently as his father
proposes. When his interests are weighed in the balance overall, the burden of
such frequent
travel on school days cannot be diminished. That fact, as well as
the child’s need also to spend leisure time in his mother’s
household, compels the adoption of the mother’s proposal as being more
consistent with his best interests overall. That means
the child will spend
with his father three nights in every fourteen during school terms and half of
his school holidays. His father
will collect him from school on those Friday
afternoons and return him to school on Monday mornings, thus eliminating the
expose him to any contact between his parents, at least during school
terms. The changeover of his care will occur beyond the school
environment on
occasions to implement the school holiday arrangements but that will be for the
parents to manage in the future in
light of what they now know of the impact on
the child of those occasions. The arrangement adopted will provide substantial
significant time as defined in
for the child in his father’s
care and that is the arrangement better suited to his needs and best interests.
have been drafted by the legal representatives to reflect the agreed
arrangements and these decisions are incorporated into
the draft Minute of
then arose this afternoon a further dispute that had not been previously aired.
It is about the child’s dog. It was the
subject of discussion between the
child and the reporter, as set out in paragraph 33 of her
‘One concern expressed by [the child] was in
respect of his dog. He mentioned that his dog is locked in a cage and he is
the opinion that his father “does not take good care
of it” and does
not exercise it enough. [The child] stated that he feared that, unless the dog
was “allowed to run free
now and then” he would become vicious and
might bite. [The child] mentioned that all of the pets he has had in the past
died and he was afraid a similar fate might beset his dog.’
mother proposes the dog be collected from the father according to arrangements
set out at paragraph 14 of the Minute of Orders.
Mr Cumming on behalf of the
father made submissions resisting the making of any such order, pointing out the
issue had not been
raised previously, the father wanted more time to reflect on
it, and in any event the Court has no jurisdiction to make any order
I said to Mr Cumming when ruling on the issue, the matter will conclude today
rather than abide the further reflection of his client
and his passing reference
to the absence of jurisdiction may be right. But whether the issue falls to be
considered under the accrued,
associated, inherent, or
parens patriae
attached to the dog. The dog is to go with the boy.
that the preceding twenty-two (22) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for
judgment of the Honourable Justice Moore
Date: 1 November 2007
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (105 KB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter