D20-21\085 [2020] SCTA 193 (20 November 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\085
FILE NUMBER : 17-1353
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 24 August 2020 before Justin
Malbon, Presiding Member.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
decision under review is that of the Trustee refusing to compromise the
Complainant’s claim arising from a delay in processing
his request to
transfer money from his pension income account to his accumulation account.
Trustee notified the Complainant of its decision by phone call dated 5 July 2017
and, following review, by email dated 25 July
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal affirms the decision of the Trustee.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
Tribunal requested, under s32 of the Complaints Act, submissions from the
submission was received from the Complainant.
Trustee declined to provide a submission, choosing instead to rely on
information previously submitted to the Tribunal.
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited.
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
papers provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant complains the decision of the Trustee was
unreasonable for the reasons summarised in this determination.
area of disagreement relates to the Trustee’s failure to act on the
Complainant’s transfer instructions in a timely
Complainant is currently aged 68 years.
Federal Government instigated changes to superannuation laws, which had the
effect of imposing new tax liabilities on amounts
held in certain superannuation
accounts above $1.6 million. The changes were to take effect on 1 July 2017. The
Complainant made
a number of requests to the Fund to transfer money from his
pension income account to his accumulation account. The apparent aim
minimise or remove the imposition of the new tax liabilities on his
superannuation.
made his first request on 23 April 2017, asking the Fund to transfer the amount
in excess of $1.6 million as at 30 June 2017 from
his pension account to his
accumulation account. The Fund informed him that legislation required it
execute a transfer request within
30 days, consequently, he would need to make
his request in June.
Complainant lodged an application in early June 2017, again with the instruction
the transfer take place on 30 June 2017. He
was contacted by the Fund on 13
June 2017 and was informed the transfer may not be able to be done on that day
due to an expected
high number of transfer requests for that day as there would
be a risk of system outages. He was advised by the Fund during a 13
call to request the transfer take place on a day prior to 30 June. He asked the
advice to be confirmed in writing –
which he did not receive. He was again
advised by the Fund during a 20 June phone call to request an earlier day for
the transfer,
but he insisted it take place on 30 June.
Fund did not process his request on 30 June but did so on 3 July 2017, with the
transfer being executed on 6 July 2017. The Complainant
says he suffered
financial loss as a result. He has not specified the amount of loss, instead he
asks the Trustee to provide him
additional information to enable him to
calculate his loss. The Trustee says that he did not suffer any tax liabilities
arising from
Events not in dispute:
first column below specifies the day on which the event or events specified in
the second column occurred.
− The Complainant is born.
− The Complainant first contacts the Fund about
transferring an amount to ensure he does not have an amount in excess of 1.6
million at 30 June 2017 in his pension account.
− The first transfer application (dated 23 April 2017
is received by the Trustee.
− The Fund contacts the Complainant advising him
transfer requests cannot be held for longer than 30 days.
− The second transfer request (dated 2 June 2017 is
received by the Trustee,
to be effected 30 June 2017.
− The Fund contacts the Complainant advising the
transfer may not be able to be completed on 30 June and the Fund advised him
request an earlier date for transfer, suggesting 20 June 2017. The Complainant
requests this be put in writing so he can consider
− The Complainant follows up by phone call to see
if he is going to get a written response as he requested.
− The Fund contacts the Complainant to see if the
transfer can be completed that day. He is again advised of the risks of
the transfer take place on 30 June, however he insists the Fund
proceed with making the transfer on that day.
− The transfer process is commenced. However, the
Fund seeks additional confirmation about his investment choice.
− The Complainant responds and clarifies his
investment choice.
− The Trustee’s Decision was notified to the
Complainant
− The effective date of the transfer.
− The Complaint is lodged with the Tribunal.
Tribunal considers that the trust deed relevant to this complaint is that of the
Fund in effect when the Complainant requested
the transfer take effect (i.e. 30
June 2017), being the trust deed dated 12 December 2012 (the Trust Deed).
Trust Deed provisions relevant to the complaint are:
of the Fund and powers of the Trustee
4.2 Subject to the
Requirements, the Trustee has the complete
management and control of all proceedings, matters and things in connection with
and, without derogating from any other provision of this Deed, may do
all acts and things which it considers necessary, desirable
or expedient for the
proper application, administration, maintenance and preservation of the Fund or
any part of the Fund.
4.4 Without limiting· the generality of Rule.4.2, and in addition to any
other powers conferred on the Trustee by
Deed, the Trustee shall
have the following specific powers:
(11) To settle, compromise or submit to arbitration or to a court of law, any
doubts, disputes, claims, controversies or difficulties
whatsoever arising out
of or relating to this Deed or the construction of any provision in this Deed,
the Fund or the rights of Members
and Beneficiaries and to act on the award or
determination of the arbitrator or court or, (where a Member submits a dispute
Superannuation Complaints Tribunal) on a determination of the
Superannuation Complaints Tribunal;
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
salient points made by the Complainant are:
The Complainant,
in his Registration of Complaint form, submitted in part that:
I had lodged a written request to transfer funds in
excess of $1.6m on 30 June 17, from my choice income account to accumulation
account - first on 23 Apr 17 but [the Trustee] could not act on it as it
was >30 days away. Second request was lodged on 2 June
17 to be actioned on
30 June17. [The Trustee] had contacted me by phone on 13 June 17 to advise that
they would like to transfer
on 20 June 17 as they considered that ATO website
could be unavailable on 30 Jun 17. I requested [the Trustee] to put the phone
in writing together with explanation of why they wanted to process my
request earlier, so that I can check this further and respond
to [the Trustee]
accordingly. [The Trustee] failed to respond with email confirmation. I followed
this up on 14 June 2017 with an
online email request seeking a confirmation of
their telephone advice on 13 June 2017. I had not received any written advice
and any response to these requests until AFTER 30 June 2017. These failures
by [the Trustee] had prevented me from checking their
claims and responding
prior 20 June 2017. Also, I was travelling overseas on 30 June 2017. The failure
of [the Trustee] to action
the transfer on 30 June 2017 as provided to them in
writing by me, could result in potential financial losses and/or penalties for
which I am holding [the Trustee].
[The Trustee] did the transfer of funds in excess of $1.6million from my
Choice Income Account to Accumulation Super account on 6
July 2017. However, as
a result the balance in my Choice Income Account on 1 July 2017 was greater than
$1.6million and [the Trustee]
had calculated the minimum monthly payment based
upon the higher amount on 1 July 2017 which is against my written request.
Despite requesting on 13 June 2017, a written email confirmation of their
verbal advice, [the Trustee] failed to provide such response
until after 30 June
Despite my sending an online email request to [the Trustee] seeking such
written confirmation on 14 June 2017, [the Trustee] failed
to respond until
after 30 June 2017.
[The Trustee] ad only submitted written queries relating to my request for
transfer AFTER 30 June 2017, by which time, [the Trustee]
had failed to action
my transfer request.
My subsequent enquiries with ATO indicated that since my request to transfer
funds in excess of $1.6million from my Choice Income
Account to Accumulation
Super account – both of which are with [the Trustee], the status of the
ATO website should not have
prevented [the Trustee] from actioning my request
on 30 June 2017. However, ATO have indicated that I may be subject to penalties
for holding funds in excess of $1.6milliion (sic) in Choice Income Account on 1
[A Trustee] complaints officer, has rejected any responsibilities by [the
Trustee] in the failure to action my written request submitted
to them on 2 June
2017. I believe that the response from [the Trustee] is very unfair and will
unreasonably disadvantage me.
The failure of [the Trustee] to transfer the funds on 30 June 2017, had also
led to the calculation of higher monthly minimum payment
from Choice Income
Account based upon the balance on 1 July 2017. This is against my written
request of 2 June 2017 and would result
in a more rapid drawdown in my Choice
Income Account than what I had requested. Despite a number of requested to
adjust this, [the
Trustee] had failed to do so. I believe that these actions by
[the Trustee] are unreasonable and unfair to me.
I had relied upon [the Trustee’s] advice that they could not action my
request dated 23 April 2017 and had resubmitted the written
request on 2 June
Despite agreeing on the telephone that [a Trustee] representative would send
a written email to me confirming their recommendation
on 13 June 2017, no such
confirmation email was received.
The Complainant
further submits:
Despite my efforts to stop the payment of higher amount
) from Choice Income Account..., [the Trustee] proceeded to
make payment on
which I received on 11 August 2017. This
had reduced the amount of balance I had in my [Trustee] Choice Income account...
than what was required if [the Trustee] had acted in a timely manner to
my request. This action has disadvantaged me financially
in terms of my
superannuation retirement balance.
The Trustee
failed to provide any written reasons prior to 30 June 2017, to enable the
Complainant to verify the veracity of claims,
regarding supposed ATO advice to
the Trustee concerning any anticipated downtime on 30 June 2017, despite seeking
written confirmation
several times.
Trustee has maintained that there was no financial disadvantage suffered by the
Complainant, the information provided by
the Complainant illustrates that there
was indeed a financial disadvantage suffered.
The Trustee
salient points made by the Trustee are:
The Complainant
was advised on 13 June 2017 of an expected outage within the ATO portal on 30
June 2017 that would impact the ability
to process his request on that day.
On 20 June 2017
the Trustee again contacted the Complainant to inform him that it may not be
possible to process the transfer on 30
June 2017. The Complainant confirmed his
decision that the Trustee attempt to process the transfer on 30 June 2017,
despite the Trustee’s
concerns that this may not be possible.
The Trustee
complied with Complainant’s request and began to process the transfer of
funds on 30 June 2017. The expected outage
within the ATO portal did occur which
resulted in an inability to process the request on that day.
The required
component of the ATO portal was available the following business day, 3 July
2017, and the Trustee recommenced the transfer
process which was completed on 6
The Trustee
maintains its position that it has acted within their time frames and were not
the cause of the delay. The Trustee forewarned
the Complainant of the expected
ATO outage and that processing this request on 30 June 2017 would likely not be
possible. In doing
this, the Trustee attempted to help the Complainant
understand the risks involved with the transfer on the last day of the financial
year. The Complainant made an informed decision that the Fund attempt to process
his request on 30 June 2017.
In a letter to
the Complainant, the Trustee wrote:
In respect of you being advised by the ATO there was no
system maintenance or outage on 30 June 2017. I acknowledge their wider system
may have been functioning; however the components of the ATO website we require
in order to process a rollover experienced an unplanned
outage. I have attached
confirmation from the ATO website that the system functionality we required was
experiencing an outage for
your records. This information can also be accessed
http://sses.status.ato.gov.au/.
If you select month on each of the
options available you will notice an outage on 30 June 2017
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
Tribunal must initially determine, under s37(6) of the Complaints Act, whether
the decision of the Trustee to refuse to compromise
the Complainant’s
claim arising from a delay in processing his request to transfer money from his
pension income account to
his accumulation account was fair and reasonable in
its operation in relation to the Complainant in the circumstances.
issue is not what decision the Tribunal would have made on the evidence before
the Trustee but whether the decision was fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal took the whole of the evidence and
submissions into account. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the material it has
relied on has been provided to both Parties
Complainant complains the Fund did not transfer the fund in excess of $1.6
million in his pension income account to his accumulation
account on 30 June, as
he requested, but on 6 July, thereby causing him financial loss.
Trustee says the Fund advised him a number of times during phone calls in June
that it anticipated there might be difficulties
in it processing his request on
30 June because of an anticipated overload of transfer requests. Changes in tax
law impacting on
superannuation accounts were to take effect on 1 July. The
Fund’s advice was prescient as the relevant parts of the ATO website
suffer outages on 30 June.
Trustee submitted that:
When the transfer balance cap of 1.6m took effect on 1 July 2017,
the onus was on members to transfer excess amounts above the cap
accordingly.
[The Complainant] submitted a request to transfer the excess to his Super
account and asked that the transfer be processed on 30 June
2017. The Fund
advised [the Complainant] on multiple occasions that it couldn’t guarantee
the transfer could be processed on
a set day, specifically due to advice from
the ATO that maintenance of its systems including SuperStream would be affected
the end of June. [The Complainant] insisted the Fund attempt the
transfer on 30 June 2017 after this advice.
The Fund attempted the transfer on 30 June 2017 in accordance with his
instructions. The Fund was unable to complete the transfer
and did so on 5 July
2017 as soon as it was able.
The inability to transfer funds from the Pension account to the Super account
was due to maintenance of the ATO’s SuperStream
system, which is outside
the Fund’s control. As the Fund gave multiple warnings to [the
Complainant] that the transfer couldn’t
be guaranteed on a set date, due
to circumstances outside its control, the Fund has not erred in the processing
of [the Complainant’s]
transfer and doesn’t agree that compensation
is payable.
to the ATO website:
SuperStream is the way businesses must pay employee superannuation
guarantee contributions to super funds. With SuperStream money
and data are sent
electronically in a standard format.
It must be used by:
• employers
• self-managed super funds
• APRA-regulated funds
SuperStream transmits money and information consistently across the super
system – between employers, funds, service providers
and the ATO. The data
is linked to the payment by a unique payment reference number.
This means:
employers can
make all their contributions in a single transaction, even if they're going to
multiple super funds
contributions
and rollovers can be processed faster, more efficiently and with fewer
people can be
more reliably linked to their super, reducing lost accounts and unclaimed
All employers should be SuperStream compliant.
https://www.ato.gov.au/Super/SuperStream/
ATO frequently issues Contribution Transaction Request (CTR) alerts on its
website. The following alert appeared on its website
on 30 June 2017:
CRT alert 054/2017
... Superannuation services resumed
Superannuation services on our SBR2 platform including superTICK3 SuperMatch2
and Fund Validation Service (FVS) have now resumed.
Services may experience degraded performance throughout the day as our
systems normalise. For the latest information please monitor
superannuation dashboard.
The FVS nightly file did not generate last night. You should continue to use
yesterday’s file until a new file is available
Electronic Portability Form (EPF)batch processing was stopped last night.
Unprocessed forms will be included in the next regular batch
Last nights scheduled maintenance was completed as planned
We apologise for the inconvenience and thank you for your patience during our
work to restore services.
Trustee submitted:
As shown in the attachment the ATO advises that systems were
currently unavailable and they were continuing work to solve the problem.
further update would be provided.
CRT Alerts from the ATO (attached) confirm services were intermittent
throughout the day. While the Fund tried to complete [the Complainant’s]
rollover on the date requested it was unable to do so and had warmed (sic)[the
Complainant] of this multiple times leading up to
30 June 2017. The Fund
be completed due to the outages
as previously warned.
The Trustee’s position hasn’t changed from that previously
communicated to [the Complainant]. The Fund advised that it
was unable to
guarantee the rollover to be processed on a set date. Due to the ATO’s
planned outage which occurred throughout
the day of 30 June 2017 and on
additional days around this time the Fund processed the rollover once able. The
Trustee understands
that [the Complainant] was required to pay tax on earnings
he received for Pension funds in excess of the transfer balance cap.
Complainant submitted in response that he had requested the Fund provide him a
written confirmation of the advice he had given
him during the 13 June phone
call, which he did not receive. He was asked in the Tribunal’s complaint
form what he would have
done differently had he known the correct or full
information or the representation had not been made. He answered:
I would have promptly sought the clarification from ATO in relation
to potential risk to website availability as well as whether it
was essential
for [the Trustee] to have access to relevant ATO website to be to action my
written request for transfer on 30 June
2017. Based upon these, I could have
responded to [the Trustee] in writing PRIOR to 20 June 2017.
Tribunal has listened to recordings of the phone conversations he had with the
Fund. It is apparent from the 20 June conversation
he was aware of the
Fund’s advice about the risks associated with requesting the transfer take
place on 30 June, however he
insisted the Fund proceed with his request for a 30
June transfer.
Tribunal is of the view the Fund made him aware of the risks of a 30 June
transfer and the Complainant nevertheless insisted the
transfer take place on
that date. The Tribunal is not satisfied in the circumstances he would have
altered his request had he received
written confirmation of the Fund’s
advice in mid to late June.
Complainant says he suffered a loss from the delay in having his request
actioned. However, he has not quantified the loss. Rather,
he asked the Trustee
to provide him information, which he says, in effect, would enable him to
quantify the loss. In the complaint
form he requests the Trustee: ‘Provide
a complete breakdown of the funds movement from 30 June 2017 which show in
details what,
if any, financial disadvantage suffered by me’. The Trustee
As [the Complainant] would have paid tax on these earnings had the
Pension funds been moved to the Super account prior to 1 July 2017
the Fund is
unable to identify a financial loss and therefore unable to offer
compensation.
Tribunal is not satisfied that any losses that may have been sustained by the
Complainant from the delay in processing his transfer
request are attributable
to the Trustee. The Tribunal is not satisfied in the circumstances the
Trustee’s refusal to compromise
the Complainant’s claim is unfair or
unreasonable.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decision under review
if it is satisfied that the decision, in its
operation in relation to the
Complainant, was fair and reasonable in the circumstances. For the reasons
stated above the Tribunal
is so satisfied.
Tribunal affirms the decision of the Trustee.
Justin Malbon, Presiding
Date of Tribunal signature: 20 November
RTF format (264 KB)
Signed PDF/A format