XSLP and Telstra Corporation Limited (Compensation) [2024] AATA 3614 (11 October 2024)
XSLP and Telstra Corporation Limited (Compensation)
[2024] AATA 3614
October 2024)
Division: GENERAL DIVISION
File Number(s):
Telstra Corporation Limited
Mr S. Webb,
The decision under review is affirmed.
............................[SGD]..................................
Mr S. Webb, Member
COMPENSATION – psychiatric ‘ailment’ – compensation
claim – liability to pay compensation –
– work stress – perceptions of bullying and harassment –
psychotic ailment – perseveration
– cognitive effects of ailment
– persecutory delusions – adverse perceptions – contribution
of actual incidents
– work stress – employment contribution to
ailment – ‘significant degree’ threshold not met –
‘injury’ – decision affirmed
Legislation
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act
Comcare v Reardon
[2015] FCA 1166
De Tarle v Comcare
Dean v Australian Postal Corporation
Kirkpatrick v Commonwealth of Australia
Military Rehabilitation and Compensation Commission v May
[2016] HCA 19
Weigand v Comcare
[2002] FCA 1464
[2022] FCAFC 42
REASONS FOR DECISION
Mr S. Webb, Member
Applicant, ‘XSLP’ was employed by Telstra Corporation Limited
). She became mentally unwell. Her employment was terminated. She
lodged a claim for compensation, alleging she experienced work stress,
and sexual harassment in her employment which contributed to her mental illness.
Telstra decided, by primary determination
and on reconsideration, XSLP is not
entitled to compensation and refused her claim. XSLP lodged an application for
review of this
decision by the Tribunal.
is appropriate to observe at the outset this case raises issues of mental
illness and causation which are medically and legally
perplexing and, in
practical and human terms, sad and difficult.
is 39 years old.
has given extensive and detailed written statements setting out events she
considers relevant in these
proceedings.
As a teenager, she
experienced family stresses. Her parents separated for a time in 1997. She
attempted self-harm after a “
fight with my then boyfriend
and stated she was “
sexually assaulted by a male
sports and completed the Higher School Certificate in or about 2003.
commenced employment with Telstra in or about June 2004. At that time, she was
employed as a Retail Sales Officer in a Telstra
shop. In 2007, XSLP she
progressed to employment in Telstra’s Enterprise and Government business
In October 2009, she was
employed in the Delivery Works Program area “
at head office
administering Telstra’s resource management system. In 2011, XSLP worked
in accounting and financial
In the period from March
2007 to November 2011, she received awards for her
July 2012, XSLP was employed in Telstra’s Network Applications and
Services Division as an information
She continued in this
employment until March 2013.
2012, XSLP broke up with her (then) partner. On 14 July 2012, she consulted Dr
Sowmyn Sreeharan, a general practitioner at the
Kildara Medical Centre, who
under a lot of stress by her own admission
separation from partner of 12 years-sounds messy
having councilling
here to discuss abnormal physical sx-wonders if stress related but wants them
change,fluctuates from constipation to diarrhoea
No weight loss abdo pain etc
heat feeling on top of head..now pressure feeling off and on in forehead and
Imp-nil sinister neurology
Sounds like attypical tension type headaches
Nb explained she looks physically well with no abnormal signs. Explained
atypical headaches and bowel sx
Can be manifestation of
March 2013, XSLP was employed as an information analyst in the Delivery, Support
and Enablement team which was managed by ‘GG’.
At the time, the team
was comprised of RF, PL, CT and a woman who “
left the team after a few
described XSLP as a relatively young, inexperienced and junior member of the
team he perceived as a highly strung or “
”, who was treated with “
Nevertheless, on GG’s evidence, the team worked in a high-pressure
environment, running up to 1,000 projects at a time with
up to 300 project
managers and demanding clients. In this context, XSLP’s role involved data
analysis in respect of project
performance and financials. GG explained that
XSLP was required to work long hours from time to time in order to meet
deadlines or requirements. Furthermore, the nature of some projects
required changes to be made on client premises, out of hours
so as not to affect
ongoing operations.
left his role managing the Delivery, Support and Enablement team. It is probable
this occurred within months of XSLP joining the
team, whereupon CT managed the
team. CT was not called to give evidence in these proceedings.
24 May 2013, XSLP attempted to schedule a regular meeting with CT and stated:
A couple of things I would like initially address are:
Job Role and Description (which should ultimately be represented in the
Capability database)
PRDP for new role
this material, it is probable CT was undertaking the role of XSLP’s direct
manager at this time.
reiterated her request to meet with CT on 29 and 30 May
It is not clear if CT
responded to these requests.
1 July 2013, XSLP consulted Dr Kwok Wan at the Kildara Medical Centre, who
certified she was unfit for work on that day and noted:
1 year ago went through a stressful time
Started to one sided facial/head pains, can be either right or left
Associated with numbness in the right arm
Gets these symptoms mainly during the day, better at night
Under a bit of work stress at the moment
No vomiting/nausea/visual/auditory
Imp ?tension headache
16 July 2013, CT asked XSLP to join a group telephone call on 17 July 2013. In
reply, XSLP asked “
Do we need to prep for this
clear if CT responded.
1 August 2013, XSLP sought a meeting with CT “
to have a chat about my
It is not clear
if CT responded or if the meeting occurred.
6 August 2013, XSLP declined registration for two Apptio training modules,
‘Getting Started with Service Costing’ and
‘Apptio Studio
(Sydney)’, as she was absent “
on sick leave, returning on Monday
9 August 2013, XSLP sent an email to CT, stating:
I went to the Dr yesterday and I have requested a certificate to cover me
being off work until 23/08, hopefully returning to work
August, at this stage. I have done this as I am not sure what is
wrong with me and I would like to avoid stress and pressure until
I am aware of
a diagnosis and an appropriate treatment plan and return to work.
When we spoke earlier in the week, you said you would look at a plan for my
role and a training plan and mentioned that I could attend
Apptio training on
September. To help you with this, at this particular stage,
I think that I need a role/position which is:
documented plan with achievable KPI’s, in line with company priorities/
vision/ advocacy/ planning, with regular meetings
to review specific KPI’s
planned to be achieved within certain timeframes by having pre-planned regular
meetings to review
outcomes of set KPI’s, and also forward looking to
future KPI’s and whether there are risks to meeting those KPI’s
how risks could be mitigated where possible
put under large amounts of stress or pressure when undertaking new/ unfamiliar
tasks with hard to meet deadlines
within an uncertain and perceived unloyal environment
need some level of consistency in the type of work being asked, however where
new tasks are needing to be completed I am willing
to do so, I just require
adequate training and support to be provided and not rushed by deadlines as well
as trying to learn at the
need closer mentoring and guidance and some formal training where I have a
skills gap in activities being asked of me to complete
e.g. a training plan
which links to job role and job tasks and outcomes
like to work collaboratively and autonomously as needed, depending on the type
of task being requested to be completed
am open to learning new things and then completing these as ongoing
am very open to honesty feedback, whether it is perceived as good or bad –
it just means that if it is bad that these are
areas which I need to work on,
learn more about or plan for
Right now I feel exhausted, drained, tired, sad, uncertain and I am
experiencing physical symptoms, so I think the best thing for
me right now is to
really rest, sleep, not think about work and receive a diagnosis and treatment
plan from healthcare professionals,
and then let you know what the diagnosis and
treatment plan is and what the next steps could be by working with you to
the best way for me to transition back into work as a realistic
expressed concern about point 3 in XSLP’s email which he wanted to
discuss. XSLP informed CT he should call using her personal
telephone number as:
Work phone has no charge as I left my charger at work as was not expecting to
take time off. And I was afraid to ask you for a new
sim card to fit your old
phone which you gave me, because I don’t want to cost Telstra extra money
given I am a support person,
not a customer facing person. Whether that is the
right way of thinking or not, that’s how I feel...
sent CT a further email on 9 August 2013, querying a course enrolment and
I am feeling very stressed right
12 August 2013, XSLP sent an email to a colleague, declining coffee, in which
she stated:
... Is there anyone in HR or a HSW rep you would recommend to me to speak to,
in your opinion? If I believe that I am being treated
not quite right at work,
maybe? This is not something which I EVER thought I would ever need to even
consider, but the physical symptoms
I have been having since I had what seemed
like a heart attack at work on my right side one afternoon, have not fully
subsided and
are exacerbated by stress and pressure and are not going away... I
want to come back to work, but I’m actually a little afraid
Please do not repeat this to anyone, please keep this between us. I
haven’t raised this with anyone at work, only with my family
right now. I
don’t want to cause anyone trouble, I just want to see what a third party
thinks of the situation, get some help
to understand my options and work towards
having the situation resolved, so I can return to
16 August 2013, XSLP sent an email to CT in which she stated:
Just setting up some time for tomorrow, however I don’t really have
much of an update... But happy to give you a call anyway.
Hope all is okay in
the office.
suggested symptoms may be caused by stress, muscle tension or posture and
perhaps try swimming, yoga or pilates, but to
go back to the GP
requested an appointment via EAP
1 September 2013, XSLP presented at the Emergency Department of the Blacktown
Hospital. The hospital notes include the following
Triage Presenting Information: BIBA L sided chest pain, and anxiety,
hyperventilating
... Hx: suicidal ideation thoughts yesterday. Nil self harm attempts.
recent stressors with social life.
O/e: warm and well perfused. pacing around ambulance bay.
C/o: left sided chest pain, with L arm tingling. Nil SOB
Appears agitated.
Denies drug or alcohol use today.
Patient stress at work in the past six months, patient states her stress is
the cause of her physical symptoms.
Had Lt sided chest pain and before Rt sided chest pain
Brok up with boyfriend today
Divorced last year.
Presenting Problem:
Reported she came to ED because she had a
‘tingling’ effect on left side of her body and since today (Evening)
to her that going towards right side.
[XSLP] reported that she is quite stressed and mainly due to her work
She said her work is mainly going to out source such as
“India” and her position is in a threatening situation. Moreover
had difficulties with her Boss who she thinks lies most of the time and not
keeping transparencies. She also reported some conflict
with work colleagues and
said basically she feels stressed as she has to earn something but she does not
feel comfortable there.
Mother said that on top of this they are also doing
renovation to the house.
[XSLP] argues to every thing and believes there is nothing such as Anxiety
and Depression.
She said she was quite stressed and said she does have heart palpitation,
racing thoughts and sweaty palms at time but does not believe
that she would
have anxiety.
[XSLP did said that she had difficulty sleeping and Father said last week
she did not sleep for two days.
She also reported relationship difficulties with her Partner in last few
years and legally they were separated last December.
She said she used to enjoy working in Telstra. Here it is much stressful and
she is proactive but has to face lots of bullying.
She does not feel her work environment is healthy and said that she feels at
time that her colleagues are plotting against her (then
laugh with her
Reported ongoing conflict with her Manager who tried to manipulate the work
was discharged.
5 September 2013, XSLP attended the Blacktown Hospital Bungarribee House Mental
Health unit with her parents. The hospital Mental
Health Assessment notes
Going through multiple psychosocial str
with boyfriend March 2013. The problem has started from there
Not sleeping well ...
Doctor prescribed Temazepam which worked for her, but she did not take
Current stressors “Job related stress”, “Boss is
horrible” “Broke up with boyfriend” “Not
(??) ago doctor prescribed Aropax but did
MENTAL STATE EXAMINATION
Affect Anxious
Mood ... “I am disappointed”
Thought form Logical
Preoccupied w work related stressors
Thought content ...
Stated he does not trust her boss
Perception Denied AH/VH
PROVISIONAL DIAGNOSIS
Distress 2° to multiple psychosocial stressors
Mental Health Risk Assessment was undertaken in which current risk factors and
comments were set out, including:
Disorientation or disorganisation
Significant physical pain
COMMENTS In arm tingling pin and needs? Due to anxiety
Recent significant life events
Hopelessness/despair
Expressing high levels of distress
COMMENTS Major relationship breakup March, recent breakup of relationship,
work stress
Recent/current violence
Paranoid ideation about others
Anger, frustration or agitation
Reduced ability to control behaviour
COMMENTS Past abusive relationship, paranoid re life situation/work
Current delusional beliefs
Physical illness
Self neglect, poor self care etc
COMMENTS bought lottery ticket over internet ? scam with ticket depts,
parania re others
10 September 2013, XSLP consulted Dr Usha Bansal and the Pacific Medical and
Dental Centre (
), who noted:
Feb 2012-pressure/numbness R head
Last 6/12-has progressed under breast
In 6/12-R arm seized up-became x30sec-1 min-at work
Since then strange sensations-since 1/09-feels like electric
shock-painful
24 October 2013, CT responded to a question from Leah Catanese, a Telstra HR
Advisor, in respect of XSLP returning to work in which
[XSLP] returned to work last week but in my opinion I don’t believe she
is fit for work.... Her behaviour and reactions are
erratic and causing some
distress and anxiety to other team members....
At CT’s request, PL provided further information, including:
In a meeting, which [XSLP] initiated, at 4.30 yesterday she revealed to
been to 4 Drs. She has been diagnosed by at least two of these Drs to have a
mental illness, Depression or Schizophrenia.
been prescribed Aropax, which is an SSRI, but she is not taking is because she
is afraid of the side effects
She claimed
on several occasions her computer was being watched.
asking me if she was being normal.
asking me if she was going to be sacked or outsourced despite my assertions to
the contrary.
incapable of following a line of reason or having a work discussion.
25 October 2013, XSLP was admitted to Nepean Hospital experiencing a psychotic
The clinical notes of
this admission include:
seen by Blacktown mental health recently
sod her schizophrenia and referred her to a psychologist
prescribed antidepress but pt is not taking it – worried about
BIBA – psychologist Rita called ambulance.
phoned psychologist that she is scared and is hiding in the corner, someone will
pt presented, very anxious, vague, perplex thoughts, tangential, delusional
thoughts. Not suicidal.
stressors trigger this episode 6 months ago with gradual ↑ in delusional
work last 2 months.
her discharge from the Nepean Hospital on 31 October 2013, XSLP was referred to
Dr Jaspreet Singh, a psychiatrist, for treatment.
returned to work and stated that “
things settled down a bit
although she was “
less able to cope with the ordinary stresses of my
work than I was
or about February 2014, XSLP transferred into Telstra’s Sydney Project
Management office.
15 March 2014, XSLP attended the Emergency Department of Blacktown Hospital
complaining of breast pain and suicidal thoughts. The
Hospital Assessment
Documents from interviews with a psychiatric registrar, Dr Adalia, include the
following relevant information:
From the patchy history from patient and collateral information from parents,
it appears that patient has been stressed for the past
couple of months due to
relationship and work issues. Her boyfriend (who she has been living with) and
her separated recently...
She disclosed some problems as work, believes that her work mates are judging
her. She said that she is unable to concentrate at
had guilt of not able to manage her team well
running a small team and working for Telstra but couple of years ago she had
‘some feelings’ towards a staff member
and was sending message which
happened to disclose to staff
blaming her self for the staff member who left after that incident
in answering questions and ?Poor historian, ?Manipulation in giving
... Reported that she was working as a Marketing person for Telstra then as a
business analyst and now she is in a company for data
She is managing a small group. Reported a few years back she had feelings
toward a co worker and somehow all staff get to knew this.
She was bullied and
had to face reactions from her colleagues. She also said that she is feeling
guilty about a staff member left
their team because “I was not
concentrating on work”...
She said she used to enjoy working in Telstra. Here it is much more stressful
and she is proactive but has to face lots of bullying.
She does not feel that her work environment is healthy and said that she
feels at time her colleagues are plotting against her (then
Reported ongoing conflict with her Manager who tried to manipulate the work
25 March 2014, Dr Singh examined XSLP and certified she was unfit for
The doctor subsequently
diagnosed schizoaffective
1 April 2014, Dr Singh noted:
Has been taking only 2.5 mg olanzapine nocte
Avoiding eye contact and talks about going back to work as soon as she
Mentions that everyone at work was watching her and making comments to make
her anxious
Still lwants to go back due to financial and social
10 April 2014, XSLP consulted Pierre-Louis Lamarque (a psychologist) who noted:
[XSLP] feels that everybody is watching her and waiting for her to do
something wrong.
16 April 2014, Dr Singh noted:
Much better today
Has gone back to work last week
Doing ok so far, supportive colleagues and boss at work
Compliant with Luvox 150 mg a day, taking 1 ½ twice a day
Also takes 5 mg Olanzapine
21 May 2014, Dr Singh noted:
Has been taking Luvox 150 mg and stopped taking Olanzapine
... works full time now
Studying diploma of accounting/management online
No psychotic symptoms evident
Still remembers those symptoms
However, not experiencing them
Feels support at work has helped a lot with
On 18 June 2014, Dr Singh noted:
Has been taking Luvox regularly
Has been regular at work, going ok with other
5 August 2014, Dr Singh noted:
Olanzapine 5mg tablet ceased.
Has been feeling a bit low again over the last 2 weeks
Feels that colleagues at work are again behaving oddly and all the thoughts
from the past have resurfaced again
Can not point to any specific instances but overall feels paranoid and
Has been to work regularly and discussed with her boss but not reassured
No other stressors are evident at this stage
Preoccupied with events of the past
... worried about being on regular
24 August 2014, XSLP attended the Pacific MC and consulted Dr Jalal Qamar, who
noted she was seeking a fertility test and she
has depression and
23 September 2014, Dr Singh reported to Dr Bansal:
There has been some exacerbation in her symptoms over the last few months and
she started questioning the diagnosis and the need for
treatment again...
Fortunately she has maintained a remission from symptoms and has been able to
continue work on a regular basis.
[XSLP] also started c/o somatic symptoms similar to last
consulted Dr Singh on 21 October 2014 and 2 December
14 March 2015, XSLP attended the Pacific MC. Dr Sayed Hussaini noted that she
presented with a history of “
ongoing mental stress for past few
” and she was “
down and low
24 April 2015, an incident is noted (in a subsequent return to work plan),
[XSLP] would like it noted that she believes her most recent period of
absence (and a period of absence in February 2015) is related
to unreported
bullying incidents from
2 May 2015, 12 May 2015 and 26 May 2015, XSLP consulted Dr Singh. On the latter
occasion the doctor noted:
[XSLP] is currently taking 100 mg nocte and Luvox 50 mg bd
Has not been working since April 2015
Has felt better in terms of mood and says she has not felt paranoid as when
she was at work, wher she felt targeted by other people
Starting in 2013, feels it was a group or 4 people in Telstra, 1-2 are still
working alongside her, not in the same team but in the
same building
The other 2, she is not sure what they do or where they are
She says she was being bullied by them verbally, giving her too little work
or too much work and little guidance for the work. Making
her involve other
people do extra jobs
When she was sent to the new team (delivery support and enablement) was not
given a job description
Prior: Commercial audit/compliance team
Since Feb 2014: Global operations
Moved as she was afraid she would be made redundant
Terminated interview then as she was
3 June 2015, XSLP consulted Dr Singh, who noted:
Has been worried about things in the past and bullying in the
Has been preoccupied with alleged incidents of abuse as a child
Spoke about breaking up with her boyfriend and that she was suicidal at the
Sleep and appetite are erratic. Mood is reported as low and disappointed
Very keen about getting back to work
Has been compliant with her usual medication
Residual psychotic symptoms
4 June 2015, Dr Singh prepared a report for Telstra in respect of XSLP’s
fitness for work.
In my opinion, when [XSLP] returns to work after the resolution of her acute
symptoms, there would need to be some limitations and
modifications needed at
her workplace...
These should include a limited interaction with some colleagues who do seem
to be part of her delusional thinking and physical placement
in a manner that
minimises such interaction.
I do not feel [XSLP] should return to the work place before resolution of her
acute symptoms in any capacity at all as the work place
and some of her
colleagues rather than the nature of the work itself could be a trigger for some
of her symptoms.
[XSLP’s] diagnosis is consistent with Schizoaffective Disorder- Current
episode depressive with psychotic symptoms. The symptoms
that are consistent
with the same are:
inability to enjoy pleasurable activities, irritability, anhedonia, erratic
sleep and appetite
to concentrate and preoccupation with past events related to possible abuse as a
isolation and perceived lack of support
ideas of self, future and those around her
standing suscpicions about motives of those around her especially her colleagues
and supervisor at Telstra
that there is a group of people in Telstra trying to hatch a conspiracy against
her to get her to donate her organs
Misidentification
phenomena: [XSLP] reports that she mistook one of her colleagues to be a father
of another colleague in Melbourne
[XSLP] has had symptoms of this condition at least since late 2013. She
started seeing me in Early 2014 and thereafter disengaged
after a few months. I
believe her symptoms make ot difficult for her to develop trust in other people
including her family as well
as care provides, doctors, etc. Her mood improves
but she retains underlying paranoid ideas which seems to get worse under stress
or when she becomes depressed.
There is a risk of harm to her reputation through making allegations based on
faulty assumptions due to underlying psychotic symptoms.
... she has paranoid delusions against 1-2 people and also generalised
feeling of being targeted...
There is a risk, however, of her making others a subject of complaints or
allegations which may have psychological impact upon them.
This comes out of a
deep seated belief that she has been targeted by a group of people in Telstra.
She believes she has been bullied
by personnel at Telstra over the last few
[XSLP’s] condition is likely to be episodic with periodic exacerbations
interspersed with periods of remission. When in remission,
she may have residual
symptoms of her illness but I believe be able to continue to work
[XSLP’s] condition involves mistrust and suspicions of motives of other
around her. I have noticed in your letter that she believes
she is being made to
see other doctors as part of a conspiracy. I believe that it has been and will
remain relatively difficult to
keep [XSLP] in regular treatment and follow up
due to the nature of her symptoms. It is unfortunately evident in her
disengaging
with treatment last year with myself. This is turn has led to a
relapse of her symptoms.
16 June 2015, XSLP attended the Pacific MC and consulted Dr Jalal Qamar
following a chest x-ray. The doctor noted “
somatization symptoms
” and that she “
Psychiatrist
1 July 2015, Dr Singh noted:
Appears to be in early remission of her symptoms
Has been compliant with her medications and feels her mood is stable
Remains preoccupied with her previous alleged bullying incidents...
No psychotic symptoms
4 July 2015, XSLP consulted Dr Syed Hussaini at the Pacific MC. The doctor
came for review
but managing OK
11 July 2015, Dr Singh noted:
Mood reported as stable and observed to be euthymic but still a bit worried
No thought disorder or cognitive symptoms
No psychotic symptoms
Said that Telstra will be engaging and injury mgt specialists and train the
immediate managers
They feel that she is back to her premorbid self
Discussed issues in terms of psychoeducation and responding to her
Suggested they do not reinforce her symptoms or obsessive ideas by attempting
to provide evidence for same
18 July 2015, XSLP consulted Dr Giridhar Parla at the Pacific MC. The doctor
noted XSLP “
attended for the results of the [STD test requested without
symptoms on 10 July 2015] which are normal
” and that she was
Systemically
18 July 2015, Dr Singh noted:
Discussed recent incidents at work
[XSLP] appeared very upset about having had a low hormone levels
Also spekaing about havign asbestos in one of her houses
Detailed the incidents at work on Thursday and Friday
Felt people were not genuine in theri comments
Spoke about “do you need more radiation with that”
“does you wife every cry”
Appeared irritable, teary loud and swearing at times
Preoccupied with the alleged abuses and bullying that
occurred back in 2013 though says this is not happening at the moment
not able to discuss in detail about her current mental state but it is
she has worsening of underlying depressive symptoms and paranoid ideas
after returning to work last week
19 July 2015 and 24 July 2015, XSLP consulted Dr Singh. On the latter occasion
Dr Singh changed XSLP’s prescribed
medication.
25 July 2015, XSLP was conveyed to Blacktown Hospital where she was examined and
found to be “
” and in an “
Elevated manic
The Hospital
notes include:
[XSLP] states that she had refused to take her tablet
[XSLP] denies any risk to herself and says she does not understand why she
was brought to hospital
[XSLP] informed us that she is on a Return to work Plan from her
communications company work where she is employed in a “desk
Has had problems in the past with bullying at work but was vague with
Has had problems with boyfriend ... and according to her they only
communicate via FB
She has been living with parents for the past week because she believes her
house has asbestos deposits
Pt thinks her own house is inhabitable and unsafe
[XSLP] denies financial stress and wants to return to work ‘3 days a
... she feels that no one supports her
Appears unkempt and uses inappropriate language with sexual
connotations
She has multiple psychosocial stressors i.e. relationship stressors (wants to
get married and have children but her partner is not
ready), her home has got
asbestos and work stress.
On review, she was manic- talking fast, flight of ideas, elevated and
sexually disinhibited...
She is staying with her parents for last 4 days as she had a fight with her
Parents noticed that she was sad initially but then started becoming unhappy.
She was saying things which were not rational. She was
expressing persecutory
delusions...
was admitted to the Bungaribee House Mental Health Unit.
27 August 2015, XSLP was discharged. She consulted Jill Abeshouse, a
psychologist. Ms Abeshouse noted:
Issues around management at
28 August 2015, Dr Singh reported:
[XSLP] was discharged yesterday without any notification or discussion with
me and is currently a voluntary patient.
Her main reason to visit me today was to get clearance to get back to work as
Telstra HR have been communicating with me about the
On review today, I found [XSLP] to be easily irritated, questioning the
reasons for her admission and treatment and though agreeable
to take medication
for some time, had no insight into her symptoms, illness or need for treatment.
In my opinion, she would be at risk of decompensating if she were to get back
to work at the moment, as she still has residual symptoms
of mania and psychosis
in addition to a complete lack of insight. However, she does not agree with
4 September 2015, XSLP consulted Ms Abeshouse, who noted:
Concerns re the way she was treated at
8 September 2015, XSLP consulted Dr Singh, who noted:
[XSLP] ... started by saying that
she wanted to go back to work
Has not been taking the prescribed dose of Epilim at this stage
only 400 mg and said she is “fine” with same
Appeared reluctant to increase it to the prescribed dosage
Not willing to discuss alternatives except Telstra or delaying return to work
by taking LSL, etc
10 September 2015, XSLP consulted Ms Abeshouse, who noted:
Allegations of bullying by
19 September 2015, XSLP consulted Dr Matthew Davies, a psychiatrist, with her
boyfriend and her mother. The doctor noted the following
EAP 2012 – relationship breakdown
Seeing Dr Singh ... Jill Abeshouse → fortnightly
→ bullied at work 2013
→ off work 2/12. Return to work plan formulated. But at last review Dr
Singh suggested [XSLP] not return to work at all (8/9).
Moved sections. Bullying
issue resolved
→ Psychological behaviour “made me paranoid”
“antagonised me” Unsure. Why. Moved different team early
Another month off “paranoid, delusions”. Initially treated with
Luvox. Problem sleeping, persecutory delusions,
delusions of reference.
→ Used LSL + SIL
→Ongoing delusions. Misidentification delusions. Meds ∆ed July
2015 to Seroquel 400mg + Epilim 500mg
Denies persecutory delusions
Mood “stable,
Dr Davies recommended a return-to-work plan: 7 hours per day for 3
days per week for 3 months after which XSLP would resume full
7 October 2015, Dr Singh reported XSLP was fit to return to work, 2 days per
week, from 9 October 2015.
21 October 2015, XSLP consulted Dr Singh, who noted:
She reports maintaining well at the moment
Has not made up her mind about the incident in 2013 as yet but aware of the
procedures that she has been told about by the Telstra
a further consultation on 4 November 2015, Dr Singh noted XSLP “
to be doing rather well
Has been to work 3 days a week and
progressing
7.30am on 21 January 2016, XSLP attended the Pacific MC and consulted Dr Syed
Hussaini. The doctor noted:
anxiety and depression
metallic taste
tightness in chest
had silver filling in tooth along mercury...thinkd its all because of
9.32am on 21 January 2016, XSLP consulted Dr Michael Burke at the Kildara
Medical Centre. The doctor noted:
Over the last five years having lots of weird feelings
be due to fillings in mouth – silver and mercury
dentist today
11.59am on 21 January 2016, XSLP consulted Dr Bansal at the Pacific MC who
Saw the dentist this am
Wonders if her symptoms sec to mercury from
The doctor provided referrals to Dr Parvathi Menon, a neurologist,
Dr Duggins, another neurologist, and Ms
attended the Pacific MC on 4 February 2016 and Dr Giridhar Parla noted
has attended for review as she need a referral to sees a
toxicologist
doctor provided a referral to Dr Naren Gunga, a toxicologist, and to Dr Faruque
Riffat, an ear nose and throat surgeon, in respect
consulted Dr Singh on 2 February 2016 and 19 February 2016. On the latter
occasion, the doctor noted:
[XSLP] reports that she has maintained well
And has been going to work full time
Has reduced the Seroquel to 200 mg nocte
Pedal edema has not settled as yet after reducing
the Epiim .Has seen neurologists (Dr Jay, Dr at Norwest )
has done a contrast MRI which is normal and seen
an ENT specialist as well
Now booked in to see the smell clinic
Same medications, increase seroquel to 300 mg
continue Epilim 700 mg
Blood tests as requested
25 February 2016, Dr Chin noted XSLP was “
seeing toxicologist Dr N
Ganga in W/mead – needs
3 March 2016, Dr Parla noted:
Received a phone call from DR Ganga and advised that as per him
[XSLP’s] symptoms are not secondary to any kind of poisoning
an dhe desnt
feel the need to see her
[XSLP] wants second opinion and wants to see a
Toxicologist
The doctor referred XSLP to Dr Richard Day, a toxicologist, and Dr
Mark Liew, a rheumatologist.
18 March 2016, XSLP consulted Dr Singh, who noted:
Had a performance review with [KH] on the Monday
She raised her concerns in writing for the last 5 years
Felt that the meeting went well and she was reassured by his replies
Also said she has seen a fertility specialist who has suggested she go off
Says she has generally been compliant with medication and only been taking
Seroquel 200 mg nocte. Has been taking Epilim 700 mg per
Denies any symptoms suggestive of psychosis or mania at the
The doctor reported to Dr Bansal and observed “
some concerns mentioned by Jill who has been seeing her more frequently but I
did not find any acute symptoms or risks
4 April 2016, Dr Day reported to Dr Parla:
... [XSLP] ... was concerned about mercury poisoning related to an amalgam
filling placed in her mouth aged about 17 years...
Some years later, aged about 24 or 25, she noticed a metallic taste in her
mouth which was quite persistent and she noticed her sense
of smell was not as
acute as it had been. She was also suffering from disturbed sleep, waking up a
lot, and at that stage there were
suggestions that this was related to stress at
In early 2013 she developed more significant symptoms of pain in her chest,
numbness and tingling in all her limbs, loss of her sense
of smell, sensation of
electric shocks in her body and diagnoses were made of anxiety, depression and
schizoaffective disorder and
she was placed on Seroquel and valproate.
Since commencing those medications her symptoms had improved somewhat,
particularly her sleep and her anxiety. There had been considerable
work where she works as a business analyst. There was bullying and threat of job
loss which apparently have resolved.
... She is very concerned about whether the symptoms that she has experienced
were related to the amalgam and the mercury leaching
from it. To this end she
will have the amalgam removed
11 April 2016, Dr Day reported the results of heavy metal test results to Dr
Parla and stated “
These values are all extremely low for all heavy
15 April 2016 and 17 April 2016, XSLP consulted Dr Singh. In respect of the
former, the doctor noted:
[XSLP] came in with her parents
Currently staying with them for a few nights
Parents reported that she has been stressed due to her partner's
mum not being well. [XSLP] appears abrupt, distractible and laughing for
reason at times. She got up frequently to drink water in between
and wanted to end the appointment early
Has not managed to get her blood test early
Mntioned somehting about her new ID card and her
new license and what the numbers mean for her ovrell
was not able to elaborate on the same eityher
To stay with parents
Increase Seroquel to 300 mg nocte
Investigations as discussed
Reiew: 2 weeks.
In respect of the latter, Dr Singh reported to Dr Bansal
It will be fair to assume that [
] is in the early stages of
a relapse at the
6 June 2016, KH, a Telstra Investment Manager, requested advice from Dr Singh in
respect of XSLP's fitness for work. KH set out
relevant events and concerns
with XSLP on 8 April 2016
and an email she was sent on that day “
potential changes within the business which
impact her role in the
XSLP responded with questions on 12 April 2016. KH set out concerns about her
behaviour on 28 April 2016, 4 May 2016,
12 May 2016, 17 May 2016, 25 May 2016
and 26 May 2016.
KH explained a
decision was taken to inform XSLP she would stay in her then present role and
the office was relocated in May 2016.
He stated he spoke to her on 10 May 2016:
... I told [XSLP] I had overheard her speaking to somebody on the phone [on 4
May 2016]. I mentioned I had heard her saying she had
been bullied and that
someone had threatened her life. I asked [XSLP] if she was OK and if she wanted
to talk about the issues she
was referring to, so that they could be
investigated, as per our process. [XSLP] did not disclose much information,
confirming she
did not wish to discuss the issue any further.... During the
conversation, [XSLP] did mention she had been feeling unwell the previous
26 May 2016, XSLP was conveyed to the Campbelltown
Dr Andy Huang, a
psychiatry registrar, reported:
[XSLP] was brought in by Ambulance under
to Campelltown Hospital
on 26/5 due to familial concerns regarding a 5-6/52 week deterioration of her
Mental State. This was in the
context of non-compliance with her medication, as
she was self-weaning off her Quetiapine and Sodium Valproate without the advice
of her Private Psychiatrist because she was trying to get pregnant. On
assessment, she exhibited characteristics of being in a Manic
Additionally, she expressed paranoid delusions of her family coercing against
her to place her in Hospital. She believed that
her dental filling was releasing
poisonous mercury into her mouth. Furthermore, she believed there has been
months of significant
workplace bullying, and believes her co-workers at Telstra
are trying to manipulate her and jeopardise her job. “There are
things going on there”, she
explained...
On admission, a registered nurse noted:
pt lived with her partner of 2 1/2 year prior to coming to live with her
parents in last 5- 6 weeks, pt mental state has been deteriorating
allegedly pt has been weaning herself of the medication a pt was planning to
start the family, pt has been under stress from
work due to bullying at work,
also partners mother had been terminally sick in the last 3 months, partner
spent most of his time
with his mother, partners mother passed away, pt planned
to attend her funeral today, became irrationa, locking herself in the room,
paranoid, manic, parentscalled the
6 July 2016, XSLP was discharged from Cambelltown Hospital. It was noted she
No longer rushing to go back to
9 July 2016, Dr Sandra Wellington certified XSLP was unfit for
16 July 2016, Dr Davies reported to Dr Chaminda De Silva that XSLP's mental
state on discharge was “
stable with no evidence of pervasive mood
disturbance or psychosis
She is oversedated on her mane
Seroquel dose, which she decreased by herself 5 days
recommended a return-to-work plan commencing on 10 August
1 September 2016, XSLP consulted Dr San San Myint at the Plumpton Medical
Centre. The doctor noted “
dizzy, tiredness” and “pressure
feeling in the
17 September 2016, Dr Davies noted:
Work going well. My manager [KH] says the General Manager Director is going
something about her position. Unsure what this means but
has caused some
anxiety. “... some uncertainty”.
No issues with work
colleagues...
15 October 2016, XSLP consulted Dr Davies, who noted:
Got made redundant on 23/9. Finishes 26/10....
Has applied for internal roles – one has come up. Will hear early next
“Been very depressed” Sleep went off the night was told so
increased Seroquel to 100 mg nocte for a few days then reduced.
Now sleeping
Still functioning at work
Appetite decreased
Not psychotic
or about October 2016, XSLP transferred into Telstra’s Global Services
team, which was managed by
5 November 2016, XSLP consulted Dr Davies and the doctor noted:
Got another job. 2 weeks ago. ...
“Very happy”
Started new job 24/10 – going well, likes team
Opportunity of career progression
Sleeping well
Appetite “not much, but still eat”
Concentration “very focussed”
asserts she was sexually harassed on 8 December 2016:
On 8 December 2016 someone took a photograph of me in the workplace with my
manager BX. A senior member of the team FJ commented “
you both look so
happy you should get
FJ denies making this comment.
18 February 2017, Dr Davies noted:
Work going well – nice workmates
Not stressed
3 March 2017, XSLP cancelled an appointment with Dr Davies on 4 March 2017.
14 March 2017, XSLP attended the Pacific MC and consulted Dr Andrea Laylo. The
doctor noted:
here for bloo dtest
on seroquel and valproate
feeling tried all teh time
deneis depression
soemtimes as well vomits no particulra time and notrelated to food
feel sok after
discussed results
advised repeat blood test liver fuction in 2-3 months
advised earlie rif with symptoms
2 May 2017, XSLP consulted Dr Taimoor Rasheed at the Pacific MC, seeking a
repeat prescription for her medications. The doctor
13 May 2017, Dr Davies noted a telephone conversation with XSLP's parents:
P/C to parents (returning their call) re [XSLP]: aware has cancelled. Very
concerned about [XSLP] and her behaviour. Staying in a
motel for 2 weeks.
Meeting with [previous partner] every second day for lunch. Seems to be under
control of her new BF “[MX]”.
Met him in Banks house. Heard [XSLP]
has money, 2 houses.
Spoke to [XSLP ] 3 weeks ago, stating [previous partner] had tried to kill
her with a drug. Prev mentioned this before being admitted.
Non compliant with medications
27 May 2017, XSLP consulted Dr Davies. The doctor noted:
Broke up with [previous partner]...
New BF “[MX]” – moved in with him. Met in hospital.
No abuse. D
Denies control.
Enjoying working – busy. Workmates supportive “really good
Sleeps well with 100mg Seroquel nocte.
Zeldox 40mg bd – concerns with Zeldox...
Mood “feel fine”
Not psychotic
Anxiety “not really” – around
work/parents
12 July 2017, DF, Supply Lead, sent an email to XSLP in which she stated:
You are really doing way too much in over servicing the accounts. I have been
in your shoes before and don’t want to see you
Please go ahead and take the day off. You need a break.
alleges she was sexually harassed on 18 July 2017. XSLP attended an off-site
Workforce Management team lunch with BX and 7 colleagues.
She alleges BX made
lewd comments about a woman in the restaurant. BX denies this. A witness recalls
BX and another employee “
commenting on a female restaurant staff member
being attractive but this was not in a lude or sexualised
evidence that she returned to the workplace and, at or about 5pm, BX
grabbed my head with his right hand, and kissed me on the left cheek
hard and for a long amount of
this occurred.
or about 20 July 2017, FJ joined the Team in which XSLP was
I understand FJ was
based in Melbourne and oversaw some changes in the operation of the Melbourne
Team, whereupon similar changes
were expected by the Sydney
9 August 2017, XSLP sent an email to BX, asking:
... Is this aimed at reducing staff in the ... team? Through natural
attrition, redundancy or through performance management?
BX replied “
This is not about reducing the tem at all but
adjusting what we are doing and how we are doing
9.48pm on 9 August 2017, XSLP sent an email to BX seeking approval of a period
Would it be okay if I take some time off to look into the attached
[screenshot]?
I am being honest, I am very stressed. Will leave it up to you as to how much
time I can take off. I think I have a few months leave.
If you want me to call
you I will. As long as I have a job to come back to after the leave. I do like
working with you guys.
replied the following morning:
[XSLP] – yes you can take leave of course. We can discuss tomorrow in
our one on one. Try and
exchange of emails ensued,
which included:
XSLP emailed BX at 8.06am:
So you are only approving a day of leave, for today 10/08/17, is that
correct? Which leave should I put in, elite athletes leave?
Or other leave?
There are less leave choices via the F% app then ever before! I have been
working for over 10 years at Telstra so
I have accrued LSL. Although I
didn’t really pick up/ accrue any tech skills (but I’m sure there is
a loooooooot of data
thanks to the big T, working with various other govt
agencies/ organisations)!
If we have a 1on1 tomorrow should I be in the office???? Or can that be done
remotely also. Depending on the above question, regarding
how much leave you are
approving???? Could you please specifically tell me the number of days you are
approving and the leave type
Gosh I am soooooooo stressed!!!! Maybe I should see a Dr. Or family planning
clinic. No scripts lol! ...
Gosh where do I start!
BX replied at 8.30am:
[XSLP] – please stay at home tomorrow as well. We can do the one on one
over the phone – there is no need to put in any
leave at this
I am worried about you.
I want DF to talk to you about the tasks we can give to someone else to
perform asap. Can she call you some time today???
At 8.49am, XSLP responded:
It’s okay I can work, I just sent a work related email just now.
Should I put in leave for today or work remotely today? If I should put in
leave, which leave type should I input into the system
and for how long? Just
I’m not playing games here, just want to know what is happening.
I can move the meetings today to when I am off leave, rather than handover.
Depending on how much leave you approve and the leave
I do like my job and the team and would like to remain employed by Telstra in
my current position.
Many thanks (which is how I used to conclude my emails).
DF can call me, if she wants to take my job then no thanks.
raised further questions about the amount and type of
leave and wrote:
6. Please confirm my current position (not sure of the position number) at
Telstra is permanent full time, regardless of having leave
or working remotely
and offshoring etc etc. Yes or No.
BX responded at 11.31am and stated:
[XSLP]– can you please put 2 days of sick leave in for the system for
today and tomorrow
Do not attend the meeting today GDC and CBA please – we will cover
those meetings
6) your role is permanent within my team ...
We have a call booked for tomorrow as a one on one which I would like to keep
At 5.58pm XSLP wrote:
Just to let you know, I have changed the leave from sick leave to annual
I think I need to see a Dr about having children. I may need to take further
leave for this to investigate, pending your approval
of course – TBA
dates. Sorry that this is so last minute, but it is kind of important. But
please do confirm my position in
your team is permanent full time, in the ...
team..., for when I return from leave (pending your approval of course).
was absent from work from 10 August 2017 to 22 January
11 August 2017, a further exchange of emails between XSLP and BX. These
At 6.59am XSLP sent an email to BX in which she stated:
I have been in pain (for a while) and haven’t slept at all (last
night), so am not well. Am not sure when I will be well. Would
probably be best
if you didn’t call me, but up to you.
Please do not call ‘next of kin’ again, not sure why that’s
a Telstra process...
Please confirm you have approved my leave ... and that my position in Telstra
At 9.50am, BX replied in the following terms:
I am sorry to hear you are feeling unwell and wish to confirm my support to
To ensure my ongoing duty of care, I do wish to speak to you to get a better
understanding of what leave/support you require at this
time – both of
which I am happy to provide. I will be contacting your verbally to discuss this
later on today – can you
please confirm a time that suits you.
Alternatively you may contact me at any time so we can
replied at 10.28am and stated:
I am not feeling well (have pain, but I won’t elaborate where) and have
I have been to many different Dr’s already and there has been no
physical diagnosis made, although have done MRI, CT scan and
other tests and
examinations.... If you like, you can request access to my medical records for
your information purposes.
I would prefer ALL correspondence in writing, if that is okay by you.
And to reiterate, please do not contact next of kin...
I am not sure when I will be better, but will let you know how I am feeling
in writing, as I do have some leave still available.
At 10.58am BX informed XSLP:
Telstra have a duty of care to all employees and based on your recent emails
and no current medical evidence to support your absence
from work, I will need
to have a verbal discussion with you as soon as possible.
this is solely to support you and ensure that you are ok and
then determine next steps. There are policies and processes that need
followed by you as an employee and at this point in time, I have no medical
information to support your absence.
I am very concerned about you and ask that you contact me asap...
15 August 2017, BX sent an email to XSLP in which he confirmed leave available
to her and stated:
... I recommend that you do take this time to focus on your health and
wellbeing by seeking appropriate medical care in this regard.
I will be in touch
with you verbally on 6 September 2017 to discuss your return on 11 September
16 August 2017, XSLP attended the Pacific MC with her partner and consulted Dr
Laylo. The doctor noted:
LOOONG consult!
note donthe file have history of bipolar ider DR. Davis
have multiple questions onteh pad
asking about seroquel ??wehn wa sit ivented ? do i know any sleeping pills
taht cause harmful effct onthe baby?? and wanted me to
ona sking- cncern as stopped seroquel 3 days ago - as wanted to get pregnant(
note onteh notes of DR. davis that he is againes that)
advised if concern we need to check pregnancy test first-
asking too many questions
advised that the best 1 to answer those quetsion is her psychitrist
advised to see Dr. davis recommend
having chest pians for years - wanted referral to see cardiologist
doesnt want to answer more questions regrading the pain
wanted refrral to see a gynecologist as concern abouit fertility f she is
going to get pregnant-
doesnt seem risk to herself
have sleepingproblem
1 September 2017, XSLP was admitted to the Bankstown-Lidcombe
The Hospital
admission and progress notes include:
Triage Comment - BNK : c802 elevated mood 4/7
rapid speech flight of ideas
community mh scheduled
non compliant with medications
refusing vital signs with cda
refusing oral medications at triage agitated mht
Pt was observed to be talking continually about the food being poisioned, the
fillings in their mouth. There were period where the
pt did stopped talking. Pt
was using inappropriate language to the nurse specialist and to the RN on duty
... Pt continues to talk about political matters, being subjected to bullying
by her colleagues. Pt refuses to lie on the bed and
rest and chooses to lie on
floor with her pink top as a pillow and continues to talk about Telstra issues,
bullying, people dying,
911 anniversary coming up, and being feed human mixed
with animal meat. Pt also continues to object to having any medication as it
could make her
infertitle...
Registrar Peter Xie noted:
Relapse secondary to non-compliance of medication and ziprasidone reduction;
possibly also substance use
Denies worrying about being poisoned but ongoing persecutory delusions
regarding GG, PL and CT.
5 September 2017, XSLP was transferred from the Bankstown-Lidcombe Hospital and
admitted to the Liverpool
The Hospital
records include the following summary in respect of her presentation:
Family contacted COMHET on 28/8/17 due to concerns with her mental state.
Documentation indicates that on phone assessment she presented
well. She also
declined a MH assessment.
According to patient and her family her private psychiatrist Matthew Davies
was weaning off her Ziprasidone due to patient’s
desire to start a family.
When [XSLP] was down to Ziprasidone 20 mg BD she left her partner ... of 4.5
years. [XSLP] then lived with
and married a man (whom she met during her
previous Bankstown admission, a fellow co-patient). She married him under the
Muslim ceremony,
her parents were not present. [XSLP] also stopped her
medications on his advice... According to patient he is currently an inpatient
at Bankshouse.
Family reports that in the week prior to admission [XSLP] has been
increasingly not making sense.
According to COMHET, on a phone call review today, she appeared elevated and
thought disordered. Her family called an ambulance/police
due to ongoing
concerns regarding an escalation of her behaviour/deteriorating mental
On review during admission, [XSLP] reported that mercury amalgam fillings are
poisonous and that there is a conspiracy involving the
government, dentists arid
the medical profession to poison everyone. Food may also be contaminated. She
reported that her ex-husband
has divorced her in order to indirectly kill her as
this will affect her heart muscle. She states that there were various people,
(...), PL (...), CT (...) who bullied her at Telstra. The aim of this was to
make her not have children.
2 November 2017, XSLP was discharged. It was noted:
... She wishes to cease her medication eventually due to the negative effects
on her pregnancy plans, however she understands that
due to her acute admission,
she should remain on her current medications for at least 3-6 months, she has an
appointment with her
private psychiatrist to discuss future medication
management.
She intends to follow return to work plan and start returning to work on
13/11/17, medcical certificate provided till
3 November 2017, XSLP consulted Dr Wellington who prescribed medications and
referred XSLP to Dr
11 November 2017, XSLP consulted Dr Davies, who noted:
Not back at work
"I was doing long days, I was stressed, I ended up taking eave at the last
minute, I don't think he was happy" CDA called to home
admitted for 2/12 "I
decided to stop my
medication" - I was getting chest pain and I wanted to get pregnant - I don't
think I was my normal self, but doesn't admit was unwell
On Invega 6mg bd, Epilim 500mg 1g nocte
"I'm ok, I feel a bit dazed, a bit tired, and reactions are a bit
9 December 2017, XSLP consulted Dr Davies, who adjusted her medications and
No anxiety – getting back to work. Using LSL currently. Will be on
leave without pay.
On 13 January 2018, in a further consultation with XSLP, Dr Davies noted:
Brought [ex-partner] today to reiterate that the
reason she had mental issues is due to bullying
Has nightmares of bullying
Still feeling tired and depressed – preoccupied with bullying and no
resolution of that
Sleep – issues with sleep, triggered by FB friend suggestions of
Chest tightness associated with anxiety – paroxysmal...
Concentration ok – able to read, but reading about bullying
Examination:
Good eye contact
Reactive but decreased
Normal speech
Worries about bullying concerning but may not be
necessarily psychotically driven
Insomnia problematic
The doctor issued a medical certificate stating that XSLP was fit
for a graduated return to work from 19 January
a letter to BX dated 13 January 2018, Dr Davies stated:
Based on my
assessments I believe [XSLP] is fit to undertake all the inherent requirements
of her role from Friday 19 January 2018.
behaviour was due to a relapse of Bipolar Affective Disorder secondary to non
compliance with her medications. [XSLP] becomes
non compliant and then unwell.
She ceases her medications because she has poor insight into her illness and
believes when she is
well she does not require treatment.
extra support and monitoring of performance upon return to work and please
a consultation with XSLP on 24 January 2018, Dr Edward Kalanzi at the Plumpton
Medical Centre noted she was “
returned to the Plumpton Medical Centre and consulted Dr Simon Ng on 31 January
2018. Dr Ng noted “
chronic mental issues
3 February 2018, XSLP consulted Dr Davies, who noted:
Back at work – ... Been back 1 week, 3/7. I
think it’s going well. Currently on reduced duties, pre-injury work.
On first day mentioned to Boss about bullying who recommended she report it,
which she has.
No bullying, has found peers nice and welcoming
6 February 2018, XSLP consulted Dr Ng, who noted:
Request mental CP
16 February 2018, XSLP emailed BX to arrange a “
3 March 2018, XSLP consulted Dr Davies, who noted:
Work “going pretty well”
Memory not as good as previously – couldn’t remember part of role
she had been doing
Currently on F/T next week
24 March 2018, XSLP consulted Dr Davies who noted:
“Everything is going well”
Seeing Christina Brock – finding cost prohibitive. Was looking at EMDR.
Would prefer to see cheaper Psycholgist
Christina would support W/C claim – so going down that path
No issues at work currently
F/T for 3/52
29 March 2018, XSLP sent an email to BX to arrange a “
Setting some time to meet today, please let me know if this time is suitable.
Have booked Room 09.11.
4 May 2018, the following message exchange between XSLP and BX is recorded:
[XSLP] 8:38 AM:
Morning [BX], hey did you want a room booked for the 9am EES
meeting?...
[BX] 8:39AM:
[XSLP]8:38 AM:
Ok all good, 09.16 :)
[BX] 8:39AM:
15 May 2018, Ms Brock reported to Dr Wellington and stated:
[XSLP] has attended six sessions of therapy to date.
[XSLP] presented with a complex presentation secondary to a history of being
bullied at Telstra. The consequences for [XSLP] has been
severe with several
involuntary admissions to inpatient psychiatric units.
diagnosis is a schizo-affective disorder unspecified (F25.9).
Over the past
four months [XSLP’s] affect is consistently flat with limited emotional
reactivity.
... she reports severe emotional and physical deprivation during her
childhood and adolescence... Her parents continue to be very
unsupportive and
judgmental refusing to have any contact with [XSLP] husband ... due to his
ethnicity. Other stressors include [XSLP]
desire to have a baby, which is
difficult due to her weight gain. A consultation with an IVF practice has
confirmed the process before
she is eligible for the program...
26 May 2018, XSLP consulted Dr Davies, who noted “
Work has been good
– no issues
In a further consultation on 4 August 2018, Dr Davies noted:
“pretty good”
No change in MH
Work – back to normal duties “which is going ok”. Doing
extra 9 hours per week
Mood “fine”
Anxiety “fine” – “stress of work occ gets to
Stopped seeing CB “don’t have time” “I fell
8 June 2018, XSLP attended the Plumpton Medical Centre and consulted Dr Indira
Datt, who noted “bipolar under
XSLP attended
the Medical Centre again on 18 June 2018 and consulted Dr Seinn Phyo, who noted
Having sleeping disturbance – insomnia, broken sleep
will f/up with psychiatrist in 1 and half mth
doctor increased the prescribed dose of XSLP’s Olanzapine. XSLP consulted
Dr Phyo again on 20 June 2018 in respect
of sleep disturbance. At that time, the
doctor’s examination notes include “
pt calm, nil obvious sign of
mania or psychotic affect
3 July 2018, BX sent an email to XSLP to schedule “
a performance
discussion for the
4 August 2018, Dr Davies reported to Dr Indira Datt at the Plumpton Medical
...I have known [XSLP] since September 2015 following an admission to
Blacktown Mental Health Unit with a First Onset Psychosis. [XSLP]
least 2 further admissions with, what now appears to be BPAD. All subsequent
admissions have been secondary to non compliance
with medications.
I reviewed [XSLP] today and am pleased to report she continues to do very
well with no symptoms of pervasive mood disturbance. She
has been compliant with
treatment...
10 August 2018, XSLP consulted Dr Datt who noted “
mental health fine pt
2 September 2018, FJ sent an email to XSLP , stating:
I understand you want to do the best you can – especially in data
management right now as we work towards OpenAir but I am raising
my concerns
should not be necessary and if I have
given you too many
responsibilities/allocations please call it out – I can easily readjust. I
will ask [BX] to have a catch
up with you this coming week to see how things are
going and to make sure your work can be completed in business hours – I
mindful of too much work and this impacting your time spent on
weekends/evenings.
13 September 2018, BX sent an email to XSLP, stating:
[XSLP]– attached is your 2018 rem statement. Thanks for all the
17 September 2018, XSLP attended the Plumpton Medical Centre and consulted Dr
Nishantha Abeydeera. The doctor issued a medical
certificate and noted:
Couldn’t sleep last night
On Seroquel now
Has cut down olanzapine
returned to the Plumpton Medical Centre on 1 October 2018 and consulted Dr Ng in
respect of “
Lt hand pin and
given a referral for nerve conduction studies. She returned on 27 October 2018,
but the results were not
In a further
consultation at the Plumpton Medical Centre on 4 November 2018 with Dr Virginia
Tamayo, the doctor noted the “
numbness gone
18 October 2018, XSLP sent an email to FJ in respect of a demand logging error
issue and efforts to “
get [WK] to work within the ...
”, to which FJ replied:
Yes [XSLP] – [WK] is sometimes challenging to manage. I know I have
tried and failed. [HY] will manage this relationship...
... I know you were trying to assist but we need rigour around demand and
[HY] will enforce this.
11 November 2018, a similar issue arose and FJ referred this to HY to attend
11 November 2018, XSLP consulted Dr Tamayo in respect of a sore throat. The
doctor noted “
headache, leg
15 November 2018, XSLP consulted Dr Datt in respect of vaccinations. The doctor
issued a medical
certificate.
23 November 2018, XSLP sent an email to FJ in which she stated:
I know I have made a few errors with demand in the past month which I am not
at all happy about, and I am aware that I need to be
extremely diligent to
ensure demand is entered correctly first time in RMT and OpenAir.
I would really like to be across demand in some capacity as well as supply,
if that is something which is possible, working more closely
with [HY] or in
whatever way you both determine for all demands...
FJ replied:
Of course – you should be across both demand and supply –
everyone in the team should be.
So let’s meet, you, me and [HY] next week and work out how to go
It will be ok – have a good weekend – your work is always
thorough I just think we can make it easier for ourselves –
and be more
efficient in our output.
28 November 2018, XSLP sent an email to FJ:
When I was updating OA ..., I found the below UC&C RMT Projects may have
been previously entered incorrectly.
As discussed yesterday – I am extremely disappointed in myself & I
am sorry if I have let slip through incorrect demand...
FJ replied:
Please don’t worry about this. The data is not correct and we are
reviewing it.
You should not waste any more time in UC demand.
[HY] will manage this if there are issues.
7.29pm on 29 November 2018, FJ replied to an email from XSLP (sent at 7.21pm) in
which she stated:
There will be no further changes on OA – it is locked down.
I am becoming concerned you are working this late on data which has already
been fixed in the latest upload from IDM.
I appreciate your efforts but this work you have done below is not required
– [HY] is across the UC Data especially relating
to UC PM’s.
30 November 2018, XSLP replied to FJ:
Apologies [FJ],
I sent the below email through because on the OA daily call ... yesterday, I
had mentioned there may be issues with some of the resource
roles in OA, and he
had asked me to send any issues through...
I didn’t want to leave yesterday’s work for today, so I was
already at home when I sent the below through
I would like to let [BX] know that I have made some errors with demand
creation on 5 projects, so he is aware also. I am very stressed
very sorry, as I see what additional checks I should have done before raising
the demands.
FJ sent the following reply:
We all make mistakes – please stop worrying.
We are all totally pre-occupied with OA – we train 400 people next week
so we have locked the data for as it is.
It will be ok – lets talk more later in our meeting.
30 November 2018, XSLP consulted Dr Win Moe at the Plumpton Medical Centre. Dr
Wants to discuss relationship between deression and heart attack
Wants to check BP
7 December 2018, XSLP attended the Plumpton Medical Centre and consulted Dr Nyi
Nyi Aung. The doctor noted:
Pt came here to record medical notes as follow:
Job=Resource Manager
Last 13 years same company
2013 bullies psychologically by 3 men (2 of them were managers)
From October 2016 to September 2017 = Supply job
From July 2018 = Demand job & supply job
One small error 16-10-2018
Another error 23-11-2018
Senior manager told her that she will be took away half of Patient’s
Demand work
Senior told her work to be reviewed without discussion and meeting
The actual manager did not talk to her last few weeks
Pt suffered anxiety, chest pain, nausea and pain the body
Actal manager kissed on patient’s cheel before September 2017 ..The
manager drank alcohol at lunch time and he came to her desk
and asked what she
is doing and she answered aas I am working. Then he grasped her head and kissed
her on her cheek.
Patient was seen by psychiatrist last visit 27-10-2018
consulted Dr Aung and Nurse Blanche Calambro on 8 December 2018. The doctor
Pt came in with partner for MHC plan (nurse booking)
Stress at work, anxiety
Afebrile GC good mood stable
nurse noted:
Pt did not continue to do MHCP because husband does not want to do it
9 December 2018, XSLP consulted Dr Deada at the Plumpton Medical Centre. The
doctor stated the reason for the consultation was
hypertension
” and noted “
stated she was bullied at
10 December 2018, XSLP returned to the Plumpton Medical Centre and consulted Dr
Aung, who referred her to the Blacktown Hospital.
The doctor noted:
anxiety, chest pain, loose motion once, vomiting once today
sleep only 4 hours last night because of chest pain
chest pain ,general body pain x 3
attended the Emergency Department of the Blacktown Hospital, where she was
examined and “
nothing remarkable
” was found, whereupon she
was discharged.
The Hospital
notes include:
Sent in by LMO with chest pain onset 30
November. Increased
stressors over past month, increase HT. states radiates down arm nocte
Examination
General ex – a bit depressed
Mental state ex – stressed a lot from work
12 December 2018, XSLP consulted Dr Aaron Cheung at the Plumpton Medical Centre.
The doctor noted:
alleged being bullied
exhibit symptom of anxietyand depression
12 December 2018, XSLP sent an email to BX and FJ, stating:
Thanks [BX] & [FJ],
I am still unwell and will at this stage return to work on Monday
17/12/2018.
17 December 2018, Dr Aung certified XSLP was unfit for work until 20 December
19 December 2018, XSLP consulted Dr Ng, who noted:
Stress with work
Counselling
Request m/c
19 December 2018, Dr Abhinav Luhach, a cardiologist, provided a report to Dr
Aung following his examination of XSLP. He stated:
... She tells me over the last few months she has been troubled with chest
discomfort. Initially her pain was fairly constant and
localised to the centre
of her chest... More recently the chest discomfort has become intermittent and
occasionally radiates down
both arms and into her throat. She tells me it is
most noticeable whilst she is at work or before she goes to sleep....
She tells me she has had a difficult time at work with bullying and some
sexual harassment and that this has corresponded with her
chest discomfort over
the last few months.
Echocardiography was normal with no hypertensive changes present.
20 December 2018, XSLP and her partner consulted Dr Aung, who noted:
Still having chest pain, anxiety mild diarrhoea
Already seen by cardiologist on 18-12-2018 next app 3 weeks later
Already seen by psychologist today next app 03-01-2019
Afebrile GC GOOD no self harm ...
NB: pt requested L seroquel 100mg 1 od script
Pt had script from psychiatrist Seroquel 200mg 2 in the evening
Pt is taking 300mg in the evening
23 December 2018, XSLP consulted Dr Su Hliang Win at the Plumpton Medical
Centre. The doctor noted:
Unwell for 3 weeks due to being bullied at work
Had vomiting, diarrhoea, constipation and chest pain
24 December 2018, 28 December 2018 and 3 January 2019 XSLP consulted Dr Aung. On
the latter occasion, the doctor noted:
Reason for visit:
Came here with ... (partner)
Seen by psychologist 2 nd time today
Slightly better today
Still having chest pain, nausea, vomiting once, constipation and
Pt is very anxious about going back to work because of possible making
another error at work place
4 January 2019, XSLP consulted Dr Aung, who noted:
Pt requested
health care plan this visit (pt refsed it previously)
requested: add symptoms: rectal pain, loss of appetite, withdraw from people
,restless, anxious, guilty,irritable, unable to relax
fast heart rate, feeling
threaten extremely,feeling intyimidated, worry about the future situation,
feeling on sedge, startle, panic,
vigilant, over spending, energetic at times,
fatigue at times, falsh back bullies and sexual harassment, sometime dizzy, pain
vagina, trouble trusting anyone
Afebrile GC GOOD
Medical Certificate given (explained pt: it needs to mention medical
condition on medical certificate as too many days sick leave)
5 January 2019, XSLP consulted Dr Aung. The doctor noted:
Reason for visit:
Medical Certificate given
Pt came back here not to mention stress and anxiety on medical
certificate
Still having stress and anxiety
Afebrile GC GOOD mood stable
Re issued M/C without explanation of medical
6 January 2019, XSLP consulted Dr Win, who noted:
Being bullied at work and sexual harassment
Blurred vision, seeing lines, clear colour vertical line
Sometimes, felt dizzy, no headache
10 January 2019, Dr Ata Rehman, a consultant in internal medicine and
preventative cardiology, provided a report to Dr Aung. Dr
Rehman stated XSLP
had a normal chest and cardiovascular system
examination
11 January 2019, XSLP and her mother consulted Dr Aung. The doctor noted:
Reason for visit:
Still having chest pain, insomnia, anxiety
Medical Certificate given
15 January 2019, XSLP consulted Dr Alan Sim at the Plumpton Medical Centre. The
doctor noted:
Referral needed
seeing psychiatrist
on Seroquel
No chest pain...
15 January 2019, Dr Davies certified XSLP was unfit for work until 15 February
16 January 2019, Dr Davies referred XSLP to the Campbelltown Hospital. The
hospital notes include:
Reason for referral: Relapse of bipolar
Presenting Problems:
Saw client yesterday, concerned about declining mental state. Exhibiting
thought disorder, recent impulsive spending... making frequent
complaints about
work colleague to employer, increased use of social media, poor
18 January 2019, XSLP was admitted to the Campbelltown Hospital Waratah House
Mental Health Unit Campbelltown Hospital. Of this,
on 30 January 2019, Dr Levan,
a psychiatry registrar, reported:
[XSLP] has been seen by this service due to MH – altered mental statePt
Brought in under
as ambulance called by her father after patient has
been disclosing experiences of bulling at work and appeared elated in her mood;
reported to her father that she has not slept for number of nights.
patient was saying that she discontinued her medication because she was
pregnant; recent tests indicated otherwise and she was commenced
medication;
... patient interpretation of reality is impaired by her internal
experiences;
The current primary diagnosis appears to be Bipolar affective disorder,
current episode manic (Final).
consultations with Dr Abishek Nagesh on 14 and 15 February 2019, on 15 February
2019, XSLP was discharged.
Levan reported:
patient was seen by Dr Nagesh yesterday,
discussed progress in terms of her mood and sleep and energy level; patient
identified that she is feeling great; ... said that she
is planning to pursue
sexual harassment case against her TElstra boss;
From information the patient disclosed to me about that sexual assault, it
appears to me that she is misinterpreting situation and
her pursuing charges
could harm her reputation and also destabilised her mental state, while she is
still talking about it is she
stable enough to continue treatment in the
Prior to discharge, a registered nurse noted:
Remains entitled and demanding.
Stated to nursing staff “I don’t want my medications until after
breakfast and I’m voluntary so I can do that”.
Denies perceptual disturbances
22 February 2019, Dr Davies reported to Dr Wellington “
Unfortunately
[XSLP] remains unwell with symptoms of hypomania and
23 February 2019, XSLP consulted Dr Aung, who noted XSLP had “
today” and she requested a work cover certificate (noting she had
two medical certificates from Dr
1 March 2019, William Moloney, a clinical nurse consultant, noted:
Progress Note
PC from Dr.Davies returning my call. I advised of our review of the client
yesterday and our concerns that she remains hypomanic.Dr.
Davies confirmed was
hypomanic when he reviewed her on 15/02. He said [XSLP] was discharged hypomanic
from hospital. He said he will
see [her] tomorrow... He main concerns from a
risk perspective is that she would be contacting people on social media
regarding her
complaints of sexual harrassment and bullying at work.
2 March 2019, XSLP consulted Dr Yana Martynova and the Plumpton Medical Centre.
The doctor noted:
Preoccupied with idea and delusions of mercury intoxication from dental
feeling and body toxicity effect from that
a further progress note on 5 March 2019, Mr Moloney noted:
PC from clients private psychiatrist (Dr.Davies). He said he saw the client
on Saturday and he feels she is unwell and vulnerable.
He believes she is
“playing with her medication”. That she had some bizarre ideas about
Ablify and had reduced her Seroquel
by half. She is still preoccupied about
developing illness from mercury and teeth fillings. She is insightless... She
has been made
redundant from her work and is still accusing her boss of sexually
harassment and others of bullying. Dr. Davies believes these claims
delusional. He sees her again in 3 weeks. He feels she was discharged unwell and
should be admitted...
5 March 2019, XSLP consulted Dr Sandra Wellington at the Complete Medical
Centre, who noted:
Bullied in 2013 by Telstra – verbal bullying -had MH issues then
related to that
Bullied again last year – in a different way – some in writing
Sexually harassed by her boss in 2017.
Made redundant
Symptomatic – high bp high cortisol levels.
Mamny other symptoms over the years.. documentned on her preiovus docs
Dr Wellington issued a medical certificate stating that XSLP was
unfit for work from 10 December 2018 to 5 April 2019, and she had
Psychological injury from work + PTSD +Bipolar disorder (brought on
by) workplace bullying and sexual harassment from 2013-2018
(work) bullying started in 2013
sexual harassment in 2017
bullying in 2018
13 March 2019, Anson Kuriakose, a mental health clinician, review XSLP with her
partner, and noted:
States there is a reason why she should not have been put in hospital
States her trauma from childhood was triggered by the reported sexual
harassment at work
States there were two incidents of sexual harassment at work
Was taking photographs and a female stated “you looked cute are you
getting married” referred to this as the first incident
of verbal sexual
She knows it is difficult to prove in court
Second incident w boss making inappropriate comments, also kissed on face
coming from behind
29 March 2019, Dr Davies reported to Dr Wellington:
...Up until 2 weeks ago [XSLP] was hypomanic but now she has developed a
depressive phase of her
26 April 2019, Dr Davies reported to Dr Wellington that “
Unfortunately
an increase in Ablify to 15mg has made little change in [XSLP’s]
depression. She also continues to have daily
anxiety to the verge of
17 May 2019, XSLP’s position was made redundant and her employment with
Telstra ended.
4 June 2019, Dr Davies reported XSLP “
remains depressed and
On 3 May 2019 and 7 June 2019, Dr Wellington issued medical certificates stating
XSLP was unfit for work.
13 June 2019, Dr Wellington certified XSLP was “
unable to work due to
the severity of her MH
Wellington certified that XSLP continued to be unfit for work thereafter to 3
August 2020.
I understand
XSLP remains unfit for work.
24 February 2020, XSLP lodged a Workers’ Compensation Claim form and
related documents
of alleged injuries in the form of Bipolar disorder, panic disorder, anxiety and
Contracted psychological injuries such as anxiety, PTSD, anxiety disorder and
bipolar disorder – please see ‘Employee
Statement Details
V0.3’ for chain of events of what caused my illnesses which essentially
bullying and sexual harassment incidents
in 2013, 2016 to 2018 caused me to have
these mental health
on 24 February 2020, XSLP provided a Telstra Human Resources Senior Specialist
with an updated ‘Donesafe’ incident
report, detailing allegations of
bullying and sexual harassment in 2013 and 2016 to
29 April 2020, Sara Brooks, a Telstra Transformation, Communications and People
employee, concluded her investigation into XSLP’s
allegations of bullying
and sexual harassment and informed XSLP the allegations were
unsubstantiated.
No report of
Ms Brooks’ investigation was produced, although notes, including findings,
have been provided to the
29 April 2020, Dr Antonella Ventura, a consultant psychiatrist, produced a
report for Telstra.
Ventura reported:
[XSLP] suffers from a condition which is outside the boundaries of normal
functioning and behaviour. In my opinion, the diagnosis
is schizoaffective
disorder, currently in the depressed phase.
... In my opinion her bipolar affective disorder or schizoaffective disorder
is not a work-related condition. She has a history of
mood disorder from 2002,
when she attempted suicide. Bipolar affective disorder and schizoaffective
disorder are constitutional disorders
and are not likely to have been caused by
employment. Furthermore, I form the view, which is supported by contemporaneous
written by her treating psychiatrist, that her beliefs of being bullied
and harassed by her employers are of a delusional nature
and part of her mental
18 May 2020, Telstra determined that XSLP was not entitled to compensation under
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation Act 1988
) and refused her compensation
30 September 2020, Dr Wellington issued a Certificate of Permanent
Incapacity.
30 July 2020 and 15 April 2021, XSLP’s legal representative, Grant Watson,
lodged a request for reconsideration of this
determination.
26 April 2021, Telstra issued a reconsideration decision, affirming the
determination to refuse XSLP’s compensation
24 June 2021, XSLP lodged an application for review of this decision by the
Tribunal. I note XSLP was subject to a Financial Management
Order issued by the
New South Wales Civil and Administrative Tribunal at the time. The Order was
dismissed on 15 September 2021.
6 January 2022, XSLP was admitted to the Nepean Hospital with expressive
aphasia. She was diagnosed with superior sagittal venous
sinus thrombosis with
left parietal venous infarct and haemorrhagic transformation. Following
treatment, XSLP was discharged on 18
5 February 2022, XSLP was admitted to the Nepean Hospital with respiratory
failure complicated by pulmonary embolism likely secondary
hypersensitivity pneumonitis related to birds
”. Following
treatment, XSLP was discharged on 9 March
21 November 2022, Dr Patricia Jungfer, a consultant psychiatrist, examined XSLP
and produced a report to Telstra for the purposes
proceedings.
Dr Jungfer gave
a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder and comorbid generalised anxiety
disorder which had arisen with “
an improved insight into the fact that
she has a mental health
regard to schizoaffective disorder, Dr Jungfer reported:
[XSLP’s] clinical presentation is consistent with a schizoaffective
disorder. The first onset of the condition was 2013 although
there was evidence
of possible psychological issues as early as 2002...
... This is a neurodevelopmental condition and evidence of the underlying
structural and neurological contribution to the presentation
is the early
diagnosis of the anosmia... This early marker of her primary psychiatric
disorder would not be caused by a stress reaction
to her workplace
experiences.
... It is because of complex small gene abnormalities contributing to the
onset and development of psychiatric illness. This schizoaffective
disorder is a
condition which arises spontaneously although it may be precipitated or
triggered by some form of external life event
or for example, substance
[XSLP] would have always developed the current psychiatric pattern that she
has in that this is a neurodevelopmental condition. The
presence of anosmia, a
clear sign of impairment of brain structure and function was an early warning
indicator of an underlying neurodevelopmental
condition. This disorder would
always have developed, and her current presentation is a component of the
natural progression associated
with poor compliance to medication throughout the
the question of employment contribution to XSLP’s schizoaffective
disorder, Dr Jungfer explained that:
[XSLP’s] psychiatric condition has not arisen because of a substantial
or material contribution from her employment. [XSLP’s]
complaints regarding bullying and harassment have, according to investigations,
as alluded to in the files, not been upheld.
... Her perception that these
events of bullying are explicable based on the impact her mental health
condition has with regards
to her interaction within the
... The first instances of bullying that she describes appears to be a
paranoid interpretation... Her perception of bullying is a
sign of her
underlying mental health condition, where due to paranoid psychosis she
misperceives what people are intending in a fashion
that she perceives them as
negative towards her.
... The outline of the incidents would indicate that [XSLP’s] mental
health was affecting her decision-making...
The documentation from [XSLP], within the context of her major mental health
condition, perseverates around various themes of a paranoid
disorders caused people to perseverate, to be unable to see the greater picture,
they have a persecutory mindset
according to their delusional thinking
The interpretation of events would be consistent with the increased
interpersonal sensitivity that can be seen in Schizoaffective
illnesses...
... The condition is a relapsing and remitting condition with episodes of
relapse possibly associated with stress but in the case
of [XSLP] her relapses
are associated with non-compliance with medication...
... There is no evidence that her relapses have occurred in the context of
significant psychosocial stress...
The schizoaffective disorder, being a neurodevelopmental condition could have
episodes of fluctuation and these might occur in the
context of significant
workplace stress...
19 July 2023 and 16 August 2023, Associate Professor Robertson, a consultant
psychiatrist, produced reports in response to briefs
provided by XSLP’s
The Associate
Professor reported a diagnosis of schizoaffective disorder, which he described
a severe and persistent mental illness
that was first
evident in 2013
He explained that “
such illnesses are complex in origin with complex
genetic, neurodevelopmental and social determinants
”. The Associate
Professor reported:
One of the contributing factors was her experience of psychosocial stress in
the workplace, which exacerbated the pathophysiological
process that led to the
development of psychosis.
12 December 2023, Dr Jungfer produced a supplementary report for Telstra,
responding to matters discussed by Associate Professor
Robertson. Dr Jungfer
No doubt the normal day to day ability to work in her role would have been
affected by her schizoaffective disorder (it can affect
concentration and
cognition, as can the medication), and lead to an experience of stress which
would have set up a self-perpetuating
cycle of increased stress. This does not
equate to causation nor did this stress lead to her “contracting”
health disorder...
... I agree with Associate Professor Robertson that stress can influence the
onset and course of schizoaffective disorder, leading
to the expression of the
disorder and symptom
fluctuation...
3 July 2024, briefed by XSLP’s lawyer, Associate Professor Robertson
produced a further report, having reviewed Dr Jungfer’s
The Associate
Professor reported:
... we concur that in the complex origins of schizophrenic illnesses,
psychosocial stress is a significant contributing factor. We
also both accept
the premise that there may have been workplace stressors that were contributory
to the onset of her illness. The
putative workplace stress was not the
“cause” of her schizophrenic illness, but rather a factor which
contributed to
the elaboration of a psychotic episode in interaction with other
issue for determination is Telstra’s liability to pay XSLP compensation in
respect of as ‘injury’ under the
SRC Act within the terms of the
claim she lodged on 24 February 2020.
case was run under the ‘disease’ provisions of the SRC Act and, more
particularly, on grounds of aggravation.
No issues relating to an ‘injury
(other than a disease)’ have been raised, ventilated, or squarely
contended. On the
materials I have examined, I am satisfied no such issues arise
and it is not necessary to proceed further to consider them. The claim
respect of an ‘ailment’ XSLP alleges was caused, aggravated and
significantly contributed to by her previous employment.
Consequently,
and more specifically within the scope of the claim, it is necessary to answer
the following questions:
(a) does XSLP suffer from an ‘ailment’; and if so
(b) does XSLP have a ‘disease’, being an ailment or an aggravation
of an ailment to which her employment contributed
to a significant degree; and
(c) did XSLP suffer the disease as a result of reasonable administrative action
undertaken in a reasonable manner in respect of her
employment; and if not
(d) does the ‘injury’ result in impairment or incapacity for work;
(e) what is the date of the ‘injury’?
Submissions
asserts she experienced circumstances in her previous Telstra employment which
significantly contributed to her schizoaffective
disorder ailment. She argues
the circumstances include stressful duties, unfair treatment, bullying and
sexual harassment. These
circumstances, so the argument goes, actually occurred
and they contributed to a significant degree to aggravate her disorder. In
submission, the employment circumstances were significant in contributing to
escalation, destabilisation and recurrence of symptoms
of the disorder.
asserts she was sensitised to sexual harassment by unwanted sexual experiences
as a child, and her exposure to sexual harassment
in her previous employment was
re-traumatising. She also asserts working long hours and being sleep deprived
when taking on new roles
and duties aggravated her disorder. She contends, in
the context of her underlying disorder, albeit developing in the background,
vulnerability to such stressors, even minor stressors, was heightened during
periods she ceased taking medications.
accepts she cannot recover compensation for things she has imagined which did
not actually occur. This notwithstanding, relying
she argues her claim should not be refused on
the basis she misinterpreted actual events or formed adverse perceptions in
to events or circumstances which actually occurred. Where such
misinterpretations or adverse perceptions made a significant contribution
escalation, destabilisation or recurrence of symptoms she asserts she is
entitled to recover.
asserts XSLP’s disorder is neurodevelopmental, and it was not
significantly contributed to by her previous employment
by Telstra. In
Telstra’s submission, relying on
previous employment became the focus of her mental illness and it played a part
in her illness to this extent, but not
to the extent of making her illness
worse. Telstra argues the correct approach was discussed in
Dean v Australian
Postal Corporation
) and a distinction must be drawn between an ailment
becoming worse in the context of employment and it being made worse by the
employment.
Telstra contends the fixation of an already sick mind on
circumstances in the person’s employment is not sufficient unless
established the employment contributed to a significant degree to make the
symptoms worse.
Furthermore,
Telstra alleges if it is found XSLP has a ‘disease’, the
‘disease’ is not an ‘injury’
at it resulted from
reasonable administrative action undertaken in a reasonable manner in respect of
her employment.
first question is whether XSLP suffers from an ‘ailment’.
The word ‘ailment’ as
defined in s 4(1) of the SRC Act:
means any physical or mental ailment, disorder,
defect or morbid condition (whether of sudden onset or gradual development).
compensation claim is in respect of anxiety, post-traumatic stress disorder,
bipolar disorder and panic
extensive medical materials before the Tribunal establish that XSLP has
experienced periodic symptoms of anxiety, depression,
paranoid delusions, mania
and psychosis.
weight of medical evidence before the Tribunal, including the evidence of Dr
Associate Professor
Robertson and Dr Jungfer, is that XSLP suffers from schizoaffective disorder. Dr
Jungfer discussed controversial
aspects of a schizoaffective disorder diagnosis,
relative to a diagnosis of schizophrenia, and reported XSLP also suffers from a
co-morbid generalised anxiety
Dr Davies reported
a diagnosis of bipolar affective disorder which was revised to Schizoaffective
Dr Ventura consider
bipolar affective disorder to be an alternative diagnosis to schizoaffective
While it is
possible XSLP suffers from psychiatric comorbidities such as generalised anxiety
disorder or bipolar affective disorder,
I accept the diagnostic opinions of Dr
Singh, Dr Davies, Associate Professor Robertson and Dr Jungfer.
am satisfied XSLP’s mental ‘ailment’ is best described as
schizoaffective disorder.
threshold test of a ‘disease’ for the purposes of the SRC Act is set
out in s 5B:
(1) In this Act:
(a) an ailment suffered by an employee; or
(b) an aggravation of such an ailment;
that was contributed to, to a significant degree, by the employee’s
employment by the Commonwealth or a licensee.
(2) In determining whether an ailment or aggravation was
contributed to, to a significant degree, by an employee’s employment
the Commonwealth or a licensee, the following matters may be taken into
(a) the duration of the employment;
(b) the nature of, and particular tasks involved in, the
employment;
(c) any predisposition of the employee to the ailment or
aggravation;
(d) any activities of the employee not related to the
employment;
(e) any other matters affecting the employee’s
This subsection does not limit the matters that may be taken into
(3) In this Act:
significant degree
means a degree that is substantially
more than material.
word ‘aggravation’ is defined in s 4(1) to include acceleration or
recurrence.
asserts she was exposed to bullying, sexual harassment and unfair treatment, as
well as work stresses in her previous employment
which significantly contributed
to and aggravated her mental disorder. She alleges these circumstances actually
occurred and, relying
to the extent her adverse perceptions
ailment, she
meets the threshold for a ‘disease’.
should immediately observe some caution is required when applying
in a case of this kind. As Abraham J observed in
), a ‘disease’ requires higher threshold of employment
contribution to an ailment under s 5B(1) of the SRC Act than applied
was decided.
von Doussa J discussed the relevance of an employee’s
perception in the following two key passages:
24. ... All that is required is that the employee is exposed to some incident
or state of affairs in the course of the performance
of his duties and to which
he would not otherwise have been exposed, which is a contributing factor to the
ailment or an aggravation
of the ailment suffered by the employee. A
perception held by the employee will meet a “reality” test for the
of the definition of disease if it is a perception about an incident or
state of affairs that actually happened.
31. ... there is no requirement at law that the interpretation placed on the
incident or state of affairs by the employee, or the
employee’s perception
of it, is one which passes some qualitative test based on an objective measure
of reasonableness. If
the incident or state of affairs actually occurred, and
created a perception in the mind of the employee (whether reasonable or
unreasonable
in the thinking of others) and the perception contributed in a
material degree to an aggravation of the employee’s ailment,
requirements of the definition of disease are fulfilled.
can be seen, the key question is whether the employee has been exposed to an
incident or state of affairs in the course of the
relevant employment which
contributed to the ailment or an aggravation. Importantly, the contributory
threshold which applied in
case was ‘a material
degree’. A different threshold applies in this case under legislative
amendments which came into
effect in 2007, namely a contribution to ‘a
significant degree’. The term ‘significant degree’ is given
in s 5B(3) of the SRC Act:
significant degree
means a degree that is substantially more than
Consequently,
the key question in this case is whether XSLP was exposed to an incident or
circumstance in her previous employment
which contributed to a significant
degree to her schizoaffective disorder ailment or to aggravation of the ailment.
In answering
this question, regard must be had to the matters set out in s 5B(2)
of the SRC Act.
are two steps to consider. First, it is necessary to make factual findings in
respect of the nature and incidents of the psychiatric
change. Then, having
regard to the matters set out in s 5B(2) of the SRC Act, it is necessary to
examine the relevant probative materials
in order to determine if the incidents
or state of affairs in the employment contributed to the psychiatric change to a
significant
this context, it is important to recognise that an employee’s firm belief
particular circumstances in their employment significantly
contributed to their
ailment does not make it so.
Even though the Full Federal Court in
Kirkpatrick v Commonwealth of Australia
was dealing with
different statutory thresholds in antecedent legislation to the SRC Act, the
following observation is presently
The fact that XSLP thought his disability arose out of his work, and
therefore thought it compensable, may have been potent factors
development of his neurosis. But these were thoughts in his mind. They did not
mean that his employment actually was a contributing
factor in the development
of his neurosis. The contrary view would lead to absurd
consequences.
as belief is not sufficient to found an injury, simply becoming sick in the
course of employment, including the experience of
subjective symptoms without an
accompanying psychiatric change, is also not
sufficient.
A contributory
connection, to a significant degree, between disturbance of the employee’s
normal mental functioning and
circumstances of the relevant employment is required. The threshold for a
‘disease’ turns on the old causal conception
of getting hurt only to
the extent the employment must be found, in fact, to have contributed to the
ailment or the aggravation to
a significant degree. On this point, if the
ailment or aggravation is multifactorial, the focus of the inquiry is squarely
the employment contributed to a significant degree.
is this which raises difficult factual questions in XSLP’s case. Did
XSLP’s previous employment significantly contribute,
in fact, to the onset
or ‘aggravation’ (recurrence, destabilisation or worsening) of her
schizoaffective disorder? She
firmly believes this to be true. In the context of
her mental illness, did XSLP latch onto aspects of her previous employment she
believes contributed to her development of symptoms of her mental illness?
Without the contributory threshold being met, it is not
sufficient for her
previous employment to be a setting in which XSLP’s ailment emerged or was
expressed. Where actual incidents
of the employment are the focus of
XSLP’s disordered perceptions, and the adverse perceptions aggravate or
destabilise the
ailment she suffers, the key question is whether the incidents
of the employment, in fact, causally contributed to the aggravation
destabilisation of the ailment to a significant degree.
Psychiatric change
Professor Roberston and Dr Jungfer gave consistent evidence of the
neurodevelopmental, episodic and recurring nature of
schizoaffective disorder. Dr Jungfer explained, in female patients, it is
relatively common for the Disorder to first
emerge in their mid to late
Davies reported XSLP “
presents with First Onset Psychosis that likely
began in 2013
Singh reported XSLP has had symptoms of schizoaffective disorder “
least since late
This aligns
with records of XSLP’s presentation to the Emergency Department of the
Blacktown Hospital on 1 September 2013 with
symptoms of anxiety and suicidal
and her admission
to Nepean Hospital on 25 October 2013 with a psychotic
It was noted XSLP
had a gradual increase in delusional thought over the previous 6 months and
multiple delusions, some are
Jungfer and Dr Ventura considered it relevant that XSLP experienced symptoms of
depressed mood for which she obtained counselling
treatment in July 2012, and
she had an episode of self-harm in 2002 following a “
with her then boyfriend.
Dr Sreeharan’s 14 July 2012 clinical note, XSLP was experiencing
unexplained physical symptoms and headaches, and “
” in the context of a “
” break-up with
her then long-term partner. This is consistent with Dr King’s 8 October
2013 report XSLP had not been
feeling entirely well since January 2012 and she
developed unexplained physical symptoms in 2012 and March 2013. The history Dr
recounted in his 8 October 2013 report illuminates a progression of
symptoms, including physical symptoms without neurological
explanation,
preceding period:
[XSLP] said she last felt entirely well in January 2012. During the year she
started getting episodes of pins and needles and numbness
in the right side of
her head. She indicated the right forehead and right temporal region. Sometime
during the year her boyfriend
left the house they were sharing and she was
living alone. They formally broke up in December 2012. Around March this year
she started
getting a pinching feeling in the ribs. This usually affected the
right side, approximately around the right sixth rib region and
since then she
has had episodes affecting the left side. She had an episode at work where she
said the whole of her right side “seized
up”. She said she was
unable to describe this in different words but I understood there was some pain,
numbness and possibly
some tensing of muscles though she was not clear on the
latter. At other times she has had episodes where she feels her whole body
constricting. She said she has been on sick leave intermittently from work
during this time... She said she had the feeling at
work that work colleagues
were not explaining her work duties to her and were withholding information from
her that would allow her
to do her job. She said that when working on a computer
at home she was getting strange messages but when asked about this could
explain that she had multiple difficulties logging on to banking establishments.
She says that she perceives things on TV or
on the internet as though she has
been targeted in some way.
Jungfer expressed the opinion these physical or somatic experiences are
consistent with prodromal symptoms of XSLP’s psychotic
illness. Dr Jungfer
gave evidence XSLP’s account of not being given enough instructions at
work would be consistent with the
cognitive effects of her emerging disorder
which adversely affected her ability to function at work. It is Dr
Jungfer’s opinion
XSLP’s unexplained
is possibly a
neurological symptom associated with her schizoaffective
Associate Professor
Robertson was not persuaded that anosmia and ‘soft neurological
signs’ are linked with subsequent
development of schizophrenia. Even
though there may be a medical controversy about such matters, I accept Dr
Jungfer’s evidence
it is probable the unexplained physical or somatic
symptoms XSLP experienced in 2012 and 2013 are likely to have been prodromal
of schizoaffective disorder. I also accept that the emergence of
XSLP’s schizoaffective disorder is likely to have affected
her cognitive
functions and her interpretation or perception of events in her workplace from
early in 2013, at least.
all likelihood, XSLP’s ailment progressed thereafter with the emergence of
cognitive symptoms which became apparent in the
context of her employment in the
period prior to the episode of psychosis which emerged in September and October
2013. The evidence
of Dr Singh, Dr Davies, Dr King, Dr Jungfer, Associate
Professor Robertson and Dr Ventura support this conclusion.
this evidence it is probable XSLP’s schizoaffective disorder emerged
gradually, commencing with prodromal physical or somatic
symptoms in 2012 and
increasing cognitive, mood and behavioural symptoms through 2013 prior to her
admission to Nepean Hospital with
florid psychosis on 25 October 2013.
was in this context, XSLP’s employment role changed in March 2013. She
transferred to a new team, with a new manager (GG)
and different duties to those
she had previously undertaken. She alleges she was not provided a job
description for her new role,
and she was not given clear guidance or training.
On GG’s evidence I am satisfied XSLP was required to meet deadlines and,
on some occasions, she was required to work long hours. It can be accepted XSLP
found the change in her employment role and the new
workload it entailed
somewhat challenging, tiring and stressful.
July 2013, Dr Wan noted XSLP was experiencing physical symptoms and headaches,
a bit of work stress at the moment
”. No physiological
explanation for the physical symptoms XSLP experienced was identified. On the
evidence of Dr Jungfer, it
is probable these symptoms were prodromal and
somatic. There is no evidence XSLP’s employment contributed to the
physical symptoms
Dr Wan noted at the time and it appears Dr Wan did not
consider the “
bit of work stress
” XSLP described was
consistent with an ailment of any kind. In all likelihood, XSLP was experiencing
stress coping with her
new role in the context of her increasing cognitive and
somatic symptoms, albeit not recognised or diagnosed at that time.
XSLP attended Blacktown Hospital on 1 September 2013, she was noted to be
experiencing physical symptoms and “
recent stressors with social
”. The notes record XSLP “
brok up with boyfriend
Patient reported that she is quite stressed and mainly due to her work place.
She said her work is mainly going to out source such
as “India” and
her position is in a threatening situation. Moreover she had difficulties with
her Boss who she thinks
lies most of the time and not keeping transparencies.
She also reported some conflict with work colleagues and said basically she
feels stressed as she has to earn something but she does not feel comfortable
there. Mother said that on top of this they are also
doing renovation to the
contemporaneous employment records suggest XSLP was required to apply for
another position in Telstra, which she obtained. Viewed
objectively, the
contemporaneous records do not support XSLP’s assertions of having
difficulties with her boss, GG or CT, and
conflict with work colleagues. The
available records and the evidence of GG suggest efforts were made to support
XSLP during this
this time, XSLP is noted to have attributed her physical symptoms (which lack
any physiological medical explanation) to stress:
Patient stress at work in the past six months, patient states her stress is
the cause of her physical symptoms.
is no contemporaneous or expert medical evidence which supports this
proposition.
similar history was noted by the Nepean Hospital when XSLP was admitted in a
psychotic state on 25 October 2013:
Work stressors trigger this episode 6
months ago with gradual ↑ in delusional thoughts
. It is open to infer
this history was provided by XSLP’s then treating psychologist, Rita Aziz,
on information she obtained
from XSLP. The history of work stressors triggering
an episode 6 months earlier is not supported by contemporaneous medical
The hospital notes reveal that XSLP had not been taking medications
prescribed for her mental condition as she was concerned about
side effects. On
the evidence of Dr Jungfer and Associate Professor Robertson, it is likely this
contributed to her susceptibility
to experience increased symptoms.
is likely XSLP developed adverse perceptions about her employment situation
including her work colleagues and manager, which she
raised in retrospect. It is
likely her adverse perceptions were informed by cognitive distortions as her
emerging schizoaffective
disorder progressed in 2013.
the evidence of Dr Jungfer and Associate Professor Robertson, it is possible
XSLP’s experience of stress, changing her work
roles and duties, might
have contributed to her advancing cognitive and somatic symptoms to some degree.
The available evidence does
not satisfy me any such contribution was to a
significant degree. The more likely conclusion which can be drawn from the
evidence, particularly the evidence given by Dr Jungfer, is that as
XSLP’s mental illness emerged, she fixed on circumstances
employment and related stress to explain symptoms she was experiencing.
XSLP’s allegations of bullying and harassment
by GG, CT and PL are not
supported by relevant objective materials of probative value.
am satisfied XSLP’s previous employment did not contribute to a
significant degree to the onset or emergence of her schizoaffective
disorder in
2012 to 2103.
extensive medical records in evidence, some of which I have discussed above,
clearly demonstrate the continuing course of XSLP’s
schizoaffective
disorder, including the variable symptoms and episodes of psychosis she
experienced in the period from 2013 to May
2019, when her Telstra employment
can be seen XSLP’s schizoaffective disorder has followed a fluctuating
course marked by episodes of psychosis which required
hospitalisation in
, and periods in which
XSLP’s primary symptoms were treated with medications and were less
apparent. Nevertheless, it is probable,
on Dr Jungfer’s evidence,
XSLP’s disorder resulted in perseveration of cognitive distortions
around themes of a paranoid
relating to a
persecutory mindset, including “
delusions of reference, paranoid and
persecutory
periods of paranoid thinking, persecutory ideas and depressive
symptomatology
The evidence of Associate Professor Robertson does not suggest any different
conclusion. I am satisfied the perseverative expressions
schizoaffective disorder persisted during periods when her primary psychotic
symptoms were managed and she was taking
prescribed medications. Her symptoms
became worse during periods when she was not compliant with prescribed
medications.
the period from 2013 to the cessation of XSLP’s Telstra employment (and
thereafter), I am satisfied XSLP’s perceptions
were affected by ongoing
cognitive distortions and persecutory delusions within the framework of
perseverative ideas Dr Jungfer described.
The distortions and delusions are
exemplified by XSLP’s concerns about mercury poisoning and the adverse
effects of medications,
as well as her focus on perceptions of alleged bullying
and sexual harassment in 2013, 2016, 2017 and 2018 which Dr Singh, Dr Davies,
Nagesh and other treating doctors considered to be delusional.
is a great deal of contemporaneous material, including the evidence of Dr Singh
and Dr Davies for example
that suggests XSLP continued to experience, at least episodically, somatic
symptoms and she became preoccupied with beliefs about
alleged events and
incidents in her employment. This is consistent with the evidence of Associate
Professor Robertson and Dr Jungfer
in respect of the persistence of XSLP’s
persecutory thinking and cognitive distortions. I am satisfied XSLP became
pre-occupied
with perceptions she believed to be true about events or incidents
in her employment, involving GG, CT, PL, BX and FJ. Nevertheless,
her repeatedly
expressed desire to return to work was not diminished by her adverse perceptions
or by her recurring perception her
employment was under threat.
all likelihood, XSLP focussed on these perceptions over the course of her
illness from 2013, at least.
is also likely XSLP experienced elevated symptoms and/or episodes of psychosis
when she was not fully compliant with prescribed
medications in 2014, 2015,
2016, 2017, 2018 (albeit not resulting in hospitalisation) and 2019.
XSLP’s lack of insight into
her mental illness and her propensity to
reduce or cease taking prescribed medications without medical advice is a
recurring factor
in the contemporaneous and medical records.
Employment contribution
her evidence, retrospectively, XSLP stated the stresses involved in her work in
2013 included:
(a) working very long hours and overworking;
(b) interpersonal conflict with manager GG and later CT, and other employees in
(c) being placed under pressure to complete tasks within unreasonable timeframes
and unnecessarily;
(d) confusion and short notice of meetings without adequate preparation;
(e) inappropriate comments being made by her colleagues;
(f) a colleague taking pictures of her without explanation;
(g) colleagues humiliating her in front of other staff;
(h) making reference to the youngest member of the team being sacrificed; and
(i) sending urgent work emails to her personal email
By May 2013 I was experiencing chest symptoms which at the time I thought
might be a heart attack. The muscles were seizing up. I
continued to experience
fluctuating discomfort in my side and under my armpit. I had pins and needles in
my arm. I was not sure what
was happening... I had not experienced symptoms like
this before...
By September 2013 the chest symptoms got to the point where I was taken by
ambulance to Blacktown Hospital, where I was treated in
the emergency
department...
By about April 2015 my mental health had become much worse, and I again had
to go off work for various periods. Since the incidents
and problems with my
team in 2013, it felt like I was no longer able to cope with my work like I did
her evidence, XSLP stated she experienced the following stresses in her
employment from October 2016 to December 2018:
(a) Overwork and working very long hours;
(b) Inappropriate comments made by colleagues;
(c) Placing unreasonable pressure on me in circumstances where my manager
knew that I had a psychological condition and had had lengthy
periods off work
due to stress;
(d) Comments and behaviours which I consider to be unwanted sexual
harassment...; and
(e) Difficulties with workplace interactions and interpersonal conflicts with
more senior colleague [FJ] regarding allocation of work,
alleged mistakes,
workload issues, confusion as to who was responsible for what, and other
I found it very stressful. I worked long hours. Like when I returned to work
in 2014, I felt like I was no longer able to cope with
my work like I had
before. Sometime it would be okay, and then other times, especially when I was
put under any kind of pressure
or had to deal with difficult colleagues, I found
it overwhelming. It would aggravate my psychological symptoms and my anxiety in
particular would become much
has given extensive retrospective accounts of work stresses, including
allegations of bullying and sexual harassment, in her
Telstra employment which
she strongly believes caused and significantly contributed to her mental
disorder. I have no doubt she believes
these accounts and the perceptions from
which they arise to be true.
has made extensive allegations of:
(a) bullying by GG, PL and CT in
(b) bullying and sexual harassment by FJ and BX in 2016, 2017 and
allegations were investigated by Telstra, albeit in an informal process, and no
sexual harassment or bullying was found to have
regard to 2013, XSLP has alleged 14 ‘Verbal Incidents’ occurred from
April to November 2013,
‘Incidents with email evidence’ occurred from March 2013 to December
alleged verbal incidents involve GG and PL. She alleges GG “
enjoy putting me under immense pressure regarding a high profile task and then
telling me at the last minute that the timeframe
was not required and then he
would take me down to a café and ask me what I was
asserts GG took a photograph of her without explaining why and he humiliated her
by asking her to stand to be introduced to other
employees. XSLP alleges GG told
the company was going through changes, and that more IBM personnel
were being onboarded, and I
had a choice to ‘get with it or get
out’ of the company
”, and she viewed this as
threatening.
allegations lack corroboration and, although it is possible they occurred, the
underlying facts are not made out. GG gave oral
and written evidence which
reveals a level of concern for XSLP’s wellbeing at the time, particularly
in her then new role.
Unfortunately, BX, who replaced GG in mid-2013, was not
available to give oral evidence for health reasons. His written statement
not been tested and this affects the weight it can be given. That said, it is
largely consistent with GG’s evidence of
concern for XSLP’s mental
health and wellbeing, and it does not align with XSLP’s account of her
employment circumstances
in the lead up to her psychotic episode in October
asserts, in June 2013, she stayed back working late and GG “
offered at 11pm at night to take me out for dinner
” where he related a
story about “
being in a row boat on a river, and the boat capsizing,
and then another row boat full of persons with down syndrome beating him nearly
to death with rowing
alleges, on another occasion in June 2013, GG told her a story about killing an
ex-girlfriend’s cat. GG gave evidence the
boating story is true and he
related it to XSLP, although he disputes that this occurred over dinner at 11pm
at night. I accept GG’s
evidence on these points. GG flatly rejects the
allegation he told XSLP a story in which he killed an ex-girlfriend’s cat.
This allegation lacks probative support and it is not made out.
asserts, in April 2013, PL humiliated her by “
calling me a petulant
child in front of all other employees on the floor, whilst I was crying and
” and, when discussing a team offsite workshop, he
suggested that the youngest member of the team would be
‘sacrificed’ at the remote farm location (killed) referring to
and laughing about
She alleges PL
that my computer could be being monitored by
he had my old laptop also (and was going through
”. She alleges in August PL asked “
if my parents or
boyfriend were going over a cliff, who would I save?
”. PL was not
called to give oral evidence. These allegations rely on XSLP’s account,
alone, and the factual basis of
these assertions has not been established.
XSLP’s perceptions about these matters have a paranoid or persecutory
consistent with and likely attributable to her then emerging
schizoaffective disorder and related cognitive distortions.
allegations in respect of ‘Incidents with email evidence’ in 2013
include that she was not given a job role
description, one on one meetings with
GG or CT were declined, an annual performance review meeting did not take place
and she was
not provided with a Performance Review Development Plan for 2 years,
She asserts, in March
to July 2013, she “
started to receive mixed communication, short notice
to attend meetings and not being provided with a brief or explanation of what
role/purpose was within certain meetings
” and she was required to
produce a report following an Apptio meeting about which, on 16 July 2013, CT
joked that the report would “kill
XSLP asserts, in August 2013, she was excluded from Unit Costing activities and
she was enrolled in training when she was on extended
sick leave. She alleges CT
sent work emails with a ‘same day’ timeframe to her personal email
account in December 2013.
CT was not called to give oral evidence. There is some
documentary evidence to support her allegations in respect of seeking meetings
with CT and a Performance Review Development Plan in May 2013, and I am
satisfied XSLP sought clarification of her role in August
2013. I accept XSLP
struggled to comprehend aspects of the role she took on in March 2013, and she
found this to be challenging.
the evidence of Dr Jungfer and Associate Professor Robertson, these matters and
the stress XSLP experienced may well have contributed
to the destabilisation or
elevation of symptoms of her schizoaffective disorder ailment. As will appear, I
am not satisfied these
stressors and XSLP’s related perceptions
contributed to her ailment to a significant degree, being a degree which is
substantially
greater than material.
2016, 2017 and 2018, XSLP has raised 12 alleged incidents involving FJ and BX.
She alleges she was bullied by FJ on 6 occasions
and by BX on 2 occasions
, and that FJ and BX
sexually harassed her on 2 occasions in
and BX sexually
harassed her on 2 occasions in
allegations of bullying by FJ include FJ removing ‘Demand' work from XSLP
in October 2018 in a manner which singled
her out and XSLP considered to be
unjustified, unreasonable and unfair, and FJ sending XSLP an email on Sunday 11
November 2018 about
restrictions on updating ‘RMT’ which allegedly
did not apply to others.
alleges, on 23 November 218, FJ asked another employee to correct a mistake XSLP
made duplicating a Demand code and instructing
” which she considered to be humiliating. In response to this,
XSLP alleges she reviewed “
all CCC demand
” on 26 to 28
November 2018 outside business hours, without being asked to do so, and informed
FJ of her findings, but FJ’s
made me feel
psychologically confused, abused and bullied
”, and she considered FJ
telling her “
to not be so ‘worried’
” amounted to
playing psychological mindgames
” with her. XSLP alleges
FJ acted as her manager when she was not, and she victimised XSLP. The relevant
materials establish
a factual basis, in which FJ engaged in day-to-day
management of XSLP’s work. FJ gave evidence of her concern about
wellbeing and the protective actions she took to ensure
XSLP’s workload and duties were appropriate and not excessive. I accept
FJ’s evidence on these points and find she removed work duties from XSLP.
I am satisfied FJ treated XSLP somewhat differently
to other employees following
her return to work and XSLP perceived this as bullying.
Considering
these matters, even though there is a factual basis to some aspects of
XSLP’s allegations in respect of these matters,
it is not established they
contributed to her schizoaffective disorder ailment to a significant degree.
asserts on 8 December 2016 a photograph was taken of her with BX for a team
newsletter and FJ allegedly said “
you both look so happy, you should
both get married
FJ denies saying this. I am not satisfied XSLP’s perception of the comment
she attributes to FJ has a factual foundation.
alleges her former manager, BX, sexually harassed her on 18 July
She has given extensive
accounts of these allegations. XSLP alleges BX made lewd comments about another
woman during a team lunch
and after returning to the office he “
my head with his right hand, and kissed me on the left check hard and for a long
amount of time
XSLP asserts “
it wasn’t until I was bullied by [FJ] from
18/10/2018 to 30/11/2018 that I remembered this incident properly
she realised “
with hindsight
” these (and other alleged
bullying incidents) triggered a relapse of her Disorder which rendered her unfit
for work from 10
August 2017 to 22 January 2018 and required admission to
Bankstown and Liverpool Hospitals from 1 September 2017 to 2 November 2017.
These alleged incidents are not supported by relevant, reliable probative
material. In his untested statement, BX rejects XSLP’s
assertions.
am satisfied the team lunch occurred on 18 July 2017, but I am not satisfied
other aspects of XSLP’s perceptions about BX’s
alleged conduct have
a factual basis. XSLP asserts that she remembered this alleged incident
” in October 2018. I note, on 17 September 2018, Dr
Abeydeera recorded that XSLP had reduced her Olanzapine medication, and
subsequent medical records reveal she experienced unexplained symptoms including
numbness and pins and needles. There are real questions
mental health in the period following reduction of Olanzapine in September 2018
to 15 January 2019, at which time
Dr Davies considered she was relapsing into
hypomania and referred her to Cambelltown Hospital. Even if one accepts XSLP
formed adverse
perceptions about the events of 18 July 2017 and her perceptions
contributed to her schizoaffective disorder ailment, which is possible,
available evidence of probative value, for reasons which I discuss below, I am
not satisfied the contribution was to a significant
allegations of bullying by BX are in respect of “
unreasonable
” in the period from June to August 2017, when she was
already suffering from Bipolar Disorder
”, and BX’s
request for XSLP to provide a medical certificate covering absences on 10 and 11
August 2018. It is likely
XSLP was working long hours in the period from June to
August 2017 and BX asked her to provide medical certificates for her absences
10 and 11 August 2018. The documentary evidence suggests BX was concerned about
the long hours XSLP was working. There is insufficient
probative evidence to
establish BX required XSLP to work ‘unreasonable overtime’. BX
denies he did so, but his written
statement has not been tested and this reduces
the weight it can be given. Nonetheless, it is possible these events and
related perceptions contributed to her schizoaffective disorder
ailment but, as will appear, I am not satisfied any such contribution
significant degree.
asserts by about 8 August 2017 she was “
starting to relive the bullying
incidents from
This aligns
with the evidence of Dr Singh and Dr Davies that XSLP was pre-occupied with
these alleged events.
asserts on 4 May 2018 BX “sent me a communicator message with kiss kiss,
as “xx” at the end of the
“would unnecessarily touch my arm on occasion especially in
BX accepts he
included ‘xx’ at the end of a Chat communication to XSLP on 4 May
2018, but he rejects the proposition
he unnecessarily and excessively touch
XSLP’s arm during closed door
assertion BX unnecessarily touched her arm in the course of her employment lacks
corroboration and I am not satisfied
this occurred. Noting the Telstra
investigation finding,
allegation BX included ‘xx’ at the end of a Chat communication to
XSLP on 4 May 2018 can be accepted. Even though
it is possible this event and
XSLP’s perceptions of it might have contributed to her schizoaffective
disorder ailment to some
extent, this is not established by relevant probative
am satisfied XSLP experienced cognitive distortions as a result of her
schizoaffective disorder in the context of her employment
during and after 2013.
The distortions she experienced probably informed her perceptions of events
which occurred in her workplace,
in her employment and in her life. On Dr
Jungfer’s evidence, XSLP’s mental health condition would have
affected her interactions
in the community, and her cognitive distortions and
persecutory delusions interacted with reality and influenced her interpretation
of circumstances she encountered.
carefully considered the documentary material, I am satisfied XSLP probably
misinterpreted events which actually occurred about
which she formed adverse
perceptions. I am also satisfied she experienced persecutory and psychotic
delusions she believed to be
true. The proposition XSLP is able to distinguish
between delusions and real experiences is difficult to assess. On the one hand,
XSLP gave evidence she can differentiate delusions from real experiences. On the
other hand, on Dr Jungfer’s evidence, XSLP
probably suffers from cognitive
distortions, perseverative ideas of a persecutory or paranoid type and related
delusions she believes
to be true. I accept XSLP may be able to distinguish
psychotic delusions from experiences she believes to be true. I am satisfied
that XSLP’s subjective experience informs her beliefs about such matters
and this is affected by cognitive distortions and
perseverative ideas which are
attributable to her schizoaffective disorder ailment. This weighs on the
reliability of XSLP’s
subjective evidence.
perceptions about alleged bullying by GG, CT and PL have a paranoid and
persecutory character which does not align with rather
scant evidence of their
conduct or behaviour at the time. This is reinforced by XSLP’s
retrospective attribution in September
and October 2013 of the unexplained
physical symptoms she was experiencing and her assertion that these were
triggered by circumstances
in her employment six months earlier. The objective
evidence establishes that XSLP experienced such symptoms from 2012 and there
no complaint to Dr Wan in July 2013 of bullying in her workplace. The available
employment records and the evidence given by
GG suggests that allowances were
made in her employment as her psychiatric condition deteriorated.
perceptions of alleged bullying and sexual harassment by BX and FJ also have a
paranoid and persecutory character which
does not align with the evidence of
their actual conduct in XSLP’s employment. I am satisfied XSLP
misinterpreted events which
actually occurred and it is probable her
misinterpretation was informed by cognitive distortions and perseverative
persecutory ideas
produced by her schizoaffective disorder.
regard to XSLP’s allegations and perceptions of sexual harassment,
Associate Professor Robertson and Dr Jungfer agree XSLP’s
experiences of sexual conduct and sexual violence as a child could increase her
vulnerability to retraumatisation with further
exposure to perceived similar
conduct as an adult. Associate Professor Robertson explained if XSLP was exposed
to such conduct as
a very young child, at the age of 4 as she alleges, this
might increase her later vulnerability. These considerations are relevant
XSLP’s allegations of sexual harassment in her previous employment and
evidence of alleged childhood experiences of a sexual
and sexually violent
nature, as well as a previous related episode of mental illness. Considering
these matters, two things must
there appears to be a sexual element in XSLP’s Disorder which affects
related perception and conduct. This is clearly
demonstrated in the clinical
materials and reports of Dr Davies and Dr Singh. It is also apparent in the
clinical records of XSLP’s
admission to the Blacktown Hospital in March
XSLP has given varying accounts of memories of alleged sexual conduct she
experienced as a child. She has given an account
of engaging in sexual activity
with a family member as a young teenager, but in another an account this was a
” sexual event which occurred in a bath when she
was a young child. She has given an account of being sexually abused by a
as a teenage child and that she was sexually assaulted on a different
occasion. Without any corroboration of her allegations of childhood
experiences, it is difficult to know what to make of them. The available
evidence is not sufficient to permit factual findings
to be made with any degree
of satisfaction in respect of XSLP’s alleged childhood sexual memories or
experiences. Perhaps the
best that can be said is that I accept XSLP believes
her memories are true and the alleged events actually occurred.
Associate Professor Robertson’s evidence, it is likely these experiences
and perceptions increased XSLP’s vulnerability
or sensitivity to sexual
harassment.
notwithstanding, I have concluded XSLP’s allegations of sexual harassment
in her previous employment are not reliable,
and in all likelihood are informed
by misinterpretation or delusional thinking. XSLP’s perception of events
in which she alleges
she was sexually harassed, after the team lunch for
example, are not corroborated. It is possible the alleged events actually
in the manner XSLP believes to be true, but the present materials are
not sufficient to support such a finding.
Jungfer and Associate Professor Robertson gave evidence about the possible
contributory role of stressful circumstances in the
emergence of episodes or the
destabilisation and elevation of symptoms of XSLP’s mental health
condition. On their evidence,
it is possible work stresses, including working
long hours to meet deadlines and taking on a new role, might have contributed to
XSLP’s increasing symptoms.
Professor Robertson gave evidence of the hypothesis of epigenetic manipulation
and methylation, in which stress-related
compounds trigger genetic switches
leading to the onset of psychotic (or other) disease. While this offers a
tantalising glimpse
into possible physiological causes of psychotic disease, it
is presently no more than a hypothesis which requires further scientific
investigation. It does not assist in this case without evidence of XSLP having
particular chemical or genetic markers at relevant
points in time. As Associate
Professor Robertson explained, without such evidence, there is a great
difficulty disentangling the
specific contributory factual causes of any
particular psychotic episode. He described this as a Gordian knot. And therein
difficulty in this case.
all likelihood, there are multiple factors which possibly contributed to the
episodes of psychosis or elevated symptoms of schizoaffective
disorder XSLP
experienced in the period from 2013 to 2019, including the neurodevelopmental,
episodic and recurring nature of the
disorder itself.
is likely XSLP’s schizoaffective disorder ailment reduced her capacity to
function and to cope with the ordinary stresses
of her work. These effects of
her mental disorder probably influenced her interpretation of events and they
were elevated at times
when XSLP reduced or ceased taking prescribed
medications.
turns on XSLP’s perceptions of events. It is clear some of the allegations
XSLP has raised are based on events which are
likely to have occurred, such as:
(a) FJ removing work from XSLP in 2018;
(b) a work lunch on 18 July 2017;
(c) BX including ‘xx’ in Chat communication to XSLP on 4 May
(d) GG recounting a story about a real boating incident;
(e) XSLP struggling to comprehend her new role and duties in March 2013; and
(f) XSLP working long hours in a high-pressure work environment and engaging in
work outside business hours from time to time.
alleged incidents lack any supporting evidence and were not substantiated on
investigation. It is possible but not established
BX unnecessarily touched
XSLP’s arm at work. XSLP’s allegations about BX making lewd remarks
are not supported by other
employees who were present. There is no evidence to
corroborate XSLP’s allegation BX kissed her on her left cheek, even though
this is alleged to have occurred at around 5pm in the workplace where other
people may have been present. The fact that XSLP touched
her left cheek when
giving evidence might be taken as a demonstration she believes her account is
true, but it does not prove the
incident actually occurred.
and FJ gave evidence of their concerns for XSLP’s well-being and the
effects and actions they took, particularly FJ, to manage
XSLP appropriately. FJ
was aware XSLP had experienced a mental illness prior to her return to work, and
this informed decisions she
made about XSLP’s duties and workload.
XSLP’s evidence of bullying and unfair treatment stands alone, without
and it reflects adverse perceptions she formed about events in her
employment. I am satisfied, for example, FJ took decisions to
remove work from
XSLP in order to reduce her workload and related stress, which XSLP perceived to
be bullying and unfair.
the clinical evidence of Dr Singh, in July 2015, XSLP was “
preoccupied
with her previous alleged bullying incidents
” about which she held
obsessive ideas
”. This is consistent with Dr Jungfer’s
opinion XSLP “
perseverates around paranoid themes
cognitive distortions from her Disorder affect the way she thinks and sees the
world in a “
persecutory manner
as if someone is
trying to harm her
”, even during periods in which she is not
psychotic. As I comprehend Dr Jungfer’s evidence on this point,
disorder and the related cognitive impairments and distortions she
experiences are likely to inform her perception of circumstances
and cause her
to interpret things in a more paranoid light, and this renders her more
susceptible to experience stress and destabilisation.
Professor Robertson described this as a “
snowballing effect
in which XSLP’s resilience is likely to decline. He did not consider
schizoaffective disorder to be a reactive condition
and explained that, even
though the illness runs “
its own course
internal mechanisms
”, it can be adversely affected by
stressful feedback loops
” in which the disorder affects the
person’s perceptions and the person’s perceptions inform their
response to circumstances
in their environment, which can adversely affect the
person’s disorder: “
the lens or prism of the person’s
mental illness can affect their perception of objective reality
Associate Professor went further and explained that, in his opinion, events
which are demonstrably stressful, such as
sexual harassment, physical assault,
overt bullying or witnessing trauma, can also affect the person’s
Professor Robertson and Dr Jungfer agreed XSLP did not comply with prescribed
medications on repeated occasions and this
increased her vulnerability or
susceptibility to experience increased symptoms or destabilisation of her
schizoaffective disorder,
where even minor environmental stressors, such as
working late to meet a deadline, could trigger an episode or increased symptoms
of her disorder.
accept Associate Professor Robertson’s evidence the “
formulation
of delusions often involves overinterpretation of interpersonal interactions and
integration of persons and their behaviour
into delusional belief
”, and this can lead to “
false negative evaluations of
the contribution of mundane workplace stress in the onset of psychotic
his evidence, the prism of XSLP’s mental illness likely affected her
perception of objective reality, and the “
putative workplace stress was
not the “cause” of her schizophrenic illness, but rather a factor
which contributed to the
elaboration of a psychotic episode in interaction with
other factors”
While the possibility XSLP was exposed to genuinely stressful events, such as
sexual harassment and overt bullying, cannot be ruled
out, no such positive
finding can be made on the available materials.
Professor Robertson and Dr Jungfer agreed that XSLP’s evolving psychosis
could itself be a separate stressor, and
this likely caused her functioning,
resilience and tolerance of normal things to deteriorate. On Dr Jungfer’s
evidence, XSLP’s
Poor insight into being ill and not managing
her illness affected her levels of stress, her perception of the impact of
normal workplace
matters leading to more severe
is possible XSLP is able to distinguish between delusions and reality, as she
asserts. Nevertheless, in the context of the delusional
beliefs Associate
Professor Robertson and Dr Jungfer discussed, there are real questions about her
ability to differentiate between
what she believes to be true and what she
acknowledges to be delusional. It is not possible to disentangle Associate
Professor Robertson’s
‘Gordian knot’ without objective
evidence of relevant facts. In this case, there is insufficient objective
evidence to
support XSLP’s allegations of bullying and sexual harassment,
and the alleged facts XSLP believes are true.
into account the contributory role of the stressful feedback loops Associate
Professor Robertson referred to and the perseverating
persecutory ideas Dr
Jungfer discussed, I am satisfied XSLP’s previous employment was more than
a neutral context in which
her mental ailment progressed.
am satisfied XSLP experienced work stresses as a result of taking on new roles
and duties, working long hours, managing a high-volume
workload under pressure
to meet deadlines, and lack of clarity about work roles and duties, at times
when she was experiencing cognitive
difficulties, paranoid delusions and lack of
insight which reduced her functional capacity and resilience, especially during
in which she was not fully compliant with prescribed medications.
the evidence of Dr Jungfer and Associate Professor Robertson, it is possible
these work stresses contributed to destabilisation
schizoaffective disorder and to the elevation of symptoms and episodes of
this context, it is likely, and I find, her previous employment was a
contributory factor in the episodes of her schizoaffective
disorder in October
2013 and December 2018. This notwithstanding, the employment contribution is
enmeshed in the Gordian knot of
contributory factors Associate Professor
Robertson discussed. I am not persuaded any of the contributory employment
factors which
have been raised and considered in these proceedings contributed
to XSLP’s schizoaffective disorder to a ‘significant
Considering
all the materials and the medical evidence, I am satisfied the degree to which
XSLP’s previous employment contributed
to her mental ailment is not
substantially greater than material.
this it follows, and I am satisfied, XSLP does not have a ‘disease’
for the purposes of s 5B of the SRC Act.
XSLP does not have a ‘disease’ kind of ‘injury’, and no
issue was raised in respect of an ‘injury
(other than a disease)’
(or an aggravation of an injury of that kind), she does not have an
‘injury’ for the purposes
of the SRC Act.
being so, XSLP’s compensation claim cannot be accepted.
claim for compensation is not made out.
is so even though it is likely work stresses she experienced in employment by
Telstra contributed to her schizoaffective disorder
ailment to some extent.
have found XSLP’s schizoaffective disorder ailment emerged and progressed
in the context of her Telstra employment. It affected
her cognitive functions
and perceptions, and her interpretation of events and interactions in the course
of her employment. It is
probable she became obsessed with perceptions about her
employment she believes to be true.
allegations of bullying and sexual harassment in 2013, 2016, 2017 and 2018 are
not made out.
the context of the neurodevelopment nature of XSLP’s emerging
schizoaffective disorder ailment from 2012 and the social stressors
referred to
in the clinical records from July, September and October 2013, including
significant personal relationship issues and
non-compliance with medication she
was prescribed, I am satisfied the employment contribution to the onset and
progress of the ailment
was not substantially greater than material. While the
circumstances of XSLP taking on and struggling with the new role under
supervision in March 2013, and the subsequent issues she perceived in
respect of lack of training, a job description and a performance
development
plan, may have contributed to the progress of her Schizoaffective Disorder
ailment to some extent, the relevant materials
do not support a finding that the
contribution was to a significant degree.
regard to the progress and episodes of XSLP’s schizoaffective disorder
thereafter until the cessation of her employment
by Telstra in May 2019, I am
satisfied XSLP experienced stress dealing with her duties in employment in 2018,
particularly when dealing
with new roles and duties, and working long hours to
meet deadlines. These stresses likely contributed to the destabilisation or
aggravation of her schizoaffective disorder to some extent, but the evidence
does not support a finding the employment contribution
was to a significant
am satisfied XSLP experienced employment-related stress as a result of
perseverative ideas, persecutory delusions, cognitive distortions
increasing focus on her perceptions relating to GG, PL, CT, BX and FJ. On the
relevant probative evidence, I am not satisfied,
and I cannot positively find,
stresses of these kinds and XSLP’s related perceptions contributed to her
schizoaffective disorder
ailment to a significant degree.
these reasons, the threshold of a ‘disease’ is not surpassed. No
issue was raised in respect of an ‘injury (other
than a disease)’.
Consequently, there is no ‘injury’ for the purposes of s 5A of the
being so, the decision under review must be affirmed.
decision under review is affirmed.
I certify that the preceding 303 (three hundred and three) paragraphs
are a true copy of the reasons for the decision herein of
........................................................................
Dated: October 2024
Date(s) of hearing:
19, 20, 21, 22 August 2024
Solicitors for XSLP:
G. Watson, Grieve Watson Kelly Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitors for the Respondent:
A. Bortone, Sparke Helmore
Exhibit 3, pages 16-81; T41,
T42 and T43
Exhibit 3, page 17.
Exhibit 4, pages 2830-2831.
Exhibit 3, page 17; Exhibit 4,
page 2830 refers.
Exhibit 3, pages 82-86.
Exhibit 4, page 2829.
Exhibit 4, page 1701.
Exhibit 3, page 19.
Ibid, pages 89 and 90.
ST162 and ST163.
Ibid, pages 1701 and
ST166, page 415.
ST170 and ST171.
ST169, pages 420-421.
Ibid, page 420.
ST168, page 418.
Exhibit 4, pages
Ibid, pages 337-338.
Ibid, page 705.
Ibid, page 707.
Ibid, pages 709-710
Ibid, pages 703-704
Ibid, pages 1642-1643.
ST177, pages 430-431.
Ibid, pages 1987, 1990 and
Ibid, page 1999.
Exhibit 3, page 22.
Exhibit 4, page 2829.
Ibid, page 324.
Ibid, page 326.
Ibid, page 328.
Ibid, page 1431.
Ibid, page 1432.
Ibid, page 1406.
Ibid, page 1637
Ibid, page 1407.
Ibid, pages 1407-1408.
Ibid, page 1636.
Ibid, page 1432.
Ibid, page 1408.
Ibid, page 1635.
T7, page 24.
Exhibit 4, page 1409.
Ibid, page 1409.
Ibid, pages 13, 14, 15, 16
Ibid, page 1633.
Ibid, page 1410.
Ibid, page 1633.
Ibid, page 1411.
Ibid, page 1632.
Ibid, page 1411.
Ibid, page 1412.
Ibid, page 317.
Ibid, page 316.
Ibid, page 323
Ibid, page 1738.
Ibid, page 1436.
Ibid, page 1739.
Ibid, page 1413.
Ibid, page 1740.
Ibid, pages 1481-1482.
Ibid, page 1485.
Ibid, page 1439.
Ibid, page 1414.
Ibid, page 1629.
Ibid, page 1701.
Ibid, page 1628.
Ibid, pages 1677-1679
Ibid, 1680-1682..
Ibid, page 1627.
Ibid, pages 1683-1684.
Ibid, page 1416.
Ibid, page 1445.
Ibid, page 1704.
Ibid, page 1707.
Ibid, page 1447.
T8, page 28.
Ibid, pages 29-30.
Ibid, page 29.
Ibid, page 64.
Ibid, page 57; pages 840-843
and T9 refer. See also Exhibit 4, page 55.
Ibid, page 842.
T9, page 33; Exhibit 4, page
Exhibit 4, pages 1235 and
Ibid, page 1480.
T9, pages 35-42.
Exhibit 4, page 2251.
Ibid, page 1457.
Exhibit 4, page1459.
T42, page 104.
Ibid, page 1460.
Exhibit 3, page 25;
Ibid, page 1461.
Ibid, page 1625.
Ibid, page 1463.
Ibid, page 1464.
ST133, page 369.
ST182, page 454.
Ibid, page 455.
ST101 pages 215-216.
ST 132, page 368.
Ibid, page 367.
ST138, page 381.
Ibid, page 384.
Ibid, pages 380-386.
Ibid, pages 382, 383, 384
Ibid, page 1560; ST143,
page 389 refers.
ST142, page 388.
ST24, page 63.
Ibid, pages 43-46.
Ibid, page 282.
Ibid, page 285.
Ibid, page 13; page 23
Ibid, page 1798.
Ibid, page 1796.
Ibid, page 1797.
Ibid, page1235-1236.
Ibid, page 1466.
Ibid, page 1468.
Ibid, page 1469.
Ibid, page 2823-2826.
Ibid, pages 1548 and
1549; pages 1554-1557 refer.
Ibid, page 2253.
Ibid, page 1472.
Ibid page 2254.
ST65, page 151.
Ibid, page 1473; pages
1550 and 1552 refer.
Ibid, page 1474.
ST66, page 152.
ST182, page 455.
Ibid, page 1476.
Ibid, page 1477
Ibid, page 2254.
Ibid, page 2255.
ST67, page 153.
Ibid, page 1558.
Ibid, page 2256.
ST61, page 138.
ST70, page 156.
Exhibit 4, page 2258;
ST81, page 171 refers.
Ibid, page 2258.
Ibid, ST79, page 167
ST17, page 43.
ST34, page 81.
Exhibit 4, page 2259.
Ibid, page 2260.
ST44, pages 111-112.
ST54, page 126.
ST56, pages 130-131.
Ibid, pages
Ibid, page 2262
Ibid, page 2263.
Ibid, page 313; ST75,
page 162 refers.
Ibid, page 2263.
Ibid, page 309.
Ibid, pages 311 and
Ibid, page 2264.
ST74, page 160.
Exhibit 4, page 2797.
Exhibit 4, page 2266.
T21, page 54.
Exhibit 4, page 2268.
Ibid, page 2269.
Ibid, page 2271.
T22, page 55.
Exhibit 4, page 2272.
Ibid, page 2273.
ST13, page 27.
Ibid, page 835; ST13,
page 27 refers..
Ibid, page 846.
Ibid, pages 974-975 and
Ibid, page 979.
Ibid, page 980.
Ibid, page 2650.
Ibid, page 2273
Ibid, page 819; pages
818-829 refer.
Ibid, page 2274.
Ibid, page 816.
Ibid, page 1237.
Ibid, page 1383.
Ibid, page 808.
Ibid, page 2648.
Ibid, page 1390.
ST180. Page 450.
Ibid, page 1391.
T61, pages 282-285.
Exhibit 4, pages
T61, pages 286-293.
Ibid, page 145
T51; T49 refers.
T51, pages 188-189.
Exhibit 4, pages
T55 and T56.
Exhibit 4, pages 2173 and
Ibid, page 2030.
Exhibit 3, pages 164-199;
pages 159-163 refer.
Ibid, page 192.
Ibid, page 165.
Ibid, page 195.
Ibid, page 197.
Ibid, page 165.
Ibid, pages 168-170.
Ibid, pages 192-193.
Ibid, pages 115-139.
Ibid, page 125.
Ibid, pages 202-203
Ibid, pages140-157.
Ibid, page 145.
[2002] FCA 1464.
[2015] FCA 1166.
[2010] FCA 680.
Rehabilitation and Compensation Commission v May
[2016] HCA 19
per French CJ, Kiefel, Nettle and Gordon JJ at [50].
T43, pages 141 and
Ibid, page 14.
T9, pages 32 and 34.
T51, page 188.
Exhibit 3, page 192.
T27, page 64; Exhibit 4,
page 1577..
T51, page 189.
[2022] FCA 175.
Ibid, at [89].
Ibid, at [88].
[1985] FCA 440.
Ibid, at [11].
Wuth v Comcare
[2022] FCAFC 42
, per Wheelahan J, with whom Griffiths and Snaden JJ agreed,
, per French CJ, Kiefel, Nettle and Gordon JJ at [57].
[1996] FCA 1587
Exhibit 4, page 1424.
T5, page 15.
Exhibit 4, page 337.
Ibid, page 1987.
Ibid, pages 1999 and
See also Exhibit 4,
pages1641-1643 and 1701.
Exhibit 3, page 22:
Applicant’s statement 5 March 2024 at [43].
Ibid, pages 165 and
Ibid, pages 337-338.
Ibid, pages 342-343.
Exhibit 4, pages
Ibid, pages 334-336.
Ibid, pages 71-72.
Ibid, pages 10-14.
Ibid, pages 825 and
Ibid, page 1375
Ibid, pages 169-170.
Ibid, page 189.
Ibid, page 190; page 191
Ibid, pages 1579 and
Exhibit 3, page 20.
Ibid, page 21.
Exhibit 3, page 23.
Ibid, pages 25-27.
Exhibit 3, page 25.
See, for example, T42,
pages 133-137 and ST179, pages 436-440.
See, for example, T42,
pages104-133 and ST179, pages 439-447.
T42, pages 133-134.
Ibid, page 133.
Ibid, page 134.
Ibid, page 134.
Ibid, page 133.
Ibid, pages 134-135.
Ibid, page 136.
Ibid, pages 106-121.
Ibid, pages 126-131.
Ibid, pages 124-126.
Ibid, pages 131-132.
Ibid, pages 106-111.
Ibid, page 131.
Ibid, page 124-126.
Ibid, page 125.
Ibid, page 127.
Ibid, page 131.
Exhibit 3, page 97.
ST182, page 458.
Exhibit 3, page 145.
Ibid, page 203.
RTF format (2.55 MB)
Signed PDF/A format