Riley & Riley [2025] FedCFamC2F 1020 (28 July 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Riley & Riley
[2025] FedCFamC2F 1020
File number:
LNC 769 of 2023
Judgment of:
JUDGE TURNBULL
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PROPERTY – Long
marriage – Where both parties made significant financial and non-financial
contributions –
Where the Wife claims that her contributions were made
more arduous as a result of family violence perpetrated by the Husband towards
herself and the children – Whether the Husband committed family violence
as alleged – Whether the Husband made full disclosure
of his income
working as a self-employed builder – Where the Husband allowed others to
use his building licence to take on
projects for which he claimed he received no
financial benefit – Whether there should be an adjustment to the Wife
of the Husband’s greater income earning capacity – Just and
equitable division
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Evidence Act 1995
Cases cited:
Australian Securities & Investments
Commission v Fortescue Metals Group Ltd [No 5]
[2009] FCA 1586
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich
[2009] NSWSC 1229
Beck & Beck (No 2)
[1983] FamCA 7
(1983) FLC 91-318
Blatch & Archer
[1774] EngR 2
[1774] 98 ER 969
Boulton & Boulton
[2024] FedCFamC1A 132
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Clauson & Clauson
[1995] FamCA 10
(1995) FLC 92-595
Coshott & Prentice
[2014] FCAFC 88
Dajani & Dajani
[2025] FedCFamC1A 28
Dawes & Dawes
[1989] FamCA 71
Dickons & Dickons
[2012] FamCAFC 154
Dovgan & Dovgan
[2021] FamCA 306
Gadhavi & Gadhavi
[2023] FedCFamC1A 117
Gould & Gould
[2007] FamCA 609
Grier & Malphas
[2016] FamCAFC 84
Hickey & Hickey
[2003] FamCA 395
Hicks & Trustee of the Bankrupt Estate of Hicks
[2021] FamCAFC
Jabour & Jabour
[2019] FamCAFC 78
Jacobson & Jacobson
(1989) FLC 92-103
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Kannis & Kannis
[2002] FamCA 1150
Kennon v Kennon
[1997] FamCA 27
(1997) FLC 92-757
Lavell & Lavell
[2012] FamCA 34
Lotta & Lotta
[2017] FamCA 50
MacKinnon & Talbot
[2023] FedCFamC1A 156
Mallet & Mallet
[1984] HCA 21
(1984) 156 CLR 605
Martell & Martell
[2023] FedCFamC1A 71
(2023) 66 Fam LR 650
Meadows & Meadows
[2019] FamCA 491
Norman & Norman
[2010] FamCAFC 66
Petruski & Balewa
[2013] FamCAFC 15
Robb & Robb
(1995) FLC 92- 555
Scaletta & Scaletta
[2024] FedCFamC1A 87
Sigley & Cullen (No 3)
[2015] FamCA 825
Stamatou & Stamatou
[2022] FedCFamC1F 241
Stanford & Stanford
(2012) 247 CLR 108
Teal & Teal
[2010] FamCAFC 120
Weir and Weir
[1992] FamCA 69
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
Date of hearing:
8, 9, 10, 11 October 2024 and 20 February 2025
Burnie, Launceston
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr Williams
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Glynn Williams Legal
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
McVeity Dean
LNC 769 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
JUDGE TURNBULL
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
extant property orders be discharged.
14 days of the date of orders each of the Applicant Wife and Respondent Husband
are to do all things reasonably necessary so
as to sell the former matrimonial
Title Volume []...
Folio []... (‘1 B Street property’) with such
real estate agent and for such listing price as is agreed between the parties.
proceeds of sale of the 1 B Street property be divided as follows:
(a) Firstly, to pay all costs and expenses of the sale and to pay any council
and water rates outstanding in respect of the real
(b) Secondly, to repay all sums necessary to effect the registration of a
discharge of the parties existing mortgage to D Bank;
(c) Thirdly, pay out the loan relating to Motor Vehicle 1;
(d) The balance be held in trust to be distributed to the parties in accordance
with the method set out in paragraph 4 of this order.
be a division of all property of the parties (including superannuation) in the
proportion 55.5% to the Applicant and 44.5% to
the Respondent, calculated as
net assets retained by the Applicant — ($20,500)
net assets retained by the Respondent — ($147,726)
the net proceeds of the sale of the 1 B Street property per sub-paragraph 3(d)
of this Order and the net proceeds of the sale of
(ii) AND WHERE A+B+C= I;
Applicant shall receive a sum equal to (I x 55.5%) – A; and
Respondent shall receive a sum equal to (I x 44.5%) – B.
to section 90XT(l)(a)
Family Law Act 1975
whenever a splitable payment
becomes payable in respect of the Husband's interest in Super Fund 1 the wife
shall be entitled to be
paid an amount calculated in accordance with
Family Law (Superannuation) Regulations 2001
using a base amount, at
the date of these orders, in the sum of $17,000 and that there be a
corresponding reduction to the entitlement
the Husband would have had in the
said superannuation fund but for this Order.
trustees of the said superannuation fund having been afforded procedural
fairness, the previous Order binds the said trustees
and shall take effect from
the operative time which shall be seven days after the day on which the said
trustees are served with
a sealed copy of these orders.
party shall be otherwise solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all
other property and chattels of whatsoever nature
and kind in the possession of
such party as at the date of these Orders and that for this purpose bank
accounts are deemed to be
in the possession of the party whose name appears on
the bank's records thereof, insurance policies are deemed to be in the
of the beneficiary thereof, superannuation entitlements are deemed to
be in the possession of the person who is named as the worker
therein and
service pensions are deemed to be the property of the person in receipt of
party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any liability
encumbering any item of property to which that patty
is entitled pursuant to
these Orders.
Family Law Act 1975
the parties intend that these
Orders shall, as far as practicable, finally determine the financial
relationship between them and
avoid further proceedings between them.
extant Applications be otherwise dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE TURNBULL
are property proceedings initiated on 3 November 2023 by Ms Riley (‘the
Wife’) as against Mr Riley (‘the Husband’).
the parties were able to agree upon the nature and value of the asset pool, the
property that each of them would retain,
and that a property — 2 B Street,
Town C in Tasmania (‘the 2 B Street block’) would be sold
—which occurred
in January 2025. It was also agreed that the main home
— 1 B Street, Town C in Tasmania (‘the 1 B Street property’)
— would be placed on the market for sale.
parties agreed that the loan for Motor Vehicle 1— to be kept by the
Husband — would be paid out from the proceeds
of the sale of 1 B
Street, and that each otherwise keep the assets in their possession. The parties
also agreed to a rough equalisation
of their superannuation interests, resulting
in a split to the Wife of $17,000 from the Husband’s fund —
with the resulting
superannuation interests to be considered as part of one pool
of assets for division.
Wife submitted that she should receive 70 per cent of the net asset
whilst the Husband sought an
equal division.
Wife was born in 1975 and is currently employed as an allied health
She has not
re-partnered.
Husband was born in 1972 and is a self-employed
He lives with his de facto
partner, Ms F.
parties began cohabitation in July 1996 and married in
are two children of the marriage — Ms G (‘Ms G’) born in 1998
and Mr E (‘Mr E’) born in 1999.
parties purchased their first property together at H Street, Town J, Tasmania
(‘the Town J property’) in 1997. The
parties undertook renovations
on that property, with the Husband undertaking 80 per cent of the work, and the
Wife 20 per cent.
June 2012 the parties purchased land at B Street, Town C in Tasmania, which was
subdivided into two lots.
2014 a house was built on one of the B Street lots. In the same year, the
parties sold the Town J property for $495,000, with the
funds used to pay down
the mortgage and to help pay for the construction the house on the B Street lot.
The parties then lived in
a rental property in Town
The construction of the B Street
property was undertaken solely by the
2014, the Husband injured his shoulder at work and required surgery. He was
unable to work for three months and, after that
period, returned to work on
light duties.
late 2015 the Husband was charged with common assault of the Wife for hitting
her to the face with an open hand.
A Police Family Violence Order (PFVO) issued on the same day. The Husband
pleaded guilty at the first instance and no conviction
was recorded, but he had
to pay the court’s fees.
The Husband said that this was the only instance of family violence, whilst the
Wife alleged that there was other violence perpetrated
against herself and Mr
parties separated on 4 December 2016. They are yet to divorce.
Post-separation,
the Wife remained at the 1 B Street
and paid its mortgage,
whilst the Husband lived in a motorhome located on a friend's property.
months later the Husband began renting a property in Town C with Mr E. He then
moved to a property at Town J where, in lieu
of rent, he maintained the property
and undertook building work.
2020, the Husband sustained an injury to his other shoulder when he fell through
a floor, again requiring surgery. He was unable
to work for three to four months
before returning to light duties.
early 2023 the Husband had a third workplace injury to his shoulder when he fell
from a roof, preventing him from working for 8-10
Wife initiated property proceedings on 3 November 2023.
April 2024 the Husband moved into another rental property owned by his uncle,
and again, undertook building and maintenance work
in lieu of rent.
January 2025 the vacant block at 2 B Street was sold, leaving net proceeds of
trial commenced on 8 October 2024 in City L, before adjourning whilst the M
Authority investigated the Husband, N Pty Ltd and
its director, Mr O’s,
involvement in some building projects, and whether there had been breaches of
Occupational Licensing Act
following a
referral by this Court on 5 November
submissions were received on 20 February 2025.
parties tendered a joint balance sheet, which was exhibited as ‘J1’
and is extracted here:
Net proceeds 2 B Street (Joint)
1 B Street (to be sold) (Joint)
Motor Vehicle 2 (W)
Motor Vehicle 3 (H)
Business Assets (H)
Motor Vehicle 4 (H)
Motor Vehicle 5 (H)
Motor Vehicle 1 (H)
Superannuation (H)
Superannuation (W)
TOTAL ASSETS:
Liabilities
Motor Vehicle 1
TOTAL NET ASSETS:
note that the Husband, under cross-examination, said he owed his father an
amount of $17,500 of which he has repaid
This item was not
included in J1, no submissions were made about it, and the Husband did not call
his father as a witness. I will
not have regard to the alleged loan.
Applicant Wife
Wife relied upon:
Her Case Outline
filed 8 October 2024;
Her Amended
Application filed 18 July 2024;
Her Financial
Statement filed 27 September 2024;
Her Affidavit
filed 30 August 2024;
Affidavit of Ms
G filed 1 October 2024;
Affidavit of Dr
P filed 27 September 2024; and
Williams, Counsel for the Wife, initially submitted that an overall division of
60 per cent should be awarded to the Wife when
assessing contributions. At the
end of the trial, he modified his position, seeking 55 per cent for
contributions, submitting that
her contributions were made more arduous because
of family violence perpetrated on her and the children by the Husband, and she
contributed
more in any event because she was the primary parent and homemaker
whilst working part time, including when the Husband was unable
Williams submitted that there should be a further adjustment for
section 75(2)
factors of 15 to 20 percent due to the greater income earning capacity of the
Husband and that of his de facto partner.
Wife was cross-examined, answering questions in a matter-of-fact way, from her
perspective. She remained adamant that she had
been the victim of physical and
verbal violence from the Husband, that had impacted her self-worth — a
position unshaken under
cross-examination.
accept her evidence.
P is a clinical psychologist, who treated the Wife over 12 sessions between
2018-19 and 2023-24,
to help her
with her experiences of domestic violence:
[Ms Riley] was referred to me by her General Practitioner [Dr Q] in 2018 for
counselling in relation to being "a victim of DV for
20 years". When I first met
her in 2018 she had been separate from her husband for about 18
her curriculum vitae she described her experience:
I have been working for over 17 years in public and private mental health
services, extensive experience and training in clinical
diagnosis of mental
health disorders, mental state examinations and detailed formulations and
treatment planning for adults with
major mental health disorders. For the past
8-12 years the focus of my practice has become on the treatment of PTSD and
complex trauma.
P was not cross-examined, and I give her evidence weight.
G is the 27-year-old daughter of the parties, who filed an affidavit on 1
October 2024, in support of her mother’s contention
that the Husband had
been violent to her and Mr E. Under cross-examination she presented as
articulate, sensible and measured, conceding
that she did not see her father
pushing Mr E’s head onto the ground repeatedly — as she
claimed — but rather saw
him hold Mr E’s head held forcibly on
the ground, which she continued to regard as her father ‘bashing’ Mr
parties have raised an intelligent, kind and strong young woman, who loves both
of her parents and should not have been drawn
into her parents’
litigation. I accept her evidence.
Respondent Husband
Husband relied upon:
His Case Outline
filed 7 October 2024;
His Amended
Response filed 4 June 2024;
His Financial
Statement filed 17 November 2023 and his Amended Financial Statement filed 4
October 2024;
His affidavits
filed 13 August 2024, 27 September 2024, and 30 January 2025;
Affidavit of Mr
R filed 13 August 2024;
Affidavit of Mr
E filed 7 October 2024 (not ultimately read); and
Questionnaire filed 17 November 2023.
the start of the trial, Mr Trezise, Counsel for the Husband, submitted that
there should be a 45/55 division in favour of the Husband
primarily on his introduction of three vehicles post separation, which amounted
to 8 to 9 percent of the value of the
asset pool. At the end of the trial Mr
Trezise submitted that even though the parties' contributions should be assessed
just and equitable outcome results in an equal division of the
parties’ assets.
Husband was cross-examined at length, not only about the Wife’s
allegations of family violence but also of his involvement
in two building
projects being undertaken with N Pty Ltd/ Mr O.
Husband’s involvement in these projects was not revealed until information
was put to him under cross-examination. The Husband’s
non-disclosure in
this regard left the impression that he had deliberately sought to keep this
information from the Wife and the
Court. The impact was to undermine the
reliability of the Husband’s evidence, particularly in relation to his
true earning
capacity. This failure to disclose also led to an extension of the
trial, while further information was sought and the Court referred
the matter to
M Authority. The Husband did not adequately explain his failure to disclose the
information in his affidavits.
Husband maintained his denial of a pattern of family violence against the Wife
under sustained cross-examination, but his denials
did not sit comfortably with
other evidence.
treat the Husband’s evidence with caution.
R is a friend of the Husband’s and had a financial arrangement with the
Husband in April 2024 when Mr R was short of money.
Mr R was cross-examined
and pay security to obtain
Husband provided these monies notwithstanding his claim that his income was low.
Mr R paid the Husband back.
R maintained his position under cross-examination, and gave his evidence
honestly enough, but the question remained as to how the
Husband raised the
funds given his stated low income.
STANDARD OF PROOF
note briefly, before continuing, that all facts in issue in these proceedings
must be proved on the balance of probabilities. A
fact in issue is 'proved' if I
am reasonably satisfied, on the evidence, that it is more likely than not that
the fact existed or
occurred in the manner ultimately determined.
Evidence Act 1995
Evidence Act
’) sets out
the applicable standard:
140 Civil proceedings: standard of proof
(1) In a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of a party proved if it
is satisfied that the case has been proved on the
balance of probabilities.
(2) Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in
deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into
(a) the nature of the cause of action or defence; and
(b) the nature of the subject‑matter of the proceeding; and
(c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
J, as he then was, also remarked upon the standard of proof for civil
proceedings in
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
, which remain
relevant and authoritative:
The truth is that, when the law requires the proof of any fact,
the tribunal
must feel an actual persuasion of its occurrence or existence before it can be
It cannot be found as a result of a mere mechanical comparison of
probabilities independently of any belief in its reality. No doubt
that a state of facts exists may be held according to indefinite gradations of
certainty; and this has led to attempts
to define exactly the certainty required
by the law for various purposes. Fortunately, however, at common law no third
standard of
persuasion was definitely developed. Except upon criminal issues to
be proved by the prosecution, it is enough that the affirmative
of an allegation
is made out to the reasonable satisfaction of the tribunal. But reasonable
satisfaction is not a state of mind that
is attained or established
independently of the nature and consequence of the fact or facts to be proved.
The seriousness of an allegation made, the inherent unlikelihood of an
occurrence of a given description, or the gravity of the consequences
from a particular finding are considerations which must affect the answer to the
question whether the issue has been proved
to the reasonable satisfaction of the
(Emphasis added)
must ground my assessment of the issues in dispute in facts, of which I am
persuaded, on the balance of probabilities.
PROPERTY ADJUSTMENT: THE LAW
Property proceedings under
and the approach in Hickey
and Stanford
governs the
scope of the Court’s power with respect to property and financial matters.
The Court’s powers under
— as ‘very wide
discretion[s]’ — must be exercised according to principled
and are constrained by a
number of factors to which the Court must direct
To this end, a typical
approach is that set out in
Hickey & Hickey & Hickey
[2003] FamCA
Stanford & Stanford
(2012) 247 CLR
comprising four
(1) identify the parties’ existing legal and equitable property interests,
liabilities, and financial resources at the time
of trial, and then determine
whether it is just and equitable to adjust their interests pursuant to
(2) consider the parties’ contributions under
(3) consider the factors under
–(g) including, by virtue of
, the ‘subjective considerations’ under
they are relevant;
(4) ‘stand back’ to consider the justice and equity of the actual
terms of order proposed to be
By reference to the parties’ existing legal and equitable
property interests, is it just and equitable to make an order pursuant
foreshadowed above, the law requires that any interference with legal and
equitable interests adheres to principled
Justice and equity, with
respect to property settlement in
, does not admit of exhaustive
definition and it is ‘not possible to chart its metes and
The principles
contained within the Act also accommodate ‘stated or unstated assumptions
and agreements about property interests
during the continuance of the
It is just and
equitable, according to
, for a Court to make a property
settlement order if such agreements or assumptions with respect to property
interests during the
marriage have been brought to an end, which usually occurs
with the end of the marriage.
parties submitted that there should be a property order in relation to the
parties' own real estate and other property jointly
— I agree. They both
agree that an amount of the Husband’s superannuation should be transferred
to the Wife. The assumptions
that the parties held during their relationship, as
to the appropriateness of the arrangement of their property interests and
liabilities,
were ended when the parties' separated. It is just and equitable
for there to be a property order in this case.
Section 79(4)(a)
–(c) — contributions
assessing the parties’ contributions I must ‘weigh and assess the
contributions of all kinds and from all sources made
by each of the parties
throughout the period of their
cohabitation’.
judge must not disproportionately account for one contribution over and above
the ‘myriad of other contributions’
made during the
relationship.
This means that any
contribution, whatever its size or significance, should not be weighed against
the other ‘miscellany’
of contributions made, but instead should be
assessed as one of those myriad
contributions.
In essence, as
expressed by Harper J in
Dovgan & Dovgan
[2021] FamCA 306
the introduction of property by one party to a long relationship
must be assessed holistically:
‘all contributions must be weighed
collectively and so it is an error to segment or compartmentalise the various
contributions
and weigh one against the
Full Court in
Dickons & Dickons
[2012] FamCAFC 154
, as restated by
later authorities, refuted the idea that contributions should be assessed
according to their ultimate economic
MacKinnon & Talbot
[2023] FedCFamC1A 156
the Full Court confirmed:
[N]ot all contributions by parties to marriages or de facto relationships lead
to an increase in the wealth of the parties. A more
common example of work and
effort that does not lead to a financial benefit is where a party unsuccessfully
attempts to establish
a business to provide for the family: one could not deny
that the work and effort in attempting to establish a business is a contribution
to be considered, even if the business fails. There is no requirement that a
contribution must result in a positive economic result
before it can be taken
into account: see Browne v Green
[1999] FamCA 1483
(1999) FLC 92-873
Whilst the lack of economic benefit may be relevant (Willmore and Willmore
[1988] FamCA 45
(1988) FLC 91-975)
, a party’s work and effort generally
remains a contribution unless it is conduct of the type described in Kowaliw and
[1981] FamCA 70; (1981) FLC
the Full Court in
Gadhavi & Gadhavi
[2023] FedCFamC1A 117
that the Court cannot overlook the use and impact of an asset introduced into
the relationship by a party:
was not in dispute that the primary judge applied proper principle in
determining that the assessment of the impact of the Husband's
contributions could only properly occur after she assessed "the totality of the
parties' contribution—based entitlement
over the entirety of the marriage
and post-separation" (at [210]).
that respect, in
Pierce v Pierce
(1999) FLC 92—844
"), the Full Court stated at [28]:
... It is necessary to weigh the initial contributions by a party with all other
relevant contributions of both the Husband and the
Wife. In considering the
weight to be attached to the initial contribution, in this case of the Husband,
regard must be had to the use made by the parties of that
contribution
similar effect, in
Cabbell & Cabbell
[2009] FamCAFC 205
Court stated at [54] that in considering the parties' contributions, it is
necessary to trace the use of those assets and
consider the foundation that they
laid for the subsequent accumulation of wealth by the parties.
is, in evaluating the parties' contributions, it was necessary for the primary
judge to have regard to the context of the Husband's
initial contribution and
specifically,
to the opportunity that initial contribution created and the
impact of that initial contribution on the subsequent wealth of the parties
at the date of the
(Emphasis added)
Full Court in
Petruski & Balewa
[2013] FamCAFC 15
; (2013), summarised
the approach at [49]:
The task of assessing contributions under
of the Act is an holistic one;
what is required is to evaluate the extent of the contributions of all types
made by each of the parties
in the context of their particular relationship:
Dickons v Dickons
[2012] FamCAFC 154 (Dickons).
As was also said by the Full
Court in Lovine v Connor
[2012] FamCAFC 168
and [41] (Lovine) such an
evaluation “inevitably involves value judgments and matters of
impression”, and accordingly
it cannot be treated as “a mathematical
Section 79(4)(a):
direct or indirect financial contributions
to property
parties commenced their relationship with a small amount of property. The
Husband, working as a self-employed builder, had a car,
motorbike, approximately
$8,000 (which was put towards the deposit on the Town J property) and
superannuation from his previous five
employment.
Wife had a car at the commencement of the relationship and was employed
full-time working in the community sector.
parties bought their first property together in 1997, being the Town J property.
The Husband’s introduction of capital was
an important contribution to
that property.
2001 the parties bought a business — a shop — which they ran for
approximately two years, while the Husband took on
building work to supplement
the parties’ income.
parties sold the business and began operating the business partnership,
‘S Business’.
the Husband worked as a full-time self-employed builder, the Wife worked in
retail and then was the bookkeeper for the partnership,
whilst studying to
become an allied health
2008 the Wife started her own business as a self-employed allied health
2012 the parties purchased land at B Street, Town C for $120,000 which was
subdivided into two lots, with a house being built on
the main lot, which became
the family home. As stated, the vacant block of land was sold in January 2025.
The property at B Street,
Town C will now be sold.
2014 the parties sold the Town J property for $495,000 and put the balance funds
towards building the B Street property.
the relationship, the Husband said that he earned a small income, although was
able to meet some living expenses from the business:
I have only ever taken drawings from the business when I have needed money which
is all accounted for in my taxable income. I have
never paid myself a wage
either during our marriage or since our separation. My tax returns and financial
statements show my taxable
income was as follows:
25.1. Year ending 30 June 2016 - $39,004;
25.2. Year ending 30 June 2017 - $19,061;
25.3. Year ending 30 June 2018 - $21,789 ;
25.4. Year ending 30 June 2019 - $42,401 ;
25.5. Year ending 30 June 2020 - $28 891;
25.6. Year ending 30 June 2021 - $33,772;
25.7. Year ending 30 June 2022 - $42 ,061; and
25.8. Year ending 30 June 2023 - $41,516.
26. This is not an unusual earning history. Before our separation I had some
better years but generally
income from the partnership was
. We actually had to extend our mortgage in about 2014 to help pay
our bills and living costs as we were struggling
financially.
(Emphasis added)
Husband also denied, as claimed by the
that he received large
amounts in cash during the relationship:
I am expecting that [Ms Riley] will have the view that I have cash income from
my business. That is not correct. I do some work for
the [T Authority] which is
minor home modifications for their clients. I have no contract with them, and I
submit quotes when approached
by them and if successful the quote is accepted,
and I complete the work and issue an invoice. The last private home I built was
in 2022. It is not work that I enjoy, but in any event all work was invoiced
because the clients had building contracts with me and
finance through banks, so
everything was properly accounted for in order for their banks to release
Wife worked during the relationship but did not state what she earned:
I was not a stay at home mother during the marriage. I did employed work during
the marriage as well as joint business work. Between
2001 and 2004 we operated a
business together known as [S Business]. Other external work was:
a) Between 1996 and 1998 I worked as an assistant at the [U Centre] in [Town
b) Between 2004 and 2007 I was a casual [retail assistant] at [V Company] in
c) Between 2007 and 2012 I was the bookkeeper for the partnership.
d) Between 2012 and 2017 as employed as [an allied health worker] at the
business at the [W Centre].
Husband primarily ran the business and the business income was higher than the
Wife’s income.
the Husband’s evidence suggests that income of the business may have been
spilt with the Wife in some way, as they
operated as a partnership. In
[2016] FamCAFC 84
, Murphy and Kent JJ commented on income
splitting arrangements:
141. When the parties to a relationship earn income and derive capital through
corporate/trust structures established primarily
to lawfully minimise taxation,
the indirect contribution of a party who is not involved in the day-to-day
operation of those structures
is sometimes overlooked. Yet, the
“non-active” party can, in truth, be a significant contributor.
This Court said more
than 30 years ago in
Lee Steere and Lee Steere
“it cannot be denied that the splitting of income tax is a direct and
immediate financial benefit to the husband and to
that extent a direct
financial contribution on the part of the wife”. So, too, “the
issue of the wife’s personal
liability as a director of the companies ...
is a matter of increasing relevance in recent times ... the ‘days of the
or passive, director are well and truly
Post-separation,
the Wife continued to pay the mortgage on the B Street property and pay the
rates for both the 1 B and 2 B Street
Under cross-examination,
the Wife said that she was paying $1,470 per month on the mortgage and $30 per
week towards the rates.
Husband alleged that, at the time of separation, there was $160,000 remaining on
the mortgage,
noting that the
mortgage has now been paid off from the sale proceeds of the 2 B lot. The
Wife’s financial statement revealed
that as of September 2024, the
mortgage stood at $141,000,
suggesting that she paid approximately $19,000 off the mortgage
post-separation.
Post-separation,
the Husband purchased three motor vehicles that form a sizeable proportion of
the agreed asset pool, as Mr Trezise
The balance sheet is contentious only in relation to the vehicles identified as
items 7,8 and 9. The husband nominally contends that
the items should be
excluded as they were purchased by him from income accrued after the
parties’ separation, and in circumstances
where it could not be seriously
suggested by the wife that she was making post-separation contributions in other
areas; for instance,
with parenting non-adult children. He concedes, however,
that the items can properly be included.
If those items are to be included in the balance sheet at the insistence of the
wife, there will need to be, and should be, a commensurate
adjustment in the
assessment of the contribution factors in the husband’s favour. Those
items currently comprise 8.5 –
9 per cent of what is expected to be value
of the net assets available for adjustment following the agreed sale of the real
Williams submitted that the Husband’s contributions, in this regard, were
offset by the Wife’s post separation contributions
to the mortgage and
rates. That submission has some attraction, but I also accept that the
Wife’s occupation of the home, to
his exclusion, can be regarded as an
indirect financial contribution of his, as confirmed in
MacKinnon &
[2023] FedCFamC1A 156:
Meadows & Meadows
[2020] FamCAFC 124
(at [152]), the
occupation of a former matrimonial home was considered to be an indirect
contribution by the spouse not in occupation,
even though the title to the
former matrimonial home was held by the spouse in occupation: see
[2019] FamCA 491.
The fact that the interest of the
appellant may be only an inchoate right at common law (until property settlement
orders are made),
does not restrict consideration of the use of the property
pursuant to s 90SM of the Act as between the
case is, however, distinguishable from this one, as there the Husband paid all
outgoings for the property, including the mortgage,
whilst also paying
Here, the Wife has paid the
mortgage and rates for eight or nine years, whist the Husband was accommodated,
largely free from formal
rent. That said, the occupation of the home by the Wife
is an indirect contribution of the Husband.
Considering
all these matters, the Husband made greater financial contributions to the
Section 79(4)(b):
direct and indirect non-financial
contributions to property
parties spent time and money renovating and maintaining the Town J
66. The renovation and construction at [Town J] was both of us. [Mr Riley] did
80% and I 20%. I did plastering with him, painting,
demolition anything that I
could help with.
Wife acknowledged that the Husband was primarily responsible for the Town J
build and solely responsible for building the B Street
which was done using
the funds from the Town J property:
75. [Mr Riley] had a hard working offsider called [Mr X]. They helped build [B
Street] with the team of people very quickly. We paid
everyone but [Mr Riley]. I
worked to pay household bills, and no money left over from the sale of [Town J]
finance a lot of the build,
but we borrowed on the mortgage as
Husband contended that building the property himself, he saved the parties
approximately $200,000 but did not produce any evidence
to substantiate this
Post-separation,
the Wife said she maintained the B Street property, but did not provide specific
details about this, other than saying
she re-stained the deck in
Both parties agreed that
the Husband did not make any contributions to that property
post-separation.
Husband made greater non-financial contributions than the Wife, particularly to
the construction of the Town J and B Street dwellings.
Section 79(4)(c):
contributions to the welfare of the
family, including contributions as homemaker or parent
Court must not give the parties' contributions to the family, including those as
Dawes & Dawes
[1989] FamCA 71
the Full Court stated:
it is difficult, as it always is in such cases, to put one's finger squarely on
what led his Honour to so undervalue the
Wife's contribution, we think that one
significant matter which did so was that he failed to give any weight to the
fact that the
Wife's performance of her role as homemaker and parent during the
30 years of cohabitation was not just a contribution under
subsequently recognized to some degree) but was also a significant contribution
s.79(4)(b).
That point was made by the Full Court (Nicholson, C.J., Murray
and Buckley, JJ.) in
In the Marriage of Napthali
[1988] FamCA 9
(1988) 13 Fam LR 146
p 151, where their Honours said:-
now to the second ground of appeal, (which was that 'the court erred in law in
failing to take into account contributions
made by the Wife during the marriage
as homemaker and parent') it is apparent that nowhere in her Honour's judgment
does she consider
the contribution of the Wife to the business assets as a
nowhere in the evidence or in the submissions was any criticism directed at her
capacities in this regard. It is to be noted
Mallet v. Mallet
[1984] HCA 21
(1984) 9 Fam LR 449
; (1984) FLC 91—507, the High Court
whilst rejecting the proposition of a presumption of equality, approved
statements by this
Court that the purpose of
is to give recognition
the position of the house Wife who by her attention to the home and the
children frees her Husband to earn income and acquire assets
and also approved
the proposition that the contribution made by the Wife as a home—maker and
parent should be recognised not
in a token way but in a substantial way
Gibbs C.J. at Fam LR 451; FLC 79,111; Mason J. at Fam LR 461—2; FLC
Husband acknowledged that the Wife was the primary caregiver of the children,
however, said when they were younger and the parties
were running the store
together, that the care of the children was
Wife stated that she was the dominant carer for the children and
55. I was responsible for the children's extra activities during the marriage.
There was [sport] every Wednesday night for most of
our primary school years 3
to 6. [Mr E] played for the local roster and school roster and was often doing
tournaments.
62. As [Mr Riley] worked, I did the majority of the running around for the
children. I loved doing it for them.
64. [Mr Riley] did contribute to home duties when needed but I would say that I
did 85-90%. I cooked 95% of the time and did all
the shopping. I did all the
housework, washing, ironing, making beds and paying bills, including the
partnership and household bills.
nature of the Wife’s contribution to the care of the children was noted by
The way I see it, dad checked out on all of us when we were teenagers...
By the time that we were 14, dad was largely absent from the household or doing
things that we did not even know about when he was
said, the Wife agreed that the Husband would care for the children when she was
undertaking her training to become an allied
accept the Wife’s evidence, which was not seriously challenged. The
Wife’s contributions to homemaking and parenting
were greater than the
Were the Wife’s overall contributions made more
arduous by virtue of the Husband’s violence?
Wife devoted a substantial part of her affidavit to her claim that she and Mr E
were subject to years of family violence from
the Husband and her contributions
were made more arduous as a result.
Wife and Ms G described the following instances of family violence:
Seven months
into the parties’ relationship the Husband smashed a camera in front of
the Wife after arguing at a friend’s
In 1997 when the
Wife was pregnant with Ms G, the Husband hit the Wife with an open
In April 2000,
the Husband punched the windscreen of a truck after the parties had an
In 2002 the
Husband ‘snapped’ and grabbed her by the throat and held her up
against the wall and smashed the coffee table
The Wife also
stated that approximately twice a year in the early years of the relationship,
the Husband would grab her by the throat
and hold her up against the wall. The
Wife says she learned to step away when he was mad and try to calm him down to
stop him from
grabbing her.
Ms G recounted
an event where the Husband assaulted Mr E and held him on the ground, with Mr
E’s head hitting the ground numerous
times. Ms G said this occurred
because Mr E used the Wi-Fi.
Both the Wife
and Ms G recounted Mr E being assaulted by the Husband when he was a
Wife also described the impact of her experiences upon her:
45. During the marriage
I had to work so hard to keep myself stable
relationship where violence was potentially only seconds away. I continued to
work in what I would describe as a
survival mode after the
46. I knew that I had to keep working, but I also needed to address my mental
health and capacity to work while dealing with [Mr
E]'s ongoing mental health
and drug addictions.
47. In 2017 went to see psychologist [Dr P] to address my mental health issues
and to look at why
I was always living in fight or flight mode
48.1 also had a strong desire to help my daughter [Ms G] with her daughter after
[Ms G] had come out of an abusive relationship herself.
I was a completely broken person when my marriage finished
to keep going.
(Emphasis added)
Wife’s Psychologist, Dr P, whose evidence was unchallenged, stated in her
11. In 2018 [Ms Riley] presented with low mood and anxiety in relation to the
relationship. She reported at the time that her manage
had been marked by
emotional abuse, extramarital affairs on his part and that he was physically
violent to her about twice per year.
She also reported that interactions
relating to wanting to work towards financial separation raised significant
anxiety in her at
12. In the time I was seeing [Ms Riley], particularly in 2018 and 2019, she
presented with symptoms of anxiety and although she was
doing some work
was not able to work at full time capacity
The psychological work
focused on trauma recovery and reduction in anxiety
and she had a reasonable
treatment response. She learned to manage her anxiety and emotions more
effectively although there was not
a complete resolution of her
Husband admitted that he assaulted the Wife in September 2015, by hitting her
across the face with an open hand. The Husband was
charged and pleaded guilty to
common assault.
information from Tasmania Police, exhibited as
contained a Police Family
Violence Order, made in September 2015, with basic conditions that the Husband
not threaten, harass, abuse
or assault the Wife. The information also included
the ‘Facts for Prosecutor’ regarding the Husband’s assault
the Wife which included the following:
During the interview the defendant stated that;
That he and the
victim had an altercation about Facebook.
That they were
both looking at their phones.
That words were
said about a previous separation.
believed the victim inflamed the situation.
slapped the victim with the back of his left hand.
back of his hand connected with her cheek.
believed he was provoked.
At the conclusion of the interview the defendant was arrested, charged and
bailed in respect of the offence. He was also issued with
a Police Family
Violence Order.
The victim later attended hospital for X-rays to be taken.
She suffered
bruising, a small abrasion, swelling to her nose and flow out bruising to both
. She subsequently had photographs taken of her injuries by an officer
from Forensic Services.
(Emphasis added)
Husband stated in his affidavit that this incident was the only time where there
was any violence during the relationship:
36. [Ms Riley] has told me she is pursuing a claim in the property settlement
for family violence she alleges I committed during
our relationship. There is
only incident that would be at all relevant to this. Sometime in 2015 or early
2016 I was having a bath
and scrolling through Facebook marketplace and news
feeds on my mobile phone. When I got out and got dressed I sat down on the couch
next to [Ms Riley]. She had been drinking (she had a glass of wine she was
holding and drinking from). She appeared to me to be in
a bad mood. She started
accusing me of talking to other women on Facebook. I denied this and showed her
all my messages I had but
she continued to accuse me and then accused me of
having an affair. I did the wrong thing then
. I got up from the couch and
with the back of my hand I slapped her on the cheek and told her to "shut the
[Ms Riley] reported this to the police and I cooperated
fully. I was charged with assault and pleaded guilty.
37. This was the only time there was any violence in our relationship. We had
the occasional argument over the years of our marriage
where we both yelled and
swore at each other but we both did this. A part from that one time in 2015/2016
I have not otherwise had
any police charges for family violence or family
violence orders issued against
(Emphasis added)
Husband dedicated his affidavit filed 27 September 2024, to the allegations of
family violence, denying that he engaged in the
other physical violence as
I have never done anything of the sort alleged in paragraph 31 of [Ms Riley]'s
affidavit. I have never and would never strangle or
hold [Ms Riley] by her
throat. I am actually quite offended and insulted that she would make such
allegations. Apart from that one
time I have explained in my trial affidavit I
have not been in trouble with the law for any matters of violence against [Ms
or any other person. I do not have any temper or anger problems. If
anything, [Ms Riley] was the one who was quick to get angry.
She is very quick
witted, opinionated and sarcastic and would often say nasty things without
having thought about it first. In that
way she was quite intimidating. I was the
placid one in our marriage and I found avoiding her by going to the shed was the
way to manage her when she was moody or angry or accusing me of having
Husband also denied that he had ever been violent to Mr E:
Paragraph 38 of her affidavit is true in part but an exaggeration and untrue in
other parts. I have never punched [Mr E] nor has
[Ms G] ever punched me to the
face. [Mr E] was difficult to parent from an early age for us both. He has food
and severe skin allergies
which frustrated him and made him angry but his
behaviour worsened when he started early puberty, about 10 or 11 years of age.
was at times violent to both of us and his sister. [Ms Riley] used the wooden
spoon to try and control and settle him but I used
bear hugs and occasionally
held him to the ground to restrain him when he was at risk of hurting [Ms G],
[Ms Riley] or our property.
His behaviour was terrible at high school as well.
He had numerous detentions and internal
suspensions.
had initially sought to rely upon an affidavit from Mr E, but chose not to call
him as a witness. Given the fragility of Mr E’s
mental health, the
decision was a wise one and I accept that there was a reasonable explanation for
Mr E not attending court. Consequently,
Mr E’s affidavit was not read. I
do not draw any inference because of the Husband’s failure to present Mr E
as a witness.
Husband concluded:
18. There are parts of [Ms Riley]'s affidavit that I cannot comment on as she
does not talk of factual matters, or she talks of her
feelings and there are
other parts relating to the history of our roles during our marriage that I have
addressed already in my trial
I do not agree with the inference
[Ms Riley] makes that our marriage was bad and or that it was all my fault when
there were bad times.
We both played a part in that as I have already mentioned.
There were occasions also when [Ms Riley] was violent to me. I did not
notes of when it happened but there were several occasions when she was angry
hand, punched me to my back,
pushed me and or yelled and swore at me and called me names like "dickhead" and
"arsehole" and told
me that I was "useless" and "stupid".
I always walked
off from her and did not retaliate even though she sometimes yelled at me to hit
her. I knew the best thing to do
was to let her calm down in her own time. I
never rep1ied this to anyone because I did not feel at risk with her. I am only
it now because she has not.
19. [Mr E] was a challenge to parent and we both struggled with him and his
violence at different times, but we also had many happy
family times which
included holidays all over Australia (and one cruise which was our only
international trip).
Both [Ms Riley] and I drank alcohol during our marriage
but I would describe us both as moderate drinkers. I was not a heavy drinker
did not prioritise socialising with friends over my family.
[Ms Riley] and I
often drank with our friends on a Friday and Saturday night. Our friends came to
our place, or we went to
(Emphasis added)
Consideration
Kennon v Kennon
[1997] FamCA 27
(1997) FLC 92-757
Fogarty and Lindenmayer JJ set out the relevant principle:
Put shortly, our view is that where there is a course of violent conduct by one
party towards the other during the marriage which
is demonstrated to have had a
significant adverse impact upon that party’s contributions to the
marriage, or, put the other
way, to have made his or her contributions
significantly more arduous than they ought to have been, that is a fact which a
judge is entitled to take into account in assessing the parties’
respective contributions within s 79...
Martell & Martell
[2023] FedCFamC1A 71
(2023) 66 Fam LR 650
, Aldridge J explained the
principle in a more modern context:
For the reasons given, the words “significantly” and “more
arduous” are not to be read as coterminous with
“exceptional”.
Rather, they arise from the basis of the principle itself which focuses on
contributions. If the nature and extent of a person’s
contributions are
made more difficult or harder so that they should be accorded greater weight,
such that they should be taken into
account in the determining of the outcome,
they have therefore been “significantly impacted” or made
“more arduous”.
The focus is not on the conduct per se, but on its
effects on contributions.
The threshold for recognition is therefore met by conduct which has a
discernible effect on the contributions of the other party
such that it should
be recognised in determining the respective contributions of the parties.
That, in my view, should be the focus and terms such as
“exceptional” or “narrow”, or indeed,
add an unnecessary and unacceptable gloss suggesting that
a rare and high level of impact is required and that the violence or its
must be exceptional. That is not however, what their Honours said. All that was
required was a “significant adverse
impact” upon a party’s
contributions. The word “significant” was used, in my opinion, as
describing that
the effect must be sufficient to warrant recognition but not
imparting some artificial threshold. The effect of the conduct must
be such that
a greater weight should be given to the contributions.
More recent cases have softened some of the harshness of the original
application of the principles identified in Kennon. For example,
it is now the
position that the
adverse effect of the violence on the contributions of a
party can be inferred from the lay evidence of the parties
and that there is
no need to call evidence to “quantify” that effect
[2016] FamCAFC 270
(2016) 56 Fam LR 500
... at [47]–[52] (Maine);
Britt v Britt
[2017] FamCAFC 27
(2017) 56 Fam LR 526
... at [74]–[75];
Keating v Keating
[2019] FamCAFC 46
(2019) 59 Fam LR 158
... [27]–[43],
[52]–[67]; Benson v Drury
[2020] FamCAFC 303
(2020) 62 Fam LR 1
[47]–[50]).
It seems to me that regarding Kennon claims as “special” or
“exceptional” is apt to mislead. In reality,
all the majority said
in that case was that a person’s contributions are to be assessed in the
light of all of the circumstances
and where those circumstances have the effect
of making the contributions more difficult, onerous or arduous, that should be
in the assessment of contributions. That, of course, takes place in a
holistic manner (Dickons v Dickons (2012) 50 Fam LR 244...;
Jabour v Jabour
[2019] FamCAFC 78
; (201) 59 Fam LR
(Emphasis added)
approach was confirmed in
Dajani & Dajani
[2025] FedCFamC1A 28
McClelland DCJ, Aldridge & Jarrett JJ affirmed the above, stating:
It can be seen the focus is on the contributions made by a party and the nature
The circumstances in which family violence could make that
contribution more arduous and deserving of greater weight can easily be
The point is, however, the recognition of the true nature and
extent of the contributions and not punishment of the
perpetrator.
Returning then to the case before this Court, it is important to note
express evidence that the contributions were made more arduous
or worthy of
significantly greater weight is not required.
Such a finding can be inferred
if the evidence permits such a
(Emphasis added)
Full Court in
Boulton & Boulton
[2024] FedCFamC1A 132
confirmed that
behaviour of the type that attracts the ‘
considerations, can be relevant to both the assessment of contributions and
section 75(2) factors:
There is no error of principle by taking into account findings of prior family
violence in evaluating past contributions and then
considering its prospective
impact in combination with other factors as relevant to findings as to future
earning capacity.
The projected effects of family violence on the wife were considered by the
primary judge, coupled with both the history of the marriage
dynamic whereby the
wife was not in employment for many years while caring for the children and her
future full-time care of them.
The accumulation of these facts grounded the
predictive prospective factor as to the wife’s future earning capacity
uncontroversial historical facts and from present
circumstances.
Scaletta & Scaletta
[2024] FedCFamC1A 87
, the Full Court confirmed
that a course of conduct does not have to be established, and a single incident
may be sufficient:
Secondly, it takes only a moment of thought to envisage that a single event
could give rise to a permanent disability which would
make all subsequent
contributions more arduous. Indeed, as Kennon itself explains, the focus is on
the nature of the contributions,
as the above quotation makes clear (see also
Martell at [24]–[28]).
Thus, a “course of conduct” is not a prerequisite for considering
whether the nature and extent of contributions has
been made more
Did the Husband commit acts of family violence and otherwise
act as alleged by the Wife?
Stamatou & Stamatou
[2022] FedCFamC1F 241
following observations regarding fact finding in cases where there are disputed
allegations of family violence:
180. Before turning to the wife’s evidence in this respect, it is
desirable to say something about the corroboration of family
well settled that a party does not require their evidence of family violence to
be corroborated before such evidence can be
Given the tendency of
domestic violence to occur in circumstances where there are no witnesses other
than the parties to the marriage
and perhaps their children, this must
necessarily be so: see Keating & Keating
[2019] FamCAFC 46
(Ainslie-Wallace and Ryan JJ) (“Keating”); Hendy
[2018] FamCAFC 257
(2018) FLC 93-879
(Ainslie-Wallace,
Ryan & Austin JJ); Amador & Amador
[2009] FamCAFC 196
(2009) 43 Fam LR
(May, Coleman & Le Poer Trench JJ) (“Amador”).
181. Whilst as a general principle it is important to identify a core
consistency in the evidence of an alleged victim of family violence
rather than
concentrating on supposed inconsistencies in the evidence, this does not permit
a court to ignore or otherwise dismiss
inconsistencies in that evidence:
Keating at [62] (Austin J); Zuen & Lhao
[2020] FamCAFC 84
(Ryan, Aldridge and Stevenson JJ) (“Zuen & Lhao”).
the reference to the importance of identifying a core consistency, while
important in cases involving family violence, must
not obscure the reality that
there cannot be a finding of family violence otherwise than in accordance with
Evidence Act
and having regard to all relevant matters:
Amador at [86]-[93]. Where allegations of family violence are made it is
necessary for the Court to make findings where the evidence
enables that to be
done: see Zuen & Lhao at
(Emphasis added)
Wife’s allegations meet the definition of family violence, as defined in
section 4AB of the Act:
(1) For the purposes of this Act, family violence means violent, threatening or
other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls
a member of the
person’s family (the family member) or causes the family member to be
(2) Examples of behaviour that may constitute family violence include (but are
not limited to):
(a) an assault; or
(b) a sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour; or
(c) stalking; or
(d) repeated derogatory taunts; or
(e) intentionally damaging or destroying property; or
(f) intentionally causing death or injury to an animal; or
(g) unreasonably denying the family member the financial autonomy that he or she
would otherwise have had; or
(h) unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the reasonable
living expenses of the family member, or his or her
child, at a time when the
family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the person for financial
support; or
(i) preventing the family member from making or keeping connections with his or
her family, friends or culture; or
(j) unlawfully depriving the family member, or any member of the family
member’s family, of his or her liberty.
(3) For the purposes of this Act, a child is
violence if the child sees or hears family violence or otherwise experiences the
effects of family violence.
(4) Examples of situations that may constitute a child being exposed to family
violence include (but are not limited to) the child:
(a) overhearing threats of death or personal injury by a member of the
child’s family towards another member of the child’s
(b) seeing or hearing an assault of a member of the child’s family by
another member of the child’s family; or
(c) comforting or providing assistance to a member of the child’s family
who has been assaulted by another member of the child’s
(d) cleaning up a site after a member of the child’s family has
intentionally damaged property of another member of the child’s
(e) being present when police or ambulance officers attend an incident involving
the assault of a member of the child’s family
by another member of the
child’s family.
cross-examination the Wife maintained her position that her allegations, set out
in her affidavit were true, while conceding
that she would sometimes be verbally
abusive and sarcastic to the Husband. She also agreed that she would use the
wooden spoon to
discipline the children if required.
found the Wife’s evidence in her affidavit and under cross-examination, to
be detailed, consistent and compelling, including
that at paragraph 31 of her
[Mr Riley] seemed to have a switch that triggered him.
He could be very
placid, very loving, very helpful but if I said run one wrong word then I was in
trouble. We were on and off with
happy or strained over the next few years. [Mr
Riley] could be abusive to me but also loving. He would lie about small things
would upset me and when I confronted him, his response was to grab me by
the throat and hold me up against the wall.
His eyes would go black like he
wasn't there, and he would even have white froth at the corners of his mouth. I
would beg for him
to stop and tell him that I loved him and say that it's me
it's me. He wouldn't squeeze my throat hard. He would just grab me by
happened maybe twice a year for 3 to 4 years in the early part of the decade. I
learnt to move away from him quickly and
talk to calm him
. The physical distance was a safety
barrier. [Mr Riley] didn't seem to be there. It was like he didn't know
(Emphasis added)
Wife claimed that she was also impacted by the Husband’s violence towards
Mr E. To help substantiate her allegations regarding
Mr E she annexed to her
affidavit a photograph,
apparently showing the injury Mr E suffered at his father’s hand. The
photograph does not clearly show any actual injury, although
the Husband agreed
that Mr E’s face looked
The Wife’s evidence was supported by Ms G’s evidence:
7. There were multiple times when I saw [Mr E] physically assaulted by my
father. The way I see it, dad checked out on all of us when
we were teenagers,
but he still had a special place of anger for [Mr E] and would take his anger
out on him.
8. By the time that we were 14, dad was largely
absent from the household or doing things that we did not even know about when
was not working.
9. In 2023, I accompanied [Mr E] to the [City L] Hospital where the doctor told
[Mr E] that he had diagnosed him with Border line
Personality Disorder which was
linked to trauma as a child. I heard these words myself.
10. Even in recent weeks, [Mr E] has been deeply troubled and attempted to take
his own life, again.
11. When the assault took place in 2015, I was pregnant with my daughter,
[Y], and I made a statement to the police. I will never
forget that when I spoke
to my father to get him to stop what he was doing to my mother, after he had hit
her, he said to me, "Do
you want one next?".
12. When I was younger, before I was 10, on one day I distinctly recall going to
[City Z] with my father. Something happened on the
road between the car that we
were in with my dad driving and another driver. My dad pursued this car, stopped
and there was a fight
that took place. I remember rushing off to the Police
Station and my father saying to me, "Don't tell your mum what happened".
13. Again, on a date that I cannot remember, but some years later, there was an
argument that broke out between dad and [Mr E].
My dad had grabbed hold of
[Mr E] and bashed his head into the ground.
This was near the house.
I intervened and was hitting dad to get him off [Mr E]. He later told me that I
had given him a black eye.
(Emphasis added)
G was unshaken when she was questioned about these matters, including adhering
to the term ‘bash’ as the appropriate
description of what she
witnessed when the Husband assaulted Mr E in front of her. She did, however,
concede that rather than repeatedly
hitting Mr E’s head into the ground,
as her affidavit suggests, she said her father held Mr E’s head on the
ground. When
asked what she meant by her witnessing her father’s violence
towards Mr E, ‘
multiple times’,
she clarified,
‘every year’.
is a core consistency to the Wife’s the allegations — the neglect of
the family, the abuse of alcohol, the hits
to the face, the grabbing of her
throat, the destroying property and the violence towards Mr E. The violence
occurred a few times
each year. Ms G’s evidence helped corroborate some of
her claims regarding Mr E, as did the Husband’s conviction for
Husband’s denials did not sit well with the corroborating evidence of Ms
G, his conviction for common assault and his threat
want one’ —
which he did not mention in his affidavits
all establishing that he was unable, at times, to control his
violent emotions when angered. The Wife’s presentation and account
was also generally consistent with the claims in her affidavit.
Husband’s denial of his behaviour towards Mr E, as evidenced by Ms G,
gives me cause to doubt his denials of violence generally.
His claim to police
that he was
assaulted the Wife showed little insight at the time. Even if the Wife could be
verbally abusive, and even sarcastic, this
was no excuse for his actions. The
assault led to her being treated in hospital for facial injuries, indicating
that she was hit
with some force.
am persuaded, to the requisite standard, that the Wife and Mr E suffered from
family violence perpetrated by the Husband over the
prolonged period alleged by
Did the Husband’s behaviour make the Wife’s
contributions more arduous?
Trezise submitted that even taking a generous view of the Wife’s evidence
she did not establish an evidentiary nexus between
the conduct of which she
complained and her capacity to make relevant contributions. He referred to her
answers, given under cross-examination,
where she agreed that she
‘performed well’
at undertaking the homemaking, parenting and
other contributions she mentioned in her affidavit.
Wife did present as strong and stoic, but said, and I accept, that she
had to work so hard to keep myself stable in a relationship
where violence was potentially only seconds away’
. I repeat how she
described the Husband when he assaulted her:
His eyes would go black like he wasn't there, and he would even have white froth
at the corners of his mouth. I would beg for him
to stop and tell him that I
loved him and say that it's me it's me. He wouldn't squeeze my throat hard. He
would just grab me by
it. This happened maybe twice a year for 3 to 4 years in
the early part of the decade.
the Wife spoke of this physical violence occurring mainly in the early years of
the relationship, the threat remained real
as shown by the assault upon her in
2015. The Husband’s violent nature was also apparent from his treatment of
Mr E, which
Ms G witnessed — clearly impacting her. The
Husband’s ability to become violent effectively permeated the
relationship.
separation, the Wife spoke of being in ‘
flight or fight
, as her psychologist treated her for trauma recovery and
anxiety. The Wife said that she was not able to work full-time because of
am satisfied, given my findings as to the nature of the violence the Wife
endured and witnessed, together with her evidence as to
its impact upon her and
the evidence of Dr P, that her contributions were made more arduous because of
the Husband’s violent
behaviour. That said, I accept that the Wife was
able to contribute at a high level during the relationship notwithstanding her
experiences
of violent behaviour, and its impact upon her. Simply because the
Wife was able to contribute at a high level does not mean that
she did not, at
times, do so arduously. As she said, she had to work on keeping herself
. There will be an adjustment to the Wife.
Conclusion regarding the parties’ contributions
Williams submitted that the Wife’s contributions should be assessed at a
55/45 division in the Wife’s favour, because
she was the major homemaker
and parent — a job she largely undertook alone. In relation to any
adjustment, it was submitted that the family violence the Wife
experienced impacted her contributions to the relationship and still
impacts her to this day.
was further submitted that the Wife’s advantage in occupying the home post
separation was countered by her significant payments
towards the mortgage,
whilst the Husband had little expense associated with his post-separation
accommodation.
Trezise submitted that the parties’ contributions should be assessed 45/55
in the Husband’s favour. He submitted that
the parties did not bring in
substantial assets at the commencement of the relationship and equally
contributed within their respective
roles during the relationship. In relation
argument, Mr Trezise submitted that the Wife, even on the
most favourable assessment of her evidence, did not establish that her
contributions were made more arduous by virtue of the Husband’s behaviour.
Finally, the Husband’s post-separation contribution
of the motor vehicles
to the pool for division was significant and must be given weight.
assessed all the contributions of the parties since 1997 when cohabitation
commenced, I conclude that their contributions be
assessed at 52.5 per cent for
the Wife and 47.5 per cent for the Husband. In dollar terms — if the pool
achieved a net value
of $846,950
(upon the sale of the home) — the
Wife would be entitled to assets valued at $444,648.75 and the Husband
$402,301.25 —
a differential of $42,347.50.
Section 79(4)(d)
–(g), including
Section 79(4)(d):
the effect of any proposed order upon the
earning capacity of either party to the marriage
Full Court in
Beck & Beck (No
(1983) FLC 91-318
‘earning capacity’ for the purposes of
section 75(2)(k)
therefore section 90SF(3)(k), applicable the Act generally, as:
a capacity to obtain income which could be used to provide maintenance ... and
not merely as current income from personal exertion
or from the use of personal
Wife completed her qualifications to become an allied health worker eight years
ago. Under cross-examination she spoke of wanting
to undertake further
I would like do training in [counselling]— I also help mums — be a
listening ear as part of [allied health work]—
do training in that and I
am also doing [community support
Husband will be able to continue running his construction business.
party’s proposed orders affect the other’s earning
Section 79(4)(e):
the matters referred to in
so far as they are relevant
is not the task of a Court, with jurisdiction under
, to engage in
social engineering under
–(g) — that is, to serve any
‘moral’ or ‘charitable’ (but non-legal) ends outside the
The Full Court
Beck & Beck (No
(1983) FLC 91-318
explained that
[i]t is the financial consequences of all of the relevant matters that are to be
taken into account and the section is so drafted
to effect this purpose while
excluding matters of conduct in a moral or non-financial
in relation to maintenance or property settlement, the Court cannot assess or
account for the
(or s 90SF(3)) factors without satisfying itself that it
bears upon a party’s financial
circumstances.
Section 75(2)(a):
the age and state of health of each of the
Wife is 50 years of age, and the Husband is 52. The Wife did not adduce any
evidence of her age or physical health that would
impact her ability to work.
The Wife does not work full-time, and her psychologist referred to her
experiences of family violence
impacting her ability to do so in 2018 and
12. In the time I was seeing [Ms Riley], particularly in 2018 and 2019, she
presented with symptoms of anxiety and although she was
doing some work she was
not able to work at full time capacity. The psychological work focused on trauma
recovery and reduction in
anxiety and she had a reasonable treatment response.
She learned to manage her anxiety and emotions more effectively although there
was not a complete resolution of her
Wife’s engagement with her psychologist ended in January 2024, and the
Wife did not present any evidence to suggest that
her current choice to work
part-time is driven by her exposure to past violent behaviour.
Husband did refer to shoulder injuries he sustained at work, stating in his
affidavit that he will be able to continue to work
as normal provided he does
not lift his arms above his
No evidence was
produced to prove that his earning capacity is impacted by his past work
am satisfied both parties have the ability to work and earn income.
Section 75(2)(b):
the income, property and financial
resources of each of the parties and the physical and mental capacity of each of
them for appropriate
gainful employment
Clauson & Clauson
[1995] FamCA 10
(1995) FLC 92-595
, the Full Court stated:
It has long been recognised that in most cases the most valuable
“asset” which a party can take out of the marriage is
a substantial,
reliable, income-earning capacity: see
Best and Best
[1993] FamCA 107
(1993) FLC 92-418
Honours further remarked that:
In addition, it should not be forgotten that the payment of child support in no
way compensates the custodial parent for the loss
of career opportunity, lack of
employment mobility and the restriction on an independent lifestyle which the
obligation to care for
children usually entails: see
January, 1995, Full Court, not
trial, the Wife submitted that she is currently earning $32,000 per year as an
allied health worker,
a few days per week, which meets the demand for her business:
84. I have a steady clientele in [...] with a focus on [...]. I currently have
last 1-2 years from 40-50
per month as interest rates and cost of living has seen regular clients drop
85. I have a mostly female clientele. I have women that have been coming to me
for 8 years now. Bookings are permanently re-booked
either monthly or 3 weekly,
fortnightly or even weekly depending on client need.
86. Some clients book a 2 hour spot every month, others it is just one hour.
Over the years I have tended to extended families over
time and all my business
has been via word of mouth.
87. Much of my activity is for younger women and associated with pregnancy where
I have helped many young women before and after
childbirth.
Wife also stated that she was receiving jobseeker payments as her client base
has shrunk.
This gives the
Wife $700 per week to pay her expenses. Under cross-examination, as extracted
earlier, the Wife said that she hoped
to add to her training in the years
cross-examination, the Husband stated that in the 2023-2024 financial year, he
earned $42,600 - $44,483,
which had been his consistent income since separation. In his updated financial
statement he stated that his weekly income was $807,
but he did not fully set
out his weekly expenses. Mr Williams submitted, however, that his income was
understated:
Here, the Respondent is a licensed builder. He still trades but only enough to
lower his taxable income to that of the Applicant.
His evidence says nothing of
his hourly rate, work in progress, his ability to gain new work, work for others
and just about anything
that may relate to his income earning capacity. His
evidence is and will be categorised as of a businessperson who ignores his own
business in, as if he is idling his boat through the shallows of litigation
until he reaches the deep water on the other side where
the engine is free to
rev and income and wealth will rapidly emerge from a once distant
Williams submitted that the Husband had a higher income earning capacity,
however, the exact figure is unknown:
I can’t say that pushes his income from forty thousand dollars a per year
to fifty-five thousand dollars, but there is opportunity
in business,
there’s a – demonstrated evidence of link with people who do
building work where he had put himself down
as the builder, and was going to be
involved in building at – at the minimum at a supervisory level.
That – that when – when a person is giving evidence and saying
‘not by job, not by job, not by job’ it would
have been quite
different if he’s – “Yes, look I am involved in that – I
am part of the project I am doing
these things which could classify as
‘work’ and this is our profit share arrangement.” Now of
course, that didn’t
happen, but there’s nothing stopping that,
legally, from happening — that’s the opportunity to earn
cross-examination, the Husband was questioned about his representation made in
insurance documentation for his construction
business — exhibited as W4
— where he estimated his gross turnover to be
cross-examination, he said that the figure of $670,000 in turnover was correct,
but that the money
‘would not touch me’
‘go to the young
‘young fellas’ are the Husband’s nephews, Mr AA and Mr BB,
whom, he claimed, were conducting building work using
his building licence, from
which he received no financial benefit. He agreed that he had increased his
insurance cover from $250,000
to $900,000 — to cover larger projects
— but insisted he would not receive a financial benefit, even though he
on the risk. He agreed that the cost of the higher insurance, to him,
was $6,000 and that his nephews had not yet paid anything towards
Exhibit W4 confirmed the three buildings that were to be constructed during the
Description
Project Value
Project Start Date
% Completed
Estimated Completion Date
New Dwelling
information was not disclosed by the Husband in his trial affidavits and only
came to light under questioning. When asked why
he had not disclosed this
information earlier, he simply repeated that he was not obtaining a financial
Husband’s name was also associated with two building contracts —
with N Pty Ltd as the builder — which were
exhibited as W6. These
contracts related to the construction of two homes at Town CC and Town DD, with
a value of $275,000 each.
The contracting parties are the owners of each block
of land and N Pty Ltd. The Husband, however, signed the contracts for N Pty
even though he claimed to have no interest in that company. He also accepted
that he signed the
‘start work notice’
on each occasion.
company search of N Pty Ltd did not reveal the Husband to be an office holder,
but its letter head — exhibited as W5 —
displayed the
Husband’s building licence number. This information came at some surprise
to the Husband, who said it ‘
was wrong’.
information again came out under cross-examination, and differed from his
initial answers, when did not mention his involvement
with N Pty Ltd and its
director, Mr O. He simply volunteered that he was allowing his nephews to use
his licence so they could take
on building work. Ultimately, it was revealed
that his nephews are employees of N Pty Ltd and it was N Pty Ltd that used the
and his licence to construct the dwellings at Town CC and Town DD. The
Husband also confirmed that he had been to Town DD on four
occasions to inspect
the workmanship but was yet to inspect Town CC.
asked as to how the arrangement with N Pty Ltd had started, he said that his
nephews had explained that they worked for Mr O
and he wanted to use his
licence. To help them out he agreed. He said that he did not know Mr O prior to
this but agreed to take
out increased insurance and sign the contracts for the
builds, for no financial benefit and N Pty Ltd purchased all the materials.
with his friend Mr R, Mr O is a contractor.
drip-fed information undermined the Husband’s credit and led to the trial
adjourning and subpoenas issuing while the Court
contemplated whether the matter
should be referred to M Authority to decide if N Pty Ltd and/or the Husband
had breached the
Occupational Licensing Act
Court’s concern was that the Husband may have allowed his building licence
to be used by others improperly, or that it had
not been fully disclosed to his
clients the true nature of his involvement in the projects — potentially
placing their investment
January 2025, the Husband filed an affidavit to explain his involvement with N
In about September 2023 [Mr AA] asked me if [Mr O] could use my building licence
to build two properties with his building system
with [Mr AA] and [Mr BB] to
then work for him (both my nephews are qualified [tradesmen]). I understood that
[Mr O] had developed
a [...] building system that he wanted to introduce to
Tasmania but he did not have his builders licence in place yet. I was happy
licence but I refused as my only condition was that
he employ my nephews. This
was going to help my nephews with income and experience.
[Mr O] has two contracts to build two properties using my licence, one at [Town
DD] and the other at Hobart. The contracts are in
his name as he is the person
responsible for the builds. The purchasers are fully aware of the arrangement
[Mr O] and I have. I also
met with the purchasers a couple of times (and by
FaceTime with the Hobart purchasers) before the contracts were signed by
There was an error in the contracts with my licence number...
6. In letting [Mr O] use my licence he has done and will do the work assisted by
my nephews and all I have done and will do is attend
the sites at critical
inspection stages to ensure the work has been completed to the correct standard
and meets building regulations.
I have attended 3 inspections at the [Town DD]
site. That build is complete as far as I am aware. I have not yet been asked to
any inspection at the Hobart site. I do not know what stage the build is
at as I have not been able to contact [Mr O]. I was forbidden
by the Court from
7. I understand that [Mr O] has all the necessary insurances in place so if
there is any damage to or loss of the properties or injuries
on site there is
insurance coverage under his own insurance policies. I also included these two
builds on my construction insurance
so as to meet my reporting requirements, and
again this is common practice. There is actually no home warranty insurance in
which is unlike other states in Australia.
8. [Mr O] will reimburse me for the construction insurance cost that I have
incurred in including his 2 builds on my insurance policy.
That is the only
payment I will receive from him. I will not be making any income or profit from
his builds. As I have said earlier,
all I wanted was for my nephews to have the
work he would give them on his building
cross-examination the Husband maintained that he has not and will not receive
any benefit from the building of the dwellings,
explaining that his sole intent
was to help his nephews gain employment and experience. The fact that he signed
the relevant contracts
and he had been to the building sites, and was personally
liable for defects was irrelevant, as he felt there was little actual risk.
Unfortunately,
the Husband did not bring Mr O to court to confirm the arrangement as set out in
his affidavit. Mr O did engage in
the court process and appeared by telephone
when the question of the referral to M Authority was being contemplated. Why it
Mr O and the Husband’s nephews were not called as witnesses was
not explained.
party’s failure to call or provide evidence from important witnesses is a
matter that can be considered when assessing evidence
and can allow the Court to
draw certain inferences.
Mansfield in
Blatch & Archer
[1774] EngR 2
[1774] 98 ER 969
... all evidence is to be weighed according to the proof which it was in the
power of one side to have produced, and in the power
of the other side to have
contradicted.
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
is a ‘particular application’ of the
relation to the trial judge’s directions that:
what should have been added, and not being added was in the circumstances as
good as denied, was that any inference
favourable to the plaintiff
which there was ground in the evidence might be more confidently drawn when a
person presumably able to put the true complexion
on the facts relied on as the
ground for the inference has not been called as a witness
and the evidence provides no sufficient explanation of his
(Emphasis added)
Coshott & Prentice
[2014] FCAFC 88
the Full Court of the Federal
Court made the same observation when referring, with approval, to Lord
Mansfield’s maxim in
Blatch v Archer
where the evidence relied upon by a party bearing the onus of proof does not
itself clearly discharge the onus, the failure by that
party to call or give
evidence that could cast light on a matter in dispute is relevant to
determining whether the onus is being discharged
Hampton Court Ltd v
[1957] HCA 28
(1957) 97 CLR 367
at 371 (Dixon CJ); Shalhoub v Buchanan
[2004] NSWSC 99
(Campbell J).
This principle is therefore
wider than that in Jones v Dunkel [
1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298.
Austin J in Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich
[2009] NSWSC
(2009) 236 FLR 1
explained at 93 [440], “[w]hereas
Dunkel reinforces an inference drawn against the party who has not called
evidence, to the effect that the evidence would
not have assisted that
party’s case, Blatch v Archer leads either to the drawing of such an
to some other
assessment of the weight of evidence, unfavourable to the party against whom the
principle is applied.”
short, the Coshott parties bore the onus of proving the trust over
Robert’s interest but failed to call or give evidence
explaining the
documents and transactions on which they rely.
Yet Robert, in particular, was
in the best position to explain them. This cannot be ignored when weighing the
limited evidence they
relied upon to support their case with all the other
evidence which tended to undermine
(Emphasis added)
Australian Securities & Investments Commission v Fortescue Metals Group
[2009] FCA 1586
, Gilmour J at [102]-[105] explained the nature of
the inferences that can be drawn when applying
Jones v Dunkel
authorities state that two inferences are involved in the rule in
a court might infer that the evidence of the absent
witness would not have assisted the party that failed to call that witness;
a court might draw, with greater confidence, any inference
unfavourable to the party that failed to call that witness, if that witness
appears to be in a position to cast light on whether the inference should be
Manly Council v Byrne and Anor
[2004] NSWCA 123
ASIC v Macdonald
[2009] NSWSC 287
256 ALR 199
per Gzell J at
Manly Council, the Court of Appeal stated that there is no compulsion on the
trial judge to draw either of the
Jones v Dunkel
inferences. This was
confirmed by the Court of Appeal in
Howell v Macquarie University
- [98], where Campbell JA said, with the agreement of Spigelman
CJ and Bell JA (as her Honour then was):
In other words, in a civil trial by judge alone Jones v Dunkel licences, but
does not compel, the drawing of inferences when a witness
is not called. Whether
either or both
of the inferences are actually drawn is part of the trial
judge's task of weighing the evidence.
the Court of Appeal in Manly Council referred to the principles concerning the
application of
Jones v Dunkel
set out by Glass JA in
Payne v Parker
[1976] 1 NSWLR 191
at 201-202 which have been widely regarded as correct
although Glass JA was in dissent as to the application of the principles to
facts: per Campbell JA with whom Beazley JA and Pearlman AJA agreed, at [53]. In
[1976] 1 NSWLR 191
Glass JA said that whether
should be applied depends on establishing three
conditions:
(a) the missing witness would be expected to be called by one party rather
than the other,
(b) his evidence would elucidate a particular matter,
(c) his absence is unexplained.
105. Glass JA elaborated on condition (b), saying (omitting authorities):
According to Wigmore, par. 285, the second condition is fulfilled where the
party or his opponent claims that the facts would thereby
be elucidated. Under
other formulations, the condition is made out when the witness is presumably
able to put a true complexion on
the facts..., might have proved the
contrary...; would have a close knowledge of the facts..., or where it appears
that he had knowledge....
I would think it in-sufficient to meet the
requirements of principle that one party merely claims that the missing witness
has knowledge,
or that, upon the evidence, he may have knowledge.
upon the evidence, the tribunal of fact is entitled to conclude that he probably
would have knowledge, there would seem to
be no basis for any adverse deduction
from the failure to call
(Emphasis added)
Jones v Dunkel
Blatch v Archer
, this Court can be
confident about drawing inferences against a party and assessing the weight of
evidence as unfavourable to a party,
if a party chooses not to call elucidating
evidence that was within their power to
this case I draw the inference that the evidence of Mr O would not have assisted
the Husband’s case. I draw the same inference
in relation to the
Husband’s failure to call either of his nephews to court — which
again was not adequately explained.
extent of the Husband’s earning capacity was also brought into question by
virtue of his ability to lend sizeable monies
to his friend Mr R. Mr R explained
his need for financial assistance in his affidavit:
[Mr Riley] loaned me $25,000 for my business to allow me to pay wages as my
cashflow was running low due to a slowing at that time
of invoices being paid by
my clients (who sometimes take up to 3 months to pay an invoice). I borrowed
funds from other people at
the time, and without their help I would not have
been able to pay my employees for another 2 to 3 weeks while I waited for
to be paid.
Husband explained:
[Ms Riley] questioned me about a payment I received from a [Mr R] that shows in
my accounts. I explained to her that I had loaned
to him $25,000 when he had
cashflow shortage with his business. It was a short-term loan I gave him which I
paid as $20,000 on the
7th of April 2024 and a further $1000 on the 8th of April
2024 from my business account and $4,000 in cash that I had saved up. Through
error [Mr R] paid to me to the business account $42,500 on the 31st of April
2024. I returned the overpayment of $17,500 to him from
the business account 011
the 11th of June 2024, which is when I was doing my bank reconciliation and I
realised there was an error
cross-examination Mr R confirmed that he asked for the monies from the Husband
to meet pressing financial obligations. He said
that the monies have been
repaid, although, due to an accounting error, he initially repaid too much.
Husband’s ability to draw $25,000, $4,000 of which was in cash, to so
quickly assist Mr R, when his income is around $43,000
per annum, gives
rise to the inference that the Husband has ready access to more monies than his
declared income suggests. He has
access to the income of his business, and this
also allowed him to purchase a number of motor vehicles post separation. This is
a resource available to the Wife.
note that Mr Williams submitted that the Husband was also able to work during
the covid years without drawing on his superannuation
— unlike the Wife.
The only evidence to support this position was the Wife’s claim that she
withdrew monies from her
superannuation in October
but the Husband was not
questioned about the proposition.
relation to the Husband’s accessibility of work and therefore income, Mr
Williams submitted:
My suggestion is that given the Husband’s evidence about his business
[regional area], his
connections with tradespeople that there is a – there is a vast untapped
resource there, that you only
have to turn the switch on and things pick up
Husband and/or N Pty Ltd was, or is, expecting to make $670,000 gross from the
building works set out in Exhibit W4. It is difficult
to accept that the Husband
did not or will not derive any financial benefit from these building works,
given his deep involvement
in the projects. His non-disclosure of this valuable
information, as well as not calling Mr O, nor his nephews to give evidence,
to the suspicion.
obligation to make full and frank disclosure is set out at rule 6.01 and
following of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law)
(‘the Rules’).
Full Court in
Weir and Weir
[1992] FamCA 69
[W]here there is clear evidence of non-disclosure as there was here, the
Court should not be unduly cautious about making findings
in favour of the other
It has been said by one commentator (O'Ryan and Broadfoot, 5th
National Family Law Conference Handbook, p 249) the failure to disclose
undermines the whole process of adjudication of proceedings for a settlement of
property in that the court is unable to identify
the property of the parties, to
properly assess contribution, or to properly assess s75(2) factors.
(Emphasis added)
the Full Court in
Hicks & Trustee of the Bankrupt Estate of Hicks
[2021] FamCAFC 19
referred to the potential ramifications of failing to
It is trite that the integrity of the s 79 process heavily depends upon the
absolute duty of parties to meet their obligations of
full and frank disclosure
of all information relevant to the case, including disclosure of their financial
position both as to assets
and liabilities.
Whilst at one time this Court appeared to adopt the approach in non-disclosure
cases that the jurisdiction under s 79 of the Act
was limited to making orders
with respect to identified, identifiable or quantified assets (see, for example,
Monte and Monte
[1986] FamCA 1
(1986) FLC 91-757)
more recent Full Court
authority supports the principle that a party should not be able to take
advantage of his or her own non-disclosure
it may be appropriate to
make an order beyond the ascertained property,
provided that any order made
on this basis can be seen to achieve substantial justice relative to the subject
non-disclosure
(Weir at 79,593).
(Emphasis added)
Full Court in
Gould & Gould
[2007] FamCA 609
, set out the correct
approach in relation to the failure to fully disclose assets, with reference to
the decision in
Kannis & Kannis
[2002] FamCA 1150
’), where the Full Court stated:
the decision of the Full Court (and indeed also of Holden CJ) in Kannis confirms
the earlier decisions which were cited by
the Full Court and which establish
that a robust approach can be taken by the court in cases of non-disclosure,
neither that decision,
nor any of the earlier decisions cited, would, in our
view, support the approach which the trial Judge in this case took in paragraph
24 of his reasons for judgment, being to reduce his assessment of the
Father’s contributions of account of the Father’s
non-disclosure.
the appropriate approach for his Honour to have adopted in this case would have
been to have increased the asset pool to take
account of non-disclosure by the
Father, and indeed his Honour had already done this to some extent in accepting
the schedule of
assets prepared by the Mother’s Counsel
paragraphs 12 and 14 of his Honour’s reasons).
Alternatively,
even in addition, had his Honour been persuaded that on the balance of
probabilities there existed assets other than those contained
in the asset pool
contained in his reasons,
his Honour could have made some adjustment in
favour of the Mother on account of the Father’s non-disclosure pursuant to
provisions of s 75(2)(o)
, as did Holden CJ in
(Emphasis added)
, the Full Court emphasised the ‘absolute’ nature of
the duty to disclose and stated:
the non-disclosure is wilful or accidental, is a result of misfeasance, or
malfeasance or nonfeasance, is beside the point.
The duty to disclose is
. Where the Court is satisfied the whole truth has not come out it
might readily conclude that the asset pool is greater than demonstrated.
those circumstances it might be appropriate to
err on the side of
to the party who might be otherwise be seen to be disadvantaged
by the lack of complete candour.
(Emphasis added)
my view this evidence supports Mr William’s submission that the
Husband’s available income and resources are greater
than set out in his
taxation returns and updated Financial Statement. His ability to quickly lend
$25,000 to Mr R (including $4,000
in cash — also supporting the
Wife’s claim that he is paid in cash from time to time) supports this
am satisfied that the Husband’s available income was likely higher than
stated in his 2024 tax return and the $807 per week
put in his updated financial
possible, however, to say how much higher. The Husband’s 2024 tax return
was exhibited as W3. That document evidenced
that his gross business income for
that year was $238,620. His expenses to achieve that income were $194,512
— including fuel,
insurance, and phone/internet — suggesting
that some of his personal expenses may have been deducted as legitimate business
bulk of his expenditure was however, dedicated to ‘purchases and other
costs’ — $92,700 — and contractor/subcontractor
commissions expenses — $55,520. Ultimately, 82 per cent of his income was
reduced by deductible expenses, leaving a profit
of $44,483.00. Whatever his
gross income, his expenses are likely to remain very high. As such, even if he
were to receive a financial
benefit from the building contracts listed in W4, it
cannot be assumed that all of those funds will become monies available for the
Husband’s use.
find that the Husband has a greater resources and income earning potential than
the Wife. It is difficult to determine the full
nature of the income
discrepancy, but he is able to access funds through his business income as he
needs them — a benefit not
available to the Wife — and is likely to
receive some extra financial benefit from the arrangements that he has with N
Ltd. There is no evidence however, that the Husband leads an opulent
lifestyle and I am not satisfied that the extra income, not
otherwise disclosed,
is significant. There will be a small adjustment to the Wife for the differing
income earning abilities and
Section 75(2)(c): whether either party has the care or
control of a child of the marriage who has not attained the age of 18
factor is not relevant.
Section 75(2)(d): commitments of each of the parties
necessary to enable them to support themselves and a child or another person
that the party has a duty to maintain
factor is not relevant.
Section 75(2)(e): the responsibilities of either parent to
support any other person
Wife takes care of her grandchild two days a week to allow her daughter to
[Ms G] was very young when [Y] was born, I was needed by [Ms G] to assist
greatly. Following the breakdown of the relationship that
she was in, [Ms G]
lived with me at [B Street] until August 2022. I take [Y] to school 2 days a
week and in school holidays I have
her 2 days a week so [Ms G] can
Husband stated that he will take responsibility for Mr E, as his mental health
has declined, resulting in Mr E attempting to take
his life twice:
[Mr E] is going to survive his attempt but will require significant
psychological intervention for the foreseeable future, which
I am expecting I
will be responsible for funding as a mental health plan will be inadequate. He
will require admission to [EE Clinic]
as well but at present they have no beds
available, so he remains in the hospital in restraints (he has been violent to
he de-escalates when I am with him). He is going to be released to my
care to live with me. He is booked to attend rehab at [FF Centre]
October which will give him a placement for 2-4 weeks. He is homeless at present
so he will have to live with me after rehab
until he can find somewhere
permanent to live.
parties have ongoing involvement in their children’s lives, and, in the
case of the Wife, her grandchild’s life,
and such involvement may impact
on their ability to earn greater income from time to time.
Section 75(2)(f): subject to s 75(3), the eligibility of
either party for a pension, allowance or benefit under: (i) any law of the
Commonwealth, of a State or Territory or of another country; or (ii) an
superannuation fund or scheme, whether the fund or scheme
was established, or
operates, within or outside of Australia
parties agreed to roughly equalise their modest superannuation
Section 75(2)(g): a standard of living that in all the
circumstances is reasonable
parties have enjoyed a reasonable standard of living during the relationship and
post-separation, which should not diminish whatever
orders are made.
Section 75(2)(h): the extent to which the payment of
maintenance to the party whose maintenance is under consideration would increase
the earning capacity of that party by enabling that party to undertake a course
of education or training or to establish himself
or herself in a business or
otherwise to obtain an adequate income
mentioned, the Wife hopes to add to her qualifications and training in the years
to come. Whether this will add to her income earning
potential is
Section 75(2)(ha): the effect of any proposed order on the
ability of a creditor of a party to recover the creditor’s debt,
that effect is relevant
is not a relevant factor.
Section 75(2)(j): the extent to which the party whose
maintenance is under consideration has contributed to the income, earning
property and financial resources of the other party
have already taken this into account when assessing the parties’
contributions.
Section 75(2)(k): the duration of the marriage and the
extent to which it has affected the earning capacity of the party whose
maintenance
is under consideration
was a clear demarcation of the parties’ roles during the marriage, with
the Husband as the primary breadwinner and the
Wife as the homemaker. The
duration of the marriage did not impact on the Wife’s ability to work as
an allied health worker
post-separation.
the marriage the Husband was able to build his reputation as a builder, by
working full-time and developing his business. I
have found that he is able to
earn a greater income than stated in his tax returns for recent years and has
the connections and ability
to sustain a higher income than that available to
the Wife for the foreseeable future. The duration of the marriage has not
him in this regard.
Section 75(2)(l): the need to protect a party who wishes to
continue that party’s role as a parent
children are over the age of eighteen, and as such, this is not a relevant
Section 75(2)(m): if either party is cohabiting with another
person—the financial circumstances relating to the
cohabitation
Wife has not re-partnered post-separation. The Husband is currently in a de
facto relationship with Ms F and they live together
and share living
Section 75(2)(n): the terms of any order made or proposed to
be made under section 79 in relation to the property of the parties
have determined that that the parties’ contributions should be assessed as
52.5 per cent to the Wife and 47.5 per cent to
the Husband. If, following the
sale of B Street, the net pool is valued as it is in Exhibit J1 — $846,950
will have an entitlement to $444,648.75 and the Husband
$402,301.25 — a differential of $42,347.50.
Section 75(2)(na): any child support under the
Child Support
(Assessment) Act 1989
that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide,
or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the
is not a relevant factor.
Section 75(2)(o):
any fact or circumstance which, in the
opinion of the Court, the justice of the case requires to be taken into
Wife said that for a short period during the relationship, the Husband’s
then 14-year-old son, Mr GG, came to stay with
them. She also claimed that she
ensured the Husband met his child support obligations until Mr GG turned 16
years of age, and, acting
as a confidant — noting that Mr GG witnessed his
father’s violence.
will take the Wife’s minor contributions to the care and maintenance of Mr
GG into account under this
Section 75(2)(p):
the terms of any financial agreement that
is binding on the parties to the marriage
is not a relevant factor.
Section 75(2)(q):
the terms of any
Part VIIIAB
agreement that is binding on a party to the marriage
is not a relevant factor.
Section 79(4)(f):
any order made under this Act affecting a
party to the marriage or a child of the marriage
is not a relevant factor
Section 79(4)(g):
any child support under the
Child Support
(Assessment) Act 1989
that a party to the marriage has provided, is to provide,
or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child of the
is not a relevant factor.
Conclusion regarding the matters referred to in
–(g) and ultimate outcome
considered all the factors mentioned — particularly the income earning
disparity between the parties — I determine
that it is appropriate for
there to be a three (3) per cent adjustment in favour of the Wife.
results in an overall outcome whereby the Wife receives 55.5 percent of the
parties’ net assets and the Husband 44.5 per
cent. If the asset pool
remained at $846,950 upon the sale of the B Street property, the Wife would
receive net assets to a value
of $470,057.25 and the Husband $376,892.75—
a differential of $93,164.50. This differential is significant in the context of
a relationship of this length, and an asset pool of this size, where neither
party has a high income.
Final assessment: a just and equitable exercise of
discretion?
assessing contributions and other factors this Court must consider whether, in
light of those assessments and the actual property
to be divided, the proposed
exercise of the discretion under
is just and equitable. In
, the Full Court said the following:
... that exercise is not done in isolation; it is done against the background of
conclusions already arrived at on contributions,
the consequence of which will
be in some cases to intrude into the
exercise because of the dimension
of the former conclusion and the total pool.
It is largely for that reason that it is ultimately necessary to stand back from
the process and reach a conclusion which appears
overall to be a just and
equitable exercise of the
discretion.
have decided that the parties’ assets be divided on a 55.5/44.5 basis in
favour of the Wife. This results in the parties receiving
both cash and
superannuation, together with the assets that they already hold. Having
considered all the evidence, I am satisfied
the stated division results in a
just and equitable outcome.
final amount to be received by each party from the sale proceeds of 1 B and 2 B
Streets will be calculated following the formula
set out in my Order. For that
purpose, the parties’ superannuation interests will be included in the
calculation, based on
the amounts each party will have upon the superannuation
split set out in the Order being actioned. I again note that the Motor Vehicle
loan is not included in the calculation of the value of what each part keeps as
that debt will be cleared from the sale proceeds
of B Street.
make the orders set out at the commencement of these Reasons.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
ninety-six (196) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment
Dated: 28 July 2025
Wife’s Amended Initiating
Application 18 July 2024.
Husband’s Amended Response 4 June 2024, clarified in final
submissions.
Affidavit of Ms
Riley (‘Wife’s trial Affidavit’) [84]; Trial:
Cross-examination of the Wife by Mr Trezise 9 October
Affidavit of Mr Riley 30
August 2024 (‘Husband’
August 2024 Affidavit’),
Husband’s Case
Outline 7 October 2024, 2.
Wife’s Trial Affidavit (n 3)
Wife’s Trial
Affidavit (n 3) [68].
Wife’s Trial Affidavit (n 3),
2024 Affidavit (n 4) [36]; Exhibit W1: Bundle of Police records from Subpoena
from Tasmania Police, 11.
Examination-in-chief of the Husband by Mr Trezise 10 October
Wife’s Trial
Affidavit (n 3),[11]; Husband’
August 2024 Affidavit (n 4)
Order of Judge
Turnbull in
(Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 2), LNC769/2023, 5 November
Exhibit J1: Joint
Balance Sheet (‘Exhibit
The parties
agreed during the trial to a one pool approach and agreed that the Wife should
receive a payment of $17,000 from the
Husband’s Super Fund 1, this sum has
been calculated from the total superannuation amount listed in J1 of $35,776
minus $17,000.
Exhibit J1 (n
It is agreed that this
loan will be paid from the proceeds of sale of the B Street property. As such
when calculating the final amount
to be received by each party from the sale of
B Street, the Husband's net assets will be calculated by including Motor Vehicle
but will not take into account the
Re-Examination of the
Husband by Mr Trezise 20 February
Affidavit of Dr P 27
September 2024 (‘Affidavit of Dr P’),
Evidence Act
Evidence Act
Briginshaw v
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
This trial concluded
prior to the amendments to the
Family law Act 1975
(Cth) which became
operational on 10 June 2025. Those amendments do not apply to this
(2012) 247 CLR 108, 122,
[1984] HCA 21
(1984) 156 CLR 605
, 608 (Gibbs CJ), noting that the ‘very wide
discretion to make such order as [the Court] thinks fit’ is conferred only
‘when [the Court] is satisfied that it is just and equitable that an order
should be made’, with his Honour further stating
that ‘there are
some broad principles to which the Court is required to give effect, and some
circumstances which it is required
to take into account’ in making an
order, and with Dawson J (at 647) referring to the just and equitable
requirement as the
‘overriding
requirement’.
Hickey & Hickey
[2003] FamCA 395
, [39], noting the remarks of the
Full Court in
Norman & Norman
[2010] FamCAFC 66
, [60], at which their
Honours state that ‘[i]t is the mandatory legislative imperative (to reach
a conclusion that is just
and equitable) that drives the ultimate result’
and that ‘[f]or all its usefulness and merit [the four-step approach]
merely illuminates the path to the ultimate result’. I also note the three
‘fundamental propositions’ set out in
Stanford & Stanford
(2012) 247 CLR 108 (‘
’) 120 [36], as alternative
guidance for trial judges, ultimately towards the same objective as the approach
, namely to cover off on all necessary points and criteria in pt
[37], noting the explanatory remarks in
Lotta & Lotta
[2017] FamCA
, [283]–[284], importantly that ‘[s]uch a consideration should not
be guided by an assumption that the parties’
rights to or interests in
property are or should be different from those that then exist’ and that
‘the Court needs to
conclude that it would be unjust or unfair to leave
property rights intact under s 79(2) of the
[2017] FamCA 50
[2010] FamCAFC 120
, [70], referring to
Phillips & Phillips
[2002] FamCA 350
in which, at [68], their Honours discuss the importance of
considering the ‘real impact’ of an order to assess whether
result is just and
(n 24) 121 [41].
[2019] FamCAFC 78
[2021] FamCA 306
[2012] FamCAFC 154
, [14] (Bryant CJ, Faulks DCJ, Murphy J)
Jabour & Jabour
(n 33), [61]
(Alstergren CJ, Ryan and Aldridge JJ). See also
Dovgan & Dovgan
36), [347] (Harper J), which restates the need to holistically assess
contributions following the case of
, and that ‘all
contributions must be weighed collectively and so it is an error to segment or
compartmentalise the various
contributions and weigh one against the
remainder’.
MacKinnon & Talbot
[2022] FedCFamC1A 156
[2023] FedCFamC1A 117
Husband’s 13 August
2024 Affidavit (n 4), [5].
Husband’s 13 August 2024 Affidavit (n 4), [8]; Wife’s Trial
Affidavit (n 3), [9].
Wife’s Trial Affidavit (n 3),
Husband’s 13
August 2024 Affidavit (n 4),
Trial Affidavit (n 3), [17].
Husband’s 13 August 2024 Affidavit (n 4),
Wife’s Trial
Affidavit (n 3) [83].
Wife’s Case Outline 8 October 2024 (‘Wife’s Case
Outline’), 4.
[2016] FamCAFC 84
, [141] (Murphy and Kent
Wife’s Trial
Affidavit (n 3) [76], [80]; that is, until the vacant land at 2 B Street was
Husband’s 13
August 2024 Affidavit (n 4)
Wife’s Financial
Statement 27 September 2024, part
Husband’s Case
Outline (n 2), 4.
MacKinnon & Talbot
[2019] FamCA 491
[87(f)]. In
MacKinnon & Talbot
the Full Court, in re-exercising the discretion, found that
the Wife had occupied the premises and while doing so paid $65,000 off
Trial Affidavit (n 3)
Trial Affidavit (n 3) [65].
Husband’s 13 August Affidavit (n 4),[11]; Wife’s Trial Affidavit (n
Wife’s Trial
Affidavit (n 3),[75].
Wife’s Trial Affidavit (n 3),
Husband’s Case
Outline (n 2), 4.
Dawes & Dawes
[1989] FamCA 71
(Lindenmayer, Strauss and Cohen JJ).
Husband’s Financial
Questionnaire 17 November 2023,
Wife’s Case Outline
Trial Affidavit (n 3) [55],[62],
Affidavit of Ms G 1
October 2024, [7] [8].
Cross-examination of the Wife by Mr Trezise 9 October
Cross-examination of
the Wife by Mr Trezise 8 October 2024; Wife’s Affidavit (n 3),
Wife’s Trial
Affidavit (n 3), [25].
Wife’s Trial Affidavit (n 3), [30]; Cross-examination of the Wife by Mr
Trezise 8 October 2024.
Cross-Examination of the Wife by Mr Trezise 9 October 2024; Wife’s Trial
Affidavit (n 3), [33].
Wife’s Trial Affidavit (n 3), [31]; Cross-examination of the Wife by Mr
Trezise 9 October 2024.
Cross-examination of Ms G by Mr Trezise 8 October 2024; Affidavit of Ms G (n
65), [13]; Wife’s Affidavit (n 3)
Cross-examination of
Ms G by Mr Trezise 8 October 202; Affidavit of Ms G (n 65), [7]; Wife’s
Affidavit (n 3), [18]-[19].
Wife’s Trial Affidavit (n 3),
[45]-[48],[52].
Affidavit of
Dr P (n 18), [10]-[12].
Husband’s 13 August 2024 Affidavit (n 4), [36]; Exhibit W1 (n
Exhibit W1 (n 9),
Husband’s 13 August
2024 Affidavit (n
4),[36]-[37]
Affidavit of Mr
Riley 27 September 2024 (‘Husband’s 27 September 2024
Affidavit’) [12].
Husband’s 27 September 2024 Affidavit (n 80)
Securities & Investments Commission v Fortescue Metals Group Ltd [No 5]
[2009] FCA 1586
, Gilmour J at
[102]-[105].
27 September 2024 Affidavit (n 80),
[2023] FedCFamC1A 71
(2023) 66 Fam LR 650
[2025] FedCFamC1A 28
[2024] FedCFamC1A 132
[2024] FedCFamC1A 87
[2022] FedCFamC1F 241
[180]-[181].
Trial Affidavit (n 3), [31].
Ibid, Annexure MSR2.
Cross-examination of the Husband by Mr Williams 10 October
Affidavit of Ms G (n
65), [7]-[13].
Exhibit W1 (n
Wife’s Trial
Affidavit (n 3), [31].
Beck & Beck (No
(1983) FLC 91-318
’) 78,166 (Evatt CJ, Emery and Hase
Extracted from notes
and may not be verbatim when compared to the
transcript.
[1995] FamCA 10
(1995) FLC 92-595
Beck & Beck
96),167–78,168.
Jacobson & Jacobson
(1989) FLC 92-003
, 77,178, at which Nygh J
remarks that there ‘cannot be any doubling up as between the adjustment in
capital position of the
parties, which is implicit in sec 75(2) factors [in the
context of s 79], and making provision for the periodic needs of a party
suffers from an inability to support [themselves] pursuant to sec 72 of the
Act’. Both assessments, on his Honour’s
remarks, require an
assessment of the financial consequences of the factors considered. See also
Sigley & Cullen (No 3)
[2015] FamCA 825
, [42], [105], as an example,
in which Cronin J discusses the Applicant ’s health as it affected her
academic studies, which
in turn may have affected her employment
Affidavit of
Dr P (n 18) [12].
Husband’s 13 August 2024 Affidavit (n 4)
(n 98), 81, 911 (Barblett DCJ, Fogarty and Mushin
Cross-Examination
of the Wife by Mr Trezise 8 October
Wife’s Trial
Affidavit (n 3),
Cross-Examination of the Wife by Mr Trezise 8 October 2024; Wife’s
Affidavit (n 3), [86].
Cross-Examination of the Husband 9 October 2024; Exhibit W3: Husband’s
2024 Tax Return.
Wife’s Case Outline (n 47), 7,
Oral Submissions of
Mr Williams 20 February
Insurance Bundle, 14.
Cross-Examination of the Husband by Mr Williams, 9 October
Insurance Bundle, 16.
Affidavit of Mr Riley 30 January Affidavit (‘Husband’s 30 January
2025 Affidavit’) [3], [5],
[1774] EngR 2
(1774) 98 ER 969
[2012] FamCA 34
’) [122]-[123] (Murphy
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
, 308 (Kitto
[2014] FCAFC 88
Securities & Investments Commission v Fortescue Metals Group Ltd [No 5]
[2009] FCA 1586
[102]-[105].
Australian Securities and Investments Commission v Rich
[439] (Austin J).
Jones v Dunkel
(n 22) (Kitto J) which, with respect to
the trial directions forming the basis of appeal, states that ‘what should
added, and not being added was in the circumstances as good as denied,
was that any inference favourable to the plaintiff for which
there was ground in
the evidence might be more confidently drawn when a person presumably able to
put the true complexion on the
facts relied on as the ground for the inference
has not been called as a witness by the defendant and the evidence provides no
explanation of his
Affidavit of Mr R 13 August 2024,
Husband’s 13
August 2024 Affidavit (n 4),
Financial Statement (n 51), 8.
Oral Submissions of Mr
Williams 20 February
Financial Statements 17 November 2023 and 30 January
Wife’s Trial
Affidavit (n 3), [11].
Husband’s 27 September 2024 Affidavit (n 80),
Husband’s 13
August 2024 Affidavit (n 4)
Wife’s Trial
affidavit (n 3)
(1995) FLC 92-
(n 98) 81,911–81,912.
RTF format (1.46 MB)
Signed PDF/A format