Farmer v Minister for Home Affairs [2025] HCA 38 (15 October 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
EDELMAN, STEWARD, GLEESON, JAGOT AND BEECH‑JONES JJ
CANDACE OWENS FARMER PLAINTIFF
MINISTER FOR HOME
AFFAIRS & ANOR DEFENDANTS
Farmer v Minister for Home Affairs
Date of Hearing: 6 May 2025
Date of Judgment: 15 October
The questions stated for the opinion of the Full Court in the special case
filed on 13 March 2025 be answered as follows:
Question (1): Is
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) invalid because it unjustifiably burdens the implied freedom of political
communication?
Answer: No.
Question (2): If the answer to question 1 is "no", is the decision of the
Minister to refuse to grant the plaintiff the Temporary
Activity (Class GG) visa
invalid on the ground that the Minister adopted an incorrect construction of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)?
Answer: No.
Question (3): If the answer to question 1 or question 2 is "yes", what, if
any, relief should be granted to the plaintiff?
Answer: Unnecessary to answer.
Question (4): Who should pay the costs of the Special Case?
Answer: The plaintiff.
Representation
Herzfeld SC with T C Smartt for the plaintiff (instructed by Gillis Delaney
S P Donaghue KC, Solicitor-General of the Commonwealth, with
J D Watson and W C H Randles for the defendants (instructed by
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
Farmer v Minister for Home Affairs
Constitutional law (Cth) – Implied freedom of communication about
government or political matters – Where
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) provides that person does not pass character
test if risk they would, if allowed to enter Australia, "incite discord in the
Australian community or in a segment of that community" – Where Minister
for Home Affairs ("Minister") refused visa to controversial
commentator on basis of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
– Whether there need be risk
of harm to Australian community or segment of that community in order to satisfy
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
invalid for infringing
implied freedom of communication about government or political matters –
Whether Minister misconstrued
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
in decision to refuse
Words and phrases – "aliens power", "character test",
"controversial views", "danger", "definitional", "discord", "dissension
strife", "effectively burdens", "extremist views", "free flow of political
communication", "harm", "implicature", "implied freedom
of political
communication", "in the Australian community or a segment of that community",
"incite discord", "national interest",
"no liberty to enter", "non-citizens",
"personal right", "political communication", "practical burden", "right-wing
extremism", "visa".
Constitution
Migration Act 1958
(6)(d)(iv),
GAGELER CJ,
GORDON AND BEECH-JONES JJ. The implied freedom of political communication
Constitution
denies legislative and executive power to restrict
freedom of communication on governmental or political matters unless the
restriction
is imposed to fulfil a constitutionally legitimate purpose and the
restriction is reasonably appropriate and adapted to advance that
constitutionally legitimate means. To be constitutionally permissible,
both the purpose and the means of achieving it
must be compatible with
the system of representative and responsible government for which the
Constitution
provides. The implied freedom of political
communication is not a personal right.
plaintiff, Ms Farmer, a citizen and resident of the United States of America,
intended to undertake a speaking tour in Australia
in November 2024. She
intended to visit multiple cities and, at each event, to speak about political
matters that she believed would
be relevant and interesting to the audience and
to take questions from the audience, which in her experience from prior
international
speaking tours would mostly concern political matters.
Ms Farmer also intended to host private and VIP events where she and the
would speak about mostly political matters. On 12 September 2024, Ms
Farmer applied under the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) for a Temporary
Activity (Class GG) visa ("the Visa") to enter Australia to undertake
the speaking tour.
object of the
Migration Act
is "to regulate, in the national interest,
the coming into, and presence in, Australia of
non‑citizens".
advance that object, the
Migration Act
"provides for visas permitting
non-citizens to enter or remain in Australia" and is intended to be "the only
source of the right
of non‑citizens to so enter or
Migration Act
relevantly provides that, after considering a valid visa
application, the Minister "is to grant the visa" if satisfied that, among
things, the criteria prescribed by the
Migration Act
Migration Regulations 1994
and the grant is
not prevented by
or any other relevant section of
, headed "Refusal or cancellation of visa on character grounds", is
Section 501(3)
provides that the Minister may refuse to grant a visa
to a person,
or may cancel a
visa that has been granted to a
if the Minister
reasonably suspects that the person does not pass the character test in
Minister is satisfied that the refusal or cancellation is in the national
The power under
may only be exercised by the Minister
and the rules of
natural justice do not apply to a decision under
the purposes of
s 501(3)(c)
, a person does not pass the
"(d) in the event the person were allowed to enter or to remain in Australia,
there is a risk that the person would:
(i) engage in criminal conduct in Australia; or
(ii) harass, molest, intimidate or stalk another person in Australia; or
(iii) vilify a segment of the Australian community; or
incite discord in the Australian community or in a segment of that
(v) represent a danger to the Australian community or to a segment of that
community, whether by way of being liable to become involved
in activities that
are disruptive to, or in violence threatening harm to, that community or
segment, or in any other way; or
Otherwise, the person passes the
character test
." (emphasis added)
On 25 October
2024, the first defendant, the Minister, decided to refuse to grant
Ms Farmer the Visa ("the Decision"). In making the
the Minister decided that he reasonably suspected that Ms Farmer did
not pass the "character test" on the basis that, if
Ms Farmer were allowed
to enter Australia, there was a risk that she would "incite discord in the
Australian community or in a segment
of that community", within the meaning of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
, and that he was also satisfied that the refusal of the
Visa was in the national interest, within the meaning of
s 501(3)(d).
1 November 2024, Ms Farmer made representations to the Minister pursuant to
and (4) of the
Migration Act
seeking revocation of
the Decision. On 15 November 2024, Ms Farmer wrote to the
Department of Home Affairs and informed it that,
if she was not notified that a
decision had been made pursuant to
Migration Act
22 November 2024, she intended to bring proceedings in the Federal Court of
Australia or in this Court seeking appropriate
22 November 2024, a representative of the Minister wrote to Ms Farmer
saying that her revocation request would be considered and
decided within a
reasonable period of time but that the exact timing of that process could not be
confirmed. No determination of
whether to revoke the Decision had been made
at the time of the filing of the special case.
her amended application for a constitutional or other writ filed in this Court,
Ms Farmer sought a declaration that
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
is invalid on the ground that it infringes the implied
freedom of political communication, a writ of certiorari quashing the Decision,
and a writ of peremptory mandamus commanding the Minister to grant her the Visa
or, in the alternative, a writ of mandamus commanding
the Minister to
remake the Decision according to law. Ms Farmer also contended, in the
alternative, that in making the Decision the
Minister misconstrued
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
the time of her application for the Visa, Ms Farmer met all relevant legal
requirements to be issued with the Visa, except for
the requirement she satisfy
public interest criterion
and the character
Migration Act
. Ms Farmer
maintains that she satisfies those requirements. The defendants say she
parties agreed on questions of law for the opinion of the Full Court. Those
questions, and the answers, are as follows:
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
invalid because
it unjustifiably burdens the implied freedom of political communication?
(2) If the answer to question 1 is "no", is the Decision invalid on
the ground that the Minister adopted an incorrect construction
s 501(6)(d)(iv)?
(3) If the answer to question 1 or question 2 is "yes", what, if any,
relief should be granted to the plaintiff?
Unnecessary to answer.
(4) Who should pay the costs of the Special Case?
The plaintiff.
The Decision
making the Decision, the Minister said that, in considering the character test
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
as it applied to Ms Farmer, he had turned his
mind to her profile as a political commentator, author and activist known for
her controversial
and conspiratorial views. The Minister also observed that Ms
Farmer had been the subject of significant media reporting as a result
her comments.
Minister then proceeded to examine some of Ms Farmer's views and comments
in detail. That examination was conducted under the
headings "Holocaust denial",
"Islamophobia", "Anti-racism, Black Lives Matter and anti‑Semitism",
"Women's and LGBTQIA+ rights",
and "COVID‑19 and anti‑vaccination".
After that examination, the Minister turned his mind to whether, if Ms Farmer
allowed to enter Australia, there was a risk that her presence would incite
discord in the Australian community (or a segment of
it), given her views and
comments, which the Minister stated he found to be "extremist and inflammatory
comments towards Muslim,
Black, Jewish and LGBTQIA+ communities which generate
controversy and hatred".
Minister observed that the Director-General of the Australian Security
Intelligence Organisation ("ASIO") stated, on 5 August
2024, when raising
the National Threat level from "possible" to "probable", that "while the
threats to our way of life remain elevated",
ASIO was seeing "an increase in
extremism". The Director-General warned that "inflamed language could lead to
inflamed community
tensions" and that "while political differences, political
debates and political protests are essential parts of a healthy economy
was] seeing spikes in political polarisation and intolerance, uncivil debate and
unpeaceful protest". The Minister then referred
to submissions from ASIO and the
Australian Federal Police in 2021 to the Parliamentary Joint Committee on
Intelligence and Security
on its inquiry into extremist movements and radicalism
in Australia about the rising threats and challenges in Australia posed by
right-wing extremism, including through online connectivity.
Minister quoted from an article published by
Mr Greg Barton, the Chair in Global Islamic Politics, Alfred
Deakin Institute for Citizenship
and Globalisation at Deakin University, which,
in turn, quoted the former Race Discrimination Commissioner, Mr Tim
Soutphommasane,
who said, in part, that "[h]ate speech leads to political
violence if you allow it to escalate". The Minister referred to the fact
that Mr Barton stated that "limiting space for hateful extremism reduces
the likelihood of violent extremism".
Minister accepted this information from government authorities,
law enforcement and academic researchers as being credible and
then stated
that these "sources collectively describe the causal link between individuals
who promote and encourage right wing extremism
via online platforms and how this
supports greater intent and capacity to [undertake] violent acts". The Minister
said he was "satisfied
these sources provide well evidenced and consistent
assessments of the potential for persons who espouse ideologically motivated
extremist views to pose a risk of inciting discord in the Australian
community".
Minister referred, among other things, to Ms Farmer's "inflammatory
comments about the Black Lives Matter movement [and] the
Israel-Hamas conflict"
and stated that she had "expressed anti-Semitic, [I]slamophobic and other
controversial views", the gravity
of which was emphasised by her suspension from
YouTube in 2023 for promoting hatred against protected individuals or groups.
"the magnitude and number of [her] comments, their recency and
the topical and high profile issues [Ms Farmer had] elected to
concentrate
upon". On the basis of the information and material before the
Minister, he found that Ms Farmer "uses various online platforms to
misinformation and promote her controversial views and ideologies which leads to
fostering division and fear in communities".
The Minister further found that the
evidence was clear that the "use of platforms for inflammatory rhetoric can
lead to increased
hate crimes, radicalisation of individuals and heightened
tensions in communities".
Notwithstanding
Ms Farmer's social media influence of over 18 million followers across
all platforms worldwide, including Australia, and accepting
her ability to
influence and incite discord through her online platforms, the Minister
considered whether, in the event that she
were allowed to enter Australia,
there was a risk that she would incite discord in the Australian community
or a segment of it. After
stating that he accepted that Ms Farmer had not
used her influence and various social media platforms to promote direct and
violence, and that her representative had provided a signed undertaking
that Ms Farmer would abide by her visa conditions and not
engage in any
disruptive or violent behaviour towards the Australian community, the Minister
stated that, in considering the matter,
he was "not limited to
Ms Farmer's personal behaviour whilst in Australia, but [may also
consider] the effect her presence may have
on others in
the community".
Minister said:
"In the current environment where the Australian community is experiencing
heightened community tensions, as per the advice of Australia's
apparatus, I find that there is a risk that Ms Farmer's controversial views will
amplify grievances among communities and
lead to increased hostility and violent
or radical action. I have carefully considered that Ms Farmer has an online
presence but
that her physical presence in Australia at this time, when there
are community tensions, would have the potential to galvanise discord
otherwise may, in particular because her events would attract onshore media
attention, including main stream media and her
shows would garner interest.
I consider that the normalisation of controversial rhetoric that
dehumanises and targets specific communities
has the propensity to galvanise
individuals and incite discord in the community."
The Minister found that, should Ms Farmer be allowed to enter Australia,
there was a risk she would incite discord in the Australian
community and
that he was thereby satisfied that Ms Farmer did not pass the character
test by virtue of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
Minister then went on to consider whether the refusal of the Visa was in the
national interest, noting that this was a separate
and distinct question from
whether the Minister reasonably suspected that Ms Farmer did not pass
the character test.
The Minister "considered the need to protect the
Australian community from harm". In doing so, he "considered the seriousness of
Farmer's conduct (this being her views and comments) having regard to
the circumstances and nature of the conduct, the likelihood
engaging in ongoing conduct, and the risk she pose[d] to the Australian
community if such a likelihood eventuated, in particular
the risk of
Ms Farmer inciting discord in the Australian community".
part of that analysis, the Minister stated that:
"[t]he Australian Government is committed to protecting the Australian community
from harm as a result of criminal activity or other
serious conduct
non-citizens. Entering or remaining in Australia is a privilege that Australia
confers on non-citizens in the expectation that
they are, and have been,
law abiding, will respect important institutions, such as Australia's law
enforcement framework, and will
not cause or threaten harm to individuals or the
Australian community. In this case, with Ms Farmer that harm is about a risk of
inciting discord." (emphasis in original)
The Minister found "that Ms Farmer's conduct, that being her views and
comments are controversial and her presence in Australia ha[d]
the potential to
incite discord and in the course of such to cause physical and/or psychological
harm to segments of the Australian
community, or our society in general".
Minister concluded that he reasonably suspected that Ms Farmer did not pass
the character test in
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
there was a risk that she would "incite discord in the Australian community or
in a segment of that community" and that he
was satisfied that the refusal
to grant her the Visa was in the national interest. The Minister exercised the
power under
s 501(3)(a)
to refuse the Visa.
we have seen, Ms Farmer challenged the validity of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
the basis that it infringes the implied freedom of political communication.
Ms Farmer also contended, in the alternative, that
in making the Decision
the Minister misconstrued
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
first step is to construe the statutory language.
Construction of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
we have seen,
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
provides that a
person does not pass the character test if "in the event the person were allowed
to enter or to remain in Australia,
there is a risk that the person would ...
incite discord
in the Australian community or in a segment of that
community" (emphasis added). It may be accepted that
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
definitional,
challenged to the extent that it affects the scope of the operation of
was common ground that the word "discord" is a broad term capable of carrying
multiple meanings, from the benign – disagreement,
debate – to the
serious – war, strife,
that the breadth of the word presents a constructional choice as to which
of those meanings it carries in
s 501(6)(d)(iv).
At one end of the spectrum, Ms Farmer's argument was that a person
would not pass that aspect of the character test if, in the event
person were allowed to enter or remain in Australia, there is a risk that the
person would cause disagreement or debate
in the Australian community, or a
segment of it. At the other end of the spectrum, a risk that a person
would "incite discord" in
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
does not refer merely to
causing disagreement or debate but to the risk that the person would stir up
strife or dissension in the
Australian community or a segment of it of a kind
that causes danger.
that spectrum lies the construction ultimately contended for by
the defendants: that a person would not pass the character
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
if, in the event the person were allowed to enter or to
remain in Australia, there is a risk that the person would stir up
or strife in the Australian community, or a segment of that
community, "of a kind that involves harm to that community or segment".
the reasons that follow, the construction of "incite discord" most consistent
with the text, context and purpose of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is that it applies
where, in the event that the person were allowed to enter or to remain in
Australia, there is a risk that the
person would stir up or encourage dissension
or strife in the Australian community, or a segment of that community, of a
to a degree that is harmful to that community or segment. "Incite
discord" is a compound criterion which directs attention to risk
risk of a person inciting discord in the Australian community or a segment
of that community which is of a kind or to
a degree that causes the requisite
construction of "discord" as referring to "dissension or strife", and not merely
disagreement or debate, derives support from,
and reflects, the fact that
"discord" is part of the collocation "incite discord". It may be accepted,
and the parties agreed, that
"incite" means "to rouse, to stimulate,
to urge, to spur on, to stir up, to
"incite" in this context does not require any intention or mental element. As
Ms Farmer accepted, it is possible to "incite
public outrage" without
intending to do so. But, as the defendants submitted, "incite" is narrower
and more nuanced than simply "to
cause". To "incite", an act must be "one which
could encourage or spur
to a particular
reaction. The "risk" spoken of in
s 501(6)(d)
is not a theoretical risk but
a real or appreciable risk.
effect of the phrases "in the Australian community" and "in a segment of that
community" in
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is that the risk that a person would stir up
or encourage dissension or strife – "incite discord" – is not in
to discord between two people or perhaps even a small number of people.
Rather, it is the risk that the person would stir up or encourage
dissension or strife on a larger scale – in the Australian
community, or a segment of that community (including between segments
the community). Those phrases assist in identifying the kind and degree of the
the risk that a person might stir up or encourage dissension or strife in the
Australian community, or a segment of it, will
not alone be sufficient for
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
to apply. The phrase "incite discord" in
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
requires that there be a real or appreciable risk that the
person would stir up or encourage harmful or deleterious dissension or
the Australian community, or a segment of it. Violent dissension or
strife would suffice but
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is not limited to the
circumstance where there is a real or appreciable risk of physical danger to the
Australian community, or a
segment of it. Consistent with
s 501(6)(d)(iii)
and (v), harmful dissension or strife includes the intimidation, vilification or
victimisation of, or disruption within or to, a
segment of the Australian
community. On the other hand, it would not be sufficient if only
the feelings or sensitivities of the Australian
community or a segment of
the community would be hurt or adversely affected. No more precise
elucidation of inciting discord is necessary
to decide this case. The facts
which are said to engage
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
will always be important.
501(6)(d)(iv)
must also be construed in context. This Court and the Federal
Court have long recognised that "the protection of the Australian community
lies at the heart" of
and that the
risk of harm to the Australian community is the mischief to which
This reinforces
the view that
, and, more particularly, the "discord" in "incite
discord" in
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
, require that there be a risk of discord
of a kind or to a degree (nature or effect) that causes relevant harm.
Section 501(6)(d)(iv)
is not enlivened merely by debate or disagreement or
even merely dissension or strife.
that view is reinforced by
s 501(6)(d)
read as a whole.
As the defendants submitted, the common feature of all five limbs of
s 501(6)(d)
is that "each ... involves protection of the Australian
community ... against some kind of harm, disadvantage or unacceptable or
undesirable consequence".
Given the seriousness of the harms addressed in
s 501(6)(d)(i)
and (v), it would be wrong to construe
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
as providing
that the character test could be failed because there is a risk that a person
would merely incite "debate or disagreement"
or even merely dissension or
strife. And the limbs are not mutually exclusive. So, for example,
s 501(6)(d)(v)
, which is broad and addresses people who would "represent a
danger to the Australian community or to a segment of that community,
way of being liable to become involved in activities that are disruptive to, or
in violence threatening harm to, that
community or segment, or in any other
way", provides no basis to read down the limbs which precede it, including
s 501(6)(d)(iv).
As the defendants submitted, the presumption against
surplusage is never
determinative.
is especially so where, as here, the legislative history indicates that
s 501(6)(d)(i)
-(iv) were included "to guard against the possibility that
the general might be read as
including the
particular".
was originally enacted in 1992 as s 180A(1)(b) of the
Migration Act
. Prior to the introduction of s 180A(1)(b), the
Migration Regulations 1989
(Cth) provided that an applicant for a visa
must meet the "public interest
criteri[on]"
applicant "is not determined by the Minister ... to be likely to become
involved in activities disruptive to, or violence
threatening harm to, the
Australian community or a group within the Australian community". The Minister
had relied on that criterion
in refusing applications for visas made by members
of the Hells Angels Motorcycle Club. After those refusals were set aside by the
Federal Court in 1991,
there was "close scrutiny of the decision-making regime for the exclusion of
persons ... who may represent a danger to the Australian
community".
was s 180A.
180A, like s 501(6)(d)(iv), included separate limbs for persons who "incite
discord" (s 180A(1)(b)(iii)) and persons who
"represent a danger"
(s 180A(1)(b)(iv)). In the Second Reading Speech, the Minister for
Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic
Affairs said that the power under
s 180A(1)(b) was intended to be exercised in line with "well-accepted
Australian values, such that
it is aimed at those persons who may regard entry
to this country as a means to attack those
terms, the Explanatory Memorandum described s 180A(1)(b)(iv) as applying
where a person "
represent[s] a danger to the Australian
community or part of that
community".
1994, s 180A was renumbered as
s 501 was repealed and substituted with a new s 501 as part of a suite
of amendments directed to giving the Government "greater
control over the entry
into, and presence in, Australia of certain non-citizens who are unable to
satisfy the Minister that they
pass the 'character
Changes were said
to ensure that "the objective of protecting the Australian community [took]
precedence in immigration
decision-making".
history reinforces the view that the preferable construction of
s 501(6)(d)(iv) is that it is concerned with where, in the event
person were allowed to enter or to remain in Australia, there is a risk that the
person would stir up or encourage dissension
or strife in the Australian
community, or a segment of that community, of a kind or to a degree that causes
relevant harm. It does
not include a requirement of intention on the part of the
person. The risk need not necessarily result in such harm. But the risk
such that the dissension or strife that may be incited by the person is of a
kind, or to a degree, that causes relevant harm
in the Australian community or a
segment of that community.
Implied freedom of political
communication
concept of representative government in a democracy is of government by the
people through their elected representatives or,
in constitutional terms,
a sovereign power residing in the people, exercised by their elected
representatives.
The implied freedom of political communication is an indispensable
incident of that system of representative government for which
Constitution
system in which electors are able to exercise a free and informed choice when
choosing their representatives and, for them
to be able to do so, a system in
which there is a free flow of political communication. The implied freedom
of political communication
is also an indispensable incident of the
constitutionally prescribed system of responsible
government,
which facilitates the political accountability of Ministers to the House of
Representatives and the
implied freedom is not a "personal
is not unlimited
and is not absolute.
is a limit on legislative and executive power that invalidates a law that so
burdens freedom of communication on governmental
or political matters that the
impugned law may be taken to affect the system of government for which the
Constitution
provides, a system which depends for its existence upon that
that end, the implied freedom invalidates a law that impairs or tends to impair
the constitutionally prescribed system of representative
and responsible
government by burdening freedom to communicate on governmental or political
matters unless the law has a purpose
compatible with that system and is
reasonably appropriate and adapted to advancing that purpose in a manner that is
consistent with
that system.
a law is alleged to infringe the implied freedom of political communication, the
first question is: does the impugned law effectively
burden freedom of
communication about governmental or political matters in its terms, operation or
effect? Next, is the purpose of
the law legitimate, in the sense that it is
compatible with the maintenance of the constitutionally prescribed system of
representative
and responsible government? And third, is the impugned law
reasonably appropriate and adapted to advance that purpose in a manner
compatible with the maintenance of that constitutionally prescribed system of
government?
If the first
question is answered "yes", and if either of the second or third questions is
answered "no", the law is invalid.
Effectively burden?
first question asks whether
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
effectively burdens freedom of communication about governmental or political
matters in its terms, operation or
"effectively burdens" means "nothing more complicated than that the effect
of the law is to prohibit, or put some limitation
on, the making or the
content of political
communications".
That inquiry requires consideration as to how the impugned law – in
its terms, operation or effect – affects the free
flow of communication on
governmental or political matters
The free flow
of political communication is "not simply a two-way affair between electors and
government or
candidates";
to communication between electors and between electors and other persons who may
seek to influence the ultimate choice
of the people as to whom they elect
as their representatives.
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
permits the Minister to deny
a person a visa on the basis that, in the event that the person were
allowed to enter or to remain in
Australia, there is a risk that the person
would stir up or encourage dissension or strife in the Australian community, or
of that community, of a kind or to a degree that causes harm in the
Australian community or a segment of that community.
assessing the legal operation or practical effect of the impugned law, there was
much focus on the fact that Ms Farmer's right
to enter Australia, or to
enter and remain in Australia, was contingent on her satisfying the conditions
Migration Act
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
(3). It must be accepted that Ms Farmer has no existing
right or liberty to enter or remain in Australia, absent a
But that is not the
only legal operation or practical effect of
s 501(6)(d)(iv).
any application of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
to keep a person out of Australia, or to
prevent them remaining in Australia, because there is a risk that the person
up or encourage dissension or strife on political matters in the
Australian community, or a segment of that community, of a kind
or to a degree
that causes relevant harm, the inhibition or limiting of the making and
receiving of political communications is inevitable.
Section 501(6)(d)(iv)
diminishes or limits the ability of a segment of the Australian community to
participate in political discussion and debate. For
example, in this case, a
segment of the Australian community is prevented from attending speaking events
with the speaker in person
interesting to that segment of the Australian community, asking live
questions of
the speaker in person, and attending private and VIP events
with the speaker to speak about political matters in person. Moreover,
communication of controversial political views by the speaker in Australia
likely would have generated further political communication
between people who
attended the events and by people who did not attend the events, including as a
result of media reporting and
conversations between family members and friends
– all of which is prevented or limited by the operation of
s 501(6)(d)(iv).
Those examples are not exhaustive. In each of those cases,
the free flow of communication between electors and between electors and
non‑citizen is
a person's entry to Australia
of what they will or may say on
political matters practically affects or impedes the freedom of members of the
Australian community
to communicate (an element of which is the freedom to
communicate in person) which has also enjoyed special recognition at common
501(6)(d)(iv)
imposes a meaningful constraint on freedom of political
communication.
That burden on freedom of political communication is obvious and not
insubstantial.
of this analysis suggests that the implied freedom of political communication is
a personal right. What is important is not
that the conduct of
an individual is restricted by the challenged law but that the existing
freedom to communicate on political matters,
and thus the free flow of political
communication, is burdened by it. By that law, a segment of the population has
its ability to
make and receive political communication diminished. None of that
analysis is affected by the fact that no one, whether Ms Farmer
or anyone with
whom she might communicate in Australia, has any right that Ms Farmer enter
defendants submitted that Ms Farmer's attempt to establish that
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
imposes a burden on freedom of political communication was
"foreclosed by [the] unchallenged authority" of
Mulholland v Australian
Electoral Commission
No party applied to reopen
. The defendants submitted that
establishes that a statute which confers a right if certain
conditions are met cannot impose a burden on freedom of political communication.
In this case, the defendants submitted that, because
Migration Act
obliges the Minister to grant a visa if statutory
conditions are met, a condition for the grant of a visa which relates to
communication cannot burden freedom of political communication.
are at least three reasons why the defendants' submissions cannot be accepted.
the general proposition advanced – that no grant of a statutory right on
conditions being met can ever amount to a burden
on freedom of political
communication even if one or more of the conditions relates to or affects
whether the applicant for the right
can, will, or may participate in political
debate – overlooks that the implied freedom is concerned with
the free flow of political
communication
need to consider the practical effect or operation of a particular law on that
free flow of political
communication,
its effect on the recipient or audience of the political communication.
Commonwealth
Commonwealth
the wider proposition now advanced. Each of
concerned an entitlement to engage in a particular form of
political communication – to have a candidate's political party
affiliation
appear on the ballot paper. The ability to engage in that particular
form of political communication was granted by statute. The
entitlement to have candidates' party affiliation appear on the ballot paper was
available only if certain conditions were
met. It existed only by and under the
statute – the
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
McHugh J explained in
, the challenged provisions in that case
were "the conditions of the entitlement to have a party's name placed on
the ballot-paper",
and those conditions did not "burden rights of
communication on political and government matters that exist[ed] independently
the entitlement".
Any political communication that was involved in the delivery and lodging of a
ballot paper resulted solely from the Australian Electoral
Commission's
statutory obligation to hold elections and deliver ballot papers in
a prescribed form.
also concerned provisions of the
Commonwealth Electoral
that were the conditions of, and could not be considered to be
independent of, the entitlement of a candidate to have their party
affiliation
appear on the ballot
The conclusion
that there was no burden on freedom of political communication was reached in
light of the specific legal and factual
context of each case. By contrast, this
case does not involve an entitlement to participate in political communication
which arises
only by or under the statute. On the contrary, as has been
explained, members of the Australian community have freedom to communicate,
which includes meeting and communicating in person, and that freedom is burdened
by s 501(6)(d)(iv).
, there was no submission that the challenged law
burdened the ability of parties or candidates to use their party name beyond
context of the ballot
, the plaintiffs submitted that there was such a practical
, the plaintiff could not establish that candidates' freedom to
communicate their party affiliation was otherwise
, the issue was not reached because a majority of this Court
concluded that it was unnecessary to consider the plaintiffs' application
in circumstances where any burden imposed by the
challenged law was
next question is whether the purpose of the law is constitutionally legitimate,
in the sense that it is compatible with the maintenance
the constitutionally prescribed system of government.
object or purpose of a law is what the law is designed to achieve in fact, which
is akin to what mischief the law is designed
seen from the extrinsic materials and the legislative
s 501(6)(d)(iv) is part of a suite of provisions intended to serve a
protective purpose.
seeks to protect the Australian community from a risk that a person who is
not part of that community would stir up or encourage
dissension or strife on
political matters in the Australian community, or a segment of that community,
of a kind or to a degree that
is harmful to that community or segment.
purpose is legitimate in the sense that it is compatible with
the preservation of the integrity of the system of representative
responsible government. Consistent with the maintenance of the integrity of that
system, the legislature has a wide power to
determine the circumstances in
which a non‑citizen should be permitted to enter
legislative power is subject to the implied freedom of political communication,
and while it may be accepted that Parliament
cannot use this power for the
purpose of curbing political disagreement and debate inside
that is not
the purpose or practical effect of s 501(6)(d)(iv) when it is construed in
the manner described.
Reasonably appropriate and adapted
leaves the third question: can the law be justified? In this case,
is s 501(6)(d)(iv) reasonably appropriate and adapted to
advance that
legitimate protective purpose in a manner that is compatible with the
maintenance of the constitutionally prescribed
system of government which
the freedom exists to protect? The answer is "yes".
as here, the impugned law effectively burdens freedom of political communication
and does so in pursuit of a legitimate purpose,
the question is whether the
means (the manner in which the law pursues that purpose) are reasonably
appropriate and adapted to advance
that purpose in a manner that is compatible
with the maintenance of the constitutionally prescribed system of
government.
In addressing
this question, the nature and extent of the burden are
Here, although
the burden is obvious and not insubstantial, it is indirect. Any effect on
political communication is the indirect
consequence of the Minister refusing to
grant a person a visa to enter Australia. In its legal operation,
the provision is viewpoint‑neutral.
However, in its practical
operation the provision is likely to impact differentially on persons
expressing "non‑mainstream"
political views, those being views that are
more likely to incite "discord" which is of a kind or to a degree that causes
the requisite
Farmer contended that, even if the purpose of s 501(6)(d)(iv) were to
prevent harm to the Australian community of the kind described,
s 501(6)(d)(iv) could not be justified because the threshold imposed by
s 501(6)(d)(iv) is too low and, further, there are two "alternative,
reasonably practicable, means of achieving the same object" with "a less
restrictive effect on the
s 501 without s 501(6)(d)(iv), on the basis that s 501 would
still have s 501(6)(d)(v), which Ms Farmer argued is sufficient
prevent harm to the Australian community from strife, dispute, disharmony and
dissension; and second, the original formulation
of s 180A(1)(b)(iii),
which required the Minister to be satisfied that the person
discord, not merely that there was a
that the person would do so.
Each of those contentions must be rejected.
first of Ms Farmer's contentions about s 501(6)(d)(iv) imposing too
low a threshold falls away. On the proper construction of
the provision, a
person does not fail the character test in s 501(6)(d)(iv) if, in the event
that the person were allowed to enter
or remain in Australia, there is merely a
risk that the person would cause
disagreement or debate
in the Australian
community, or a segment of it, without there being a risk of inciting dissension
or strife of a kind or to a degree
(nature or effect) that causes the requisite
second of Ms Farmer's contentions – that there are "alternative,
reasonably practicable, means of achieving the same object"
with "a less
restrictive effect on the freedom" – also fails. There is no obvious and
compelling, reasonably practicable means
of achieving the purpose of
s 501(6)(d)(iv) to the same extent which has a less restrictive
effect on the freedom. Contrary to Ms
Farmer's submission,
s 501(6)(d)(v) is not less restrictive of the freedom; rather, it is
directed to harm of a different character.
The second "alternative" argued by Ms
Farmer – namely, requiring a finding that the person "would"
incite discord – would
not achieve the purpose of
s 501(6)(d)(iv) to the same extent because "would" implies that something
must occur, thereby exposing
the Australian community, or a segment of it,
to an appreciably greater risk of harm. Similarly, Ms Farmer's further
contention that,
because "incite" does not require any intention or mental
element, it places a significant unnecessary burden on freedom of political
communication on the basis that the uncontrollable reaction of others can and
does cause a person to fail the character test must
be rejected.
would such a requirement be impractical, but it would not achieve
the purpose of s 501(6)(d)(iv) to the same extent because
again expose the Australian community, or a segment of it, to a greater risk of
501(6)(d)(iv) is justified because the nature and extent of the burden on
political communication do not outweigh the provision's
Challenge to the Decision
content and structure of the Decision have been
Reading the Decision fairly, and as a whole, the Minister did not
misconstrue s 501(6)(d)(iv). The
Minister considered the risk of Ms
Farmer inciting discord of a kind or to a degree that causes the requisite harm,
rather than, as
Ms Farmer contended, merely considering the prospect that
Ms Farmer's "controversial" views might result in disagreement or
Minister found that Ms Farmer's comments amounted to "extremist and inflammatory
comments towards Muslim, Black, Jewish and LGBTQIA+
controversy and hatred".
The Minister then examined material that he found "collectively describe[d] the
causal link between individuals who promote and encourage
right wing extremism
via online platforms and how this supports greater intent and capacity to
[undertake] violent acts". The Minister
was satisfied that that material
"provide[d] well evidenced and consistent assessments of the potential for
persons who espouse ideologically
motivated extremist views to pose a risk of
inciting discord in the Australian
community".
findings refute any suggestion that the Minister thought "discord" meant no more
than disagreement or debate.
Minister then considered the risk posed by Ms Farmer's planned visit and
found that it could "lead to increased hostility and
violent or radical action",
that it would "have the potential to galvanise discord", and that "the
normalisation of controversial
rhetoric that dehumanises and targets specific
community".
findings underscore that the Minister's concern about Ms Farmer expressing
her views in Australia was that this could lead
not merely to disagreement or
debate but, as he put it, to "hostility and violent or radical action".
Minister's findings describe a state of affairs involving "hostility and violent
or radical action" incited by Ms Farmer expressing
views whilst in
Australia that dehumanise and target specific communities and confirm that
the Minister considered "incite discord"
to refer to conduct of a kind or
to a degree that causes the requisite harm to the Australian community or a
segment of the Australian
answers to the questions of law stated for the opinion of the Full Court are
accordingly to be answered as has already been
A self-evident truth
freedom of some must at times be curtailed to secure the freedom of others. ...
We cannot remain absolutely free, and must
give up some of our liberty to
preserve the rest. ... What then must the minimum
every civilised society there is a minimum baseline of individual liberty with
which political communication by others is not
free to interfere. This principle
of basic reason is reflected in common law and constitutional jurisprudence. For
instance, there
is no freedom to make a serious threat to kill an individual in
order to communicate a political
There is no
freedom to commit a battery upon a politician in order to communicate a
political message.
is no freedom to trespass on the land of another in order to communicate a
political message.
principal issue in this special case should be decided by application of this
principle of basic reason. That issue is whether
provisions of the
concerning the exercise of the Minister for Home
Affairs' power to admit aliens to Australia, impose a burden on freedom of
communication. It should be a self‑evident truth that a freedom
of political communication can only be burdened if the freedom
exists in the
first place. If there is no freedom to engage in an act of political
communication, then there is no freedom that can
be burdened. A law that
restricts actions which people are not free to take cannot impose any burden
upon a freedom of political
communication. This remains a self‑evident
truth even if the witnessing of, or participation in, that political
communication
by assault, battery, or trespass were something that was desired
by 10 other people, 100 other people, 1,000 other people, or even
10,000 other
this self‑evident truth, Ms Owens Farmer (as she describes
herself in her application for a constitutional or other
writ) claims that
although she is an alien with no freedom to enter Australia, the implied freedom
of political communication in
Constitution
invalidates a law in the
Migration Act
which permits the Minister a discretion to refuse to
aliens entry to Australia due to a reasonable suspicion of a risk
that the person would "incite discord in the Australian community
segment of that
community".
words, Ms Owens Farmer claims that the implied freedom of political
communication protects a freedom that (absent a visa)
neither she nor any other
alien holds, therefore precluding any liberty of anyone else in Australia to
engage with her to the extent
that such engagement relies upon her having a
freedom to be present in Australia.
Ms Owens Farmer
asserts that the implied freedom of political communication in the
Constitution
affords her a freedom from laws that restrict her entry to
Australia to communicate political messages described by the Minister as
involving "anti-Semitic" and "[I]slamophobic" views and "extremist and
inflammatory comments towards Muslim, Black, Jewish and LGBTQIA+
which generate controversy and hatred". As the Minister explained,
Ms Owens Farmer was described by the perpetrator of
the terror attack
on two mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand, where 51 people were killed and 35
others were injured, as the "person
who influenced them the most to carry out
the attack".
Ms Owens Farmer
also asserts that the implied freedom of political communication affords a
freedom to others in Australia to listen
to her and to engage
political message. Ms Owens Farmer is not content with the freedom,
untouched by the
Migration Act
, for her to communicate the same message
by audio-visual transmission. She asserts that provisions of the
which concern the Minister's discretion to refuse her liberty to
enter Australia, burden her ability to engage in political communication
person in Australia.
Ms Owens Farmer's
submissions should be emphatically rejected. No member of Australian society has
a liberty to engage in acts of
assault, battery, or trespass in order to
communicate a political message. Consequently, no other member of Australian
society has
a liberty to watch, or participate in, acts of assault, battery, or
trespass. So too, no alien has a liberty to enter Australia and
no member of
Australian society has a liberty to hear an alien speak
liberty to engage with an alien
if the alien has not
been permitted entry to Australia. The implied freedom of political
communication is not engaged by a law that
permits an alien, such as
Ms Owens Farmer, to be denied entry to Australia on the basis that
there is a risk that the alien would
"incite discord in the Australian community
or in a segment of that community".
A constitutional
implied right or implied freedom of political communication?
Constitution
require that members of Parliament be
"directly chosen by the people". One implication from those words is in the
nature of an explicature,
an implication which draws its content primarily from
the words. That implication is that the Commonwealth Parliament cannot, unless
reasonably necessary, burden either: (i) the quality of information that is
intended to affect, or likely to affect, voting choice;
or (ii) the people
who are able to exercise that choice in Commonwealth elections and
Lange v Australian Broadcasting
Corporation
this Court recognised a separate, broader implication which draws more
heavily from context and structure than from the words "directly
chosen by the
people" in ss 7 and
Constitution
. The separate
implication, an implicature which relies heavily on the underlying
constitutional notion of representative democracy,
is broader than notions of
electoral choice or of the electoral
implicature is that an Australian Parliament cannot enact either laws with an
illegitimate end (purpose) of impairing free political
communication or laws
with the effect of impairing free political communication which adopt
disproportionate means to achieve a legitimate
constitutional implication of a freedom of political communication was said by
this Court in
that the following question be asked: "does the law effectively burden freedom
of communication about government or political
matters either in its terms,
operation or effect?" The emphasis upon a burden on
of political
communication, rather than upon political communication generally, reflected
words that had been carefully chosen by
a unanimous Court. Even in the United
States, where there is an express constitutional protection of freedom of speech
"[t]he First Amendment 'does not forbid the abridging of speech ...
it does forbid the abridging of the
quoted from Sir Owen Dixon, saying that "[t]he
anterior operation of the common law in Australia is not just a dogma of our
system, an abstraction of our constitutional reasoning. It is a fact of
legal history."
constitutional implication builds upon the freedom to communicate which the
common law respects and protects, being "that [existing]
communication between the people concerning political or government matters
which enables the people to exercise a free
and informed choice as
protection afforded by the constitutional implication builds only upon existing
freedom by constraining legislative power,
the protection afforded by the
constitutional implication does not create any individual rights, nor does the
protection impose any
duties upon the body
a decision delivered later the same month as
, McHugh J (whose
reasoning prior to
had been heavily drawn from in
) explained
why, if protesters had no liberty to enter a hunting area, there could be no
burden upon any freedom of political communication
if they were prevented from
entering the area to
"The constitutional implication does not create rights. It merely invalidates
laws that improperly impair a person's freedom to communicate
political and
government matters relating to the Commonwealth to other members of the
Australian community. It gave the protesters
no right to enter the hunting area.
That means that, unless the common law or Victorian statute law gave them a
right to enter that
area, it was the lack of that right, and not the [impugned
law], that destroyed their opportunity to make their political protest."
operation of the implied freedom of political communication upon the baseline of
constitutionally
rules is not merely a matter of constitutional precedent. It is a matter of
basic and fundamental principle. This basic
principle does not even require a
denial of the ovine bleating of political communication fundamentalists that
Parliament should
not disproportionately burden
act of political
communication, even an act that is independently unlawful. The basic principle
simply denies that such a controversial
proposition is constitutionalised. The
basic principle rejects the bovine assertion that a
prerequisite of representative and responsible government requires the
proportionality of laws that burden even independently unlawful
political communication (acts which are not free)
the inconsistency of such a constitutional restraint with basic principle, there
have nevertheless been statements in this
Court after
which might
be taken to suggest that the implied freedom of political communication can lead
to the invalidation of a law that burdens
only "political communication",
treating the "freedom of political communication" and "political communication"
as concepts with
Such statements
might be, as in the instance of a decision to which I was a
no more than
semantic slips of the pen or on the keyboard. But they might also be carefully
chosen words, attempts to expand the
freedom of political communication, beyond
the extent to which the implied freedom had been recognised in
to encompass even independently unlawful acts of political communication
which are not free. Such an expansion would be a considerable,
unjustifiable,
and unwarranted expansion of judicial power beyond even that contemplated by the
First Amendment to the United States
Constitution
from the moment of its unanimous acceptance by this Court in
broader implied freedom of political communication, as an implicature, has been
controversial. The same month that the decision
was delivered,
Dawson J remarked that "[t]he freedom is often said to be implied in the
Constitution
but I do not think that it really is". By this, his Honour
meant that the freedom of political communication recognised by the
Constitution
was only that which arose, as an explicature, from the words
of ss 7 and
, which his Honour described as speaking "in terms of
representatives being directly chosen by the people at periodic elections".
His Honour added that it was "clear ... that the freedom does not rest upon
an implication drawn from any underlying or overarching
representative
government".
remarks by Dawson J were not the first expressions of
scepticism about an implied freedom of political communication that, as an
implicature,
is based more heavily in context than in
And they were far
from the last.
becomes even more important as the implicature expands. Ultimately, the
recognition and boundaries of implications are a matter of
judgment. And a
freedom of judicial communication and critique is essential for the coherent
expression of that judgment in the long
the exercise of the judgment that is required for the recognition of an
implication in a written document, the more that an implication
shades from
explicature to implicature, and (consequently) the less that the implication
relies upon any textual basis, the stronger
must be the need for the implication
in order for it to be recognised. Hence, in
Court said that the implied freedom of political communication "is limited to
what is necessary for the effective operation of
th[e] system of representative
and responsible government provided for by the
Constitution
". That necessity
supported the recognition of an implicature with two significant limits. One of
the limits to the implicature was
the concept of
proportionality,
was later developed with a structure that aimed to provide transparent analysis.
Another was that the implicature was concerned
only with burdens upon
political communication.
existence of those two limits may have been the basis for members of this Court,
such as McHugh J, to depart from a view that
"the reasoning in
Nationwide News
Australian Capital Television
Theophanous
in so far as it invokes an implied principle of
representative democracy [is] fundamentally wrong and [is] an alteration of the
Constitution
without the authority of the people under
Constitution
abolition of either or both of the limits that constrain the constitutional
implication as recognised in
would be contrary to principle and
precedent because it would expand the implied freedom of political communication
beyond that which
is necessary for the effective operation of representative and
responsible government. The abolition would also undermine the authority
Court. The unanimous decision in
was described as a "major miracle
explicable only by divine interference with the forces of
by which this
Court distanced itself from less justifiable aspects of decisions that had
sparked a "political storm" while nevertheless
confirming the implied
The more that
this Court were to depart from the limits recognised in
that it would become necessary to heed the words of Higgins J, said in the
earliest years of the existence of this Court,
that "[n]othing would tend to
detract from the influence and the usefulness of this Court more than the
appearance of an eagerness
to sit in judgment on Acts of Parliament, and to
Constitution
with the impress which we wish it to
The implied freedom of political communication and the aliens
The aliens power and the lack of any freedom to enter Australia
the most extreme view of the aliens power in
Constitution
, that power effectively sits outside the rest of the
Constitution
as a potentially unique power for the Commonwealth
Parliament to determine
"who has and who does not have the
legal status of
"[specify] the legal consequences of that legal
words, on that extreme view it is for the Commonwealth Parliament to "create and
define the concept of ...
not any member of this Court could be taken to have intended to express that
extreme view, or some variant of
"[e]veryone [else]
agrees that the term 'aliens' does not mean whatever Parliament wants it to
"Alien" is a
constitutional term with a constitutional meaning and constitutional boundaries
of operation.
to one side any issues concerning the application of the aliens power to persons
who are refugees or owed obligations of
protection by the Australian body
one premise
of the aliens power is that an alien has no liberty to enter Australia. That
premise has a long history. In 1685, Jeffreys
LCJ said that the "king had
an absolute power to forbid foreigners ... from coming within his dominions;
both in times of war and
in times of peace, according to his royal will and
Vattel wrote that an alien "cannot then settle by a full right" but "ought to
demand the permission of doing it of the superior
of the place; and if it is
refused, it is his place to
Blackstone wrote that "it is left in the power of all states, to take such
measures about the admission of strangers, as
convenient".
the Privy Council described the "supreme power of every state" as including a
power to make laws for the exclusion of a
In 1854, in
a passage later endorsed by the Supreme Court of the United
said that it was a "received maxim of International Law, that the Government of
a State may prohibit the entrance of strangers
there were centuries of support for the remark by Scott LJ that "[e]very
alien in the United Kingdom is here only because
his presence has been licensed
by the King".
long history of this basic premise in the domestic law of the United Kingdom and
in international law was recognised in Australian
law by the Privy Council in
Musgrove v Chun Teeong
Council held that an alien had no liberty, enforceable by action, to enter the
colony of Victoria so that an alien could
bring no action in relation to a
refusal of permission to enter. That decision was reaffirmed by the Privy
Council, on appeal from
The same year,
in Australia, this basic premise was held to inform the application of the
aliens power in
Although the application of the power to Pacific
Islanders who were British subjects is a stain on the jurisprudence of this
Griffith CJ was undoubtedly correct to affirm the centuries of acceptance
of this basic premise when he said that the aliens power
"must surely, if it
includes anything, include the power to determine the conditions under which
aliens may be admitted to the
In 1992, in
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic
Deane and Dawson JJ (with whom
on this point) said that the vulnerability of an alien to exclusion from
Australia "flows from both the common law and the
provisions of the
Constitution
would be a judicial revolution now for this Court to depart from this basic
The interaction of the aliens power
and the implied freedom
alien who is present in Australia is not an
Other than in
times of war, and subject to their liability to be removed from Australia in
accordance with the proper legal
an alien who
is present in Australia is entitled to the same fundamental rights as others in
constitutional power to specify the legal consequences for a person who is an
alien within the meaning of
Constitution
confined by limits in the
Constitution
in the same way as other heads of
power. One of those limits is the implied freedom of political
communication.
Nevertheless,
the implied freedom of political communication cannot rise higher than the
independent freedoms of an alien; it cannot
create freedoms where none exist.
Hence, while an alien is outside Australia, the basic premise that an alien has
no liberty to enter
Australia means that the implied freedom of political
communication cannot be burdened by any restrictions upon the ability of an
alien to enter Australia.
conclusion that the implied freedom of political communication cannot be
burdened if a law prohibits an action of political communication
that the person
is not independently free to do is not merely supported by the self-evident
truth with which these reasons began.
It also underpins the reasons of at least
a majority of this Court in
Mulholland v Australian Electoral
was endorsed by a majority of this Court in
Ruddick v The
Commonwealth
and applied by this Court in
Babet v The
Commonwealth
this Court held that the impugned provisions did not
burden any freedom of political communication because the freedom upon which
appellant relied did not exist independently of the scheme of which the impugned
provisions formed a part. Thus, in
there was no burden imposed
by a law that restricted the ability of candidates from some political parties
to communicate their party
affiliation to voters. The liberty to communicate
party affiliation did not exist independently of the impugned provisions. The
freedom was not a source of positive right or entitlement for candidates
to be able to communicate party affiliation on the
conclusion, that the implied freedom of political communication cannot be
burdened if a law prohibits an action of political
communication that the person
is not independently free to do, is further illustrated by contrast with two
hypothetical circumstances
raised during oral submissions. The first is a law of
the Commonwealth Parliament, presumably under
prohibited the importation of written political communications into Australia.
Assuming, as the example does, that, absent such
a law, an importer would have
the freedom to import that material into Australia, such a law would burden the
implied freedom of
political communication by restricting the importer's freedom
of political communication. But, unlike the position of an alien, the
there would be a burden is that there was otherwise a liberty to import.
second example raised in oral argument and relied upon by
Ms Owens Farmer is that of a hypothetical condition subsequent which
is placed on the visa of an alien who enters Australia prohibiting that alien
from engaging in various forms of political communication.
The absence of any
liberty for an alien to enter Australia means that permission to enter can be
made subject to
conditions.
of a condition subsequent that prohibited an alien's political communication in
Australia would be to remove a liberty
that the alien would have had, once the
alien had entered Australia, to engage in political communication. The condition
to the alien's visa would be, by definition, a condition that
operated upon an alien after entry into Australia. Upon the entry by
into Australia, such a condition would be subject to the implied freedom of
political communication.
Section 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
imposes no burden upon freedom of political communication
Ms Owens Farmer challenged the wrong provision
principal question in the special case asks whether
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
is invalid because it unjustifiably burdens the implied
freedom of political communication.
Section 501(6)(d)(iv)
is concerned with
a circumstance in which a person does not pass the character test in the
Migration Act
, where: "in the event the person were allowed to enter or
to remain in Australia, there is a risk that the person would ... incite
in the Australian community or in a segment of that community".
character test in
Migration Act
has no substantive
effect. The substantive provisions, relevant to this case, that rely upon the
character test are
that the Minister is to grant a visa if certain conditions are met, including
that the grant of the visa is not prevented
Section 501(3)
relevantly provides, in
ss 501(3)(a)
that "[t]he Minister may refuse to grant a visa to a person ... if the Minister
reasonably suspects that the person does not
pass the character test".
the defendants (the Minister and the Commonwealth) correctly submitted, since
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is merely a definitional provision it has no operative
effect. Ms Owens Farmer argued that the defendants' submission
the definitional nature of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
was merely a
"quibbl[e]". But however one characterises the objection, for a court to
invalidate a provision that has no substantive
or operative effect would amount
to an advisory opinion about a law that did not affect the rights or liberties
of any person.
Ms Owens Farmer therefore attempted, without seeking leave, to reframe
her case as, in effect, a challenge to the application of
as that operative provision engaged
s 501(6)(d)(iv).
Her argument would
to be disapplied to the extent to which its application
relies upon that part of the character test in
s 501(6)(d)(iv).
It suffices to say that, for the reasons below, even Ms Owens Farmer's
reformulated argument cannot succeed.
Ms Owens Farmer
has no liberty to enter Australia and nobody in Australia has any liberties
derived from her being in Australia
is no dispute that Ms Owens Farmer is an alien within the meaning of
Ms Owens Farmer therefore has no liberty to enter
Australia independently of the Minister's exercise of power under
Migration Act
, including the power of the Minister
s 501(3)(c)
to refuse the grant of such a liberty based on a reasonable
suspicion that the person does not pass the character test.
Commonwealth law that prohibited Ms Owens Farmer from appearing by
audio-visual link to an audience in Australia to deliver a political
might burden the freedom of political communication of Australian people. That
burden could arise because, absent any common
law or valid statutory constraint,
the people of Australia have a liberty to establish an audio-visual link
overseas and to listen
to, and engage with, Ms Owens Farmer by that
link. But since Ms Owens Farmer has no freedom to enter Australia,
neither she nor the
people of the Commonwealth have any freedom to engage in
political communication where that political communication would require
Ms Owens Farmer to be present in Australia.
may be that the exercise of the discretion to refuse Ms Owens Farmer
entry into Australia to espouse political views described
by the Minister as
anti-Semitic and Islamophobic will constrain political discourse when compared
with her liberty to appear by audio-visual
link. As Professor Barendt
"Restrictions on the free flow of political information are suspect because they
invade the audience's interests in having enough
material before it to make
informed choices and to participate fully in the democratic process. ... The
arguments from truth and
from democracy attach particular weight to the
interests of recipients; ideas, as well as information, should be freely
communicable
in order to enable recipients to discover the truth and to
participate fully in public discourse."
to ask whether a restriction upon Ms Owens Farmer entering Australia
is a burden on the flow of political information is to ask
the wrong question.
As explained in detail above, and as the precedent of this Court has
consistently reiterated, the implied freedom
of political communication is not
concerned with political communication generally. The concern is with political
communication that
people are free
to express. Since
Ms Owens Farmer was not free to engage in political communication
in Australia without the exercise of the Minister's discretion,
no other member of the people of the Commonwealth had any freedom
to engage with
in Australia. Nor did any of the people of the Commonwealth
have any freedom to engage with each other concerning
Ms Owens Farmer's
political ideas to the extent that such engagement
was dependent upon her presence in Australia.
Any burden in
applied with
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
would be justified
Section 501(3)
Migration Act
, when applied by reliance upon
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
would be justified even if, contrary to these
reasons, the implied freedom of political communication constrained a law of the
Commonwealth
Parliament concerning the entry of an alien into Australia. This
conclusion can be explained briefly.
The meaning of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
Ms Owens Farmer's
submission concerning the disproportionate operation of
application with
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
, relied upon a meaning of "discord" in
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
as "disagreement or debate" in the Australian community or
in any segment of it. In her submission, that aspect of the character
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
was intended to be sufficiently broad for the Minister to
refuse entry into Australia even to those whose opinions were only on scientific
matters upon which the scientific community was strongly divided. The Minister
could reasonably suspect that a person would fail
the character test merely
because their views would lead to strong scientific disagreement. On
Ms Owens Farmer's submission, the
Minister might reasonably suspect to
be of bad character a modern equivalent to: René Descartes at the
time he wrote on analytic
geometry; Charles Darwin at the time he was
exploring the origin of species; or Albert Einstein at the time of
expounding his general
theory of relativity.
meaning of "discord" in
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
must be construed with regard to
its purpose as part of the character test. It must also be construed in its
context as one of the
five limbs of
s 501(6)(d)
, all of which involve a
risk of danger or significant physical or mental harm to the Australian
community or a segment of it. It
matters very little whether or not
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
has much further application than the harms considered in
the other limbs, such as
s 501(6)(d)(v).
Where a so-called "presumption"
against redundancy is relied upon to assert only that some words, or even a
sub-section, of a provision
are redundant, the presumption "seldom ... carries
great weight".
"presumption" carries almost no weight when the provision is part of a scheme of
overlapping
circumstances,
the scheme of
s 501(6)(d)
, which, as Gageler CJ, Gordon and
Beech-Jones JJ explain, is intended to, and does, cover a variety of
different and related sources
of potential harm to the Australian community or a
segment of the Australian community.
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is interpreted in its context and in light of its purpose
then, as Gageler CJ, Gordon and Beech-Jones JJ explain, a risk that a
would "incite discord" in the Australian community or in a segment of
that community is a real or appreciable risk that the person
would stir up
dissension or strife in the Australian community or a segment of the Australian
community. That includes intimidation,
vilification, or victimisation of a
segment of the Australian community.
Justification of
applied with
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
McHugh J said in
"clear" that in
this Court "did intend ... that both [a law's] end
and the manner of its achievement be compatible with the system of
representative
and responsible government" in order for the law to be justified.
The existence of any incompatible purpose or any incompatible means
that purpose will invalidate the provision. For the reasons expressed in various
judgments in
Ravbar v The
Commonwealth
as a matter of principle the implied freedom requires all of Parliament's
ends (purposes) to be compatible with representative and
responsible government
and all of the means used by Parliament to involve a proportionate manner of
achieving those ends having regard
to the burden imposed on free political
communication.
in its application with
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
expressed at an appropriate level of generality, which is almost always higher
than the meaning of the words of the
provisions.
purpose is one of preventing the risk of harm to the Australian community or a
segment of it by the admission of certain aliens
to Australia. Contrary to the
submissions of Ms Owens Farmer, which conflate purpose and means, that
purpose is not properly expressed
by reference to the manner in which the
purpose is achieved, which is the burdening of some political communication by
aliens, albeit
political communication that would require the presence of the
alien in Australia and which, therefore, is not free.
Ms Owens Farmer,
properly following the test of structured proportionality that had been adopted
for a decade in this Court prior
Babet v The
Commonwealth
submitted that
in its application with
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
disproportionate in the means it adopted—not reasonably appropriate and
adapted—for two reasons. First, it was said
application with
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
was not necessary (perhaps more
appropriately, was not reasonably capable of being seen as necessary) because
there were obvious
and compelling alternatives. Secondly, it was said that
in its application with
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
was not adequate in
its balance. Ms Owens Farmer, unsurprisingly, did not submit that
in its application with
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
was not "suitable"
because it lacked a rational connection with its purpose. Indeed, it is doubtful
that "suitability" adds anything
to the test of structured
proportionality.
were to impose some burden on the freedom of political
communication in its application with
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
, it would be
reasonably capable of being seen as necessary. This reasonable necessity must be
addressed by reference to the false
assumption that the freedom of political
communication
in Australia of an alien (or anyone who wishes to
listen or engage in person with the alien or with each other to the extent that
this depends on the presence of the alien in Australia) can be burdened despite
the alien lacking any liberty to be present in Australia.
But even on that
assumption, Ms Owens Farmer's proposed alternatives are neither
obvious nor compelling.
first proposed alternative was removing
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
altogether since,
it was submitted,
s 501(6)(d)(v)
would be sufficient to prevent harm to the
Australian community from dissension or strife. The fifth limb of
s 501(6)(d)
is concerned with circumstances where the Minister reasonably
suspects that the alien represents "a danger to the Australian community
segment of that community, whether by way of being liable to become involved in
activities that are disruptive to, or in
violence threatening harm to, that
community or segment, or in any other way". This alternative is neither obvious
nor compelling.
The five limbs of
s 501(6)(d)
are part of a single scheme
with only partially overlapping content. The removal of one of the limbs creates
a new, and narrower,
scheme in circumstances in which the stirring up of
dissension or strife can have different and, in particular, clearer and more
specific applications than the wider and more generalised limb concerning danger
to the Australian community or to a segment of that
second proposed alternative was for
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
to be expressed as
requiring the Minister to be reasonably satisfied that the alien "would" incite
discord rather than requiring
only reasonable satisfaction of a risk to that
effect. While the raising of that threshold might still achieve the purposes of
Parliament,
it is not an obvious and compelling alternative to achieve those
purposes to the same or a similar extent.
to the adequacy in the balance of
in its application with
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
, this criterion of structured proportionality lies at the
very limits of judicial power, inviting a judicial invalidation of Parliament's
pursuit of a legitimate policy by means that are reasonably capable of being
seen as necessary.
Ms Owens Farmer's submission was effectively that the burden on the
freedom of political communication in Australia was so great
that Parliament's
legitimate policy concern (preventing the risk of harm to the Australian
community or a segment of it by the admission
of certain aliens to Australia)
could not be implemented by means that are reasonably capable of being seen as
necessary. Even if
there were any burden on, or even a substantial burden on,
the freedom of political communication in Australia, it was plainly open
Parliament to adopt the means of
in its application with
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
, rather than some alternative policy such as requiring an
intention of or negligence by the alien in relation to conduct that might
up dissension or strife.
Ms Owens Farmer's
administrative law challenge
second question in the special case challenges the decision of the Minister to
refuse a visa to Ms Owens Farmer on the basis
that the Minister
incorrectly interpreted
s 501(6)(d)(iv).
On the assumption that "discord"
would be interpreted by this Court, as it should be, to mean stirring up of
dissension or strife,
Ms Owens Farmer submitted that the Minister had
misinterpreted the meaning of discord because: (i) he only used the word
"disharmony"
and did not use the words "strife" or "dissension"; (ii) the
reference to Ms Owens Farmer's controversial views suggested that the
Minister was concerned only with disagreement or debate; and (iii) the
Minister failed to find that any discord, as he understood
it, would be harmful.
is unnecessary to repeat or summarise all the reasons of the Minister. It
suffices to say that Ms Owens Farmer's submissions are
an example of
an approach to the review of reasons of an administrative decision-maker that
has been consistently deprecated by this
Court as "concerned with looseness in
the language ... []or with unhappy phrasing" or involving the inappropriate
construction of
reasons "minutely and finely with an eye keenly attuned to the
perception of error".
It is now well established that "the reasons of an administrative decision-maker
are meant to inform and not to be scrutinised upon
over-zealous judicial review
by seeking to discern whether some inadequacy may be
findings of the Minister included that Ms Owens Farmer, who had over
18 million followers across social media platforms worldwide,
"extremist and inflammatory comments towards Muslim, Black, Jewish and LGBTQIA+
hatred". The Minister referred to
statements by the Director‑General of Security that "[m]ore Australians
are embracing a more
diverse range of extreme ideologies and ... are willing to
use violence to advance their cause" and statements by the former
Commissioner that "[h]ate speech leads to political violence if you
allow it to escalate". The Minister explained that Ms Owens Farmer's
views "have previously been significant enough to influence the perpetrator of
the terror attack on two mosques in Christchurch,
were killed and 35 others were injured". The Minister concluded that the sources
to which he referred:
"collectively describe the causal link between individuals who promote and
encourage right wing extremism via online platforms and
how this supports
greater intent and capacity to undertake[] violent acts. I am satisfied these
sources provide well evidenced and
consistent assessments of the potential for
persons who espouse ideologically motivated extremist views to pose a risk of
discord in the Australian community."
Minister did not dilute the requirement of a risk of inciting discord to one of
mere disagreement or debate.
questions of law as stated in the special case should be amended to reflect
Ms Owens Farmer's submissions and answered as follows:
Migration Act
in its application by reliance
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
invalid because it unjustifiably burdens the implied
freedom of political communication?
(2) If the answer to question 1 is "no", is the Decision invalid on the ground
that the Minister adopted an incorrect construction
s 501(6)(d)(iv)?
(3) If the answer to question 1 or question 2 is "yes", what, if any, relief
should be granted to the plaintiff?
Unnecessary to answer.
(4) Who should pay the costs of the special case?
The plaintiff.
I refer to the facts of the special case described by Gageler CJ,
Gordon and Beech-Jones JJ and to their Honours' description
the relevant provisions of the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) ("the
"). I agree that
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is a valid law. However,
I have reached that conclusion for a reason which differs from that of
Gageler CJ, Gordon and Beech-Jones
JJ. I am of the view that
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
did not "effectively burden freedom of communication about
government or political matters either in its terms, operation or effect"
the first limb of the test in
Lange v Australian Broadcasting
Corporation
follows that it is unnecessary for me to consider whether the impugned law is
justified. Four propositions compel this conclusion.
They are set out
that respect I also gratefully agree with the construction of "incite
discord" in
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
preferred by Gageler CJ, Gordon and
Beech-Jones JJ. The preferable construction of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
it is concerned with where, in the event that the person were allowed to enter
or to remain in Australia, there is a risk
that the person would stir up or
encourage dissension or strife in the Australian community, or a segment of that
community, of a
kind or to a degree that causes relevant harm. It follows that
I also agree with Gageler CJ, Gordon and Beech-Jones JJ that the
did not adopt an incorrect construction of
s 501(6)(d)(iv).
Proposition one: Parliament has an
unfettered power to decide when an alien may or may not enter Australia
is a basal constitutional proposition that
Constitution
(the "naturalization and aliens" power) supplies Parliament
with an unfettered power to pass laws which determine which aliens may
Australia and which may not. In that respect, a law which denied entry to all
aliens would be valid. The capacity to control
the frontiers of Australia in
this way is a fundamental attribute of sovereignty which of necessity cannot be
Section 501(6)(d)(iv) is a law of this kind. By giving the Minister a power
to refuse a visa to an alien who might incite discord
upon entry (it also being
in the national interest to exclude that person), Australia's sovereignty is
protected and enhanced.
foregoing has been accepted by this Court as a fundamental attribute of
statehood since the decision in
Robtelmes v Brenan
principles were affirmed in 1992 in
Lim v Minister for
Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic
Deane and Dawson JJ
legislative power conferred by
with respect to 'aliens' is
expressed in unqualified terms. ... [A] law may, without trespassing beyond the
reach of the legislative
power conferred by
, either exclude the
entry of non-citizens or a particular class of non-citizens into Australia or
prescribe conditions upon which
they may be permitted to enter and remain; and
it may also provide for their expulsion or deportation."
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte
, Gleeson CJ said of
that this Court, following the
opinion of international jurists, and decisions of courts of the highest
authority in England and
the United States, had held that "it is an attribute of
sovereignty that every State is entitled to decide what aliens shall or shall
not become members of its
community".
Gleeson CJ expressly referred to and approved the following passage from
the judgment of Major and Binnie JJ of the Supreme Court
of Canada in
Mitchell v Minister of National
over the mobility of persons and goods into one country is, and always has been,
a fundamental attribute of sovereignty.
'It is commonly accepted that sovereign states have the right to control both
who and what enters their boundaries. For the general
welfare of the nation the
state is expected to perform this role.'"
in 2015, in
CPCF v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
Keane J observed that it was "well-settled that the power of the Executive
Government under the common law to deny entry into Australia
of a non-citizen
such as the plaintiff, including by compulsion, is an incident of Australia's
sovereign power as a
recently, in 2018, in
Falzon v Minister for Immigration and Border
"As a sovereign nation, Australia has the sole right to decide which
non-citizens shall be permitted to enter and remain in this
Consequently, as was decided in
Robtelmes v Brenan
and has ever since
been regarded as settled law, Parliament has power under
Constitution
to make laws for the deportation of non-citizens for
whatever reason Parliament thinks fit. And, as Gibbs CJ observed in
Pochi v Macphee
, it is only to be expected that it should be so; for such
a power is essential to national security."
in 2021, in
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs v Moorcroft
, this Court, citing Nettle J in
, unanimously stated that Parliament has the "sole right to decide
which non-citizens shall be permitted to enter and remain in
Australia".
the unqualified potency and importance of the power to decide when, if ever,
a given alien, or class of aliens, may be permitted
entry to this country,
during oral argument I raised with the Solicitor-General of the
Commonwealth the possibility that the implied
freedom of political communication
might be directly inconsistent with such a power, and thus of no application at
all. The Solicitor-General
said it was unnecessary to embrace such a proposition
because, he contended, it was clear that s 501(6)(d)(iv) did not in
impose a burden on freedom of political communication. With respect,
that contention is correct for the reasons given below. It is
otherwise unnecessary to determine whether the implied freedom may apply
distributively, and then in different strengths,
depending upon which head of
Constitution
Proposition two: the plaintiff has no liberty or right
to enter Australia
Proposition
two addresses whether s 501(6)(d)(iv) imposes a
burden on the
implied freedom; that is, does it impose a relevant burden on the plaintiff's
freedom of political communication? In
that respect, the first limb of the
test seeks to ascertain whether the impugned law (here,
s 501(6)(d)(iv)) effectively burdens freedom of communication about
or political matters either in its terms, operation or
important limb – not to be skated over (as it appears to have been in the
which must be applied in the context of protecting the function of ss 7 and
Constitution
is now very much settled law – by reason of what McHugh, Gummow, Hayne,
Callinan and Heydon JJ expressly approved in
Mulholland v Australian
which was approved again by Gordon, Edelman and Gleeson JJ (with whom
I agreed) in
Ruddick v The
Commonwealth
and again in
Babet v The
Commonwealth
– that the following proposition, taken from
foundational:
"[The implied freedom] gives immunity from the operation of laws that inhibit a
right or privilege to communicate political and government
matters. But, as
shows, that right or privilege must exist under the general law."
, McHugh J observed that a
prohibiting
persons from entering a hunting area did not burden the implied freedom, even
though some of those persons wished to
enter that area to protest against the
hunting of ducks. That is because they had no pre-existing lawful right of entry
area. His Honour
"The constitutional implication does not create rights. It merely invalidates
laws that improperly impair a person's freedom to communicate
political and
government matters relating to the Commonwealth to other members of the
Australian community. It gave the protesters
no right to enter the hunting area.
That means that, unless the common law or Victorian statute law gave them a
right to enter that
area, it was the lack of that right, and not the
Regulations, that destroyed their opportunity to make their political protest."
similar effect, Nettle J observed in
Brown v Tasmania
implied freedom does not supply a licence to do what is otherwise
It does not
"authorise or justify trespass to land or chattels, nuisance or the besetting of
business premises, or negligent conduct
And to like
effect Edelman J observed in
"[T]he constraint only applies to State or Commonwealth legislative power if
there is a 'burden on the freedom'. This phrase is not
entirely apt but it
signifies that the constitutional implication only constrains legislative power
where that power is exercised
to impede legal freedom to communicate about
government and political matters. If the conduct about which legislation is
is independently unlawful, so that there was no legal freedom to
communicate about government or political matters, then there can
be no 'burden'
on the freedom. The implied constraint upon legislative power cannot operate."
foundational principle is a fundamental feature of an implication that does not
confer anything akin to a "First Amendment"
right, but which instead is a limit
on legislative power. The focus remains on whether a given impugned law
burdens a pre-existing
liberty or right conferred by law. The focus is not on
whether there are any limitations on political communication or the capacity
so communicate; rather, the focus is on whether there are burdens on the
"freedom" to make those political communications. The
inquiry which must be made
is to identify what pre-existing law gave or supplied that "freedom" and whether
the impugned law now
burdens it.
importance of the foregoing is rendered critical in a case where the "freedom"
in question derives from the exercise of a power
conferred by a law which forms
part of a broader scheme of regulation, and which may be the subject of
legislative change from time
to time. As Edelman J observed in
"The baseline, or counterfactual, for the implied freedom of political
communication therefore requires that the common law (as adapted
to conform to
Constitution
), and any other law separate from the scheme of which
the impugned law forms part, respect the exercise of the liberty said to be
burdened. ...
This reasoning applies with even greater force where an asserted and
so-called 'freedom' is really a legal power (such as for a political
register with the effect of being included on a ballot paper) that exists only
by virtue of a scheme of which the impugned
law itself forms an essential part.
The provisions of the entire scheme of which the challenged law forms a part are
not independent
of the challenged law. Although such a scheme might be defined
at different levels of generality, the need for an independent freedom,
contrary to common law or statute, before a burden on that freedom can be found
has been expressly affirmed numerous times. A
burden will therefore be
denied not merely where no common law liberty exists but also where a valid or
unchallenged law, independent
of any scheme of which the challenged law forms an
essential part, has removed the liberty upon which the asserted freedom of
communication depends."
it was submitted that s 501(6)(d)(iv) imposed a burden on the freedom of
political communication because it, in combination
with the operative provision
contained in s 501(3)(a), prevented the plaintiff from expressing her
political views in Australia.
In that respect, it was not disputed that the
plaintiff was entirely free to communicate her beliefs using other means that
necessitate her physical presence in Australia. She could, for
example, have: given speeches virtually; sent emails containing her
views; used,
and no doubt does use, social media; and/or written a book which might have been
sold here, or distributed for free.
Thus, the only burden which
s 501(6)(d)(iv) could have imposed was to deny her the benefit of
expressing her views in person in this
country. This is sometimes described as
the "lightning bolt" effect of speaking in public.
the plaintiff had no pre-existing right conferred by the common law or by
statute to enter Australia to avoid the so-called detriment
of being denied the
"lightning bolt" effect of her words being spoken in person in this country.
Indeed, absent an exercise of the
power by the Minister to issue her with a
visa, all other means of entry would have been illegal. The implied freedom
cannot undo
that reality and otherwise supply her with a lawful means of
admission to Australia. The plaintiff's attempts to avoid that consequence,
considered below, should be rejected.
and in any event, the implied freedom is concerned with a law that
effectively
burden[s]" the freedom of political
communication;
burden must be real and not theoretical. The implied freedom is not concerned
with any kind of burden, or, in particular, with
burdens that do not
realistically affect political communication. As French CJ observed in
Tajjour v New South Wales
, "an effective burden is unlikely to be
inferred simply from the forensic construction of causal connections between the
some unlikely hypothetical restriction on the implied
not infer that denial of the "lightning bolt" effect constitutes an effective or
real burden on the plaintiff's ability to
promote her message to members of the
Australian public, and for the Australian public to have the capacity to consume
message, especially given the very many different (and unprohibited)
means of such promotion that exist in the 21st century. Nor
do any of the
agreed facts set out in the special case support a contrary conclusion. The will
of the Australian people, as expressed
by Parliament, should not be cast aside
by merely nugacious things.
whilst the references in ss 7 and
Constitution
"people" are not limited to those entitled to vote in a federal
it certainly
does not include aliens who have been denied lawful entry into Australia. The
plaintiff has never been a member of the
"people" of Australia. At the very
least, whilst remaining out of Australia, she has no right to invoke the
protection afforded by
the implied freedom or to use it as a means of entry. It
simply does not apply to
these reasons, s 501(6)(d)(iv) imposes no
burden on the
implied freedom of political communication.
Proposition three:
the "people" have no liberty or right to listen –
– to an alien who has not been permitted to enter
Proposition
three is concerned with whether s 501(6)(d)(iv) imposes a burden on the
doctrine of the implied freedom which is
; that is, does it
impose a burden on the ability of the "people" of Australia to receive the
plaintiff's political communications?
doctrine is plainly concerned with laws that seek to impose an effective burden
on doing something; that something is communication
by a person to another, or
to a group of individuals, or to the world. As Gageler J observed in
"Within the scope of that freedom is not simply communication on governmental or
political matter
electors (allowing for each individually to make an
informed electoral choice) but communication on governmental or political matter
electors (allowing for those electors collectively to communicate
with other electors and with government)."
implied freedom protects any form of communication. As Brennan CJ observed
, "actions as well as words can communicate
implied freedom is directed at laws which effectively prevent or impair a person
from a lawfully supported act of communication.
contrast, no decided authority of this Court has condemned a law because of some
perceived burden on a person or persons from
listening to or otherwise consuming
political communication. That is unsurprising. The human capacity to hear sound
cannot be undone
by any law. There is thus no pre-existing liberty or right,
conferred by the common law or by statute, to listen to political communication.
If such a communication is in fact made to a person, or group of people, who can
hear, the law has no capacity to burden or impede
its inexorable auditory
receipt. What the law can burden or impair is the making of the communication,
or a person taking steps to
receive it.
it is said, s 501(6)(d)(iv), in combination with s 501(3)(a), does
precisely that: it stops Australians from listening to the
plaintiff's messages.
But that expresses the burden too broadly. For the reasons expressed above,
s 501 does not prevent Australians
from receiving material from the
plaintiff, save in only one instance. The one instance is that they cannot hear
from the plaintiff
in this country
. In that respect they
are – but only in part – denied the so-called "lightning bolt"
effect. That is only a partial denial
because, naturally, Australians can travel
freely to the United
or any other
country that will permit the plaintiff entry – and then enjoy the
"lightning bolt" effect in full. If it mattered,
I would not consider the
cost of travel in the 21st century as necessarily being in itself a practical
burden on the implied freedom.
the common law or statute confer upon the people of Australia a liberty or right
from an alien such as the plaintiff
? Does s 501(6)(d)(iv) burden that liberty or right because it
gives the Minister a power to refuse the plaintiff the grant of a visa?
answer to the first question is "no". And it is so for the same reasons as those
given in respect of proposition two. No citizen
enjoys the liberty of permitting
any alien to enter this country, whether for the purposes of furthering
political communication,
or, indeed, for any purpose. No citizen can defy the
Migration Act
. No citizen can insist that he or she consume in Australia
political messages personally from an alien who has no lawful right of
this country. And in any event, no citizen is a party to this
proceeding.
these reasons,
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
burden on the
implied freedom of political communication.
Proposition four: the
decision in
is dispositive and cannot be distinguished
The principle in Mulholland
decision in
concerned the validity of provisions in an Act which, like the
Migration Act
regulated conduct – namely the
Commonwealth Electoral Act 1918
(Cth) ("the Electoral Act"). And like the
Migration Act
, the Electoral Act
contains a great number of complex rules; rules which are subject, from time to
time, to amendment by Parliament.
No party suggested that
should be overruled.
, the impugned laws required a political party to have at least
500 members in order to be eligible to be registered as a political
under the Electoral Act ("the
500 rule").
scheme for registration had been introduced in 1983, and later amended in 2000
and 2001. Registration conferred certain benefits,
such as having a candidate's
party affiliation appear on a ballot paper. The appellant, Mr Mulholland,
was the registered officer
of the Democratic Labor Party ("the DLP"). That party
did not have 500 members. He challenged the validity of the
500 rule on the
ground that it infringed the implied freedom of political
communication. A plurality of five Justices of this Court – being
Gummow, Hayne, Callinan and Heydon JJ – held that the 500 rule
placed no burden on the implied freedom.
decided that because the DLP had no right to make communications on political
matters on a ballot paper other than what
the Electoral Act permitted, the
500 rule could not impose a relevant burden. His Honour referred to
his judgment in
and re-affirmed that the burden "must be on a right
or privilege to communicate under the common law or under a statute that the
plaintiff already
short answer to the claim that the challenged provisions burden political
communications by the DLP to electors is that the restrictions
conditions of the entitlement to have a party's name placed on the ballot-paper.
The restrictions do not burden rights of
communication on political and
government matters that exist independently of the entitlement. Any political
communication that is
involved in the delivery and lodging of a ballot-paper
results solely from the Commission's statutory obligation to hold elections
deliver ballot-papers in the prescribed form, and from the rights of parties and
candidates to have their identities marked on
the ballot-paper."
and Hayne JJ were of the same view. Mr Mulholland's case faced, they
reasoned, "a significant threshold
obstacle was that Mr Mulholland enjoyed no freedom conferred by law to have
the name of the DLP appear on the ballot
respect, Gummow and Hayne JJ referenced with approval McHugh J's
judgment in
also agreed that the 500 rule imposed no burden on the implied freedom of
political communication. The rights created
by the Electoral Act were "entirely
statutory" and Mr Mulholland had no "relevant rights other than such rights
as may be conferred
on him by [that]
His Honour made
reference to
"As the appellant has no relevant
to the imposition of an
obligation upon another, to communicate a particular matter, he has no right
which is capable of being burdened.
The appellant is seeking a privilege, not to
vindicate or avail himself of a right. He can communicate his affiliation with
as a candidate in any way and at any time that he wishes. What he cannot
do is compel the respondent to do so in a way which would
effectively
discriminate in his favour, and would be tantamount to treatment of him as
having a relevant
Heydon J also applied McHugh J's reasons in
and thus found
that the 500 rule imposed no burden on the implied freedom. His Honour
"[T]here is no interference with any implied freedom of political communication
in these circumstances because it is necessary that
there be some relevant
'right or privilege ... under the general law' to be interfered with. In the
absence of legislation permitting
it, there is no right in any political party
or candidate to have party affiliation indicated on the ballot paper. Indeed,
the appellant
conceded that a legislative prohibition on the appearance of any
party affiliation on the ballot paper would not contravene the implied
already mentioned, the principle that there can be no burden on any implied
freedom of political communication unless there be
some relevant right or
privilege or liberty conferred under the general law which is then impaired is
the settled law of this Court.
As mentioned above, that principle was expressly
re-affirmed in
and more recently in
. There is no
logical basis for confining that principle to cases concerning the Electoral
Act. After all, the principle is derived
, which concerned
regulations about duck hunting in Victoria.
the reasons given above, neither the plaintiff, nor, if relevant, the people of
Australia, enjoyed any pre-existing right, privilege
or liberty that allowed for
the plaintiff to enter Australia. Any such right of entry was only conferred by
Migration Act
– pursuant to which
is a fundamental part of
how entry into this country is to be regulated. It follows that the Minister's
decision to refuse the plaintiff
a visa, by an application of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
, imposed no relevant burden. That conclusion is mandated by
the foregoing reasons, any attempt now to read down, confine, or cast aside
is doctrinally misconceived. That is not to deny that it is
open to a Justice of this Court to criticise
. Judges do not
exist within a gulag where critical thought is banned or censored. Rather, the
duty of a judge is to criticise doctrine
where it is wrong, but nonetheless to
apply it faithfully when it is binding precedent. In that respect
otherwise expressly endorse the observation of Edelman J that "[d]ebate
plaintiff's attempt to distinguish Mulholland
plaintiff sought to distinguish the principle settled in
two ways. Neither is sustainable. The first basis relied upon the proposition
that the plaintiff satisfied all of the other legal
requirements for the grant
of her visa, but for
s 501(6)(d)(iv).
This was said to be the pre-existing
right or privilege which
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
then effectively burdened. With
respect, no such right existed. That is so for two reasons.
the proposition fails on the agreed facts of the special case. Those facts
record the disagreement of the parties as to whether
the plaintiff had satisfied
the requirements of public interest criterion 4001 as mandated by
cl 408.216(1) of Sch 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
as well as the character test in
Migration Act
. The plaintiff
contends that she did satisfy these requirements; the defendants say she did
not. As such, on the case before this
Court, no right of entry, with or without
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
, has ever existed.
and in any event, in order for the plaintiff to be entitled to a visa she had to
satisfy a number of conditions; they
needed to be made out. In that
respect, the power to issue a visa reposed in the Minister by
Migration Act
is expressly bound up with the power of refusal conferred by
s 501(3)(a)
, which in turn is informed by the definition of the "character
test" found in
Thus, pursuant to
the Minister
cannot issue a visa if its grant is "prevented" by, amongst other provisions,
of the Act. Here the Minister was not satisfied that the plaintiff
satisfied the character test. As a result, the suggested right
or privilege
never existed.
that respect, there was debate about whether a
pre-existing
privilege can only ever exist if it is conferred by a statute different from
that containing the impugned law (or inferentially
by the common law). The
plaintiff accepted that where the impugned provision is the very provision which
confers the right or privilege
said to be burdened, the
principle applies. She also accepted that, where the impugned provision is
inseverable from the provision which confers the right
or privilege, the
principle also applies. But not otherwise. Here it was said that
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is severable from the
Migration Act
respect, the distinctions sought to be drawn are somewhat arid and unreal. The
question to be asked is simply: without the impugned
provision, would a person
or people enjoy a right or privilege conferred on them by the law, which is
impaired or denied by that
provision? In
, the law conferred no right
to trespass. In
, the law conferred no right to have party
affiliation appear on the ballot paper. Here, for the reasons given above, the
Migration Act
generally confers no right on an alien of entry to Australia, and
specifically conferred no such right on the plaintiff.
even if the plaintiff's expression of the principle from
correct, again it avails her not. That is because one cannot simply sever
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
from the power to issue visas conferred by
a basal requirement for the grant of a visa that the Minister is satisfied that
does not prevent its issue. In that respect,
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
entirely analogous with the 500 rule considered in
that it forms part of the regulation by the
Migration Act
of which aliens may
enter Australia and when they may do so. It is the
Migration Act
itself, and
nothing else, which gives an alien the liberty of such entry. Conjuring up a
comparison between a world with and then
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
no assistance. A world without
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is simply a fictitious
second basis for distinguishing
was said to be the existence
of a burden on political communication that would have taken place in Australia,
amongst Australians,
but for the refusal of the plaintiff's visa request. It was
said that these communications would have taken place at in‑person
gatherings had the plaintiff been permitted entry to this country, and would not
now take place in her absence. With respect, given
the very many ways the
plaintiff was and is able to communicate with Australians without the need to be
physically present in this
country, that suggested burden is but speculation. It
is not supported by any fact in the agreed special
Disposition
with the answers to the questions of law posed by the special case given by
Gageler CJ, Gordon and Beech-Jones JJ.
Introduction
Farmer, "the new face of black conservatism" and an "outspoken and fearless
American conservative social commentator, author,
activist, and YouTube
sensation", planned to undertake a speaking tour in Australia in November 2024.
Being a non-citizen, Ms Farmer
required a visa to enter
She applied
for a Temporary Activity (Class GG) visa ("the visa"), which was refused
pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
write separately to explain why, in my view, the exclusion of a non-citizen from
Australia by operation of the "character test"
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
does not effectively burden the implied freedom of
political communication. In short, the asserted burden would: (1) extend the
freedom beyond its constitutional purpose; (2) be inconsistent with the
absence of a constitutional right to engage in political
communication; (3)
relate to no existing right, freedom or immunity; and (4) unjustifiably
attribute the character of an "effective
burden" upon the implied freedom to
incidental and remote consequences of
s 501(6)(d)(iv).
As to the last matter,
the special case does not adequately demonstrate how
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
effectively limit political communication between a non-citizen and members of
the Australian community, so as to justify a
conclusion that
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
effectively burdens the implied freedom.
as stated below, I agree with the reasons of Gageler CJ, Gordon and Beech-Jones
The relevant statutory framework
2 April 1984, the Commonwealth Parliament has relied on the aliens power in
Constitution
to sustain the
The "settled
understanding" of the aliens power is that it gives the Commonwealth Parliament
power to "determine who is and who is
not to have the legal status of an alien
and power to attach consequences to that
Consistently
with that understanding, the
Migration Act
provides for a system of visas
permitting non-citizens to enter or remain in Australia.
to presently immaterial exceptions, by
, after considering a valid
application for a visa, the Minister is "to grant the visa" unless barred from
doing so by
Migration Act
Section 501(3)
Migration Act
confers a discretionary power on the Minister to refuse to
grant a visa if two conditions exist. The first is that the Minister reasonably
suspects that a person does not pass the "character test". The second is that
the Minister is satisfied that the refusal of the visa
is in the national
interest. Relevantly for this case, by
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
, a person will not pass
the character test if "in the event the person were allowed to enter or to
remain in Australia, there is
a risk that the person would ... incite discord in
the Australian community or in a segment of that community". In short,
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
, when read with
Migration Act
, operates as a legislative roadblock to obtaining a visa to
enter Australia if the visa applicant is judged by the Minister to pose
of inciting "discord".
the reasons that Gageler CJ, Gordon and Beech-Jones JJ give, I agree with their
interpretation of the words "incite discord in
the Australian community or in a
segment of that community" in
s 501(6)(d)(iv).
The primary purpose of
Migration Act
is the protection of the Australian
The purpose
of protecting the Australian community is not advanced by preventing a risk of
inciting discord that is harmless or is
harmful only to a trivial extent. The
risk of inciting discord concerns the possible adverse impact of a person's
conduct upon the
Australian community (or a segment of that community), which
might include (for example) destruction of property or divisiveness
violence, such as acts of exclusion, denigration, segregation or boycotts, or
other conduct that engenders fear of such
harm in the community or in a segment
of the community.
legislative history assists to explain why the provision is not engaged by less
serious conduct which is apt merely to cause
displeasure, discomfort or upset to
members of the Australian community. The catalyst for the original introduction
of the character
test in s 180A of the
renumbered as
ultimately reenacted
which conferred a power on the Minister to refuse a visa or entry permit where
the Minister was satisfied that a person would "incite
discord in the Australian
community or in a segment" thereof, was a successful challenge to the decision
to exclude from Australia
members of the Hells Angels Motorcycle Club (who were
non-citizens) on the basis of "public interest"
considerations.
Section 180A was therefore enacted to "enable[] the Minister to exclude
from Australia persons of bad character and other undesirable
the Minister's Second Reading Speech the Hon Gerard Hand MP said that
"[t]he power is intended to be exercised in a manner consistent
well-accepted Australian
Theophanous MP, the Member for Calwell and a member of the governing party at
the time, further identified the focus of
"The Minister has put forward a Bill which will give the Minister the power to
exclude certain people who have committed offences
or whom for several reasons
it is undesirable to have in Australia. The kind of person we are thinking about
is someone who specialises
in preaching messages of hatred and racial tension,
someone who wants to promulgate extreme views about violence, or someone who
a criminal record ... [T]his power is not intended to be exercised against
people for political motives. It is intended to be
exercised in the sorts of
cases that I mentioned – for example, extremists, violent people and
people preaching hatred or violence.
It is not intended to be used against
people who have a political philosophy different from that of the Government or
the Opposition
or who may have different views on industrial relations or
industrial democracy."
The Minister's decision
Minister for Home Affairs and Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
Affairs, the Hon Tony Burke MP, suspected that Ms Farmer
did not pass the
character test because, if she was allowed to enter Australia, "there is a risk
she would incite discord in the
Australian community or a segment of the
Australian community". He was also satisfied that it was in the national
interest to refuse
to grant Ms Farmer a visa. The Minister therefore refused to
grant the visa to Ms Farmer.
reaching that state of satisfaction, the Minister found that Ms Farmer had a
history of making "extremist and inflammatory comments
towards Muslim, Black,
Jewish and LGBTQIA+ communities" and that there was a risk that her
"controversial views [would] amplify grievances
among communities and lead to
increased hostility and violent or radical action" if she were allowed into
Australia to express those
views. Although the Minister found that Ms Farmer had
an existing ability to incite discord through her online presence, he concluded
that Ms Farmer's physical presence in Australia would amplify that
potential, including because her events "would attract onshore
media attention,
including main stream media and her shows would garner interest".
Minister did not state what he understood to amount to "a risk that [a] person
would ... incite discord in the Australian community",
but the following aspects
of the Minister's reasons shed light on how he assessed whether there was a
relevant risk: (1) information
collected by the Minister which the Minister
found to "describe the causal link between individuals who promote and encourage
wing extremism via online platforms and how this supports greater intent
and capacity to [undertake] violent acts";
(2) the Minister's observation
that "inflammatory rhetoric can lead to increased hate crimes,
radicalisation of individuals and heightened tensions in communities";
(3) the Minister's reference to the claim by the perpetrator of the lethal
attacks on two mosques in 2019 in Christchurch, New Zealand,
that he was most
influenced to carry them out by Ms Farmer;
and (4) the Minister's
finding that there was a "risk that Ms Farmer's controversial views will
amplify grievances among communities
and lead to increased hostility and violent
or radical action".
fairly and as a whole,
the Minister took the view, having regard to advice from Australian security
agencies, that there is a risk that Ms Farmer would
incite discord because her
views may lead to an increase in physical violence, including acts causing death
or physical injury, and
extending to the generation of "controversy and hatred",
manifested by "heightened tensions in communities" and "increased hostility"
within the Australian community.
The scope of the implied
freedom is limited by its constitutional purpose
Constitutional
implications, of which the implied freedom is perhaps the best-known Australian
example, are only recognised where
they are "logically or practically necessary
for the preservation of the integrity of the constitutional
structure".
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
the identified need
was for the protection of freedom of communication between "the people"
concerning governmental or political matters
that enables "the people" to
exercise a free and informed choice as
Court declared that "each member of the Australian community has an interest in
disseminating and receiving information,
opinions and arguments concerning
government and political matters that affect the people of
Australia",
had occasion to consider whether the text and structure of the
Constitution
makes it logically and practically necessary for political
communications emanating from a non-citizen to be imported for the benefit
"the people" exercising a free and informed choice as electors.
Levy v Victoria
McHugh J referred to the fact that the
Constitution
protects "the freedom of 'the people of the Commonwealth'
(the members of the Australian community) to communicate with each other
concerning those political and government matters that are relevant to the
system of representative and responsible government provided
Constitution
Court later extended the coverage of protected communication as "between
electors and legislators and the officers of the executive,
and between electors
themselves".
Subsequently,
Unions NSW v New South Wales
Unions No 1
plurality observed that the Court's declaration in
also implies
that a free flow of communication between "all interested persons" is necessary
for the maintenance of representative
government.
Recognising that political communication is "not simply a two-way affair between
electors and government or candidates", their Honours
extended the conception of
the protected communications to communications involving members of the
community (including entities
such as unions and political parties) "who are not
electors but who are governed and are affected by decisions of
government".
Tajjour v New South Wales
Keane J explained that "[t]he
constitutional guarantee to the people of the Commonwealth of a free and
informed choice as electors
ensures free communication between them as equal
participants in the exercise of political
sovereignty".
Honour had earlier said that "the primary consideration must be that the flow of
political communication within the federation
is required to be kept free in
order to preserve the political sovereignty of the people of the
Commonwealth".
Brown v Tasmania
Gordon J also referred to the need for "a free
flow of political communication within the federation" which must be "between
and representatives and 'between all persons, groups and other bodies
in the community'".
Farm Transparency International Ltd v New South
Gageler J (with whom I relevantly agreed), in describing the
"precept of
referred to the scope of the protected
communication as "to and between electors, and between electors and elected
legislative and
representatives".
doubt, non-citizens both within Australia and outside of Australia contribute
information or ideas to debates within the Australian
community that are capable
of bearing on the formation of electoral choice. However, "[a]ny benefit to an
alien from the implication
must be indirect in the sense that it flows from the
freedom or immunity of those who are
implication extends
"the broad national environment in which the individual citizen exists and in
which representative government must operate. In the
context of that broad
national environment, the implication's confinement of the content of
legislative power protects the freedom
of communication and discussion of
non-citizens, be they corporations or aliens, to the extent necessary to ensure
that the freedom
of citizens to engage in discussion and obtain information
The subject matter covered by the implied freedom
Unions No 1
the plurality affirmed that a wide view is to be
taken of the subject matter of communications protected by the implied freedom.
view was said to be justified by the "complex interrelationship between
levels of government, issues common to State and federal
government and the
levels at which political parties
Honours affirmed that "statements made by electors or candidates or those
working for a candidate, during an election, to electors
in a State electorate,
concerning the record and suitability of a candidate for election to a State
Parliament ... are at the heart
of the freedom of communication protected by the
Constitution
Coleman v Power
it was accepted that a man distributing pamphlets
containing charges of police corruption was engaging in political
communication.
Monis v The Queen
Hayne J rejected a suggested distinction
between communications "properly" the subject of the implied freedom and
personal attacks
made upon the deceased, who was a soldier killed on active
service in Afghanistan, saying that the whole of each communication was,
and substance, a political communication about whether Australian forces should
be engaged in
Afghanistan.
Clubb v Edwards
Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ proceeded on the
basis that communications about whether governments should encourage or
discourage terminations
of pregnancy and whether laws should be changed to
restrict or facilitate terminations were political, in contrast to
communications
that were designed to persuade a recipient against having a
termination as a matter for the individual being
recently, in
Farm Transparency
discussion of animal welfare was
identified by Kiefel CJ and Keane J as a "legitimate matter of governmental and
political concern
and a matter in respect of which persons may seek to influence
government" so as to constitute communication for the purposes of
the implied
the subject matter covered by the implied freedom is not confined to matters of
demonstrated present relevance to the laws,
policies and operation of the
Commonwealth Parliament. It may extend to matters of political controversy or
social importance in
Australia, including matters of international political or
social controversy that may invite voters to think about the government
Australia in a way that could affect their electoral
conduct that poses a risk of inciting discord in the Australian community or a
segment of it within the meaning of s 501(6)(d)(iv)
may comprise or include
political communication will be a question of fact in an individual case.
Farmer sought to argue that s 501(6)(d)(iv) has the practical effect of
depriving members of the Australian community of the opportunity
to hear from
her on matters of political or government interest. The facts were sparse as to
that practical effect. Ms Farmer was
"invited" by a communications and marketing
firm to be the main speaker at the "Candace Owens Live Events" across Australia.
annexures to the special case suggest that, if permitted to enter Australia,
Ms Farmer wished to discuss matters of broad political
relevance such as
Islam, Israel and the Jewish peoples, and people who identify as LGBTQIA+. There
are no facts agreed by the parties
which provide any gauge of the interest of
members of the Australian body politic who may wish to attend to hear Ms Farmer
cannot be assumed that discussion about the topics upon which Ms Farmer
proposed to speak will necessarily involve political communication
relevant kind.
example, such discussion may concern personal identity or international affairs
or religious dogma in a way that is not capable
of bearing on electoral choice.
Accepting the breadth of the subject matter covered by the implied freedom, the
special case did
not demonstrate that Ms Farmer's intended discussion about
matters of potential political relevance would involve or generate political
communication in the relevant sense.
The implied freedom only
protects existing rights, freedoms and immunities
constitutionally implied freedom of political communication is not a personal
and does not
create "an affirmative right to engage in political
communication".
a "freedom from governmental action" as distinct from "a right to require others
to provide a means of
communication".
implication is negative in nature: it invalidates laws and consequently creates
an area of immunity from legal
The negative
aspect of the implication was emphasised in the following passage of
"[A]lthough it is true that the requirement of freedom of communication is a
consequence of the Constitution's system of representative
and responsible
government, it is the requirement and not a right of communication that is to be
found in the
Constitution
. Unlike the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution
, which has been interpreted to confer private rights, our
Constitution
contains no express right of freedom of communication or
expression. Within our legal system, communications are free only to the
that they are left unburdened by laws that comply with the
Constitution
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
CJ referred to the choice made by the framers of the
Constitution
incorporate comprehensive guarantees of individual rights, accepting "that the
citizen's rights were best left to the protection
of the common law in
association with the doctrine of parliamentary
supremacy".
Recognising
Constitution
does not confer a right of free speech, the implied
freedom has been conceived of as an "immunity from legal regulation created ...
Constitution
and a freedom "to act without legal
Theophanous v Herald & Weekly Times Ltd
explained that, by limiting
or confining legislative power, the implied freedom "gives rise to a pro tanto
immunity on the part of
the citizen from being adversely affected by" impugned
In other words,
the implied freedom of political communication is "the area of immunity which
cannot be infringed by a law of the
Commonwealth, a law of a State or a law of
those Territories whose residents are entitled to exercise the federal
franchise".
Constitution
"gives immunity from the operation of laws that inhibit a
right or privilege to communicate political and government
implied freedom does not require the legislature to pass laws to improve or
maximise opportunities for political communication,
or to provide access to
information. As Deane and Toohey JJ put it in
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v
"[t]he implication is not, of course, that the people of the
Commonwealth will have free access to all the means of communication
express guarantee of freedom of interstate trade, commerce and
intercourse a guarantee of free transportation. It is an implication
from legislative prohibition and burdensome
interference."
implied freedom is not a "freedom
communicate. It is a freedom
laws that effectively prevent" certain political
communications.
conception of the implied freedom was determinative for five members of the
Mulholland v Australian Electoral
and for the majority in
Ruddick v The
Commonwealth
both cases concerning electoral laws. Their Honours endorsed the
proposition, first articulated by McHugh J in
qualified immunity afforded by the implied freedom concerns the operation of
laws that inhibit a right or privilege to communicate
governmental or political
matters relevant to the system of representative and responsible government that
"exist under the general
Finding that
protesters against duck shooting had no right to enter the hunting area in which
their protest was conducted, McHugh
J considered that it was the lack of a
pre-existing legal right to entry and not the impugned law itself that
"destroyed" their opportunity
for political
McHugh J reiterated his view that "[p]roof of a burden
on the implied constitutional freedom requires proof that the challenged law
burdens a freedom that exists independently of that
Gummow and Hayne
JJ adopted McHugh J's reasoning in
on this point, and rejected
the possibility of a freedom "which descends deus ex
and confirmed
the necessity to identify the existence and nature of the "freedom" said to be
burdened by the impugned
considered that the appellant had to identify a relevant right to communicate a
particular matter, and concluded that
he had no right which was capable of being
also citing McHugh J in
, stated that there was no burden because
there was no "relevant 'right or privilege ... under the general law' to be
interfered with".
Heydon J observed that "[a]ll opportunities for communication that existed
before the impugned provisions were enacted continue to
Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ accepted that it was
logical "to approach the burden which a statute has on the freedom by reference
to what protesters could do were it not for the
In the same
Gageler J identified the relevant inquiry as involving a comparison
between "the practical ability of a person or persons to engage
in political
communication with the law; and the practical ability of that same person or
those same persons to engage in political
communication without the
cautioned against any suggestion that the implied freedom protects only
political communications in which persons have
some pre-existing legally
enforceable right to
has been observed that the classification of the implied freedom as "negative"
rather than "positive" is consistent with both
liberal philosophical tradition
and aspects of the common
At common law,
individual freedom of speech has historically been understood as a residual
liberty so that, subject to the principle
of legality, it is vulnerable to
impingement by legislative or executive
In that way,
the common law freedom encompasses but is not confined to legal rights for which
a remedy is available in the event
infringement.
The nature of an "effective burden"
" is that the determination of whether a law infringes
the implied freedom falls to be determined "within a standardised analytical
framework".
step in that framework is to ask whether the law, in its legal or practical
operation, "effectively burdens" communication
on governmental or political
this Court speaks of a legislative provision placing an "effective burden" on
such matters, it means "nothing more complicated
than that the effect of the law
is to prohibit, or put some limitation on, the making or the content of
communications".
However, the implied freedom is not concerned to protect laws having an
"insubstantial" or "adventitious" effect on political
communications.
all but exceptional cases, a law will not burden such communications unless, by
its operation or practical effect, it directly
and not remotely restricts or
limits the content of those communications or the time, place, manner or
conditions of their
occurrence."
for example, the burden in issue in
was the effect of the common
law of defamation of limiting the making or the content of political
communications by exposing the maker
the relevant burden was the effect of the law in precluding
the plaintiff from making his political protest within the "permitted
the relevant burdens comprised an obligation to seek and
obtain approval to interview a parolee outside a corrective services facility,
and a requirement for the observance of conditions by a parolee, where there was
a condition that the parolee not attend public meetings
without prior
has been accepted that a provision which has an indirect or incidental effect
upon communication about matters of government or
politics is sufficient to
amount to an "effective burden" on the implied
regard, the existence of a burden is not negated by the narrowness or perceived
unimportance of the category of political
communication that is affected by the
impugned law.
illustrate between them that both
direct and indirect restrictions on speech concerning governmental or political
matters may burden
the implied freedom. The law of defamation considered in
operates directly on communications generally, which may –
and in that case did – include political communication. The
operation of
did not directly prohibit or limit communication but had
that indirect effect by exposing protesters to sanction for their presence
the permitted hunting area. The laws in
operated upon Mr Wotton's
general freedom to participate in communications in interviews and at public
meetings, at which he may have
wished to discuss matters relating to Aboriginal
and Indigenous affairs. In
the relevant laws incidentally
burdened the implied freedom by, in simple terms, prohibiting communications
involving the use of a
postal service in a way that reasonable persons would
regard as being offensive.
Section 501(6)(d)(iv) does not
burden the implied freedom
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
is different from laws of
the kind that were in issue in
It does not impose civil liability for speech. It does not make it
an offence to speak in a specified area. It does not impose conditions
particular means of speech. Nor does it prohibit communications having certain
characteristics.
Section 501(6)(d)(iv)
does not in its terms operate to restrict
or limit the content of political communications or the time, place, manner or
of their occurrence. Nor does it operate to prohibit or limit
political communications by or to any member of the Australian community.
roadblock to the grant of a visa,
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
can be contrasted with the law
that permitted the imposition of conditions upon attending
public meetings, which had the effect of burdening political communication.
contrast, the grant of a visa is not the grant of permission to engage in
political speech: it is the grant of permission to enter
and remain in
501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
does not have the legal or practical
effect of burdening a pre-existing general law right, freedom or privilege. It
does not operate
as a "legal control" upon any political communications that an
Australian citizen could engage in but for that statutory provision.
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
has no independent legal effect: it does no more than
define circumstances in which a person will not meet the character test such
that, if other criteria are satisfied, the Minister may refuse to grant them a
the relevant question is, as suggested by Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ in
, what members of the Australian community, interested in Ms
Farmer's views on the above subjects, could do were it not for
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
the answer is "nothing". No member of the Australian community has a right to
compel the entry of a non-citizen into Australia without
a visa. That would be
directly contrary to the terms of the
Migration Act
. In any event, the
practical possibility that political communications are restricted or limited by
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
depends upon the additional contingencies that, apart from that
provision, the Minister would be satisfied that refusal is in the
interest; and despite the Minister's state of mind, the affected non-citizen
would nevertheless procure a visa, would enter
Australia in accordance with that
visa and thereafter would engage in political communications in Australia with
one or more Australians.
The Court cannot be satisfied of any of those matters.
substance, Ms Farmer seeks to extend the implied freedom to incorporate a right
of Australians to access information from outside
Australia, through restricting
the scope of the power to make laws about visas. That extension is not supported
by the text or structure
Constitution
or by the identified
constitutional purpose of the implied freedom.
the facts in this case did not demonstrate that members of the Australian
community would be deprived of any information
or communication if they did not
have access to Ms Farmer's ideas through her presence in Australia for
face-to-face debate, discussion
and questioning. It is notorious that political
engagement increasingly occurs through social media, as demonstrated by
Ms Farmer's
identity as a "YouTube sensation". Section 501(6)(d)(iv) does
not in any way prevent a person in Ms Farmer's situation from engaging
political communications with members of the Australian community, except on
Australian soil. It is far from obvious that Ms Farmer,
or anyone in her
situation, must be physically present in Australia to add anything to political
communications in Australia. In
the absence of evidence, or agreed facts, it is
not obvious that the opportunity to hear Ms Farmer speak in Australia (the
"lightning bolt" effect) could add anything to political communication
in Australia so that, by leading to the denial of her visa
application, s
501(6)(d)(iv) effectively burdened the implied freedom of communication on
governmental or political matters.
Ms Farmer has not succeeded in showing that s 501(6)(d)(iv) places an
effective burden on the implied freedom of political
communication, it is
unnecessary to examine whether any such burden is justified.
agree with the answers to the questions of law posed by the special case given
by Gageler CJ, Gordon and Beech-Jones JJ.
Issues to be decided
501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) provides that for the
purposes of
of that Act "a person does not pass the character test"
if "in the event the person were allowed to enter or to remain in Australia,
there is a risk that the person would: ... incite discord in the Australian
community or in a segment of that community". Under
of that Act,
the relevant Minister may (a) refuse to grant a visa to a person or (b) cancel a
visa that has been granted to a person
if "(c) the Minister reasonably
suspects that the person does not pass the character test; and (d) the
Minister is satisfied that
the refusal or cancellation is in the national
plaintiff, a resident of the United States, arranged to undertake a speaking
tour to Australia in which the plaintiff would speak
events around Australia. She applied for a Temporary Activity (Class GG)
Migration Act
. The Minister for Home Affairs
refused to grant the visa in accordance with
s 501(3)(a).
The Minister
reasonably suspected that the plaintiff did not pass the "character test"
because the Minister concluded that if permitted
to enter Australia, "there is a
risk [the plaintiff] would incite discord in the Australian community or a
segment of the Australian
community".
an amended application for a constitutional or other writ the plaintiff sought a
declaration that
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
is invalid,
certiorari to quash the decision of the Minister refusing to grant the plaintiff
a Temporary Activity (Class GG) visa
s 501(3)(a)
of that Act,
and mandamus requiring the Minister to grant the plaintiff such a visa or
requiring the Minister to remake the decision
in respect of the visa according
special case subsequently agreed between the parties identifies that the
declaration sought is based on the plaintiff's contention
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is invalid because it unjustifiably burdens the freedom of
political communication protected by implication into the
Constitution
The order for certiorari sought is based on the plaintiff's contention that in
making the decision to refuse the visa application
the Minister misconstrued
s 501(6)(d)(iv). The first order for mandamus is sought on the basis that,
as the decision to grant or
refuse a visa application is commanded by
Migration Act
, the Minister must grant the visa if
either of the plaintiff's contentions are accepted. The second order for
mandamus is sought
on the alternative basis that the plaintiff may not yet have
satisfied all requirements compelling the grant of the visa.
reasons for judgment explain that while
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
burdens the freedom
of political communication protected by the implication into the
Constitution
, the provision, properly construed, does so for an end,
object or purpose that is compatible with the maintenance of the
constitutionally
prescribed system of representative and responsible government
and in a manner and to an extent reasonably appropriate and adapted
to achieving
that legitimate end, object or
Accordingly,
s 501(6)(d)(iv) does not trespass into the zone of immunity from
legislative interference which the implication of the
freedom of political
communication into the
Constitution
creates. As will also be explained,
in making the decision to refuse the plaintiff's visa application, the Minister
did not materially
misconstrue s 501(6)(d)(iv) so as to vitiate the
Minister's decision. The plaintiff therefore cannot obtain the relief sought and
the substantive questions of law the parties posed in the special case are to be
answered in these terms:
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) invalid
because it unjustifiably burdens the implied freedom of political communication?
(2) If the answer to question 1 is "no", is the decision of the Minister to
refuse to grant the plaintiff the Temporary Activity
(Class GG) visa invalid on
the ground that the Minister adopted an incorrect construction of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)?
Statutory provisions
Migration Act
provides that, subject to immaterial
exceptions, a non-citizen must not travel to Australia without a visa that is in
a non-citizen who wants a visa must apply for a visa of
a particular class.
Section 65(1)
provides that, subject to immaterial
exceptions, after considering a valid application for a visa, the
"(a) if satisfied that:
(i) the health criteria for it (if any) have been satisfied; and
(ii) the other criteria for it prescribed by this Act or the regulations have
been satisfied; and
(iii) the grant of the visa is not prevented by section ... 501 (special power
to refuse or cancel) or any other provision of this
Act or of any other law of
the Commonwealth; and
(iv) any amount of visa application charge payable in relation to the
application has been paid;
is to grant the visa; or
(b) if not so satisfied, is to refuse to grant the visa."
includes provisions as follows:
"(1) The Minister may refuse to grant a visa to a person if the person does not
satisfy the Minister that the person passes the character
(3) The Minister may:
(a) refuse to grant a visa to a person; or
(b) cancel a visa that has been granted to a person;
(c) the Minister reasonably suspects that the person does not pass the character
(d) the Minister is satisfied that the refusal or cancellation is in the
national interest.
(4) The power under subsection (3) may only be exercised by the Minister
personally.
(6) For the purposes of this section, a person does not pass the
character test
(a) the person has a substantial criminal record (as defined by subsection (7));
(c) having regard to either or both of the following:
(i) the person's past and present criminal conduct;
(ii) the person's past and present general conduct;
the person is not of good character; or
(d) in the event the person were allowed to enter or to remain in Australia,
there is a risk that the person would:
(i) engage in criminal conduct in Australia; or
(ii) harass, molest, intimidate or stalk another person in Australia; or
(iii) vilify a segment of the Australian community; or
(iv) incite discord in the Australian community or in a segment of that
community; or
(v) represent a danger to the Australian community or to a segment of that
community, whether by way of being liable to become involved
in activities that
are disruptive to, or in violence threatening harm to, that community or
segment, or in any other way; or
(g) the person has been assessed by the Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation to be directly or indirectly a risk to security
(within the meaning
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation Act
(h) an Interpol notice in relation to the person, from which it is reasonable to
infer that the person would present a risk to the
Australian community or a
segment of that community, is in force.
Otherwise, the person passes the
character test
Construing s 501(6)(d)(iv)
parties proposed competing meanings of s 501(6)(d)(iv). The plaintiff's
proposed meaning is that the provision is engaged if,
in the event the person
were allowed to enter Australia, there is a risk that the person would incite
(meaning cause) discord (meaning
disagreement and debate) in the Australian
community or in a segment of that community. The defendants' proposed meaning is
the provision is engaged if, in the event the person were allowed to enter
Australia, there is a risk that the person would incite
(meaning urge or stir
up) discord (meaning strife or dissension involving harm) in the Australian
community or in a segment of that
community and, in that way, represents a
danger to the community or a segment of it.
plaintiff's principal arguments in support of the plaintiff's proposed
construction are: the breadth of meaning of the words
"incite" and "discord";
the need to give s 501(6)(d)(iv) work to do separate from
s 501(6)(d)(v), which refers to "a danger to the
Australian community or to
a segment of that community"; the contention that s 501(6)(d)(iv) does not
involve any concept of harm
to the Australian community or a segment of it
unless words are read into the provision, which is contrary to interpretative
principles;
and the extrinsic material in respect of a predecessor
plaintiff's arguments do not support the plaintiff's construction of
s 501(6)(d)(iv). Section 501(6) explains when a person does
not pass the
character test for the purpose of s 501, enabling the refusal or the
cancellation of a visa by the Minister personally
exercising powers under that
provision. These two aspects of the context, that the subject-matter is the
refusal or the cancellation
of a visa permitting a person to be in Australia and
that the power is exercisable only by the Minister personally, indicate that
s 501 is not concerned with trivial aspects or trivial effects of what the
legislation refers to as a person's "character".
indication is reinforced by the matters which s 501(6) specifies as
definitive of a person's so-called character. They are:
(a) a substantial
criminal record (as defined by s 501(7)); (aa) being convicted of an
offence that was committed while in, while
escaping from or after escaping from
immigration detention; (ab) being convicted of the offence of escaping from
immigration detention;
(b) being reasonably suspected of being or having
been a member or associate of a person, group or organisation involved in
conduct; (ba) being reasonably suspected of involvement in people
smuggling offences, an offence of trafficking in persons, or the
genocide or other crimes of international concern; (c) past and present
criminal and general conduct; (d) a risk that the
person would:
(i) engage in criminal conduct in Australia; (ii) harass, molest,
intimidate or stalk another person in Australia;
(iii) vilify a segment of
the Australian community; (iv) incite discord in the Australian community
or in a segment of that community;
or (v) represent a danger to the
Australian community or to a segment of that community, whether by way of being
liable to become
involved in activities that are disruptive to, or in violence
threatening harm to, that community or segment, or in any other way;
(e) conviction or discharge without conviction for sexually based offences
involving a child; (f) being charged with or indicted
for genocide, a crime
against humanity, a war crime, a crime involving torture or slavery, or a crime
otherwise of serious international
concern; (g) being assessed by the
Australian Security Intelligence Organisation (ASIO) to be directly or
indirectly a risk to security
within the meaning of ASIO's enabling legislation;
or (h) being subject to an in-force Interpol notice from which it is
to infer that the person would present a risk to the Australian
community or a segment of that community.
short, the entire context of the provision is concerned with potential material
harm to the Australian community or a segment
of it, reflecting the
understandable view that it is one thing for the Australian community or
segments of it to be subject to such
risks of harm from their fellow citizens
and residents, and another thing to be subject to such risks of harm from a
person who has
no right to be in Australia other than by specific grant of a
501(6), in specifying the character test, refers to types of objectively serious
crimes, immigration crimes, and four kinds
of risk. The four kinds of risk are:
in s 501(6)(g), a direct or indirect risk to security as assessed by ASIO
within the meaning
Australian Security Intelligence
Organisation Act 1979
(Cth); in s 501(6)(h), being subject to an
Interpol notice from which it is reasonable to infer that the person would
present a risk
to the Australian community or a segment of that community; in
s 501(6)(d)(iv), a risk that the person would incite discord in the
Australian community or in a segment of that community; and in
s 501(6)(d)(v), a risk that the person would represent a danger to
Australian community or to a segment of that community in any way. As the
ordinary meaning of "danger" itself involves the concept
of "risk", it is
apparent that s 501(6)(d)(v) is the most general and expansive provision in
s 501(6) because it is concerned with
a risk that the alien would represent
a risk of harm (including of a non-physical kind) to the Australian community
(or a segment
context indicates that "incite" and "discord" in s 501(6)(d)(iv) are not to
be given their broadest possible and decontextualised
meaning. The Explanatory
Memorandum for the predecessor provision, in saying that the "ordinary meaning
of the words is imported
and there is no intention to limit their ordinary
taken to recognise that the words "incite" and "discord" in s 501(6)(d)(iv)
(and "danger" in s 501(6)(d)(v)) have an ordinary
meaning which excludes
the most benign possible meaning of each word taken in isolation.
the Second Reading Speech for the predecessor provision, in referring to that
provision as "aimed at those persons who
may regard entry to this country as a
means to attack [Australian]
indicate that the predecessor provision was intended to be engaged by causing
mere disagreement and debate in the Australian
community by reasoned argument.
In the Second Reading Speech the Minister referred to "well-accepted Australian
values" and said
that the provisions "would not be used to breach established
standards of industrial democracy". Whatever the Minister had precisely
it is clear enough that the target of the predecessor provision was not mere
debate and disagreement but the kind of weaponisation
of words and ideas
involved in vilification of people or groups and the fomenting of social
Accordingly,
in isolation "a risk" might be construed to mean any possible chance no matter
how trivial or inconsequential. Read
in context, however, the required risk is
not any chance that an effect or thing "could" or "might" be so. The relevant
material chance that an effect or thing "would" be so. For there to be
a risk that a person "would" do or be one of the specified
things, there must be
existing facts, matters or circumstances from which a reasonable inference can
be drawn that there is a material
chance or prospect that the person would do or
be one of the specified things. Section 501(6), in referring to "a risk that the
would ...", is not satisfied by speculation that there is a mere chance a
person could or might do or be one of the specified things.
in isolation, "incite" may mean no more than unintentionally cause or "animate,
instigate, stimulate" but, in the context
of s 501(6)(d), its ordinary
meaning is to "urge" or "stir
the specified
circumstance whether the person intended that circumstance to result or not. In
isolation, "discord in the Australian
community or in a segment of that
community" may mean no more than "disharmony or disagreement between people"
but, in the context
of the provision, its ordinary meaning is "dissension" or
"strife" involving the creation or exacerbation of material antagonism
not merely between individuals but within or between segments of the Australian
community, thereby resulting in material
harm to the Australian community or a
segment of that
understood, construing s 501(6)(d)(iv) as involving a material risk of
material harm is not to read words into the provision which
do not appear, but
to read the provision in context in accordance with the ordinary meaning of the
words used. It follows from this
that s 501(6)(d)(iv) is not engaged merely
because there is a chance that a person would stimulate debate and disagreement
any part of the Australian community. That is not the ordinary meaning of
the provision construed in context.
to the submissions for the plaintiff, this construction of s 501(6)(d)(iv)
does not negate the operation of s 501(6)(d)(v).
Rather, it enables
s 501(6)(d)(v) to have its general and expansive effect in an appropriate
case. That there may be overlap between
the scope of s 501(6)(d)(i)-(v) may
be accepted. The Explanatory Memorandum, in referring to "or
represent a danger
effectively
recognises that s 501(6)(d)(v) is a more general and expansive provision
than s 501(6)(d)(iv). This is reinforced by
the fact that the statutory
criterion which s 501(6)(d)(v) constitutes is "in the event the person were
allowed to enter or to remain
in Australia, there is a risk that the person
would: ... represent a danger to the Australian community or to a segment of
that community
... in any ... way". Because "danger" ordinarily encompasses the
concept of a risk of harm, hurt or injury, s 501(6)(d)(v), unlike
provisions, is potentially engaged by a material risk of danger (meaning harm)
to the Australian community or to a segment
of that community in any way. The
expansive character of s 501(6)(d)(v) is also indicated by the example
given of "danger" to the
Australian community or to a segment of it by the
person becoming "involved in activities that are disruptive to" the community or
a segment of it. Contrary again to the submissions for the plaintiff, the word
"disruptive" in s 501(6)(d)(v) does not mean that
"discord" in
s 501(6)(d)(iv) includes mere disruption. The text and structure of the
provisions indicates to the contrary –
that s 501(6)(d)(iv)
involves a more specific and higher threshold than that in
s 501(6)(d)(v).
of this means that s 501(6)(d)(iv), so construed, makes s 501(6)(d)(v)
redundant. It does mean, however, that the Solicitor-General's
construction of s 501(6)(d)(iv) goes too far. The Solicitor-General's
proposed construction conflates s 501(6)(d)(v) with
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
and does not recognise that creating or exacerbating discord, properly
construed, automatically involves harm to
the Australian community or a segment
of it. That is, the fact of a risk of inciting discord (once construed properly)
it a sufficiently material risk of harm. No further harm, separate
from the fact of the risk of inciting of discord, need be found.
That, however,
is immaterial to the outcome in this case.
these reasons, s 501(6)(d)(iv) does not apply to a person whose entry into
or presence in Australia would merely cause anticipated
debate, disagreement or
argument in a part of the Australian community.
constitutional implication
implication into the
Constitution
of a freedom of political communication
was entrenched by the unanimous decision of seven members of this Court in
Lange v Australian Broadcasting
Corporation
Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ, in
joint reasons, held that "[f]reedom of communication on matters
of government
and politics is an indispensable incident of that system of representative
government which the
Constitution
so that, by
implication from ss 7 and
and other related provisions of the
Constitution
legislative and executive powers do not extend to "curtailment of the protected
Honours also agreed in
that the protected freedom "confers no
rights on individuals and, to the extent that the freedom rests upon
implication, that implication
defines the nature and extent of the
adopting an
earlier statement of Brennan J that the "implication is negative in nature:
it invalidates laws and consequently creates
an area of immunity from legal
control, particularly from legislative
They agreed
that if "the freedom is to effectively serve the purpose of ss 7 and
related sections, it cannot be confined to the election period" as, if so
confined, "the electors would be deprived of the greater
part of the information
necessary to make an effective choice at the
They agreed
that "the freedom of communication which the
Constitution
protects is not
absolute" and is "limited to what is necessary for the effective operation of
that system of representative and responsible
government provided for by the
Constitution
agreed that a law would not be invalid by operation of the freedom if it
satisfied two
conditions.
agreed that the first condition is "that the object of the law is compatible
with the maintenance of the constitutionally prescribed
system of representative
and responsible
government".
acknowledged that the second condition had been expressed in different terms but
agreed on expressing the second condition as
"that the law is reasonably
appropriate and adapted to achieving that legitimate object or
is also not in doubt that the protected freedom is of the entire process
involved in "communication", irrespective of how the
communication might be
achieved. In
Brennan CJ described the constitutional implication as potentially
applicable "whatever be the form of
communication",
and Gummow JJ said that "the constitutional freedom is not confined to
verbal activity ... it may extend to conduct where
that conduct is a means of
communicating a message within the scope of the
McHugh J said that "any form of expressive conduct is capable of
communicating a political or government message to those who witness
and Kirby J
said that "the constitutionally protected freedom of communication on political
and governmental matters in Australia
extends to non-verbal conduct as well as
to things said and
and as Gleeson CJ stated in
Mulholland v Australian Electoral
"[w]hen this Court declares legislation to be beyond power, or to infringe some
freedom required by the
Constitution
to be respected, it applies an external
standard. Individual judgments as to the application of that standard may
differ, but differences
of judicial opinion about the application of a
constitutional standard do not imply that the
Constitution
means what judges
want it to mean, or that the
Constitution
says what judges would prefer it to
As his Honour
put it, "[i]dentification of the end served by a law, and deciding its
compatibility with a system of representative
government, is a familiar kind of
judicial function" and "[f]or a court to describe a law as reasonably
appropriate and adapted to
a legitimate end is to use a formula which is
intended, among other things, to express the limits between legitimate judicial
and illegitimate judicial encroachment upon an area of legislative
having a "long
history of application in many aspects of Australian
jurisprudence".
made these statements in the context of a case in which his Honour's reasons for
concluding that the impugned law was
valid represented a minority view.
Gleeson CJ, in common with Kirby J, considered that the impugned
legislation, limiting the entitlement
to registration of political parties to
parties with at least 500 members in circumstances where, amongst other things,
the recording
of party affiliation on ballot papers depended on registration,
burdened political communications but did so for a legitimate end
manner and to an extent that was reasonably appropriate and adapted to that
legitimate end.
contrast, McHugh J, while accepting that "the ballot-paper is a
communication on political and government
that the restrictions imposed by the impugned legislation were "the conditions
of the [statutory] entitlement to have
a party's name placed on the
ballot-paper" and did not "exist independently of [that]
entitlement".
McHugh J put it, "[p]roof of a burden on the implied constitutional freedom
requires proof that the challenged law burdens a freedom
that exists
independently of that
Hayne JJ considered that the starting point involved asking "whose
freedom?" and "freedom from
Their Honours
considered that, as there was no freedom or right of the appellant as a
candidate for a political party to have the
recording of his party affiliation
on ballot papers apart from that provided by the impugned legislation, there was
no curtailment
of any such
Callinan J also concluded that as the "appellant has no relevant
to the imposition of an obligation upon another, to communicate a
particular matter, he has no right which is capable of being
Heydon J similarly said that before there can be any interference with
freedom of political communication it is "necessary that there
be some relevant
'right or privilege ... under the general law' to be interfered with". It
followed that "to legislate for a mixture
of permissions and prohibitions, so as
to permit the party affiliations of some candidates but not others to appear on
paper, cannot interfere with the implied
Ruddick v The
Commonwealth
Gordon, Edelman and Gleeson JJ, with whom Steward J agreed, held
that legislative amendments preventing a later formed political party's
registered name or logo from containing a word in the name or abbreviation of an
earlier registered political party did not burden
freedom of political
communication. Gordon, Edelman and Gleeson JJ considered that the challenge
to validity of the amendments failed
at the "threshold stage" of establishing a
burden on freedom of political communication because, in the context of the
whole statute,
the amendments were likely to improve rather than impair the
quality of such
communication.
material before the Court on which this evaluation was made included that the
word "Liberal" in the name of the political party
"Liberal Democrats" had
created voter confusion as to whether candidates of the "Liberal Democrats" were
candidates for the "Liberals"
(the pre-existing registered political
Their Honours
also approved earlier statements that the freedom protected by the
constitutional implication was the freedom to do
what would otherwise be
and considered
that a "further reason" the challenge to validity failed was that the
circumstances of the case were indistinguishable
from those in
contrast, Kiefel CJ and Keane J, in the minority with Gageler J,
concluded that the legislative amendments were invalid. Kiefel
Keane J reasoned that, as the legislation already effectively dealt with
the risk of voter confusion, the amendments operated
to prevent a candidate from
communicating their party affiliation to
with Gageler J, their Honours considered that
and did not determine the question in
to be "best understood as a case in which both
conditions expounded in
for compatibility with ss 7 and
Constitution
, both in their core operation and in the context of the
implied freedom of political communication, were readily found to be
satisfied".
considered that the overlapping reasons of McHugh J, Gummow and
Hayne JJ, Callinan J, and Heydon J in
to the appellant's argument in that case that the legal operation of the
amendments burdened the protected freedom because
they excluded from the ballot
paper reference to the affiliation of a candidate with the excluded political
party, and that the argument
was rejected because the proposed burden depended
on a non-existent "liberty to communicate that existed independently of
action" (meaning the actions of the Australian Electoral Commission in
accordance with the applicable legislation in respect of ballot
basis, there remained scope for "political communication to be burdened, and the
implied freedom thereby to be engaged, to
the extent that exclusion from a
ballot paper of reference to the party affiliation of a candidate can be found
to impose a practical
impediment to communication of information relevant to
electoral choice in the exercise of the liberty of communication which exists
common law".
ultimate resolution of these strands of thought is demanded by the present case.
The plaintiff did not challenge
. The Solicitor-General of the
Commonwealth contended that the plaintiff's attempt to establish a burden by
establishing that she
has a "right" to a visa, when no such right exists, was
foreclosed by
. No such right exists
because, as the Solicitor-General put it, no person can require an alien to be
granted a visa permitting the
alien to enter Australia whether to engage in
political discussions in Australia or
expressed, the Solicitor-General's proposition is unquestionable. It is also,
however, incomplete.
that the "power to exclude ... even a friendly alien is recognized by
international law as an incident of sovereignty over
doubt. It does not follow from this fundamental principle of international law
that freedom of political communication,
protected by the constitutional
implication, is incapable of being burdened by legislative or executive action
in respect of the
exercise of that sovereign power to exclude an alien. Neither
the fundamental principle nor any aspect of the majority reasoning
gives rise to such an incapacity.
Constitution
gives effect to the fundamental principle of international
law by providing, in
, that the Commonwealth Parliament "shall,
subject to this
Constitution
, have power to make laws for the peace, order, and
good government of the Commonwealth with respect to: ... aliens". The
implication
Constitution
of a freedom of political communication
means that the legislative powers in
, and the associated
executive powers under
, operate "subject to this
Constitution
including the constraint on legislative power effected by the implied
consequence of the fundamental principle of international law that a sovereign
nation may exclude all aliens is that a sovereign
nation can also permit entry
by an alien into its sovereign territory subject to "what conditions it
Yet once an
alien is within Australia, an equally fundamental principle of the common law is
engaged – that such an alien "enjoys
the protection of our law",
albeit that the status of an alien makes that person vulnerable to deportation
and powers ancillary to
the purpose of visa determination and
deportation.
follows from this that if an alien were to be granted a visa to enter Australia
subject to a condition that the alien was not
to engage in political
communications while in Australia, the majority reasoning in
would not preclude the alien or another person with standing
to do so challenging the validity of the condition. Although the alien
have no right to be in Australia other than by reason of the visa which includes
the condition, the constitutional implication,
in protecting freedom of
political communication, attaches to the entirety of the concept of
"communication" as an exchange of information
involving both expression and
reception. The alien present in Australia under a visa subject to the condition
has no right to be
so present other than by reason of the visa, but the
condition would practically restrict the capacity of every other person in
to engage in otherwise lawful political communications with the alien.
It would be no answer to the restriction on that practical
capacity that the
condition of the visa applying to the alien is part of the permission granted to
the alien to enter Australia.
and relatedly, it is apparent therefore that conceiving of the protected freedom
as attaching only to a person's specific
right or liberty in law to express a
political idea in a particular circumstance or by a particular means said to be
burdened by
an impugned law overlooks that, for people in Australia, the legal
operation of the impugned law may effect a broader practical restriction
their capacity to engage in political communications (by receipt of a
communication as well as its expression) by all such means
as otherwise might be
lawfully available to them. This is such a case.
, in the former case the argument
focused on an asserted right of the appellant as a candidate for election to
communicate his political
party affiliation to voters by it appearing on the
ballot paper. Five members of the Court reasoned that no such right existed
from the registration provisions of the legislation by which the content
of the ballot paper was regulated. In the latter case, the
principal reasoning
of the majority, to the effect that the legislative amendments would be likely
to enhance the quality of political
communications, both recognised
"communication" as an exchange involving expression (by the name of the party
being on the ballot
paper) and reception (by voters seeing the ballot paper) and
engaged with the practical effect of the impugned law. Accordingly,
majority's principal conclusion – that there was no burden on the
communication conceived of as an entire process of exchange
depend on any asserted right of the plaintiff in that case to have his party's
name appear on the ballot paper, but
rather the practical effect of the impugned
law on the entirety of the communication affected by the impugned law. The
"further reason"
the majority gave for rejecting the challenge in
was indistinguishable, in contrast,
focused on that asserted right of
expression.
return now to the present case, the plaintiff has not been granted a visa
subject to a condition preventing the plaintiff from
engaging in political
communication while in Australia. The plaintiff has been refused a visa on
grounds including that the Minister
reasonably suspected that the plaintiff did
not pass the character test because of the risk that, if permitted to enter
she would incite discord in the Australian community or a segment of
it given her stated intention of engaging in communication of
her "bold and
unfiltered perspectives" while in Australia.
Conceptualising the
challenge to the validity of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
Migration Act
terms only of an asserted right of the plaintiff as an alien to enter Australia
to engage in political communications, the case
is indistinguishable from
. Conceptualising the challenge to validity in terms of persons
in Australia, there is a manifest practical burden that
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
imposes on their capacity to receive the plaintiff's political communications by
the mode of in-person communications and, thereby,
to engage in such
communications with both the plaintiff and others who would attend her speaking
events. That the plaintiff, being
an alien, has no right to enter Australia for
that or any other purpose is not to the point. Nor is it to the point that no
in Australia has a right to require the presence of the plaintiff in
Australia for that or any other purpose. The point is that the
implied freedom
of political communication, involving, as it does, the whole process of
communication, necessarily has within its
scope both the expression and
reception of ideas via the complete range of media by which political
communication is achieved. Contrary
to the plaintiff's submissions, this
conclusion does not depend on
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
being severable from the
provisions of the
Migration Act
which the plaintiff contends would
otherwise operate to require her to be granted the visa for which she
Solicitor-General submitted that, in any event, it did not follow that
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
was invalid, because as a definitional provision
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
has no effect unless and until the power in
(to refuse to grant or to cancel a visa) is exercised; before exercise,
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
imposes no burden on the protected freedom. Putting it
another way, the argument is that the legislation itself does not burden the
protected freedom. Only an exercise of executive power by the Minister under
, in accordance with
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
, can burden the protected
freedom. Moreover, some exercises of executive power relying on
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
may involve no such burden or only a burden which is
justified. Therefore,
Migration Act
would apply. By
, unless there is a contrary intention, if a provision of the
Migration Act
would have an invalid application but also has at least one
valid application "it is the Parliament's intention that the provision
have the invalid application, but is to have every valid application".
potential operation of
depends, therefore, on
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
having an invalid application. To that question, I now
Applying the test for constitutional validity
impugned law imposing a practical burden on the freedom of political
communication, the two-part test in
must be applied. That is:
(1) is the object of the law compatible with the maintenance of the
constitutionally prescribed system
of representative and responsible government;
and (2) is the law reasonably appropriate and adapted to achieving that
object or purpose
plaintiff contended that the purpose of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is to prevent the
eroding of social cohesion of the Australian community through disagreement and
debate caused by the presence of
certain non-citizens in Australia. The
defendants contended that the purpose of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is to protect the
Australian community from non-citizens whose presence in Australia would
represent a danger to that community because
of the risk that they would rouse,
stimulate, urge, spur on or stir up strife, dispute, disharmony or dissension
within the Australian
community of a kind that involves harm to that community
(or a segment thereof). The plaintiff contended that either purpose is
incompatible
with the maintenance of the constitutionally prescribed system of
representative and responsible government. The defendants contended
purposes are compatible with the maintenance of the constitutionally prescribed
system of representative and responsible
government.
on the proper construction of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
it cannot be said that the
end, object or purpose of the provision is to prevent the eroding of social
cohesion of the Australian
community through disagreement and debate caused by
the presence of certain non-citizens in Australia. That suggested purpose misses
the target altogether. The end, object or purpose of the provision is to protect
the Australian community (or a segment of it) from
an alien's presence in
Australia having a material risk of inciting (meaning urging or stirring up)
discord (meaning strife or dissension
involving the creation or exacerbation of
material antagonism or enmity within or between segments of the Australian
community),
thereby resulting in material harm to the Australian community or a
segment of that community, whether the alien intended to have
that effect on the
community (or segment thereof) or not.
understood, the end, object or purpose of the provision is manifestly compatible
with the maintenance of the constitutionally
prescribed system of representative
and responsible government. The purpose of such protection is not to prevent or
restrict political
communications. The constitutionally prescribed system of
representative and responsible government extends to the protection of
Australia and groups of such people from a material risk of this kind of harm.
If such a risk eventuates and is left unchecked,
the resulting harm itself would
be potentially incompatible with the continuation of Australia's form of
constitutionally protected
representative and responsible government.
Reasonably appropriate and adapted
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is reasonably appropriate and adapted to the
legislative purpose of protection of the Australian community and segments of
that community
from the effect of an alien's presence in Australia involving a
material risk of material harm by the inciting of discord in the
community or a segment of it, the inciting of discord meaning the creation or
exacerbation of material antagonism or enmity
within or between segments of the
Australian community.
the purpose of the law is not to deny or restrict political communication,
albeit that such denial or restriction may be a
consequence or incident of the
operation of the law in a particular case.
the legislation is indifferent to the content of any political communication
other than by reference to its effect of harm
by creating or exacerbating
material antagonisms or enmities between a material number of people in the
Australian community or a
segment of it. The plaintiff's contention that
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is more likely to be used to exclude those who are
apprehended by the Minister to have expressed, or be likely to express,
"non-mainstream"
political ideas is mere assertion.
Section 501(6)(d)(iv)
does not attach to "mainstream" or "non-mainstream political ideas". It attaches
to the risk of effects.
legislation is therefore properly seen to be content neutral, concerned not with
the communication of any specific idea or class
of ideas, political or
otherwise, but only with the objective consequences of the presence of the
person in Australia being the risk
of harm of the required kind. These features
of the provision, if anything, tend to enhance rather than undermine the form of
representative
and responsible government which the
Constitution
entrenches. In such a case, it should be recognised that the implied freedom of
political communication enables a genuine "margin
of choice" by which the
Commonwealth Parliament can achieve its legitimate ends or
the burden is on one mode of communication only (in-person) and not any other
available mode of communication.
such alternative modes of communication, in contemporary circumstances, are
commonly known to be available, practical and
convenient. While these
alternative modes of communication, and their availability, practicality and
convenience, do not transform
the denial of the in-person mode of communication
into a non-burden on the protected freedom, they significantly confine the
and extent of the burden. Contrary to the arguments for the plaintiff, it
cannot be said that the burden is substantial, direct and
discriminatory.
Rather, the burden is minor, incidental, consequential, and non-discriminatory
in circumstances where there is an
obvious and, indeed, compelling, rational
connection between the provision (enabling denial of a visa in the specified
circumstances)
and its purpose.
mere capacity to identify a legislative alternative potentially imposing any
lesser burden on the protected freedom should not
suffice to invalidate such a
legislative provision, particularly if the legislative alternative is, in truth,
simply a less effective
means to secure an objective which is compatible with
and capable of protecting the functioning of representative and responsible
government in
plaintiff's identification of s 501(6)(d)(v) alone as a legislative
alternative depends on the plaintiff's construction of s
501(6)(d)(iv)
being accepted. Once it is recognised that s 501(6)(d)(iv) is a narrower
and more specific provision than s 501(6)(d)(v),
and includes a component
of a risk of harm to the Australian community or a segment of it from the
anticipated dissension or strife,
it cannot be said that s 501(6)(d)(v)
would have a less burdensome effect on the protected freedom than
s 501(6)(d)(iv).
plaintiff also proposed a predecessor provision to s 501(6)(d)(iv), the
former s 180A(1)(b)(iii) of the
Migration Act
, as a legislative
alternative having a less burdensome effect on the protected freedom than
s 501(6)(d)(iv).
Section 180A(1)(b)(iii) enabled the Minister to
refuse to grant or to cancel a visa if "the Minister is satisfied that, if the
were allowed to enter or to remain in Australia, the person would: ...
incite discord in the Australian community or in a segment
of that community".
It will be apparent that the difference between the provisions is that the
preamble to
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
refers to a "risk that the person would"
whereas the preamble to former s 180A(1)(b)(iii) refers to "the person
in isolation, former s 180A(1)(b)(iii) would have a less burdensome effect
on the protected freedom than
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
has because the former
provision imposes a more onerous standard (the person would) than the latter
provision (a risk that the person
would). Former s 180A(1)(b)(iii),
however, cannot be isolated from its context. Former s 180A(1)(b)(iii)
operated in conjunction
with former s 180A(1)(b)(iv), which enabled the
Minister to refuse to grant or to cancel a visa if "the Minister is satisfied
if the person were allowed to enter or to remain in Australia, the person
would: ... represent a danger to the Australian community
or to a segment of
that community, whether by way of ... or in any other way". Consistently with
s 501(6)(d)(v)
, former s 180A(1)(b)(iv) was a more general and
expansive provision than former s 180A(1)(b)(iii) because it applied if the
would represent a danger to the Australian community or to a segment of
that community in any way. As discussed, "danger" in this
context involves the
concept of "risk" of harm and is not confined to physical harm. It follows that
to propose the former s 180A(1)(b)(iii)
as a legislative alternative to
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
, as if former s 180A(1)(b)(iv) and
s 501(6)(d)(v)
did not also exist, is nothing more than an artificial exercise.
the legislative object of both sets of provisions, to protect the Australian
community from the risk of a certain kind
of harm, could not be effectively
achieved if the legislation did not enable the Minister to refuse to grant or to
cancel a visa
based on a state of satisfaction of material risk of that harm
occurring, rather than a state of satisfaction that such harm would
the provisions are each considered in isolation (which they should not be), the
plaintiff has identified no more than an
alternative and less burdensome means
of achieving a lesser legislative objective or an alternative, less burdensome
and less effective
means of achieving the same legislative objective.
way, given that the impugned provision is not directed to the restriction of
political communications, is content neutral,
has an incidental and
consequential effect on one mode of political communication only (in-person
communications), and leaves entirely
unaffected all other modes of political
communication when such modes are known to be available, practical and
convenient,
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is reasonably necessary to achieve its
objective. It is undoubtedly within the available margins of legislative choice
concept of "reasonable necessity" leaves open, recognising that, in
this context, "necessary" does not mean "essential" or
"unavoidable".
this is far from saying, as the plaintiff would have it, that the reality of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is that the Minister can apply the provision "to curb
political communication that has no real risk of causing the requisite states,
but is simply political communication that enough of the public will not like".
The provision is not engaged by any such circumstance.
The threshold of "risk"
does not bring the urging of any kind of discourse about any issue within the
provision merely because it
can be said possibly to cause debate or
disagreement.
to the plaintiff, a further vice of the provision is that "the uncontrollable
reaction of others can and does cause a person
to fail the character test" in
that, if those in Australia with opposing views to that of the person applying
for the visa threaten
to react sufficiently strongly, the Minister can refuse to
grant the visa "irrespective of the steps taken by the person to encourage
civility and respectful disagreement". If that be a vice, it is not one
involving any greater burden on the freedom of political
communication than
would otherwise be the case.
this basis, it also cannot be accepted, as the plaintiff would have it, that the
benefit which
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
achieves is outweighed, let alone materially
or manifestly outweighed, by the burden on the freedom of political
communication which
the provision
these reasons, it cannot be concluded that, properly construed,
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
has any invalid application. Accordingly,
Migration Act
is not engaged. The provision is valid in all its potential
applications.
The Minister's decision
plaintiff contended, in the alternative, that the Minister's decision to refuse
to grant her the visa miscarried because, assuming
the plaintiff's construction
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
is rejected, the Minister did not apply the provision on
the basis that "discord" required anything more than the plaintiff's presence
Australia causing mere controversy, debate or disagreement.
deciding to refuse to grant the plaintiff the visa for which she had applied
ss 501(3)(a)
(6)(d)(iv), the Minister recorded that the
plaintiff proposed to undertake her speaking tour in Australia by sharing her
unfiltered perspectives" where, amongst other things, she:
(a) had a profile as a political commentator, author and activist known
her "controversial and conspiratorial views", having been the subject of
significant media reporting for her comments relating
to the Black Lives Matter
movement, the Israel-Hamas conflict, anti-Semitism, Islamophobia, and the
LGBTQIA+ community; (b) had been
criticised for minimisation of the
Holocaust including in communications apparently relativising the "evil"
represented by Adolf
Hitler and the Nazis, indicating that the westward movement
of ethnic Germans from eastern Europe in the face of the advance of the
Army in 1945 was a greater evil by "ethnic cleansing" than the Nazi murder of
six million Jews, and dismissing as absurd Dr
Josef Mengele's torture and
murder of Jews by performing purported medical experiments on them; (c) had
said that Europe would be
a "Muslim continent within decades" and that "we" (the
United States) would be "forced to save you" (Europe) from Muslims; (d) had
been quoted by the perpetrator of the murder and injury of Muslims in
Christchurch as his greatest influence; (e) said that "Muslims
slavery"; (f) had been suspended by YouTube as YouTube considered that
three videos she posted contravened its hate speech
policies; and (g) had
reportedly been suspended by YouTube as YouTube considered she had promoted
hatred of the LGBTQIA+ community.
Minister referred to information from ASIO and the Australian Federal Police
"right-wing extremism" and
information that "[h]ate speech leads to political violence if you allow it to
escalate". The Minister
described this information as credible, well-evidenced
and consistent. On this basis, the Minister expressed satisfaction that "persons
who espouse ideologically motivated extremist views ... pose a risk of inciting
discord in the Australian community", saying the
evidence was clear that
"inflammatory rhetoric can lead to increased hate crimes, radicalisation of
individuals and heightened tensions
in communities". The Minister also found
that the plaintiff's commentary was "extremist and inflammatory ... towards
Muslim, Black,
Jewish and LGBTQIA+ communities" and such commentary "generate[s]
controversy and hatred". The Minister found that the plaintiff
misinformation" which leads to "fostering division and fear in communities". As
such, the Minister found a risk that the
plaintiff's controversial views would
"amplify grievances among communities and lead to increased hostility and
violent or radical
action", involving the "potential to galvanise discord" by
the plaintiff's presence, as the "normalisation of controversial rhetoric
dehumanises and targets specific communities has the propensity to galvanise
individuals and incite discord in the community".
plaintiff's submission that the Minister, by these reasons, misconstrued
"discord" as meaning mere "disagreement" or "debate"
is untenable. It was not
necessary for the Minister to say that "discord" means dissension or strife
involving antagonism or enmity
between people in the Australian community or a
segment of that community such as to involve a material risk of harm to the
community or a segment of it. The Minister did not refuse to grant
the plaintiff a visa merely because she had expressed "controversial"
which engendered debate and disagreement. The Minister refused to grant the
plaintiff a visa because the Minister was satisfied
that: (a) the plaintiff
had frequently espoused extremist and inflammatory views dehumanising and
targeting and capable of generating
hatred towards and fear within several
groups within the Australian community; and (b) the plaintiff's presence in
Australia for
her speaking tour where she intended to share her "bold and
unfiltered perspectives" would enable the plaintiff to espouse these
person across Australia thereby amplifying existing grievances within the
Australian community, galvanising radicalisation
of individuals, and fomenting
increased hostility and violent or radical action including increased hate
crimes. The Minister therefore
did not omit to find that the risk of discord
would cause harm. Nor did the Minister omit to identify the harm or who would
from it. The Minister's reasons also expose that the threshold of the
risk and the potential harm being material was satisfied. That
the Minister did
not find that the plaintiff intended she cause such harm to the Australian
community as a whole and groups within
it who had previously been targeted by
the plaintiff is immaterial. The Minister was right to focus instead on the
effect of the
plaintiff's presence in Australia and not her subjective
intentions.
these reasons, the Minister's reasons disclose no misconstruction of
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
but, rather, confirm that the requirements of the provision
were satisfied in this case. The plaintiff's challenge to the validity
Minister's decision must be rejected.
Conclusions and
the negative answers to each of the substantive questions of law posed in the
special case, the plaintiff is not entitled to
any relief. The plaintiff should
pay the defendants' costs of the special case.
Migration Act
Migration Act
Migration Act
s 65(1)(a)(ii).
Migration Act
s 65(1)(a)(iii).
Migration Act
s 501(3)(a).
Migration Act
s 501(3)(b).
Migration Act
s 501(3)(c).
Migration Act
s 501(3)(d).
Migration Act
Migration Act
If the Minister makes a decision under sub-s (3) in relation to a
person, the Minister must cause notice of the making of the decision
before each House of the Parliament within 15 sitting days of that House after
the day the decision was made:
Migration Act
The special case incorrectly
records the relevant provision to be
Regulations
Sch 2, cl 408.216(1). Public interest
criterion 4001 (in Sch 4) requires that the person satisfy the
Minister that they pass the character
test, or that the Minister be satisfied,
after appropriate inquiries, that there is nothing to indicate they would fail
or that the Minister decide not to refuse to grant the visa despite
reasonably suspecting that they do not, or despite not being
satisfied that they
do, pass the character test.
Ms Farmer has not provided
a letter of support that meets the requirements of cl 408.221 read with cl
408.111 definition of "passes
the support test" of Sch 2 to the
Regulations
. However, the organisation that invited Ms Farmer to
Australia confirmed that it would provide a compliant letter of support swiftly
if there was an indication that Ms Farmer was likely to receive permission
to enter Australia.
LibertyWorks Inc v The
Commonwealth
[2021] HCA 18
; (2021) 274 CLR 1 at 72
"discord", meaning 3 ("strife; dispute; war");
Oxford English Dictionary
"discord", meaning 1a ("mutual
antagonism; dissension, contention, strife").
Port of Newcastle Operations
Pty Ltd v Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] HCA 39
; (2021) 274 CLR 565 at
594‑595 [88]‑[89], citing
Taylor v Owners – Strata Plan
(2014) 253 CLR 531 at 557 [66] and
SAS Trustee Corporation
[2018] HCA 55
; (2018) 265 CLR 137 at 149
Acts Interpretation Act
Sunol v Collier [No 2]
[2012] NSWCA 44
; (2012) 289 ALR 128 at 135
Young v Cassells
NZLR 852 at 854.
[2012] NSWCA 44
; (2012) 289 ALR 128
Catch the Fire Ministries Inc v Islamic Council of
Victoria Inc
[2006] VSCA 284
; (2006) 15 VR 207 at 212
ENT19 v Minister for Home
[2023] HCA 18
; (2023) 278 CLR 75 at 99
KDSP v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2020] FCAFC 108
279 FCR 1 at 17
, in turn quoting
v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
(2004) 139 FCR 292 at
Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs v ERY19
[2021] FCAFC 133
; (2021) 285
FCR 540 at 562
[2023] HCA 18
; (2023) 278 CLR 75 at 99
v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] FCAFC 54
; (2015) 230 FCR 367 at 379
Plaintiff M47/2012 v
Director-General of Security
(2012) 251 CLR 1 at 39 [46].
Leon Fink Holdings Pty Ltd v
Australian Film Commission
(1979) 141 CLR 672 at 679 (emphasis added).
Migration Regulations
, reg 2(1) para (c) of the definition of "public interest criteria" (as
in force on 1 October 1991).
Hand v Hell's Angels
Motorcycle Club Inc
[1991] FCA 633
; (1991) 25 ALD 667.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 17 December 1992
Inserted by the
(Offences and Undesirable Persons) Amendment Act 1992
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 17 December 1992
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Migration (Offences and Undesirable Persons) Amendment Bill
, Explanatory Memorandum at 4 [16] (emphasis added).
Migration Legislation
Amendment Act 1994
Australia, Senate,
Legislation Amendment (Strengthening of Provisions Relating to Character and
Conduct) Bill 1998
, Explanatory Memorandum at 2 [1]; see also 13 [52].
Australia, Senate,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 11 November 1998 at 60.
Unions NSW v New South
(2013) 252 CLR 530 at 548 [17], citing
Australian Capital
Television Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
") (1992) 177 CLR 106 at
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 560, 567;
(2013) 252 CLR 530 at 548 [17].
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520
Comcare v Banerji
[2019] HCA 23
267 CLR 373 at 410
and the authorities cited.
(1992) 177 CLR 106
Theophanous v Herald & Weekly Times Ltd
[1994] HCA 46
; (1994) 182 CLR 104 at
149; see also 162, 168;
Cunliffe v The Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 44
; (1994) 182 CLR 272 at
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 560;
Levy v Victoria
[1997] HCA 31
189 CLR 579 at 625-626;
Attorney-General (SA) v Adelaide City Corporation
(2013) 249 CLR 1 at 73-74 [166];
McCloy v New South Wales
[2015] HCA 34
; (2015) 257 CLR
178 at 202-203
[2019] HCA 23
; (2019) 267 CLR 373 at 395
CLR 530 at 548 [18]-[19].
CLR 530 at 548‑549 [19]. See also
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at 594;
Farm Transparency International Ltd v New South Wales
(2022) 277 CLR 537
at 564-565 [75]-[77].
See the test identified
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 561-562, 567-568,
as modified and refined in
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
; (2004) 220 CLR 1 at
, 51 [95]‑[96],
[2015] HCA 34
; (2015) 257 CLR 178 at
Brown v Tasmania
(2017) 261 CLR 328 at 359 [88], 363-364
[104], 375-376 [156], 398 [236], 413 [271], 416-417 [277]-[278], 431-433
[316]-[325].
[2004] HCA 39
; (2004) 220 CLR 1
(2013) 252 CLR 530 at 553 [35];
Tajjour v New South Wales
[2014] HCA 35
; (2014) 254 CLR 508 at 578-579
(2017) 261 CLR 328 at 360 [90], 383 [181], 458 [408];
[2019] HCA 11
; (2019) 267 CLR 171 at 186
Farm Transparency
277 CLR 537 at 587‑588 [154];
Babet v The Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99
ALJR 883 at 895
, 900‑901 [72], 907 [104];
[2025] HCA 21
; 423 ALR 83 at 95, 102,
v The Queen
[2013] HCA 4
; (2013) 249 CLR 92 at 142
(2013) 252 CLR 530 at 574
[2015] HCA 34
; (2015) 257 CLR 178 at 230-231
261 CLR 328 at 382-383 [180].
CLR 530 at 551 [30], 553 [35]. See also
Wotton v Queensland
CLR 1 at 15 [25], [28]-[29], 31 [80].
CLR 530 at 551 [30].
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR
579 at 622;
Mulholland v Australian Electoral Commission
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR
181 at 223-224
, 247 [186]-[187], 298 [337], 303 [354];
The Commonwealth
(2022) 275 CLR 333 at 391-392 [155], 396-397 [171]-[172],
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR 883 at 901
, 906 [97], 921 [170], 929
[2025] HCA 21
; 423 ALR 83 at 103, 109-110, 129, 139-140.
252 CLR 530 at 551 [29]-[30];
[2015] HCA 34
; (2015) 257 CLR 178 at 201-202
[2014] HCA 35
; (2014) 254 CLR
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
; (1992) 177 CLR
1 at 31 and the authorities cited at fn 95;
Adelaide City Corporation
(2013) 249 CLR 1 at 31 [43] and the authorities cited;
[2013] HCA 4
249 CLR 92 at 128
(2017) 261 CLR 328 at 498 [545].
(2017) 261 CLR 328
at 378 [162].
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181.
CLR 530 at 551 [27], 571 [104].
See fns 43 and 44 above.
(2022) 275 CLR 333.
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR 883; 423 ALR
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 223
; see also 223 [107], 247 [186]-[187], 298 [337], 303 [354].
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 223
(2022) 275 CLR
333 at 396-397 [171]-[172], 398 [174];
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR 883 at 897
906 [97], 921 [170], 928 [201], 929 [205], 932 [222],
[2025] HCA 21
; 423 ALR 83 at 98, 109-110, 129, 138, 139-140, 143, 151.
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 182-183,
191 [17], 195-196 [28]-[30], 200 [41], 202 [45(3)], 218 [90], 247 [186]-[187],
293 [321], 303 [352].
(2022) 275 CLR
333 at 367-368 [78];
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR 883 at 907
[2025] HCA 21
(2022) 275 CLR 333 at 377-378
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR 883 at 897
, 932 [223], 934 [235], 939 [259]; cf 907 [103], 929 [205];
[2025] HCA 21
ALR 83 at 98, 143-144, 146, 152; cf 111, 139-140.
[2015] HCA 34
; (2015) 257 CLR
APLA Ltd v Legal Services Commissioner (NSW)
[2005] HCA 44
; (2005) 224 CLR 322 at 394
See [33]-[35] above.
See also, in relation to
Migration Act
more broadly,
Falzon v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] HCA 2
; (2018) 262 CLR 333 at 348-349
357 [89], 359 [94];
[2023] HCA 18
; (2023) 278 CLR 75 at 99
authorities cited at fn 84 including
(2004) 139 FCR 292 at
Constitution
and (xxvii);
[2018] HCA 2
; (2018) 262 CLR 333 at 348-349
357 [89], 358 [92], 359 [94];
Love v The Commonwealth
(2020) 270 CLR 152
at 190 [74], 209 [130], 217-218 [167], 239-240 [244]-[245].
[2004] HCA 39
; (2004) 220
CLR 1 at 53
, 54 [105], 79 [199], 91 [239], 98 [255].
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR
883 at 896-897
, 901 [72], 936 [242];
[2025] HCA 21
; 423 ALR 83 at 97, 102-103, 148.
(2017) 261 CLR 328
at 367 [118], 389-390 [201], 433 [325] and the authorities cited.
(2017) 261 CLR 328
at 371-372 [139], citing
(2013) 252 CLR 530 at 556 [44].
See [24]-[35] above.
See [11]-[21] above.
See [12] above.
See [13]-[15] above.
See [18] above.
Berlin, "Two Concepts of
Liberty", in Hardy and Hausheer (eds),
The Proper Study of Mankind: An
Anthology of Essays
(1998) 191 at 198.
Watts v United States
[1969] USSC 88
; (1969) 394 US 705 at 707.
Farm Transparency
International Ltd v New South Wales
(2022) 277 CLR 537 at 614 [241]. See
Virginia v Black
[2003] USSC 2763
; (2003) 538 US 343 at 358-360.
Levy v Victoria
[1997] HCA 31
189 CLR 579 at 625-626.
Migration Act 1958
s 501(6)(d)(iv)
, read with
ss 501(3)(a)
Roach v Electoral
Commissioner
(2007) 233 CLR 162;
Rowe v Electoral Commissioner
[2016] FCA 1081
243 CLR 1 at 20
, 58-59 [157]-[161], 118 [372]-[374];
Murphy v Electoral
Commissioner
[2016] HCA 36
; (2016) 261 CLR 28 at 50-51
, 60-61 [61]-[63], 67-68
[85]-[87], 106-107 [244], 121-122 [293];
Ruddick v The Commonwealth
(2022) 275 CLR 333. See also
Babet v The Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR
, 917-918 [157]-[160], 925 [184];
[2025] HCA 21
; 423 ALR 83 at 117, 124-125,
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520
Babet v The Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR 883 at 912
[2025] HCA 21
; 423 ALR 83 at 117.
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 567
(footnote omitted).
Fulton v City of
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
(2021) 141 S Ct 1868 at 1896, fn 28, quoting
Meiklejohn,
Free Speech and Its Relation to Self‑Government
at 19 (emphasis added).
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520
at 564, quoting Dixon, "Sources of Legal Authority", in
Jesting Pilate and
Other Papers and Addresses
(1965) 198 at 199.
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 570-571,
Stephens v West Australian Newspapers Ltd
[1994] HCA 45
; (1994) 182 CLR 211 at
Levy v Victoria
[1997] HCA 31
189 CLR 579 at 625-626.
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520
at 564-565.
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520
See, for instance,
(2011) 243 CLR 506 at 544 [50];
Clubb v Edwards
[2019] HCA 11
; (2019) 267 CLR
, 215 [127]-[128], 229 [175]-[176], 299-300 [368]-[369], 301-302
[377], 304 [386];
LibertyWorks Inc v The Commonwealth
[2021] HCA 18
; (2021) 274 CLR 1 at
Unions NSW v New South Wales (Unions NSW [No 3])
[2023] HCA 4
277 CLR 627 at 644
Babet v The Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR 883
[2025] HCA 21
; 423 ALR 83 at 152;
Ravbar v The Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 25
; (2025) 99 ALJR
1000 at 1017-1018
, 1098 [429];
[2025] HCA 25
; 423 ALR 241 at 256, 365.
Gerner v Victoria
[2020] HCA 48
270 CLR 412 at 426-427
Levy v Victoria
[1997] HCA 31
189 CLR 579 at 607.
Miller v TCN
Channel Nine Pty Ltd
[1986] HCA 60
; (1986) 161 CLR 556 at 569, 579, 615, 636;
Capital Television Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
(1992) 177 CLR 106 at 180-186,
Theophanous v Herald & Weekly Times Ltd
[1994] HCA 46
; (1994) 182 CLR 104
at 189-190, 193-194, 195-207;
Stephens v West Australian Newspapers Ltd
[1994] HCA 45
; (1994) 182 CLR 211 at 257-258, 259;
Langer v The Commonwealth
[1996] HCA 43
186 CLR 302 at 324;
McGinty v Western Australia
[1996] HCA 48
; (1996) 186 CLR 140 at
234-236, 291.
Broadcasting Corporation v Lenah Game Meats Pty Ltd
(2001) 208 CLR 199 at
330-339 [337]-[348];
Monis v The Queen
[2013] HCA 4
; (2013) 249 CLR 92 at 181-184
LibertyWorks Inc v The Commonwealth
[2021] HCA 18
; (2021) 274 CLR 1 at 95
, 111-114 [298]-[304];
Ruddick v The Commonwealth
(2022) 275 CLR 333
at 398 [174];
Farm Transparency International Ltd v New South Wales
(2022) 277 CLR 537 at 623-624 [270];
Babet v The Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99
ALJR 883 at 929
[2025] HCA 21
; 423 ALR 83 at 139-140;
Ravbar v The Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 25
; (2025) 99 ALJR 1000 at 1065-1071
[2025] HCA 25
; 423 ALR 241 at 321-328.
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 561.
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520
at 562. See also
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
(1992) 177 CLR 106 at 158.
McGinty v Western Australia
[1996] HCA 48
; (1996) 186 CLR 140 at 235-236.
Zines, "Legalism, realism
and judicial rhetoric in constitutional law" (2002) 5
Constitutional Law and
Policy Review
Lee, "The Implied Freedom of
Political Communication", in Lee and Winterton (eds),
Constitutional Landmarks
(2003) 383 at 392, 401-402.
Attorney-General for NSW
v Brewery Employés Union of NSW
[1908] HCA 94
; (1908) 6 CLR 469 at 590.
Commonwealth
(2020) 270 CLR 152 at 210 [132]. See also at 170-171 [5].
Commonwealth
(2020) 270 CLR 152 at 193 [84].
Commonwealth
(2020) 270 CLR 152 at 170-171 [5]. See also at 220 [172].
That Parliament can define
the constitutional meaning of "alien" subject to limited exceptions: compare
Jones v The Commonwealth
(2023) 280 CLR 62 at 109-110 [126]-[127].
Singh v The Commonwealth
[2004] HCA 43
; (2004) 222 CLR 322 at 329
Pochi v Macphee
[1982] HCA 60
; (1982) 151
CLR 101 at 109, 112, 116.
Jones v The
Commonwealth
(2023) 280 CLR 62 at 108-109 [123]-[125].
See Vattel,
(1760), vol 1, bk 1, ch 19 at 98 §231, bk 2,
ch 9 at 161 §125.
East India Co v
(1685) 10 ST 371 at 530.
(1760), vol 1, bk 1, ch 19 at 98 §230.
Blackstone,
Commentaries
on the Laws of England
(1765), bk 1, ch 7 at 251.
[1837] EngR 882
Moo PC 460 at 471
ER 889 at 893].
Nishimura Ekiu v United
[1892] USSC 26
; (1892) 142 US 651 at 659. See also
Fong Yue Ting v United States
[1893] USSC 185
; (1893) 149 US 698 at 705;
Turner v Williams
[1904] USSC 138
; (1904) 194 US 279 at
Phillimore,
Commentaries
Upon International Law
(1854), vol 1,
, ch 10 at 233
R v Bottrill
KB 41 at 51.
[1891] UKLawRpAC 7
; [1891] AC 272 at
Attorney-General for
Canada v Cain
[1906] UKLawRpAC 37
; [1906] AC 542 at 547. See also
Johnstone v Pedlar
[1921] UKHL 1
; [1921] 2 AC 262 at 276, 283, 296.
Robtelmes v Brenan
[1906] HCA 58
; (1906) 4 CLR 395
at 403, 415. See Prince, "'Australia's Most Inhumane
Mass Deportation Abuse':
Robtelmes v Brenan
and Expulsion of the 'Alien'
Islanders" (2018) 5
Law and History
Robtelmes v Brenan
[1906] HCA 58
; (1906) 4 CLR 395
(1992) 176 CLR 1 at 29.
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister
for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
(1992) 176 CLR 1 at 10.
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister
for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
(1992) 176 CLR 1 at
Kioa v West
[1985] HCA 81
159 CLR 550 at 631;
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister for Immigration, Local
Government and Ethnic Affairs
(1992) 176 CLR 1 at 19.
Fardon v Attorney-General
[2004] HCA 46
; (2004) 223 CLR 575 at 611-612
Bradley v The
Commonwealth
[1973] HCA 34
; (1973) 128 CLR 557 at 582. See also
Calvin's Case
7 Co Rep 1a at 6a [77 ER 377 at 384];
Johnstone v Pedlar
[1921] UKHL 1
; [1921] 2 AC 262
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181.
(2022) 275 CLR 333.
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR 883; 423 ALR
Mulholland v Australian
Electoral Commission
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 223
, 247 [186]-[187],
298 [337], 303-304 [354].
Milicevic v Campbell
(1975) 132 CLR 307 at 309. See also
Baxter v Ah Way
[1909] HCA 30
; (1909) 8 CLR 626
Australian Communist Party v The Commonwealth
[1951] HCA 5
; (1951) 83 CLR 1 at
[1837] EngR 882
Moo PC 460 at 471
ER 889 at 893];
Johnstone v Pedlar
[1921] UKHL 1
; [1921] 2 AC 262
at 296. See also Vattel,
The Law of Nations
(1760), vol 1,
bk 2, ch 8 at 153 §100; Phillimore,
Commentaries Upon
International Law
(1854), vol 1,
, ch 10 at 233
Regulations
(Cth), Sch 2, cl 408.216(1), Sch 4,
, public interest criterion 4001.
LibertyWorks Inc v
The Commonwealth
[2021] HCA 18
; (2021) 274 CLR 1 at 72
Migration Act 1958
, 2nd ed (2005) at 25-26.
Walker (Inspector of
Taxes) v Centaur Clothes Group Ltd
[2000] UKHL 23
; [2000] 1 WLR 799 at 805;
[2000] UKHL 23
; [2000] 2 All ER
589 at 595. Discussed in
Palmanova Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
Palmanova Pty Ltd v
The Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 35
[2004] HCA 39
; (2004) 220 CLR 1 at 50
[2025] HCA 25
; (2025) 99 ALJR 1000 at 1038
, 1045-1047 [177]-[185], 1054-1056 [215]-[225], 1065 [270]-[271];
[2025] HCA 25
241 at 283, 293-295, 305-308, 320-321.
LibertyWorks Inc v The
Commonwealth
[2021] HCA 18
; (2021) 274 CLR 1 at 71
, 79 [204];
Alexander v Minister
for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 19
; (2022) 276 CLR 336 at 425
NZYQ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 280 CLR 137 at 157
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR 883; 423 ALR
Babet v The Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR 883 at 924-925
[2025] HCA 21
; 423 ALR 83 at 133.
Babet v The Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR 883 at 925
[2025] HCA 21
; 423 ALR 83 at 134.
Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
(1996) 185 CLR 259 at 272, quoting
Collector of Customs v Pozzolanic Enterprises Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 456
; (1993) 43 FCR 280
at 287. See also
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex
(2001) 206 CLR 57 at 66 [23];
Plaintiff M64/2015 v Minister
for Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] HCA 50
; (2015) 258 CLR 173 at 185
Wilkie v The Commonwealth
[2017] HCA 40
; (2017) 263 CLR 487 at 542
Newcastle Operations Pty Ltd v Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] HCA 39
274 CLR 565 at 602
Minister for Immigration
and Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
(1996) 185 CLR 259 at 272. See also
Darling Casino Ltd v NSW Casino Control Authority
[1997] HCA 11
; (1997) 191 CLR 602 at
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v Singh
[2002] HCA 7
209 CLR 533 at 554
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v
[2014] HCA 45
; (2014) 254 CLR 317 at 335
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at
Whether the power to deport
an alien is as absolute as the power to control who may enter this country need
not be addressed in
these reasons.
[1906] HCA 58
; (1906) 4 CLR 395.
(1992) 176 CLR 1.
(1992) 176 CLR 1 at 25-26
(footnote omitted).
(2002) 212 CLR 162 at 170
Ex parte Te
212 CLR 162 at 171 [22], quoting
[2001] 1 SCR 911 at 989 [160],
in turn quoting
R v Simmons
[1988] 2 SCR 495 at 528 per
Dickson CJ.
(2015) 255 CLR 514 at 647
[479]. See also
Ruddock v Vadarlis
[2001] FCA 1329
; (2001) 110 FCR 491 at 543
[2018] HCA 2
; (2018) 262 CLR 333 at 358
(footnotes omitted).
[2021] HCA 19
; (2021) 273 CLR 21 at 42
(footnote omitted).
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 567.
I otherwise refer to, and adhere to, my reasons in
Ravbar v The
Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 25
; (2025) 99 ALJR 1000; 423 ALR 241.
[2025] HCA 25
; (2025) 99 ALJR
1000 at 1067
[2025] HCA 25
; 423 ALR 241 at 323.
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at
per McHugh J, 246 [184], 247 [186]‑[187] per
Gummow and Hayne JJ, 298 [337] per Callinan J, 303-304 [354] per
(2022) 275 CLR 333 at
391-392 [155], 396-397 [172] per Gordon, Edelman and Gleeson JJ, 398 [174]
per Steward J.
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR 883 at
per Gordon J, 928-929 [202]-[203] per Edelman J,
929 [205], 930 [209] per Steward J;
[2025] HCA 21
; 423 ALR 83 at 109-111, 138-140.
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at 622
per McHugh J.
Wildlife (Game) (Hunting
Season) Regulations 1994
(Vic), reg 5.
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at
625-626. McHugh J went on (at 626) to assume that the impugned regulation
did nonetheless impose a burden
because the parties had assumed that, absent it,
there was a right to enter the hunting area to make a protest.
(2017) 261 CLR 328 at 408 [259].
(2017) 261 CLR 328 at 408
[259] (footnote omitted).
(2017) 261 CLR 328 at
502-503 [557].
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR 883 at 921
[2025] HCA 21
; 423 ALR 83 at 129 (footnotes omitted).
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR
520 at 567 (emphasis added).
[2014] HCA 35
; (2014) 254 CLR 508 at 548
See, for example,
NSW v New South Wales
(2013) 252 CLR 530 at 580 [144].
By way of analogy, the
Supreme Court of the United States has held that the protection of the First
Amendment of the
United States
Constitution
applies to "all people within
[the United States'] borders" and is engaged "once an alien lawfully enters and
resides in this country":
Bridges v Wixon
[1945] USSC 118
; (1945) 326 US 135 at 161;
Kwong Hai Chew v Colding
[1953] USSC 16
; (1953) 344 US 590 at 596-597 fn 5.
[2014] HCA 35
; (2014) 254 CLR 508 at 577
(emphasis in original).
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at
Subject to the grant of a
visa pursuant to the United States' domestic law.
Save for the Minister for
plaintiff's contentions concerning
the implied freedom.
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181.
There was also a challenge
to the "no overlap rule" under s 126(2A) of the Electoral Act.
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 222
(footnote omitted), citing
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at 622,
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 223
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 247
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 247
, 249 [192].
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 246
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at 622, 625-626.
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 298
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 298
(emphasis in original; footnote omitted).
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 303
(footnote omitted).
Reasons of Edelman J at
Migration Act 1958
Chetcuti v The
Commonwealth
(2021) 272 CLR 609 at 621 [11].
Chetcuti v The
Commonwealth
(2021) 272 CLR 609 at 622 [12].
for Home Affairs
[2023] HCA 18
; (2023) 278 CLR 75 at 99
Migration (Offences and
Undesirable Persons) Amendment Act 1992
Migration Legislation
Amendment Act 1994
Migration Legislation
Amendment (Strengthening of Provisions relating to Character and Conduct) Act
Hand v Hell's Angels
Motorcycle Club Inc
[1991] FCA 633
; (1991) 25 ALD 667.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 17 December 1992
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 17 December 1992
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 17 December 1992
Collector of Customs v
Enterprises Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 456
; (1993) 43 FCR 280 at 287, cited in
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
CLR 259 at 272.
Zurich Insurance Co Ltd v
[2023] HCA 25
; (2023) 277 CLR 164 at 175
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 566-567.
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 567.
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 571.
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at 622.
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
177 CLR 106 at 139.
Aid/Watch Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2010] HCA 42
; (2010) 241 CLR 539 at 556
(2013) 252 CLR 530 at 551
(2013) 252 CLR 530 at 551
[2014] HCA 35
; (2014) 254 CLR 508 at 593
, referring to
Unions NSW v New South Wales
(2013) 252 CLR 530 at
Unions NSW v New South
(2013) 252 CLR 530 at 578 [135].
(2017) 261 CLR 328 at 430
(2022) 277 CLR 537 at 564
Cunliffe v The
Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 44
; (1994) 182 CLR 272 at 336.
Cunliffe v The
Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 44
; (1994) 182 CLR 272 at 336.
(2013) 252 CLR 530 at 550
(2013) 252 CLR 530 at 550
[25], citing
Roberts v Bass
[2002] HCA 57
; (2002) 212 CLR 1 at 29
[2004] HCA 39
; (2004) 220 CLR 1 at 31
, 33 [36], 64 [147], 78 [197].
[2013] HCA 4
; (2013) 249 CLR 92 at 177
[2019] HCA 11
; (2019) 267 CLR 171 at 191
, 194 [42], [43].
(2022) 277 CLR 537 at
551-552 [28] (footnote omitted).
Brown v Members of the
Classification Review Board of the Office of Film & Literature
Classification
[1998] FCA 319
; (1998) 82 FCR 225 at 238-239.
Clubb v Edwards
[2019] HCA 11
; (2019) 267 CLR 171 at 258
Brown v Tasmania
(2017) 261 CLR 328 at 360 [90], 384 [185], 409-410 [262], 430 [313], 503-504
Brown v Tasmania
(2017) 261 CLR 328 at 384 [185]. See also
Unions NSW v New South
(2013) 252 CLR 530 at 551 [30], 554 [36];
Tajjour v New South
[2014] HCA 35
; (2014) 254 CLR 508 at 569
, 593-594 [198];
McCloy v New South
[2015] HCA 34
; (2015) 257 CLR 178 at 202-203
Australian Electoral Commission
[1999] HCA 31
; (1999) 73 ALJR 1086 at 1090
[1999] HCA 31
734 at 740-741.
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 560, citing
Cunliffe v The
Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 44
; (1994) 182 CLR 272 at 327.
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 567.
(1992) 177 CLR 106 at 136.
Theophanous v Herald
& Weekly Times Ltd
[1994] HCA 46
; (1994) 182 CLR 104 at 146.
Theophanous v Herald
& Weekly Times Ltd
[1994] HCA 46
; (1994) 182 CLR 104 at 148.
[1994] HCA 46
; (1994) 182 CLR 104 at 168,
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 566.
Levy v Victoria
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at 622.
[1992] HCA 46
; (1992) 177 CLR 1 at 76.
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at 622 (emphasis in original).
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181.
(2022) 275 CLR 333.
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at 622.
Mulholland v Australian
Electoral Commission
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 224
, 246 [184], 298 [337],
Ruddick v The Commonwealth
(2022) 275 CLR 333 at 391-392
[155]-[156].
Levy v Victoria
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at 626.
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 223
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 247
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 249
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 298
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 303
(footnote omitted).
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 305
(2017) 261 CLR 328 at 365
(2017) 261 CLR 328 at 383
(2017) 261 CLR 328 at 384
Stone, "Rights, Personal
Rights and Freedoms: The Nature of the Freedom of Political Communication"
[2001] MelbULawRw 13
; (2001) 25
Melbourne University Law Review
374 at 400-401.
Meagher, "Is There a Common
Law 'Right' to Freedom of Speech?"
[2019] MelbULawRw 15
; (2019) 43
Melbourne University Law Review
269 at 270.
Nationwide News
Pty Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
; (1992) 177 CLR 1 at 48.
South Wales
[2014] HCA 35
; (2014) 254 CLR 508 at 578
Monis v The Queen
[2013] HCA 4
; (2013) 249 CLR 92 at 142
Babet v The Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 21
; (2025) 99 ALJR 883 at 928
, 932 [222];
[2025] HCA 21
; 423 ALR 83 at 138, 143;
Ravbar v The Commonwealth
[2025] HCA 25
; (2025) 99 ALJR 1000 at 1017-1018
[2025] HCA 25
241 at 256.
South Wales
[2014] HCA 35
; (2014) 254 CLR 508 at 579
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
; (2004) 220 CLR 1 at 49
Wotton v Queensland
(2012) 246 CLR
1 at 19 [42];
v New South Wales
[2014] HCA 35
; (2014) 254 CLR 508 at 579
Monis v The Queen
[2013] HCA 4
; (2013) 249 CLR 92 at 143
Monis v The Queen
[2013] HCA 4
; (2013) 249 CLR 92 at 143
(2012) 246 CLR 1 at 15 [28].
Mulholland v Australian
Electoral Commission
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 200
Capital Television Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
(1992) 177 CLR 106 at 169.
Monis v The Queen
[2013] HCA 4
; (2013) 249 CLR 92 at 143
Australian Capital
Television Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
(1992) 177 CLR 106 at 135, see also at
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
; (1992) 177 CLR 1 at 47-49;
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at
Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 561-562.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 17 December 1992
at 4121-4126; Australia, House of Representatives,
Migration (Offences and
Undesirable Persons) Amendment Bill 1992
, Explanatory Memorandum.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Migration (Offences and Undesirable Persons) Amendment Bill
, Explanatory Memorandum at 4 [16].
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 17 December 1992
Oxford English Dictionary
, "incite", sense a, September 2023.
Oxford English
, "discord", sense 1a, March 2025.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Migration (Offences and Undesirable Persons) Amendment Bill
, Explanatory Memorandum at 4 [16] (emphasis added).
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520.
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at
Constitution
s 7 ("The Senate shall be composed of senators for each State, directly
chosen by the people of the State ...");
("The House of
Representatives shall be composed of members directly chosen by the people of
the Commonwealth ..."). See also
Constitution
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at 560,
Cunliffe v The Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 44
; (1994) 182 CLR 272 at 327.
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579.
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR 579 at
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181.
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 197
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 197
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 200
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 201
, 265 [246], 268-269 [256], 270 [261].
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 219
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 223
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 223
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 246
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 298
(emphasis in original).
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at
(footnotes omitted).
(2022) 275 CLR 333.
(2022) 275 CLR 333 at 394
[161]-[162].
(2022) 275 CLR 333 at 386
[140], 394 [162].
(2022) 275 CLR 333 at
391-392 [155]-[156].
(2022) 275 CLR 333 at 396
(2022) 275 CLR 333 at 343
(2022) 275 CLR 333 at 349
(2022) 275 CLR 333 at 366
(2022) 275 CLR 333 at
366-367 [75].
(2022) 275 CLR 333 at 367
Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs v Moorcroft
[2021] HCA 19
273 CLR 21 at 42
, citing, amongst other cases,
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister
for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
(1992) 176 CLR 1 at 10,
29, 44-45, 64-65;
CZA19 v The Commonwealth
(2025) 99 ALJR 650 at 660
[2025] HCA 8
; 422 ALR 133 at 144, quoting
Re Woolley; Ex parte Applicants
(2004) 225 CLR 1 at 14 [26].
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister
for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
(1992) 176 CLR 1 at
Attorney-General for
Canada v Cain
[1906] UKLawRpAC 37
; [1906] AC 542 at 546, quoted in
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister
for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
(1992) 176 CLR 1 at
Chu Kheng Lim v Minister
for Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs
(1992) 176 CLR 1 at 29,
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
(2023) 280 CLR 137 at 154-155 [31], 158-159 [46], 162 [55];
v The Commonwealth
(2025) 99 ALJR 650 at 660-661 [38]-[45];
[2025] HCA 8
; 422 ALR 133 at
(2022) 275 CLR 333 at 396
[1997] HCA 25
; (1997) 189 CLR 520 at
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
; (2004) 220 CLR 1 at 52-53
Coleman v Power
[2004] HCA 39
; (2004) 220 CLR 1 at 31
Levy v Victoria
[1997] HCA 31
; (1997) 189 CLR
579 at 619. See also
Mulholland v Australian Electoral Commission
[2004] HCA 41
220 CLR 181 at 200
Hogan v Hinch
(2011) 243 CLR 506 at 555-556
Mulholland v Australian
Electoral Commission
[2004] HCA 41
; (2004) 220 CLR 181 at 199-200
Comcare v Banerji
[2019] HCA 23
; (2019) 267 CLR 373 at 402
RTF format (1.19 MB)
Signed PDF/A format