Cerny & Cerny [2013] FMCAfam 315 (5 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2013] FMCAfam 315
FAMILY LAW – Property – long marriage,
six children – consideration as to notional add-backs to the property pool
for division.
Family Law Act 1975
Stanford v Stanford
[2012] HCA 52
[2012] FamCA 1133
Russell and
[1999] FamCA 1875
(1999) FLC 92-877
Teal & Teal
[2010] FamCAFC 120
Respondent:
File Number:
SYC 3469 of 2007
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Antwan Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitors for the Respondent:
H K Husseini & Co
(1) That within one month from this date the husband do
all things necessary and sign all necessary documents to transfer to the wife
his interest in the former matrimonial property at Property B, being the whole
of the land in folio identifier [omitted].
(2) That in default of the husband complying with the previous order within the
time provided, the Registrar of the Federal Magistrates
Court of Australia at
Wollongong is hereby appointed pursuant to
Section 106A
of the Act to execute
any document or instrument in the name of the husband and to do all acts and
things necessary to give validity
and operation to the said document or
instrument and to these orders.
(3) That within two months from this date the husband pay to the wife a sum of
(4) That in default of payment by the husband as provided for in the previous
order the wife is hereby appointed trustee for sale
of the home unit property at
[2] Property L at the best price reasonably obtainable and for such purpose the
said property shall
vest in the wife as trustee for sale and that upon sale the
wife distribute the proceeds of sale in the following order and
(a) in payment
of agents commission and legal costs on sale,
discharge of the mortgage encumbrance secured thereon
(c) in payment
of the wife of the sum of
together with interest
(d) in payment
of the balance then remaining to the husband.
(5) Liberty to apply as to implementation of these orders on short notice.
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the
Cerny & Cerny
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYC 3469 of
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(AS CORRECTED)
Proceedings
are proceedings for property settlement commenced by the applicant wife by
application filed on 17 March 2010.
orders sought by the applicant in that application in summary are as
the husband pay, by way of spousal maintenance the sum of $500 per week;
the husband do all things necessary to transfer to the wife is interest in the
real estate property at Property B;
the husband do all things necessary to effect a sale of the property at [2]
Property L, two properties owned by him in [T], [E]
and the proceeds of such
sale be divided as to 65% of the wife and the balance to the
trial the wife did not press her application for periodic spouse
maintenance.
support of orders sought by her the applicant wife relied upon the following
financial statement filed on 15 February 2013,
affidavit filed on 13 July 2012,
of Mr C sworn on 19 July 2012.
respondent husband filed his response on 10 June 2010 and in that response he
sought orders in summary as follows:
the wife transfer to the husband her interest in the property at Property B and
that the husband indemnify the wife from any
mortgage secured over this
the husband transfer to the wife the home unit property at [2] Property
the alternative the husband sought orders that provided for a sale of the said
properties and that the proceeds of sale be divided
respondent husband relied upon the following documents at trial:
financial statement filed on 6 September 2012,
affidavit filed on 6 September 2012,
affidavit of Mr J filed on 6 September 2012.
financial conciliation conference was conducted in the proceedings on 13 January
2011 and the matter was not resolved.
11 August 2011 on interim hearing the wife was granted sole use and occupation
of the matrimonial home at Property B and the husband
was restrained from
entering upon or going to those premises without the consent of the wife.
Subsequently
the matter was listed for hearing on 23 July 2012. On that day the matter was
not ready to proceed due to outstanding
valuation issues. Further directions
were made and the matter was adjourned to 8 October 2012 for further
directions.
8 October 2012 the matter was adjourned for hearing to 21 February 2013 and
trial directions were made. On 21 February 2013 the
matter was adjourned not
reached to 27 March 2013 for hearing.
27 March 2013 the matter was listed for hearing and judgment was reserved to a
date to be fixed.
wife is presently aged 61. The husband is presently aged 60.
wife presently receives a Centrelink disability pension by reason of her health
circumstances.
husband asserts long-standing ill health. However it is also his evidence that
he has been self-employed as a [omitted] until
parties were married in [E] on [date omitted] 1974 and migrated to Australia in
1 January 2010 in [E] and has
subsequently remarried. It is the husband’s evidence that he is reliant
upon his new wife and
her family for his day-to-day support.
the commencement of their cohabitation the parties had minimal assets.
are six children of the marriage all of whom are now over the age of 18 years
and independent of the parties.
the course of final submissions each of the parties contended that contributions
overall should be regarded as equal with the
wife contending for a modest
section 75(2)
adjustment in her favour and the husband contending that there
should be no such adjustment with the matrimonial pool to be divided
1980 the parties purchased the matrimonial home at Property B jointly with the
husband’s cousin. They provided a deposit
from savings at that time with
the balance provided by way of mortgage. In the late 1980s the parties acquired
the husband’s
cousin’s interest in the property and by way of
a period of years various improvements were undertaken to the property either by
paid tradesmen or in some circumstances by the
the period of the relationship the wife was the primary caregiver for the six
children of the marriage and primary homemaker.
times times during cohabitation both of the parties received modest
worker’s compensation payments, which were then applied
to matrimonial
parties purchased an investment property at [1] Property L for the sum of about
$105,000 in about 1994. This property was purchased
in the joint names of the
parties with the purchase price comprising funds then available to the parties
and the balance by way of
mortgage. The property was mostly tenanted from 1994
until about 2005.
husband was in and out of employment during cohabitation and in the latter years
was engaged as a [omitted]. The husband now lives
primarily in [E] and asserts
that he is not in any form of employment.
investment property at [2] Property L was purchased by the parties in about 1996
for $90,000 with a mortgage of $50,000. For reasons
not explained, the property
was at this time purchased in the name of one of the parties’ sons who at
that time was 16 years
of age. In 2009 the property was transferred back into
the husband’s name alone. This property has been tenanted since purchase
and rental payments were received by the husband who substantially applied
payments to outgoings and mortgage payments in relation
to the property. The son
asserts that when the property was transferred back to the husband there was an
outstanding mortgage balance
on the property of only $37,000.
relation to this property in 2007 the child of the marriage Mr C borrowed the
sum of $15,000 from the parties by way of redraw
as against the mortgage secured
over the Property B property. He asserts that he has paid this borrowing back.
It appears that in
fact sums totalling almost $24,000 were provided by the
parties to this son to meet outstanding mortgage payments on this home unit
the son fell into mortgage arrears.
August 2001 the parties acquired a home unit in [T], [E] for the sum of
September 2003 the parties opened a joint account with the Arab Bank in [E] with
a deposit of $16,272. It appears that subsequently
the husband opened an account
with the Arab Bank in [E] in his own name and he transferred monies from time to
time. In November
and December 2004 the husband transferred funds totalling
$7,030 to his account.
circumstances of the parties’ separation are unclear, with the wife
asserting that there was a separation under one roof
commencing in early 2005
and the husband denying such separation.
parties continued to live together in the matrimonial home until orders were
made as to sole use and occupation in August 2011.
Since August 2011 the husband
has lived either in [E] on or in Australia.
their son [name omitted] for the sum of $270,000. The
disposition of the net
proceeds of sale is the subject of significant dispute between the parties. The
net proceeds of sale were
in the sum of approximately $221,811. This sum was
deposited to the credit of the parties’ joint ANZ Bank account on 7 June
the next day a withdrawal from that account in the sum of $220,000 was made. It
was put to the husband in cross-examination that
this withdrawal was made by him
in cash and the funds were subsequently invested by him in a term deposit
account and on maturity
of that term deposit the husband then deposited the sum
of $227,555 into an Arab Bank account in his sole name on 8 February 2006.
Thereafter on
13 February 2006 the husband transferred the sum of $200,020
to an Arab Bank account in [E] in his own name and notwithstanding documents
being available to evidence these transactions the husband’s evidence in
this regard was evasive and non-responsive.
husband asserts that after applying funds to purchase a home unit in [E], the
balance of monies, he asserts in the sum of $180,000,
has been expended by him
in repayments and living expenses. However notwithstanding the husband being
aware as to this issue being
a live issue for trial and notwithstanding that he
is in possession of all relevant financial documents that would evidence the
expenditure
of these funds by him he has produced no documents supporting his
very broad contention as to how these funds were dissipated. It
court’s conclusion that there is no reason why the sum of $180,000 should
not be included in the notional pool for division.
to the sale of this property the husband travelled to [E] and purchased a
property at [A], [E] for the sum of US$40,000
in July 2006.
the husband was unable to explain overseas transfers in the sum of US$9,500 in
April 2007, US$9,000 in May 2007, US$1,000
in April 2008 and US$9,000 in July
2008. However these transfers may have some relevance to the settlement of the
purchase of the
[A] property.
February 2010 that the husband concedes that he borrowed the sum of $64,350 by
way of additional mortgage borrowing secured against
the property at [2]
Property L. He further concedes that he has retained this sum for his own use
and benefit. The husband asserts
that these funds were used by him to meet
living expenses and payment of outgoings. However the parties were divorced in
2010. The husband gives no evidence as to why he did not seek other
employment nor as to particulars relating to the expenditure
of this sum
notwithstanding that such evidence is available to him and within his
trial the husband asserted that he no longer owned the two [E] properties, they
having been transferred to his cousin. However
the parties are agreed as to the
value for the purposes of trial and it is further agreed that they be included
in the pool of assets
for the purposes of division.
husband conceded that on 23 February 2012 he withdrew the sum of $11,041 and
representing his ANZ Superannuation Bond and that
he has retained those proceeds
for his own purposes. He asserts that the funds were used to repay a friend in
relation to borrowings
post separation. There is no reason why this sum should
not be notionally included for the purposes of
court had the opportunity to of observing and listening to the parties’
oral evidence during cross-examination.
Notwithstanding
that interpreters assisted both parties during the course of the evidence it was
clear that on many occasions the
husband understood matters being put to him in
cross-examination and initially sought to respond in English until he turned to
interpreter to assist.
court is of the view that much of the husband’s evidence in terms of the
financial history of the marriage was unreliable
and in some circumstances his
protestations that he was simply unable to recall or had no knowledge of a
particular transaction were
is a matter that has been before the court awaiting hearing for some time. The
issues as to the various add-backs sought by the
wife are not new and the
husband has been aware of such issues for some time. Notwithstanding that
circumstance and notwithstanding
that the husband it is to be reasonably
inferred was able to source financial documents that related to the various
impugned transactions
he failed to provide documents that at least one would
expect in his view would have assisted his case and met the wife’s
in relation to some if not all of the add-backs asserted by her.
is no doubt in the court’s mind that it was the husband that managed the
party’s finances, their assets and their
banking. He has available to him
no doubt documents that would reasonably be expected to assist his case. He has
chosen not to do
all the circumstances where there is a conflict between the evidence of the wife
and the husband the court prefers the evidence
of the wife unless the
husband’s evidence is supported by objective
approach to the determination of an application under
of the Act is set out in
Stanford v Stanford
[2012] HCA 52.
was observed by Ryan J in
[2012] FamCA 1133:
question which ultimately must be answered is whether it is just and equitable
to alter the parties’ rights and
interests in their property. The power to
make a property settlement order must be exercised in accordance with legal
principles,
including the principles which the Act itself lays down. In this
case the parties agree (as do I) that by reason of the manner by
conducted their marriage, which has now irretrievably broken down, it is just
and equitable that their interests and rights
in property are altered; where
they disagree is in relation to what that adjustment should comprise.
Thus, it is
necessary to first, identify the nature of the parties interests in their
property, liabilities and financial resources
at the time of the hearing.
evaluate the contributions made by the parties as defined in
, (b) and (c) and the effect of any proposed order upon the earning
capacity of either party.
then evaluate the matters contained in
insofar as they are relevant, including any other order made under the
Act affecting a party or child and any child support under
Support (Assessment) Act 1989
(Cth) (“CSAA”) that a party to the
marriage is to provide, or might be liable to provide in the future, for a child
the marriage.
Consideration
of whether it is just and equitable that an alteration of the parties’
interests is made and, if it is, its terms
are required.
question must not be conflated with the outcome of the
deliberations, albeit these may inform the justice and equity
determination.
imposes on the Court an obligation, that as far as practicable, the
orders will finally determine the financial relationships between
the parties
and avoid further proceedings between them.”
the process ordinarily involves a staged process.
court must identify the existing legal and equitable interests of the parties in
the property, the liabilities and financial resources
of the parties at the time
of the hearing and then whether it is just and equitable to make a property
settlement order.
a consideration should not be guided by an assumption that the parties’
rights to or interests in property are or should
be different from those that
then exist. The question is whether those rights and interests should be
is no presumption that one or other party has the right to have the property of
the parties divided between them or a right
to an interest in marital property
that is fixed by reference to the various matters in
). This consideration addresses the prohibition in
of the Act.
court needs to conclude that it would be unjust or unfair to leave property
rights intact. Such a conclusion cannot be informed
by reference to
(2) factors.
many cases this requirement is readily satisfied where the parties are no longer
in a marital or defacto relationship and thus,
for example, the common ownership
or use of property by husband and wife will no longer be possible or the express
or implicit assumptions
that underpinned existing property arrangements such as
the accumulation of assets or financial resources by one for the benefit
have been brought to an end with the relationship.
particular such a circumstance arises where both parties seek adjustive orders
but are unable to agree as to same.
prohibition is overcome the court then considers the contributions
made by the parties as defined in
section 79(4)(a)
to (c). The court must then
consider the subjective considerations as to the parties by having regard to the
provisions of
section 75(2)
in so far as they are relevant. Such a consideration
can include arguments as to asserted add-backs, alleged waste by a party or
other financial resources that it is contended should be added to the actual
pool as notional property or liabilities.
the light of the reconsideration of the role of
as a threshold question
it would be appropriate for the court to consider the “justice and
equity” of the actual orders
to be made (see
Russell and Russell
[1999] FamCA 1875
(1999) FLC 92-877
Teal & Teal
[2010] FamCAFC 120))
context of the courts obligation to make “appropriate orders” as
provided for in
of the Act.
The Legal and Equitable Interests of the Parties
trial the parties provided to the court a working balance sheet that was
admitted into evidence as Exhibit A.
submissions there was substantial agreement as to the balance sheet but not
unexpectedly the parties were in disagreement as to
various notional add-backs
sought by the wife has against the husband.
agreed asset pool comprises the following:
Joint Matrimonial home
at Property B $415,000
Husband Home unit at Property L $230,000
Wife Contents $ 500
Husband Contents $ 2000
Husband Ford motor vehicle $ 1000
Husband Toyota motor vehicle $ 500
Husband [E] properties
Liabilities
Husband Mortgage home unit at Property L
the wife sought notional add backs in relation to the property pool for
adjustment that comprise the following:
ANZ bank drawdown retained
by the husband $ 64,000
Sale proceeds of [1] Property L $220,000
Superannuation funds withdrawn $ 11,041
Arab Bank funds not accounted for $ 25,159
Funds withdrawn from husband’s business account $ 14,958
Overseas funds transfers $ 28,500US
Various cheque withdrawals in 2006 $ 33,682
court has dealt with the first three items sought to be added back by the wife
as against the husband in its reasons above. Three
sums being $64,000, $180,000
and $11,041 will be notionally added back to the asset pool for division.
as to the remaining asserted add-backs in all the circumstances the court is not
satisfied on the evidence that such sums
should be notionally included for the
purposes of division. The parties remained on and off living under the same
roof until August
2011 when the husband was excluded by court order from the
reasonable to expect that modest sums of capital were used for the
parties’ support and payment of outgoings.
Accordingly
the matrimonial asset pool in the sum of $719,000 will be increased by further
sums totalling
, making a total in all of
Contributions
parties contended in submissions and that the court should regard the
parties’ contributions during cohabitation and to
trial as equal. The
court considers having regard to the evidence this to be a most appropriate
circumstance.
that basis the wife would be entitled to the sum of
Such an entitlement would see the wife receive the former matrimonial home at
Bonnyrigg unencumbered together with a further adjustive
payment from the
Section 75(2)
husband contends that there should be no further adjustment from the
parties’ contribution-based entitlements by reason
of a consideration of
the subjective factors in this section.
court is conscious of the age of both parties and their respective assertions as
to their health. Otherwise no other factor referred
to in the section is of any
significance.
a contribution-based entitlement the wife would receive the matrimonial home
unencumbered and a cash adjustment from the husband
that would provide her with some capital reserve.
all the circumstances the court is not satisfied that there should be any
adjustment by reason of a consideration of the
Appropriate Orders
court is required by reason of
to make such order as it considers
appropriate.
husband it appears has made a new life for himself in [E] where he has
substantial funds. He may choose to refinance the investment
property at
Property L standing in his name to fund the adjustive payment to the wife or he
may resolve to sell the property and
then remit the balance of his funds to
court is satisfied in all the circumstances that an order requiring a transfer
of the matrimonial home at Property B to the wife
unencumbered together with an
order providing for a further adjustive payment from the husband to the wife are
appropriate.
court will make orders accordingly.
I certify that the preceding
seventy-two (72) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of
Date: 5 April 2013
Corrections
1) Amendments made to orders 3 and 4(c)
2) Changes to figures in paragraph
3) Changes to figures in paragraph 64
4) Change to figure in paragraph
RTF format (168 KB)
Signed PDF/A format