Application by Flexigroup Limited [2020] ACompT 1 (16 March 2020)
AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
Application by Flexigroup Limited
Review from:
Application for authorisation AA1000439 lodged by Australian Energy
Council, Clean Energy Council, Smart Energy Council and Energy
Australia in respect of the New Energy Tech Consumer Code
File number:
ACT 1 of 2019
O'BRYAN J (Deputy President)
Date of Determination:
Catchwords:
TRADE PRACTICES –
application for
determination made by the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission under
Competition and Consumer Act
(Cth) – applications for intervention – applications granted
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Cases cited:
Application by DBNGP (WA) Transmission Pty Ltd
[2012] ACompT 14
Application by Fortescue Metals Group Ltd
[2006] ACompT 6
Application by Independent Contractors Australia
[2015] ACompT
Application by Sea Swift Pty Limited
[2015] ACompT 5
Application by Tabcorp Holdings Ltd
[2017] ACompT 1
Application for Authorisation of Acquisition of Macquarie Generation by
AGL Energy Limited
[2014] ACompT 1
Applications by Tabcorp Holdings Limited
[2017] ACompT 5
Geographical Indications Committee v O’Connor
[2000] FCA 1877
(2000) 64 ALD
R v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal; Ex parte Hardiman
[1980] HCA 13
Re EFTPOS Interchange Fees Agreement
[2004] ACompT 7
ATPR 41-999
Re Fortescue Metals Group Ltd
[2006] ACompT 6
(2006) 203 FLR 28
Re Independent Contractors Australia
(2015) 292 FLR 80
Re Queensland Cooperative Milling Association Ltd
(1976) 8 ALR 481
Date of hearing:
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr N De Young SC
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Clayton Utz
Counsel for the Authorisation Applicants:
Mr D Preston
Solicitor for the Authorisation Applicants:
Counsel for Australian Competition and Consumer Commission:
Solicitor for Australian Competition and Consumer Commission:
Australian Government Solicitor
Counsel for RateSetter Australia RE Limited:
Mr A Barraclough
Solicitor for RateSetter Australia RE Limited:
Johnson Winter & Slattery
Counsel for Consumer Action Law Centre:
Mr T Clarke with Mr M Peckham
Solicitor for Consumer Action Law Centre:
Consumer Action Law Centre
IN THE AUSTRALIAN COMPETITION TRIBUNAL
ACT 1 of 2019
RE APPLICATION FOR AUTHORISATION AA1000439 LODGED BY AUSTRALIAN ENERGY
COUNCIL, CLEAN ENERGY COUNCIL, SMART ENERGY COUNCIL AND ENERGY
AUSTRALIA IN RESPECT OF THE NEW ENERGY TECH CONSUMER CODE
FLEXIGROUP LIMITED
O’BRYAN J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
DATE OF DETERMINATION:
THE TRIBUNAL DETERMINES THAT:
Australian Securities and Investments Commission be granted leave to intervene
in the proceeding.
to the Tribunal’s power to direct the nature and extent of its
participation in the proceeding, RateSetter Australia
RE Limited be granted
leave to intervene in the proceeding.
to the Tribunal’s power to direct the nature and extent of its
participation in the proceeding, the Consumer Action
Law Centre be granted leave
to intervene in the proceeding.
11 of the Directions of the Tribunal dated 4 February 2020 be varied such that
each intervener is to file and serve a Statement
of Facts, Issues and
Contentions on or before Monday, 23 March 2020.
12 of the Directions of the Tribunal dated 4 February 2020 be varied such that
the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
is to file and serve a
Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions on or before Friday, 27 March
13 of the Directions of the Tribunal dated 4 February 2020 be varied such that
the Australian Competition and Consumer
Commission is to file and serve an
Issues List on or before Friday, 27 March
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Introduction
30 December 2019, Flexigroup Limited (
) filed an application
pursuant to
Competition and Consumer Act
) for a review of the authorisation of the Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission (
) dated 5 December 2019 (Commission file no.
AA1000439) granted under
of the CCA.
applicants for the authorisation were the Australian Energy Council
), Clean Energy Council (
), Smart Energy Council
) and Energy Consumers Australia (
) (together, the
authorisation applicants
). The authorisation concerned a document called
the New Energy Tech Consumer Code (
Consumer Code
) which sets minimum
standards that suppliers of “New Energy Tech” products (e.g. solar
panels, energy storage systems
and other emerging products and services) must
comply with when interacting with customers, including from initial marketing
promotion through to installation and complaints handling. The authorisation
granted by the ACCC enables the authorisation applicants
and future signatories
to the Consumer Code to agree, sign up to and comply with provisions of the
Consumer Code:
(a) according to which signatories will
commit to abide by minimum standards of good practice as set out in the Consumer
Code, which
are intended to cover all aspects of the customer experience;
(b) for monitoring and sanctioning non-compliance, where the Code Administrator
has powers requiring a signatory to rectify issues
giving rise to a breach of
the Consumer Code and, where there is serious non-compliance, the Code
Administrator may propose to the
Code Monitoring and Compliance Panel that the
signatory should be suspended or expelled; and
(c) requiring signatories to only offer deferred payment arrangements that are
regulated under the
National Consumer Credit Protection Act
) and the National Credit Code (
), and provided by
credit providers licensed under the NCCPA, or to offer deferred payment
arrangements that are provided by “buy
now pay later” (
providers only in certain circumstances.
authorisation was granted subject to a number of conditions. Most relevantly,
the ACCC imposed conditions concerning BNPL finance.
Those conditions
(a) with respect to finance arrangements not
regulated by and/or exempt from the NCCPA and NCC (i.e. BNPL), signatories will
be required
to only offer such arrangements from credit providers that have been
assessed as having specified consumer safeguards in place, as
set out in the
versions of clause 25 and clauses A7 and A7A of the Annexure to the Consumer
Code at Attachment A to the authorisation;
(b) signatories must not offer customers finance arrangements not regulated by
and/or exempt from the NCCPA and NCC (i.e. BNPL) in
connection with the sale of
a New Energy Tech product if the sale of the New Energy Tech product is
unsolicited; and
(c) the condition outlined at (a) above, including the wording found in
Attachment A, may be subject to variation where approved
by the ACCC in writing
and published on the public register.
its application for review, Flexigroup states that it is a diversified financial
services group with operations in, relevantly,
Australia across a diverse range
of industries including, relevantly, solar energy. It provides a range of
finance products and payment
solutions to consumers and businesses including
interest free cards and no interest ever payment plans. Flexigroup is a provider
of no interest ever payment plans to retail customers through its product
“humm” which is a form of BNPL financial product.
Flexigroup says
that humm has financed the purchase of more than 180,000 solar installations
(approximately 10% of all installations)
in Australia and almost half of the
revenue generated by Flexigroup’s humm product is from providing credit
for sales of solar
panels and other home improvements. Flexigroup says that, of
the top 50 solar sellers with whom Flexigroup does business, approximately
were expected to or have become members of one of the authorisation applicants
and would therefore also likely become signatories
to the Consumer Code.
its application, Flexigroup seeks the review of the conditions of authorisation
imposed by the ACCC that relate to the provision
of BNPL finance. Specifically,
Flexigroup contends that the conditions identified in paragraphs 3(a) and (b)
above should not have
been imposed and that authorisation should not be granted
to any provisions of the Consumer Code that have the effect of preventing
signatories from offering BNPL products to consumers in any way.
to directions given by the Tribunal on 4 February 2020, the following entities
have applied for leave to intervene in this
proceeding pursuant to s 109(2) of
the CCA: the Australian Securities and Investments Commission (
RateSetter Australia RE Limited (
) and the Consumer Law Action
the reasons that follow, the Tribunal permits intervention by ASIC, RateSetter
Relevant principles
109(2) provides that the Tribunal may, upon such conditions as it thinks fit,
permit a person to intervene in proceedings
before the Tribunal. The section has
been considered by the Tribunal on a number of occasions.
Application by Fortescue Metals Group Ltd
[2006] ACompT 6
) (also reported as
Re Fortescue Metals Group Ltd
[2006] ACompT 6
(2006) 203 FLR 28)
, the Tribunal made the following observations about s
[30] There is no “sufficient” or “real
and substantial” interest requirement found in s 109(2) and the discretion
to grant leave to intervene reposed in that subsection is not limited by the
connotation of such expressions. The discretion is
not constrained by any
limitation and it is not easy, nor is it appropriate, to define or delimit the
categories of persons who may
be given leave to intervene under s 109(2). It
does not follow that in exercising its discretion pursuant to s 109(2) of the
there are no limitations or restrictions on the persons who wish to
intervene or participate in reviews by the Tribunal.
[35] ... an applicant for leave to intervene or participate under s 109(2) ...
must, as a minimum, be able to establish some connection
with, or interest in,
the subject matter of the proceeding which discloses that it is not merely an
officious bystander. What the
nature of that connection or interest must be,
will vary from case to case. It is not necessary that an applicant be required
establish that its business interests or business activities or prospects may
be detrimentally affected by the subject matter of
the proceeding or its
outcome. ... However, the connection should usually be one that discloses that
the applicant for leave to intervene
has some interest which is ignited by the
proceeding, which is an interest other than that found in members of the general
[43] Although s 109(2) is not couched in terms of any particular
“interest” being required to be demonstrated before
leave should be
granted, I consider that it is necessary for some connection with the subject
matter of the application for review
to be demonstrated. Obviously an officious
bystander would not be given leave to intervene, but it is necessary to show
some particular
interest in the subject matter of the application. I do not
consider that it is necessary for an applicant for intervention to go
to show that it may be affected in some way by the declaration but it is
necessary, as I have noted earlier, to show that
some interest touching and
concerning it can be demonstrated.
Application by Independent Contractors Australia
[2015] ACompT 1
reported as
Re Independent Contractors Australia
(2015) 292 FLR 80)
Tribunal proceeded on the basis that there is no “sufficient” or
“real and substantial” interest requirement,
and that the discretion
to grant leave to intervene is not limited by the introduction or application of
such expressions. However,
the Tribunal recognised that (at [28]):
...it is important to consider the extent to which the
proposed intervenor has indicated that it can usefully or relevantly add to,
supplement, evidence proposed to be led by the parties to the application or the
submissions to be made by them, as well as considering
how the proposed
intervenor might be affected by the Authorisation or the outcome of the
application to the Tribunal.
of the parties adopted those statements of principle.
should also be noted that, under s 109(2), the Tribunal may permit intervention
upon such conditions as the Tribunal thinks fit.
Tribunal exercised that power in relation to Rio Tinto’s intervention,
explaining (at [78]):
Rio Tinto will therefore be given leave to participate
in the proceeding and the review but not on the basis that it will be at large
as to its participation in the review or as to the submissions it may make or as
to the material it may place before the Tribunal.
The Tribunal wishes to ensure
that there is no unnecessary duplication of submissions and evidentiary material
placed before it.
The order will be that subject to the Tribunal’s power
to direct the nature and extent of its participation in the proceeding
review, Rio Tinto be granted leave to intervene in the proceeding and
participate in the review.
Application by Sea Swift Pty Limited
[2015] ACompT 5
, the Tribunal
limited the intervention of the Maritime Union of Australia to one issue only
and to making written and oral submissions
only, with the right to apply to the
Tribunal to adduce evidence and to cross-examine (at [5]).
also noted that interested third parties may be able to advance their interests
sufficiently by making submissions to the
Tribunal and do not need to have the
rights of an intervener in order to do so, citing as examples the approach taken
by the Tribunal
Application for Authorisation of Acquisition of Macquarie
Generation by AGL Energy Limited
[2014] ACompT 1
(at [151], [272] and [392])
Applications by Tabcorp Holdings Limited
[2017] ACompT 5
By directions made on 4 February 2020, the Tribunal has allowed for that
possibility.
also placed reliance on s 101(1A) of the CCA which provides as
Where a person has, whether before or after the
commencement of this subsection, made an application under subsection (1) for a
of a determination, the Tribunal may, if the Tribunal determines it to be
appropriate, make a determination by consent of the applicant,
the Commission,
and all persons who have been permitted under subsection 109(2) to intervene in
the proceedings for review, whether
or not the Tribunal is satisfied of the
matters referred to in subsection 90(7).
submitted that there is a possibility that this proceeding may be able to be
resolved by consent under s 101(1A). By way
of background, Flexigroup explained
that the Australian Finance Industry Association (
) has released a
draft Code of Practice for the BNPL sector and has conducted public consultation
on the draft Code. Flexigroup submitted
that the draft Code has a number of
relevant conditions to regulate BNPL finance. If the Code is adopted, it may
have implications
for the conditions in the authorisation of the Consumer Code
that relate to BNPL finance. Flexigroup submitted that, if RateSetter
were given permission to intervene under s 109(2), their consent would also be
required for any determination of this proceeding
by consent under s 101(1A).
Flexigroup submitted that that would make the achievement of a consent
determination more difficult.
For that reason, Flexigroup submitted that the
Tribunal should defer its decision with respect to the applications for
intervention
made by RateSetter and CALC until early April 2020, when the
position with respect to the AFIA Code of Practice becomes clearer.
Alternatively, Flexigroup submitted that the Tribunal should stipulate, as a
condition of intervention under s 109(2), that RateSetter
and CALC will not be
regarded as interveners for the purposes of s 101(1A).
my view, Flexigroup’s submissions in relation to s 101(1A) suffer from a
number of difficulties.
I do not accept that the Tribunal has power under s 109(2) to stipulate, as a
condition of intervention, that RateSetter and
CALC will not be regarded as
interveners for the purposes of s 101(1A). There is nothing in the language of s
109(2) which suggests
that the Tribunal may, by the imposition of a condition,
override the statutory power conferred by s 101(1A). Section 101(1A) is
its terms and empowers the Tribunal to make a consent determination only if the
applicant, the ACCC and all interveners
I do not accept the premise of Flexigroup’s submissions that it would be
beneficial to defer a decision on intervention
so that any consent determination
is not “burdened” by the need to receive the consent of the
interveners. Indeed, I
consider that any such consideration would be
inconsistent with the implicit legislative intent of s 101(1A). Section 101(1A)
clear that any consent determination requires the consent of interveners.
The section implicitly recognises that interveners have
an interest in the
determination of the proceeding, which interest is protected by requiring their
consent to a consent determination.
As a corollary, s 101(1A) provides
contextual support for the view expressed in
decisions of the Tribunal that an applicant for leave to intervene under s
109(2) must, as a minimum, be able to establish
some connection with, or
interest in, the subject matter of the proceeding which discloses that it is not
merely an officious bystander.
further matter of principle should be mentioned. In my view, it would be wrong
to refuse permission to a person to intervene for
the reason that the ACCC is
able to represent that person’s interests in the proceeding. Such an
approach would be to misapprehend
the role of the ACCC in the proceeding. The
ACCC is not a party or protagonist in the proceeding. Its role is to assist the
in an impartial manner, regardless of any conclusions it may have drawn
from its earlier analysis in the matter:
Re EFTPOS Interchange Fees
[2004] ACompT 7
155-068; ATPR 41-999
Application
by Tabcorp Holdings Ltd
[2017] ACompT 1
; ATPR 42-550. As the
Tribunal observed in
Application by DBNGP (WA) Transmission Pty Ltd (No
[2012] ACompT 14
, the manner in which the “Hardiman”
principles (
R v Australian Broadcasting Tribunal; Ex parte Hardiman
[1980] HCA 13
(1980) 144 CLR 13
especially at 35-36 per Gibbs, Stephen, Mason, Aickin and
Wilson JJ) are to be applied in a given case depends upon a number of factors
including the presence of a contradictor and the nature of the review
proceedings and whether the matter is likely to be remitted
to the initial
decision maker. In the absence of a contradictor, the ACCC may be required to
test the evidence of the applicant,
present contrary material and make
submissions putting forward an opposing point of view, although none of this
should be done in
a partisan fashion:
Re Queensland Cooperative Milling
Association Ltd
(1976) 8 ALR 481
presence of a contradictor, however, the role of the ACCC should properly be
more confined: see for example
Geographical Indications Committee v
[2000] FCA 1877
(2000) 64 ALD 325
Application for intervention by ASIC
seeks permission to intervene on three primary bases.
ASIC considers it can be of real assistance to the Tribunal in providing context
around the submission it made to the ACCC.
That context includes ASIC’s
views regarding the forms of regulation proposed by the authorisation applicants
to the ACCC,
by Flexigroup and by any other interveners in the present
application for review.
ASIC submits that it can assist the Tribunal in clarifying the present scope of
ASIC’s regulatory power over BNPL finance,
the relationship between its
regulatory powers and those of the ACCC.
ASIC is best placed to explain the views it has expressed in relation to BNPL
finance, including particularly its detailed
review of the BNPL sector being
ASIC Report 600, and how those views have developed since that report was
does not oppose the application for intervention made by ASIC and accepts that
ASIC has a sufficient interest and will
be able to adduce evidence which can
usefully or relevantly add to, or supplement, evidence proposed to be led by the
the application for review. The ACCC supports ASIC’s
intervention on the same basis. No party opposes the intervention.
Tribunal accepts those submissions and will grant leave to ASIC to intervene in
the proceeding.
Application for intervention by RateSetter
its application to intervene, RateSetter says that it is Australia’s
largest provider of regulated consumer credit for the
purpose of funding solar
and other renewable energy products (
New Energy Technology
). Since 2014,
RateSetter has facilitated over $60 million in consumer loans for the purpose of
clean energy equipment such as solar
panels and batteries. RateSetter holds an
Australian Financial Services Licence and an Australian Credit Licence. Finance
facilitated
by RateSetter is regulated by the NCCPA and the NCC.
seeks to intervene in relation to the review of the authorisation. It opposes
the variations to the Consumer Code proposed
by Flexigroup and will submit that
the authorisation should stand.
submitted that, as Australia’s largest provider of regulated consumer
credit for the purpose of funding New Energy
Technology, RateSetter has a
significant interest in the ultimate form of the Consumer Code. It referred to
the following matters:
(a) First, in the event that RateSetter is
accepted by the Administrator as a Code Signatory, RateSetter intends to become
a Signatory
and will be bound by the Code.
(b) Second, the Consumer Code will regulate the conduct of entities with which
RateSetter competes (who become signatories to the
Code), and the manner in
which that competition occurs.
(c) Third, the Consumer Code will regulate the conduct of entities who supply
New Energy Technology that is financed by RateSetter
loans, being merchants or
suppliers (who become signatories to the Code) and the manner in which that
finance is offered to the customers
of the merchants or suppliers.
(d) Fourth, RateSetter has an immediate interest in the substance of
Flexigroup’s application, which is to seek changes to
the BNPL conditions
imposed by the ACCC. RateSetter submitted that it is one of the industry
participants who will be most affected
by the removal of the BNPL conditions,
given its position in the market as a major competitor to providers of BNPL
finance such as
Flexigroup.
its interest in the authorisation and ultimate form of the Consumer Code,
RateSetter submitted three sets of submissions
to the ACCC during the
authorisation application. RateSetter submitted that it will be in a position to
assist the Tribunal by providing
evidence and submissions which draw directly on
its experience in matters raised by Flexigroup’s application, including in
respect of the factual findings made by the ACCC with which Flexigroup is
dissatisfied, and the likely impact of the BNPL conditions
on consumers and
competition in the New Energy Technology finance industry. RateSetter submitted
that it can provide information
that includes:
(a) the market landscape for the provision
of finance for the purchase of New Energy Technology;
(b) the various forms of finance available to consumers for the purchase of New
Energy Technology, ranging from loans regulated under
the NCCPA through to
“interest-free” finance;
(c) the method of sale and promotion of New Energy Technology and related
point-of-sale finance;
(d) the relationship between finance companies and the merchants who sell New
Energy Technology equipment to consumers;
(e) information in relation to the experiences of merchants who have recently
moved from providing so-called “interest free”
finance to regulated
(f) observed differences in costs passed on to consumers where they obtain
regulated finance versus unregulated finance;
(g) the protections consumers may miss out on if they obtain unregulated finance
that does not comply with provisions of the authorisation;
(h) the likely effect on overall access to New Energy Technology that would
result from upholding the authorisation;
(i) factual matters in the authorisation with which Flexigroup is said to be
dissatisfied; and
(j) the degree to which the competitive constraints that RateSetter faces will
be affected by the authorisation.
ACCC supports RateSetter’s application to intervene, essentially on the
basis of the submissions made by RateSetter. The
ACCC acknowledged that, if
given permission to intervene, RateSetter would be a contradictor in the
proceeding which would affect
the role of the ACCC.
accepted that RateSetter has an interest in the proceeding which is greater than
that of a merely officious bystander.
Flexigroup submitted, however, that
RateSetter has failed to demonstrate that it can usefully or relevantly add to,
or supplement,
evidence proposed to be led by the parties to the application or
ASIC as an intervener. It says that the intervention of RateSetter
inevitably increase the costs of the proceeding and means that the proceeding
will take additional time. Flexigroup proposed
that, in order to determine
whether to permit RateSetter to intervene, and the extent of the intervention,
RateSetter should first
put on its proposed evidence in the proceeding and the
determination of its intervention be adjourned until after that occurs. In
that submission was prompted by Flexigroup’s concern over the impact of
RateSetter’s intervention on any consent
determination, as discussed
Tribunal is satisfied that RateSetter’s interest in the proceeding, and
the categories of information that it is able to
adduce in the proceeding,
justify the Tribunal permitting it to intervene. However, the Tribunal is
mindful that, as the number of
parties increases, the risk of duplication
increases, as do the overall costs of the proceeding to the parties. For that
the Tribunal will make a direction in similar terms to the direction
, referred to earlier, that RateSetter will be
permitted to intervene in the proceeding subject to the Tribunal’s power
the nature and extent of its participation in the proceeding. In
accordance with the current directions of the Tribunal, RateSetter
required to file and serve any evidence on which it wishes to rely by 21 April
2020. The Tribunal will retain the discretion
to exclude such evidence from the
hearing if it does not usefully add to the evidence otherwise before the
Tribunal. The right to
cross-examine will also be addressed at a time closer to
the hearing or at the hearing.
Application for intervention by CALC
support of its application to intervene, CALC says that it is an independent,
not-for-profit consumer organisation with specialist
expertise in consumer
credit law and policy, and of the consumer experience in modern markets,
including the energy market. CALC
provides financial counselling and legal
assistance services to people experiencing disadvantage in Victoria, and policy
and advocacy
campaigns for the benefit of all Australians.
submitted that it has a real and substantial interest in both the initial
development of the Consumer Code and its authorisation
by the ACCC and in the
offering of deferred payment arrangements on a BNPL basis.
interest in the development and authorisation of the Consumer Code is evidenced
by the following matters:
(a) from August 2017 to about March 2019,
CALC was a member of the Behind The Meter Working Group which was tasked by the
COAG Energy
Council with developing the draft Consumer Code;
(b) on 27 November 20l8 and 17 December 2018, CALC’s CEO, Mr Brody,
participated in CEO-led discussions to develop a Memorandum
of Understanding
regarding the governance, stewardship and administration of the draft Consumer
(c) after the proponents of the Consumer Code applied to the ACCC for its
authorisation, CALC made three detailed submissions to
(d) Mr Brody participated in the pre-decision conference on the draft Consumer
Code that was convened by the ACCC on 9 September
(e) each of CALC’s submissions, and its participation in the pre-decision
conference, addressed the issue of deferred payment
arrangements and BNPL
finance which is now raised by Flexigroup in this
interest in BNPL payment arrangements more broadly is evidenced by the following
(a) CALC has long campaigned for better
consumer protections for consumers using BNPL products, both in the solar market
and generally;
(b) CALC’s legal practice regularly acts for and advises clients with
issues arising from the conduct of BNPL providers, including
subsidiary of Flexigroup, now trading as Humm);
(c) since 2014, CALC’s advocacy work concerning BNPL finance has included
complaints to regulators including the ACCC, ASIC
and Consumer Affairs Victoria,
consultation with ASIC in relation to its Report 600, and submissions to the
Senate Economics Reference
Committee in its 2019 Inquiry into the credit and
financial services targeted at Australians at risk of financial hardship;
(d) CALC published three significant reports in 20l6, 2017 and 2019, each of
which recommended changes to strengthen the consumer
protection regime for new
energy products, reduce harm caused by door to door sales, and improve trust and
confidence in the transforming
energy market; and
(e) more generally, CALC has a strong track record of legal and policy advocacy
for consumers.
anticipates that its contentions in the proceeding, and the evidence it will
file, will be substantively different from those
which it anticipates will be
put on behalf of the ACCC and the authorisation applicants, and will be of
assistance to the Tribunal.
In the Tribunal’s review, CALC proposes to
contend for authorisation of the Consumer Code on different conditions from
determined by the ACCC, and from those for which Flexigroup and the
authorisation applicants will contend. In particular, CALC proposes
(a) the Tribunal should apply different
conditions than those imposed by the ACCC, alternatively that the Tribunal
should vary the
amended draft Consumer Code as submitted to the ACCC on 25
September 2019, so that signatories to the Code are permitted to offer
deferred payment arrangement only if the provider of those deferred payment
arrangements is a credit provider who is licensed under
the NCCPA and the
deferred payment arrangement is regulated under the NCC; and
(b) further or alternatively, that the words “and this deferred payment
arrangement includes an interest component, additional
fees or an increased
price (see paragraph 3.n)” should be deleted from the chapeau to clause 25
of the Consumer Code, in order
to ensure that the clause operates unambiguously
and effectively to secure the intended public
proposes to adduce evidence concerning the nature and extent of the risk to
consumers posed by unregulated BNPL finance in the
New Energy Technology sector,
including (but not limited to) case studies and other data, based on
CALC’s direct involvement
in legal assistance, investigations and advocacy
in this sector, on behalf of financially vulnerable consumers.
submitted that its contribution to the proceeding will be different from those
of the ACCC and the authorisation applicants.
The ACCC’s role in a review
of an authorisation application is primarily to assist the Tribunal and it is
not for the ACCC
to fill the role of an advocate for the interests of consumers.
The authorisation applicants comprise an amalgam of merchant and
interests in the New Energy Technology sector. CALC’s focus is consumer
credit whereas ECA’s focus is consumer
interests in energy markets more
ACCC supports CALC’s intervention, largely for the reasons advanced by
opposes CALC’s intervention. It submitted that CALC has no greater
interest in the proceeding than an officious public
bystander and that
CALC’s prior involvement in the ACCC’s process does not of itself
confer a sufficient interest to
warrant a grant of leave to intervene, relying
at [77]. Flexigroup submitted that CALC has failed to
demonstrate some other interest in the proceeding and have the ability to make
some distinct contribution as opposed to duplicating the contribution of
Tribunal is satisfied that CALC has an interest in the proceeding beyond that of
an officious bystander by reason of its work
in the area of consumer credit
generally and BNPL finance in the New Energy Technology arena more specifically.
The Tribunal is also
satisfied that, as matters stand at the moment,
CALC’s position in the proceeding would differ from other participants.
as already noted, the Tribunal is mindful that, as the number of
parties increases, the risk of duplication increases, as do the
overall costs of
the proceeding to the parties. The Tribunal is also conscious that consumer
interests are already well represented
through the authorisation applicants (and
specifically the ECA), the ACCC and ASIC. On balance, the Tribunal considers
should be permitted to intervene subject to the same conditions as
RateSetter. The permission will be subject to the Tribunal’s
direct the nature and extent of CALC’s participation in the proceeding,
including the power to exclude evidence from
the hearing if it does not usefully
add to the evidence otherwise before the Tribunal and the power to limit or
exclude the right
to cross-examine.
conclusion, the Tribunal will permit intervention by ASIC, RateSetter and CALC.
No conditions will be attached to ASIC’s
intervention. In relation to
RateSetter and CALC, intervention will be subject to the Tribunal’s power
to direct the nature
and extent of their participation in the proceeding.
Tribunal made directions on 4 February 2020 for the following procedural steps
to be taken:
intervener is to file and serve a Statement of Facts, Issues and Contention on
or before Friday, 13 March 2020.
Commission is to file its Statement of Facts, Issues and Contention on or before
Friday, 20 March 2020.
assist interested third parties who may make a submission under Order 14, the
Commission is to file and serve an Issues List on
or before Friday, 20 March
2020, which the Tribunal will publish on its register, identifying key issues,
as identified by the Commission,
raised by the Application.
has become necessary to adjust those dates. The date referred to in direction 11
above will be varied to 23 March 2020 and the
dates referred to in directions 12
and 13 above will be varied to 27 March 2020.
I certify that the preceding forty-six (46)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination herein of
the Honourable
Dated: 16 March 2020
RTF format (362 KB)
Signed PDF/A format