Plaintiff M27-2025 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs [2025] HCA 40 (15 October 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
AND BEECH‑JONES JJ
PLAINTIFF M27/2025 PLAINTIFF
MINISTER FOR
IMMIGRATION AND
MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS DEFENDANT
Plaintiff M27/2025 v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
[2025] HCA 40
Date of Judgment: 15 October
time for the making of the application for a constitutional or other writ be
extended up to and including 3 April 2025.
writ of certiorari issue quashing the decision made by the delegate of the
defendant on 13 August 2024 to refuse to grant the plaintiff
a protection
writ of mandamus issue commanding the defendant to determine the plaintiff's
application for a protection visa according to law
within 14 days of this
be no order as to costs.
Representation
plaintiff is represented by WLW Migration Lawyers
The defendant is
represented by Australian Government Solicitor
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
Plaintiff M27/2025 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
Immigration – Visas – Where plaintiff applied for
protection (subclass 866) visa – Where document in application
included English text and images with Mandarin characters – Where
Minister's delegate requested further information
under s 56 of
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) – Where plaintiff did not provide
translation of document relied on – Where delegate refused application for
visa – Where delegate stated documents not translated not
included as part of assessment – Whether delegate failed to
comply with
Migration Act
– Whether delegate's decision
legally unreasonable – Whether necessary in interests of administration of
justice to grant
extension of time to make application for constitutional or
other writ.
Words and phrases – "certiorari", "constitutional or other writ",
"extension of time", "have regard to all of the information",
"invitation for
additional information", "jurisdictional error", "mandamus", "materiality",
"must have regard to that information",
"necessary in the interests of the
administration of justice", "protection obligations", "protection visa",
"realistic possibility",
"specify all particulars of his or her claim",
"unreasonableness".
Migration Act 1958
Court Rules 2004
(Cth), rr 4.02, 25.02.1, 25.02.2, 25.09.3.
GAGELER CJ,
GORDON AND BEECH-JONES JJ. On 3 April 2025, the plaintiff filed an
application for a constitutional or other writ, invoking
the original
Constitution
The principal relief sought is the issue of writs of certiorari and mandamus
directed to the Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
Affairs ("the
Minister"), quashing a decision of the delegate of the Minister to refuse the
plaintiff's application for a protection
visa and requiring that application to
be redetermined according to law.
decision of the delegate is a "primary decision" within the meaning of
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) ("the
It follows that the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) does not have
and nor does the
Federal Court of Australia,
and thus this proceeding cannot be remitted to either
Instead, on
13 June 2025 this application was referred by Beech-Jones J for
hearing by a Full Court.
parties agreed to a hearing on the papers. One matter raised by the Court was
the subject of supplementary submissions from the
the reasons that follow, the decision of the delegate to refuse the plaintiff's
application for a protection visa is affected
by jurisdictional errors. Although
there has been delay in the bringing of the application, the findings of
combined with the explanation for the delay means that it
is necessary in the interests of the administration of justice to extend
day period provided for in
to commence the proceedings
up to and including 3 April 2025. To the extent necessary, a corresponding
enlargement of time under
r 4.02 of the
High Court Rules 2004
in relation to rr 25.02.1 and 25.02.2 should also be
granted. The writs of certiorari and mandamus sought should
plaintiff is a citizen of the People's Republic of China ("the PRC"). He most
recently arrived in Australia from the PRC in April
2018. The plaintiff had
previously entered Australia in July 2010 to study and work.
10 November 2019, the plaintiff applied for a protection (subclass 866)
visa. His application was refused by the delegate of the
Minister on
13 August 2024. The effect of the plaintiff's affidavit is that the
notification of the decision was sent to his email
address on 13 August
2024 but allocated to his "junk mail" folder, so that he did not discover that
his application had been refused
until about 7 October 2024 when he checked
his immigration account for the purposes of seeking to prove his entitlement to
8 October 2024, the plaintiff filed an application with the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal (which on 14 October 2024 became the
Administrative Review
Tribunal ("the ART"))
extend the time for making an application for a merits review of the delegate's
3 December 2024, the ART wrote to the plaintiff inviting him to provide any
comments, by 17 December 2024, on whether he had made
a valid application. He
responded on 13 December 2024. On 10 April 2025, the ART determined
that the application was invalid as the
application had not been lodged within
the relevant time limit.
the meantime, in late December 2024 the plaintiff retained solicitors. In his
affidavit the plaintiff stated that, at around this
time, he learned that he was
out of time in which to apply to this Court for judicial review of the
delegate's decision. After applying
for access to the plaintiff's file and the
New Year break, the plaintiff's solicitors commenced preparing these
proceedings. As noted,
proceedings were not filed until 3 April
The application for a protection visa
his application for a protection visa dated 10 November 2019, the plaintiff
stated that, if he is returned to the PRC, it is likely
that he would be subject
to "[a]rrest, confessions by torture, abuse, unfair trials and imprisonment",
which may be "life-threatening".
He said that he had made "hundreds of programs
in the media", including on the social media platforms YouTube and Twitter,
expose the evils" of the Chinese Communist Party ("the CCP") and which
have attracted "millions of view[s]". He referred to his public
support for an
alleged opponent of the CCP ("the alleged opponent"). He also said that he had
"produced dozens of programs to support
Hong Kong protesters and expose[] the
truth of Hong Kong".
with the plaintiff's application for a protection visa was a portable document
format document said to provide "YouTube
channel evidence" to support his claims
("the pdf document"). The pdf document consisted of five pages that included
screenshots
of results from both the search engine Google and the search
function on YouTube, which depicted "thumbnail" images of YouTube videos
titles in Mandarin characters. The pdf document also included English text added
by the plaintiff providing a general description
of the searches that were
undertaken (for example, "[s]earching for my program name [in Mandarin
characters] on YouTube and Google
will have many results") or a broad
description of what the YouTube links depict (for example, "[e]very program is
related to the
opposition to the [CCP]").
a letter dated 27 November 2023, an officer of the Department of Home
Affairs wrote to the plaintiff seeking further information
in relation to his
application for a protection visa. It was common ground that the letter involved
an exercise of the power conferred
to "get any
information" that the Minister or his or her delegate "considers relevant" in
considering an application for the visa
letter"). The
letter advised the plaintiff that, if documents were provided in support of his
application in a language other than English, then
they had to be translated
into English with both the translation and the document in its original language
to be provided.
letter also stated that the plaintiff's application for a protection
visa "lack[ed] detailed information and evidence, such as dates
and locations"
of aspects of his claims within the application, and that the absence of that
information and evidence raised a concern
protection claims. The
letter stated that the pdf document "lack[ed]
in key details and is not in English" and requested that the plaintiff provide
translation. The
letter also requested further information,
evidence and clarification about the plaintiff's claims, including details of
his YouTube
channel and the alleged opponent that the plaintiff supported and
the plaintiff's relationship with him. Further, the
letter sought
information from the plaintiff about his delay in the lodging of his application
for a protection visa, and his departure
from Australia to the PRC and his
23 December 2023, the plaintiff provided a six‑page typed response
response"). The
response addressed his support for,
and subsequent disillusionment with, the alleged opponent. The
response provided embedded links to various sites, including YouTube pages that
the plaintiff said contained programs referring to
the alleged opponent. The
plaintiff said he "participated" in programs discussing the alleged opponent and
joined the alleged opponent's
social media group. The
response also
contained links to YouTube pages said to contain programs addressing the 1989
Tiananmen Square incident. The plaintiff
claimed that he helped produce certain
versions of this program. The plaintiff also provided a link to a YouTube page
said to contain
a program that the plaintiff had broadcast featuring a different
opponent of the CCP regime. The
response included a screenshot
containing Mandarin characters, which was said to show the numbers of
subscribers to and views of
the plaintiff's YouTube channel.
response stated that "Google Translate" could be used to verify that
the titles of the videos on the plaintiff's YouTube channel
matched his
descriptions. He added that the "vast number and length of my videos make it
impossible for me to translate each one".
response also stated
that the plaintiff's Twitter account sets out his views and promotes his YouTube
channel. He advised that Twitter
also "has an automatic translation feature for
plaintiff did not provide a translation of the pdf document, address the delay
in the lodging of his application for a protection
visa or address the
circumstances surrounding his departure from Australia to the PRC and his return
to Australia in 2018.
The delegate's decision
delegate was not satisfied of the credibility of the plaintiff's claims: namely,
that he had produced hundreds of programs on
social media exposing the evils of
the CCP; that he had participated in many organisations opposing the CCP; that
he had supported
the alleged opponent; or that he had produced dozens of
programs in support of protesters in Hong Kong. The delegate was likewise
satisfied of the credibility of the plaintiff's claim that he is unable to
reaching these conclusions the delegate noted that, contrary to the request in
letter, the plaintiff "did not provide any official translations
of his documents which he claims are evidence of social media and
online content
that supports his claims". The delegate added that "[t]herefore, any documents
that are not translated by accredited
translators in Australia, or by official
offshore translators, will not be included as part of this assessment". In
relation to the
plaintiff's claims that he supported protests in Hong Kong, the
delegate observed that to "instruct the Department to view and translate
content demonstrates that the [plaintiff] is unable or unwilling to address the
specific concerns raised in the invitation
further information". A similar observation was made in relation to the
plaintiff's provision of links to Wikipedia and
social media content concerning
the alleged opponent of the CCP regime.
Unreasonableness and the
obligation to have regard to the evidence
class of visa that the Minister may grant is a protection
a criterion of which
is that the applicant is a person in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection obligations
(or a member of the family unit of such a
Section 5AAA(2)
provides that it is the responsibility of a
non‑citizen who claims to be a person in respect of whom Australia has
obligations to specify all particulars of his or her claim and to
provide sufficient evidence to establish the claim.
Section 54(1)
obliges the Minister, in deciding whether to grant or refuse to grant
a visa, to have regard to all of the information in the application,
includes a document attached to the application when it is
Section 54(3)
provides that a decision to grant or refuse to grant a visa may be made without
giving the applicant an opportunity to make oral
or written submissions.
Section 56(1)
provides that "[i]n considering an application for a visa,
the Minister may, if he or she wants to, get any information that he or
considers relevant but, if the Minister gets such information, the Minister must
have regard to that information in making the
decision whether to grant or
refuse the visa".
Section 58(1)
provides that the invitation for additional
information made pursuant to
may be given in writing, at an interview,
or by telephone.
Section 62(1)
provides that, if an applicant for a visa has been invited to give
additional information (under
and does not give the information
before the time for giving the information has passed, then the Minister may
make a decision to
grant or refuse the visa without taking any further action to
obtain the additional information. Subject to provisions allowing for
suspension of the processing of visa applications of a specified
or limiting the
number of visas of a specified class that are
obliges the Minister to grant a visa if satisfied that the visa criteria have
been satisfied.
Minister must refuse the visa if he or she is not so
confers a discretionary power on the Minster. Those
discretionary powers must be exercised
reasonably.
plaintiff contended that the decision of the delegate to refuse his application
for a protection visa was affected by legal unreasonableness.
The plaintiff
contended that, given the volume of material supplied by the plaintiff, it was
unreasonable for the delegate not to
take some further step under
to address or resolve the "translation issue" prior to making a decision
to grant or refuse the visa. The plaintiff contended that,
having provided the
delegate with the means to interpret the material, it would have been
"administratively easy" for the delegate
to ask the plaintiff to provide
translations of a sample of the material or to interview the plaintiff in the
presence of an interpreter
who could translate "some of the YouTube
defendant submitted that the plaintiff was afforded a clear and reasonable
opportunity to provide supporting material in an appropriate
form, including
through translations by accredited professionals, but failed to do so. The
defendant also contended that none of
the alternative methods proposed by the
plaintiff for translating the material, namely using Google Translate or
Twitter's automatic
translating features, met the necessary standards of
accreditation referred to in the
letter, "and thus the material could
not be included as part of the delegate's assessment". The defendant further
contended that
it was for the plaintiff to provide sufficient evidence to
establish his claims and the complaint that the plaintiff should have
offered an interview with an interpreter present is "no more than a disagreement
with the delegate's assessment of how best
to obtain information".
plaintiff was specifically requested to provide a translated version of the pdf
document but declined to do so. It was also open
to him to provide a translation
of the titles of his videos and a sample of their content, but he chose not to
do so. In these circumstances,
obligation on the plaintiff to provide sufficient evidence to establish his
claim, we doubt that either the failure of
the delegate to exercise the
discretion conferred by
to get further information or the exercise of
the discretion conferred by
to make a decision on the application
without doing so could be characterised as failing to meet the legal standard of
reasonableness.
Ultimately,
however, it is not necessary to decide that issue because the delegate's
decision reveals a breach of different statutory
obligations, which, had they
been properly complied with, may have led to different exercises of the
discretions conferred by
and which invalidates the purported
refusal of the visa application under
noted, the effect of
was that the delegate was obliged to
have regard to all the information included in the plaintiff's application for
the protection
visa. That information included the pdf document, being a
document that was attached to the application when the application was
Similarly, the
delegate was obliged to have regard to the
response provided by the
Parts of the
pdf document and the
response were in English. Although certain
substantive parts of the documents were in Mandarin, those parts of the
documents appeared
to be at least consistent with the English language
descriptions of their contents. While it would have been open to the delegate
afford minimal weight to those parts of the documents (and recordings) that were
not translated into English, it was not open
to the delegate to treat all
documents involving untranslated components as having not been "included as part
of this assessment"
(as the delegate's reasons state).
Sections 54
obliged the delegate to have regard to those documents. They could
not be wholly put aside.
defendant submitted that the statement of the delegate that "[t]herefore, any
documents that [were] not translated ... will not
be included as part of this
assessment" was only referable to so much of the pdf document and the
response that was in Mandarin, and thus the balance written in English was
considered. The defendant pointed to aspects of the delegate's
decision that
summarised the plaintiff's claims, which in the defendant's submission were
taken from those parts of those two documents
that were written in English, and
which were said to demonstrate that the delegate had regard to the English
language portions of
the relevant documents.
are three related difficulties with this contention. First, the statement of the
delegate in his reasons was that "any documents"
that were not translated would
not be included as part of the assessment. That statement was not confined to
parts of documents.
Second, even absent translation, the thumbnail images with
Mandarin writing in the pdf
and the embedded
links in the
response were capable of providing some support for the
plaintiff's claims. The obligation imposed by
was to "have
regard to all of the information in the application", which in this case meant
the entirety of the documents and not
just the English words separated from the
balance of the documents. The obligation imposed by
to have regard to
response was not substantively different. Third, even if the
delegate reviewed the pdf document and the
response to identify the
plaintiff's "claims for protection", the delegate nevertheless failed to have
regard to "
of the information in the
application"
the pdf document) and the information in the
in deciding
whether to grant or refuse to grant the visa
and thereby failed to comply
these failures to comply with
were established the defendant
accepted that they were material and thus jurisdictional errors. That concession
was properly made;
there is a realistic possibility that the decision that was
in fact made could have been different if the error(s) had not
It would have
been open to the delegate to afford those documents weight in the evaluation of
whether the visa criteria were satisfied.
Further, as noted, had the delegate
appreciated that some regard had to be had to those documents, the delegate may
have again exercised
the power conferred by
, and exercised the power
conferred by
differently.
Extension of time
Section 486A(1)
provides that an application to this Court for a remedy to be granted
in exercise of this Court's original jurisdiction in relation
to a migration
decision, such as the decision made by the delegate, must be made within
35 days of the decision.
Section 486A(2)
enables this Court to extend
that 35 day period if (a) "an application for that order has been made in
writing ... specifying why
the applicant considers that it is necessary in the
interests of the administration of justice to make the order; and (b) this Court
"is satisfied that it is necessary in the interests of the administration of
justice to make the order".
the case of the plaintiff, the 35 day period referred to in
on 17 September 2024. As noted, the application for a constitutional or
other writ was not filed in this Court until 3 April
2025. An extension of
the 35 day period by a period of many months has been described by this Court as
"exceptional".
Rule 25.02.1
High Court Rules
provides that an application for a writ of
mandamus "must be filed within 2 months after the day of the" relevant
refusal to hear
and determine a matter. Rule 25.02.2 requires that an
application for a writ of certiorari must be filed "within 6 months after the
day the decision sought to be quashed was made", or within a shorter period as
any other law may require.
Section 486A(1)
is such a law.
Otherwise, r 4.02 provides that any period of time fixed by or under the
High Court Rules
may be enlarged or abridged by an order of the Court or
a Justice, whether made before or after the expiration of the time fixed.
this matter it suffices to observe that, if the Court is satisfied pursuant to
s 486A(2)(b)
that it is in the interests of the administration
of justice to extend the time for the making of the application until
3 April 2025,
then, to the extent necessary, an appropriate order under
r 4.02 would be made.
the purposes of
s 486A(2)(a)
, the plaintiff's posited reasons for which he
considers it necessary in the interests of the administration of justice to make
order for an extension of time comprise: the merit of his substantive
application; the lack of prejudice to the Minister; and his
explanation for the
delay as summarised above. Those matters also bear upon whether it is necessary
in the interests of the administration
of justice to extend the 35 day
have already concluded that the delegate's decision is affected by
criticised the
plaintiff's explanation that he overlooked the email notification of the
delegate's decision because it was allocated
to his junk email folder. It is
noteworthy, however, that there is no evidence that the plaintiff only took
action in respect of
the refusal of his application for a protection visa
because of any threatened enforcement action. Once apprised of the decision,
plaintiff filed an application with the Administrative Appeals Tribunal to
extend the time for making an application for merits
review of the delegate's
decision, although that application was out of time and invalid. Upon suspecting
that the application was
out of time and invalid, he retained solicitors in late
December 2024.
period between the retention of solicitors and the commencement of proceedings
was not consistent with the appropriate level
of expedition that can be expected
in the circumstances. Even so, when the plaintiff's explanation is considered
with our findings
in relation to the validity of the delegate's decision, we are
satisfied that it is necessary in the interests of the administration
to grant an extension of the 35 day period up to and including 3 April
plaintiff was out of time to bring the proceedings. The basis for the finding of
with the parties. In those
circumstances there should be no order as to
following orders should be made:
(1) The time for the making of the application for a constitutional or other
writ be extended up to and including 3 April 2025.
(2) A writ of certiorari issue quashing the decision made by the delegate of
the defendant on 13 August 2024 to refuse to grant
the plaintiff a
protection visa.
(3) A writ of mandamus issue commanding the defendant to determine the
plaintiff's application for a protection visa according to
14 days of this order.
(4) There be no order as to costs.
The decision was reviewable under
Migration Act
(Cth) but was not the
subject of an application for review within the specified period:
Migration Act
s 476(2)(a).
Migration Act
Migration Act
Judiciary Act 1903
Pursuant to
High Court Rules
(Cth), r 25.09.3(d).
Administrative Review Tribunal
; Australia,
Administrative Review
Tribunal Commencement Proclamation 2024
, 18 July 2024.
Migration Act
Migration Act
Migration Act
s 54(2)(b).
Migration Act
Migration Act
Migration Act
s 65(1)(a).
Migration Act
s 65(1)(b).
Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship v Li
[2012] HCA 61
; (2013) 249 CLR 332 at 351
, 362 [63], 370 [88].
[2012] HCA 61
; (2013) 249 CLR
, 362 [63], 370 [88].
Migration Act
Migration Act
See [10] above.
Migration Act
(emphasis added).
LPDT v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] HCA 12
280 CLR 321 at 327
Vella v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
(2015) 90 ALJR 89 at 90 [3]; 326 ALR 391
at 392, citing
Re Commonwealth; Ex parte Marks
[2000] HCA 67
; (2000) 75 ALJR 470 at 474
[2000] HCA 67
; 177 ALR 491 at 495, citing
Gallo v Dawson
(1990) 64 ALJR 458 at
459; 93 ALR 479 at 481.
Ex parte Marks
[2000] HCA 67
; (2000) 75
ALJR 470 at 473-474
[2000] HCA 67
; 177 ALR 491 at 495.
RTF format (346 KB)
Signed PDF/A format