DHI18 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs (No 2) [2021] FCCA 2038 (31 August 2021)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT COURT OF AUSTRALIA
DHI18 v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs (No 2)
[2021] FCCA 2038
File number(s):
SYG 1759 of 2018
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
MIGRATION –
Second application for
re-instatement of proceeding after dismissal of application for review because
of the non-appearance of the
applicant – initial application for Safe
Haven Enterprise visa denied – adverse credibility findings against
– due consideration by Authority of the applicant’s claims
– delay in filing of application for re-instatement
- no jurisdictional
error established – application dismissed.
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth), rr 13.03C(1)(c), 16.05, 44.15(2).
Cases cited:
BYF15 v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2016] FCA 774.
AON Risk Services Australia Limited v Australian National University
(2009) 239 CLR 175.
CED15 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v Pandey
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
Applicant WAEE v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCAFC 184
(2003) 236 FCR 593.
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS
(2010) 240 CLR
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2014] FCAFC 1
(2013) 249 CLR 332.
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr G. Foster
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Sentil Solicitor
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Mr G. Johnson
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers
Second Respondent
Submitting appearance save as to costs.
SYG 1759 of 2018
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP, MIGRANT
SERVICES AND MULTICULTURAL AFFAIRS
First Respondent
IMMIGRATION
ASSESSMENT AUTHORITY
Second Respondent
DATE OF ORDER:
IT IS ORDERED THAT:
1. The name of the First Respondent be amended to read “
Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
2. The Applicant’s Application in a Case filed on 31 March 2021 be
3. The Applicant pay the First Respondent’s costs of and incidental to
the Application in a Case filed on 31 March 2021 fixed
in the amount of $7,
REASONS FOR
JUDGE EGAN:
Introduction
1 The applicant is a Tamil Hindu citizen of eastern
Sri Lanka who arrived in Australia as an unauthorised maritime arrival in 2012.
2 On 10 May 2017, the applicant applied for a Safe Haven Enterprise Visa
3 On 22 March 2018, a delegate of the Minister refused the visa application.
The decision of the delegate was then referred to the
Immigration Assessment
Authority (‘the Authority’) for review.
4 On 24 May 2018, the Authority affirmed the decision of the delegate.
5 On 25 June 2018, the applicant filed an Originating Application for Review
of the decision of the Authority.
Events Subsequent to the Filing of the Originating Application
6 The application for review was listed for a first
return date before a Registrar of the Federal Circuit Court on 16 July 2018. On
that date, the Registrar dismissed the application for review pursuant to the
provisions of r. 13.03C(1)(c) of the
Federal Circuit Court Rules 2001
(Cth) (‘the Rules’) due to the non-appearance of the applicant.
7 The order dismissing the application was made notwithstanding the fact that
on each of 11 July 2018 and 12 July 2018, HWL Ebsworth
Lawyers had, on behalf of
the first respondent, written to the applicant at his nominated address for
service advising him that the
matter was listed for a directions hearing at
10:15 am on 16 July 2018. In each of the said letters, the applicant was advised
should he not attend the scheduled directions hearing, an application would
be made for the dismissal of his application with costs.
8 On 18 July 2018, a letter was sent by express post to the applicant (at his
address nominated on the application for review) by
HWL Ebsworth Lawyers.
Also sent with such letter was a
copy of the Orders made by the Registrar on 16 July 2018, and a copy of r. 16.05
of the Rules (which
provided that a Court or a Registrar may vary or set aside a
judgment or order after it had been entered if it was made in the absence
9 On 10 August 2018, the applicant telephoned a lawyer at HWL Ebsworth
Lawyers named Fisher to discuss the dismissal of the applicant’s
application for review. Upon the applicant asking the lawyer whether he could
make another application to the Federal Circuit Court,
the applicant was advised
that although legal advice could not be provided to him, a list of legal service
providers able to be contacted
by him for assistance had been included in the
letter sent to him on 11 July 2018. A file note of the relevant conversation was
and was Annexure AS-4 to the affidavit of Mr Sharma.
10 The next relevant contact with HWL Ebsworth Lawyers was on 26 September
2019, when a lawyer named Taylor from Sydney West Legal
and Migration had sent a
letter to Mr Fisher enclosing copies of an application in a case for the
reinstatement of the proceeding
pursuant to
of the Rules. The
application in a case was filed on 20 September 2019, together with an affidavit
in support of such application.
11 On 4 November 2019, Sydney West Legal and Migration filed a Notice of
Intention to Withdraw as the applicant’s lawyer.
12 On 19 November 2019, HWL Ebsworth Lawyers received an email from Sydney
West Legal and Migration which attached a sealed copy of
a Notice of
Discontinuance filed on 18 November 2019. The email message conveyed that the
Notice of Discontinuance had been filed
on the instructions of the applicant.
13 Consequent upon the filing of the Notice of Discontinuance, a Registrar
ordered, pursuant to
Rule 44.15(2)
of the Rules, that the applicant pay the
first respondent’s costs of and incidental to the application in a case
fixed in the
amount of $1,864.00.
14 On 4 December 2019, HWL Ebsworth sent email correspondence to the
applicant advising the applicant of the making of the costs order
Registrar on 3 December 2019.
15 The next relevant involvement of HWL Ebsworth Lawyers was its receipt of
an email from Registry staff on 14 April 2021 advising
such firm that an
application in a case and supporting affidavit seeking the setting aside of the
Registrar’s dismissal order,
and reinstatement of the proceeding, had been
filed on 31 March 2021, and that the matter had been listed for hearing before
Court on 10 May 2021.
16 On 8 June 2021, the Court ordered that the lawyers for the first
respondent prepare a Court Book, including all relevant material
before the Authority. It was ordered that the matter be adjourned for final
hearing (after preparation of the Court Book)
to 23 August 2021. Leave was also
granted to the applicant to file an Amended Application for Review,
the grounds of which were as
“Ground of Application
1. The IAA erred when it did not accept the Applicant’s submission that
he was scared of disclosing his association with the
two LTTE members, D and S,
until 2012 and did not accept he was closely associated with them as he
Particulars.
i. Paragraph
IAA stated “The Applicant did not mentioned the association at all in the
arrival interview so I have some concerns about
the credibility of his claims in
this regard. The Applicant submitted that he was scared of disclosing this
information to the Australian
government in particular due to Australia’s
close relationship to the Sri Lankan Government.” [14];
IAA then stated “I do not find this plausible particularly as he was
willing to make other claims about the Sri Lankan
Government in particular
accusing SLA and police of extortion harassment and discrimination.'' [14];
IAA considered the main reason why it rejected the Applicant's claim was
because: “he was willing to make other claims
Government in particular accusing SLA and police of extortion harassment and
discrimination.” [14];
IAA failed to consider that, from the Applicant's viewpoint, the disclosure of
his association could have led to repercussions
against him by the authorities
as having been associated with LTTE, whereas mere criticisms of the Sri Lankan
Government was not
something that would lead to reprisals or arrest or
imprisonment by the Sri Lankan Government;
Alternatively,
there is no evidence that criticisms of the Sri Lankan Government would lead to
similar punitive results as disclosure
of an association with LTTE
And accordingly the IAA's failure to accept the
Applicant was closely associated with the LTTE members was unreasonable, such
the IAA committed jurisdictional error.
2. The IAA erred when it was satisfied that the Sri Lankan authorities did not
suspect the applicant had any association with the
LTTE, and the Sri Lankan
authorities did not ultimately consider the applicant to be an LTTE member or
have links to the LTTE because
of his ethnicity, his association with S and D,
his father or other family members or his family members' circumstances since he
left Sri Lanka.
Particulars.
i. Paragraph
IAA was so satisfied, because the Applicant was investigated for LTTE links
based on his ethnicity and connections, and released
shortly after and never
arrested charged or forced to undertake rehabilitation as a result [26];
IAA noted the Applicant's claim regarding S and D [15] that they were released
within 2 days and not arrested prosecuted or referred
for rehabilitation but did
not consider these claims further;
iv. The IAA noted the Applicant's claims
a. S and D being LTTE
telling the Applicant that D was missing 3 months or less after D was released
from custody [16],
2 days after plainclothes men came to his house who continued to visit his
parents' home [16],
police were looking for him in [name of place omitted] [16];
yet did not consider these
claims further [16];
claims were all very significant, as they would have supported the
Applicant’s fears if true since they could have
indicated/confirmed:
a. D and S were L TIE;
b. D was held in custody along with the Applicant and
was deliberately killed; thereby raising the possibility that the Applicant was
also likely to be killed by the Sri Lank.an authorities;
Plainclothes
men and police were searching for the Applicant to do harm to him as was done to
Accordingly the IAA failed to consider important claims,
amounting to jurisdictional error.”
[names of places omitted]
Consideration of Reinstatement Application
Rule 13.03C(1)(c)
of the Rules relevantly
provided as follows:
“Default of appearance of a
(1) If a party to a proceeding is absent
from a hearing (including a first court date), the Court of a registrar may do 1
of the following:
(c) if the absent party is an applicant – dismiss the application;
Rule 16.05(2)(a)
of the Rules relevantly provided as follows:
“Setting aside or varying judgments or
(2) The Court or a Registrar may vary or set aside a judgment or order after it
has been entered if:
(a) it was made in the absence
of a party; or
19 The power to set aside an order of a Registrar dismissing a proceeding
pursuant to
Rule 13.03C(1)(c)
of the Rules is discretionary. In
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2016] FCA 774
J said as follows:
“[30] In this regard
the principles which govern the exercise of power under rule 16.05(2) of
the FCC Rules were identified
by Ryan J in
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] FCA 530
In circumstances where, as in the present
case, a proceeding has been dismissed in a party’s absence and
reinstatement is sought,
a discretion falls to be exercised by the
court before which the application for reinstatement is returnable. That
discretion requires
the consideration of three factors, and whether, on balance,
they tend for or against the reinstatement. Those factors
(a) whether there was a
reasonable excuse for the party’s absence from the hearing in which the
proceeding was struck out;
(b) the existence and nature of any prejudice which might flow to the other
party from the reinstatement, and the extent, if any,
to which that prejudice
can be assuaged by an adjournment, an order for costs or other relief which the
court is empowered to grant;
(c) whether the applicant has a reasonably arguable prospect of success on
the substantive application. As North J said in
MZKAJ v Minister
for Immigration and Multi-Cultural and Indigenous Affairs
The decision whether to reinstate the appeal depends, however, not only on the
existence of a reasonable explanation for the need
to adjourn the appeal, but
whether the appeal, if reinstated, has a reasonable chance of
success. If not, there is no purpose in
reinstatement.”
20 In an affidavit filed on 31 March 2021, the applicant set out how he had
arrived late for the first listed hearing date before
the Registrar on 16 July
2018. His affidavit relevantly provided as follows:
“I, [name omitted] of [address omitted] and
employed affirm:
1. I wish to explain why I did not attend at the first Court date on 16th July
2. I received a letter from the Court advising of the Court date some month
ago. However when I moved houses the letter and file
was misplaced and I
couldn't find it.
3. I think there may have been a letter on my email, but unfortunately I had
changed my phone and lost the password and lost access
to my e-mail account.
4. On the date of the first Court date, I actually mixed up the time for the
court first Court date. I thought it was at 11.15.
I arrived downstairs in the
Court building at 10.40. I then spoke to the two people at the reception on the
ground floor. They told
me the room and the level number and that I should go
and sit in the Court room there.
5. I went through security, and to the lift, and I went upstairs. I went to the
Court room and went into the Court room and sat
there and waited for my name to
be called. I did now know the pseudonym that I was given for the Court. Nobody
called my name, I
don ot know if they called my pseudonym. I waited in the Court
unit 11.25.
6. Then I came back to Level 17 and walked straight up to the Counter. There
was a young man there and I asked him "at 11.15 is
my court case time, I have a
hearing and nobody called me"
7. Then the person at reception said "no 11.15 is not your time. 1015 is your
time and you have missed it."
8. I thought the Court would let me know with a new date or that Immigration
would let me know with a new date.
9. However I did not hear from them until I received a letter dated 12th
September telling me that I did not have any current matter
and also that my
visa had expired after 13 August 2019.”
21 The applicant’s explanation for his non-attendance on the first
return date was excusable on the basis that a number of factors
combined to
result in his late appearance at Court. Such failure to attend on time is not an
uncommon occurrence where visa applicants
are concerned, particularly for people
who are unfamiliar with formal documentation and Court processes.
22 In the applicant’s affidavit, he then sought to justify why firstly
he did not cause an application for reinstatement of
his matter to be filed
until 26 September 2019 – a period of one (1) year and two (2) months
after the dismissal of his proceeding
by order of the Registrar – and
secondly, as to why such application for reinstatement was withdrawn. His
affidavit relevantly
provided as follows:
“10. Yesterday on 19 September 2019 I met with Mr
Taylor solicitor to seek legal advice. He asked me for my file number but
not know what it was as I did not have any documents from the Court.
11. He asked me to go to the Court and to ask the Registry for the file number
so that he could give me advice.
September 2019, I attended at the Registry and asked for
the file number and was given my file number on a piece of paper. A copy
paper is annexed marked PS 1.
13. I then took the paper to Mr Taylor so he could check my file and provide
14. Mr Taylor then located and provided me with a copy of the Orders of the
Court of 16
July 2018. I did not receive a copy of these orders
15. Mr Taylor advised that the Court action had been struck our but that I
could apply for it to be reinstated.
16. I took no steps to set aside the Registrar's Orders of 16th July 2018 for
two reasons:
first reason was due to my being unemployed, causing financial difficulties in
paying the filing fees.
second reason was because my girlfriend at the time lived in Sri Lanka and
wanted me to return to Sri Lanka and not proceed with
my case in Australia for a
Protection Visa.
17. Notwithstanding my girlfriend's wishes, I decided to pursue my application
and filed an Application in a Case on 26 September
2019, seeking the following
Order one of the Orders made by the Registrar on 16th July 2019, be set aside
pursuant to the
Federal Circuit Court Rules
ii. An extension of time b granted for
making this Application if required.
other orders including as to Costs as the Court deems appropriate.
18. However, in late 2019, having been again pressured
by my girlfriend, I withdrew the Application in a Case despite my fears that
would be harmed if I returned to Sri Lanka.”
23 The applicant’s explanations in that regard were inexcusable. First,
it is the obligation on the part of applicants who find
themselves in the
position of the applicant, after the dismissal of their proceeding, to act in a
timely way to seek reinstatement
by the filing of an application in a case to
set aside the dismissal order. The timely filing of such an application is
with the need for there to be certainty regarding the status of filed
proceedings which have been dismissed. The principle of finality
reason why an applicant should file an application as soon as is reasonably
practicable after the dismissal of the proceeding.
As was said by French CJ in
AON Risk Services
“[34] The House of Lords in
Johnson v Gore Wood
(114) acknowledged the distinction between “
Henderson v
abuse of process” on the one hand, and cause of action
estoppel and issue estoppel on the other. Referring to public interest
considerations of the kind discussed earlier in these reasons, Lord Bingham of
Cornhill said (115):
“The underlying public interest is the
same: that there should be finality in litigation and that a party should not be
vexed in the same matter. This public interest is reinforced by the
current emphasis on efficiency and economy in the conduct of
litigation, in the
interests of the parties and the public as a whole. The bringing of a claim or
the raising of a defence in later
proceedings may, without more, amount to abuse
if the court is satisfied (the onus being on the party alleging abuse) that the
or defence should have been raised in the earlier proceedings if it was to
be raised at all.”
A broad merits-based judgment was required, taking account of public and private
interests affected and focusing attention on the
crucial question whether, in
all the circumstances, a party is misusing or abusing the process of the court
by seeking to raise before
it an issue which could and should have been raised
earlier. As Lord Bingham said (116):
“As one cannot comprehensively list all possible forms of abuse, so one
cannot formulate any hard and fast rule to determine
whether, on given facts,
abuse is to be found or not.”
A court faced with a late amendment seeking to raise new
claims and the in terrorem prediction that a multiplicity of proceedings
follow if the amendment is not allowed, is entitled to have regard to the
barriers to the implementation of suggestions of that
24 There is also the administrative need for court caseloads to be
ascertainable and known from time to time. Access to Courts should
determined on a whimsical basis, or upon considerations influenced by a
party’s unrelated personal relationship with
another, as was the case
here. The applicant’s conduct was indicative of his treating access to the
Court as a convenience.
There are strong public policy grounds for discouraging
such inappropriate behaviour. The Court finds that the delay in the filing
application to set aside the order, and the subsequent withdrawal of such
application, was inexcusable.
25 As to the delay on the part of the applicant in the bringing of the second
application in a case for the setting aside of the Registrar’s
order, such
delay was inexcusable. The Court further finds that the applicant’s stated
reason for his having decided to seek
the indulgence of the Court to hear and
determine the application to set aside the Registrar’s order was
unconvincing. The
only reason given for the bringing of the application was as
set out in paragraph 19 of the applicant’s affidavit, which relevantly
provided as follows:
“19. I early 2020, I broke up with my girlfriend
and so I now wish to proceed with my Application as I fear returning to Sri
26 The applicant has given no reason why he delayed in the bringing of the
application in a case for such a long period of time since
early 2020. The Court
finds that the applicant’s conduct was so egregious that the Court ought
not, in the exercise of its
discretion, and for the reasons advanced above,
grant the application to set aside the order of the Registrar made on 16 July
27 Notwithstanding the Court’s findings on the question of the
applicant’s conduct in the bringing of the application
in a case now
before the Court, it is appropriate to consider whether the applicant would have
had a reasonable chance of success
based upon the grounds as set out in the
Amended Application for Review.
Consideration of Decision of the Immigration Assessment
28 At [3] of its reasons, the Authority recorded
that it had had regard to the material provided to it by the Secretary of the
pursuant to the provisions of
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) (‘the Act’).
29 At [5] of its reasons, the Authority set out the applicant’s claims
as follows:
single Tamil Hindu male who was born in Colombo on 14 August 1993. He lived most
of his life in [name of place omitted]
in the Eastern Province of Sri Lanka. He
makes no claims about his religion.
During the war
he had problems in [name of place omitted] with harassment and
exploitation.
He was regularly
stopped at security checkpoints by the authorities and asked to pay bribes. He
was detained at checkpoints two or
three times because he forgot his National
Identity Card (NIC).
The Sri Lankan
Army (SLA) would round the applicant up with other Tamil people who lived near
the camp and require them to do work
around the camp.
During the war
his father sometimes gave food and diesel to the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam (LTTE).
At the beginning
of 2011 he became close friends with two young men, D and S, who were associated
with the LTTE. He was not aware
that they had been involved with the LTTE.
In November
2011, D was taken by the CID (Criminal Investigation Department) officers, while
they were talking at the side of the
road. The same day he was released however
he did not disclose the reason why he was detained.
incident, the police visited his home and questioned him about his connections
with D and S.
He did not spend
time with D and S in the following three to four months. In March or April 2012
he saw them by the side of the road
and talked with them again. Two days later D
and S were both taken by the CID.
Two days after
they had been taken, S called him to ‘come to the road’. When he got
to the meeting place, two army officers
stopped him, blindfolded him and took
him to their camp. He was locked in a dark room and beaten. The army officers
interrogated
him about his personal links with LTTE and his connections with D
and S who were LTTE members. He was questioned as to whether he
was also with
the LTTE. He told them he did not know they were LTTE. He was kept overnight and
the next day the applicant was placed
in the same cell as D and S. They told him
they were LTTE. He was released the next day from custody but does not know
D and S were
released from detention soon after.
Around June
2012, S told him that D had disappeared.
Two days later,
unknown men in plain clothes came to his home. He was scared and ran away and
was in hiding for two days. The men
continued to visit his parents' home.
His parents
advised him that it was no longer safe to stay in [name of place omitted] and
suggested he go to [name of place omitted],
20 to 30 kilometres from [name of
place omitted]. He registered and worked in [name of place omitted] with his
father’s business
acquaintance, however within ten days the police were
looking for him in [name of place omitted] so he went into hiding in the
arranged for him to leave Sri Lanka about ten days later.
After he left
Sri Lanka the authorities came to his parents' house, multiple times in one
month, and questioned them about his whereabouts.
His parents told them that
they did not know where he was.
returned to Sri Lanka as a failed asylum seeker, he will be subject to serious
harm including torture, significant physical
harassment or even death at the
hands of the CID, SLA or Sri Lankan Government.”
[names of places omitted]
30 At [7] and [8] of its reasons, the Authority duly recorded what
constituted a person a refugee under
of the Act, and what constituted a
well-founded fear of persecution under
of the Act.
31 Ground 1 of the Amended Application for Review was a claim that the
Authority’s failure to accept that the applicant was
closely associated
with LTTE members was legally unreasonable. It was submitted on behalf of the
applicant that adverse findings
made by the Authority at [14] of its reasons
ought to have led the Authority to conclude that from the applicant’s view
the disclosure of his association could have led to repercussions against
him. The Authority’s reasons at [14] were as follows:
“[14] The applicant claims that his association
with two LTTE members, D and S, from 2011 until 2012 will result in him being
imputed to be an LTTE supporter. The applicant did not mention this association
at all in the arrival interview so I have some concerns
his claims in this regard. The applicant submitted that he was scared of
disclosing this information to
the Australian authorities in particular due to
Australia’s close relationship to the Sri Lankan Government. I do not find
this plausible particularly as he was willing to make other claims about the Sri
Lankan Government in particular accusing SLA and
police of extortion, harassment
and discrimination. The applicant states that he met D and S in his
neighbourhood in 2011 and that
they were close friends who hung out all the
time. At the SHEV interview the applicant was unable to provide their full names
any details about their employment status. I accept that the applicant may
have known two young men called D and S but I do not accept
that he was as
closely associated with them as he claims.”
32 It is clear that the Authority was sceptical of the applicant’s
evidence. It pointed to the fact that the applicant had failed
to mention his
claimed association with the alleged LTTE members named D and S at the time of
his arrival interview in support of
his claim that by reason of his association
with them, he would be imputed as having LTTE connections. The Authority further
that at the time of the SHEV interview, the applicant was unable to
provide the full names of D and S. The Authority found that the
applicant’s claim that he did not mention the association at the time of
the arrival interview because he was scared of disclosing
such information to
the Australian authorities was inconsistent with his having criticised the Sri
Lankan government by accusing
the SLA and police of extortion, harassment and
discrimination. The conclusions reached by the Authority were open on the
before it. As Thawley J said at [21] - [24] in
CED15 v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2018] FCA 451:
“[21] In his written submissions, the appellant
was more specific. The complaint centred on paragraphs [69] and [70] of the
Tribunal’s reasons, which provided:
69. The applicant has consistently claimed
that a Tamil family of four in his neighbourhood was killed and has provided a
news article referring to the murders, which took place in November
2008. The tribunal accepts that a family in the applicant’s
neighbourhood
was murdered at that time, along with Tamils in other villages.
70. However, in his evidence to the department, the applicant merely claimed
that the family were his neighbours and acquaintances.
At the hearing the
applicant claimed for the first time that the head of the family,
Vinayakamoorthy, was his cousin. He claimed
that he had previously mentioned
this while he was “at the camp” however this significant detail is
not mentioned in
either his written statement or in the decision record summary
of his evidence at departmental interview. The tribunal does not accept
this was true, the applicant would have failed to mention a familial
relationship with the deceased Tamil family in either
his written statement or
at his departmental interview. Given the concerns the tribunal holds about the
applicant’s credibility
and his failure to mention his relationship with
the Tamil family at key times during the processing of his application, the
does not accept that the applicant previously mentioned that
Vinayakamoorthy was his cousin while he was “at the
[22] The appellant submitted that the
“later” evidence, given for the first time to the Tribunal, that the
by the army in 2008 was the appellant’s cousin was a detail of
less importance than the horrific murder of the family and the
appellant’s
fear of the army because of his being a witness.
[23] It is not demonstrated that the Tribunal committed any jurisdictional
error in reaching its conclusions in paragraphs [69]
to [70]. The conclusions
which the Tribunal reached were open on the evidence before it. Specifically, it
was open to the Tribunal
to conclude that the appellant would have mentioned
earlier than he did that the head of the deceased family was his cousin if it
were true. Reasoning which takes into account the time at which claims were, or
were not, made is entirely orthodox.
[24] The fact that a different decision-maker may have reached a different
conclusion on the evidence which was before it is not
of itself a basis for
concluding that there was jurisdictional error: DAO16 v Minister for Immigration
and Border Protection
[2018] FCAFC 2
33 For an applicant to demonstrate legal unreasonableness, a high bar must be
met. On the question as to whether something was legally
unreasonable or not,
Wigney J in
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v Pandey
[2014] FCA 640
and [42] said as follows:
“[41] The relevant principles relating to legal
unreasonableness in the context of decisions by the Tribunal to refuse
adjournment
applications have been the subject of recent extensive analysis by
the High Court in Li and this Court in Minister for Immigration
Protection v Singh
[2014] FCAFC 1 (Singh).
The relevant principles may be
summarised as follows:
(a) The requirement of reasonableness flows
from or is connected with an implied legislative intention that a discretionary
that is statutorily conferred must be exercised reasonably: Li at [29],
[63], [88]; Singh at [43].
(b) Legal unreasonableness can be a conclusion reached by a supervising Court
after the identification of an underlying jurisdictional
error in the
decision-making process. Or it can be a conclusion reached without necessarily
identifying another jurisdictional error:
Li at [27]-[28], [72]; Singh at [44].
In the latter case unreasonableness may be taken to be unreasonableness from
which an undisclosed
error may be inferred: Li at [27], [68]; Singh at [44].
(c) Unreasonableness can be inferred where the decision appears to be
arbitrary, capricious, without common sense or “plainly
unjust”: Li
at [28], [110]; Singh at [44].
(d) In those circumstances, where reasons are given, the supervising Court is
concerned with seeing if there is an evident, transparent
and intelligible
justification within the decision-making process: Li at [105]; Singh at
[44]-[45]. The intelligible justification
must lie within the reasons given by
the decision-maker: Singh at [47].
(e) Regard can also be given to the outcome of the decision: whether the
“decision falls within a range of possible, acceptable
outcomes which are
defensible in respect of fact and law”: Li at [105] (Gageler J quoting
Dunsmuir v New Brunswick
[2008] 1 SCR 190
at 220-221; Singh at [44]-[45].
(f) The legal standard of reasonableness and the indicia of legal
unreasonableness will need to be found in the scope, subject and
purpose of the
particular statutory provisions in issue in any given case: Li at [67]; Singh at
[48]. In the case of discretionary
powers vested in the Tribunal, the location
of these powers in the statutory scheme, as aids to the performance of a review
is important: Singh at [49].
(g) There is an overlap between the obligation in
of the Act to invite an
applicant to a hearing to present evidence and arguments and the exercise of the
adjournment discretion in
If, by reason of the refusal of an adjournment
application, an applicant is not provided with an opportunity to present his or
evidence, it might be concluded that the hearing contemplated did not take
place: Li at [62]; Singh at [51]-[52].
(h) The overriding duty of the Tribunal to review a decision may require the
Tribunal, acting reasonably, to consider the exercise
of the discretion to
adjourn in a particular case. A failure to adjourn to allow a visa criterion to
be met can, in some circumstances,
be so unreasonable as to constitute a failure
to review: Li at [100]-[102].
(i) It cannot be suggested that the Tribunal is under an obligation to afford
every opportunity to an applicant for review to present
his or her best possible
case or improve upon the evidence. It may decide in an appropriate case that
“enough is enough”:
Li at [82]. The Tribunal is also under a duty
to review decisions within a reasonable time: Li at [102].
(j) Properly applied, a standard of legal reasonableness does not involve
substituting a Court’s view as to how a discretion
should be exercised for
that of a decision-maker: Li at [30], [66]; Singh at [47]. The test of legal
unreasonableness is stringent:
[42] The question is whether, upon application of these
principles, the decision of the Tribunal to refuse the adjournment here was
legally unreasonable. Could the Tribunal’s decision be considered to be
arbitrary, capricious, without common sense or plainly
unjust? Do the
Tribunal’s reasons disclose an evident and intelligible justification for
refusing the adjournment application?”
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
, Kiefel CJ at [10] and [11] explained that:
“[10] In the joint judgment in Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship v Li it was explained that a decision made in the
of a statutory power is unreasonable in a legal sense when it lacks an
evident and intelligible justification. That may be so where
a decision is one
which no reasonable person could have arrived at, although an inference of
unreasonableness is not to be drawn
only where a decision appears to be
irrational. None of these descriptions could be applied to the Tribunal’s
decision in the
present case.
[11] Statements such as that made in the Wednesbury Case, that a decision may
be regarded as unreasonable if no reasonable person
could have made it, may not
provide the means by which a conclusion of unreasonableness may be arrived at in
every case. But it serves
to highlight the fact that the test for
unreasonableness is necessarily stringent. And that is because the courts will
not lightly
interfere with the exercise of a statutory power involving an area
of discretion. The question is where that area
35 The Authority comprehensively considered the applicant’s claims that
he had a well-founded fear of persecution should he
be returned to Sri Lanka at
[16] – [20] of its reasons, which were as follows:
“[16] The applicant claims that he remained of
interest to the police after his release from detention. He claims that in or
around June 2012 S told him that D was missing. Two days after he found out
scared and ran away and
was in hiding for two days. The men continued to visit his parents' home. His
parents advised him that it
was no longer safe to stay in [name of place
omitted] and suggested they go to [name of place omitted], which is located 20
kilometres from [name of place omitted]. He registered and worked in [name
of place omitted] with his father’s business acquaintance,
however within
ten days the police were looking for him in [name of place omitted] so he went
into hiding in the jungle. He called
his father and explained the situation so
his father arranged for him to leave Sri Lanka about ten days later. After he
Lanka the authorities came to his parents' house, multiple times in one
month, and questioned them about his whereabouts. His parents
said that they did
not know where he was.
[17] I do not consider the applicant’s claim that he remained of interest
the authorities after his release from detention
to be credible. He did not
mention that he was wanted by the police in his arrival interview. He does not
explain why he was of interest
to the police in June 2012after being
interrogated and then released by the SLA in April 2012. He appears to have
relocated to [name
of place omitted] to work and not because he was in hiding.
The fact that he registered with the village official in [name of place
further supports this. When questioned about this in the SHEV interview he
stated that he was not aware that the police
would find him through his
registration. I do not accept this. The applicant arranged to travel to
Australia with other relatives.
I do not consider that the applicant was of any
interest to the authorities when he left the country or that he was fleeing the
authorities
when he left the country.
[18] The applicant claims that another factor which will result in him being
imputed to be an LTTE supporter on his return, is the
fact during the war his
father assisted the LTTE by providing them with food, money or diesel whenever
they asked for it but he was
not an LTTE member. The applicant’s father
and his family lived in [name of place omitted]. Country information states that
the majority-Tamil populations of the areas controlled by the LTTE were required
to interact with the LTTE as a matter of course5.
This included providing them
with voluntary and forced support. I accept that the applicant’s father
may have provided material
support to the LTTE from time to time during the war
but I do not consider that there is anything in his or his father’s
which suggests that he was suspected of supporting the LTTE at the
conclusion of the war, based on what he did during the war. I
do not therefore
consider that the applicant will be imputed to be an LTTE supporter because of
his association with his father.
[19] I note that in the applicant’s submission after the SHEV interview
he claims that he had an uncle in the LTTE. He has
not made this claim elsewhere
and he has not provided any details about this uncle. I do not accept that the
applicant has an uncle
who as in the LTTE. I consider that if this was the case,
and the applicant feared harm on this basis that he would have articulated
claim at the arrival interview, SHEV application or interview and that he would
have provided further information. I do not
consider that this claim is
[20] The applicant has claimed that after his departure from Sri Lanka the
authorities discovered weapons buried by the LTTE in
the backyard of his family
anything to him regarding the
incident. The applicant and his family lodged a
combined SHEV application. No-one in the applicant’s family was arrested
a result of the weapons cache although his mother was questioned. She claims
that neighbours were detained and then released after
paying money; the
applicant’s father stated that he did not have any personal connections
with the LTTE and had never been
an LTTE member. Based on the information before
me, I do not accept that the applicant’s father and other immediate family
members were of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities because of any
association with the LTTE or for any other reason after the
applicant left Sri
[names of places omitted]
36 At [21] – [25] of its reasons, the Authority considered relevant
country information which recorded improvements in the human
rights situation in
Sri Lanka post 2015. When summarising its consideration of both the
applicant’s claims and the country
information, the Authority at [26]
– [27] said as follows:
“[26] Given the applicant’s claims and the
above country information, I am satisfied that, although the applicant
experienced
harassment and was detained, questioned and mistreated by the Sri
Lankan authorities in the past, the SLA have investigated the applicant
links based on his ethnicity and connections and he was released shortly after
and never arrested, charged or forced to
undertake rehabilitation as a result.
In the SHEV interview the applicant confirmed that he has never been charged,
brought before
a court in Sri Lanka or sentenced. I am therefore satisfied that
the Sri Lankan authorities did not suspect the applicant had any
association
with the LTTE. Given the above, I am also satisfied that Sri Lanka’s
authorities did not ultimately consider the
applicant to be an LTTE member or
have links to the LTTE because of his ethnicity, his association with S and D,
his father or other
family members or his family members’ circumstances
since he left Sri Lanka.
[27] I consider that the situation for Tamil people has improved significantly
under the Sirisena Government. I also accept that
the Sri Lankan authorities
remain sensitive to the potential re-emergence of the LTTE throughout the
country and I accept that there
are people who return to Sri Lanka who remain at
risk of torture and other harm on the basis of their previous LTTE involvement,
political activism and support and funding of separatist activity. I do not
consider that the applicant has a political profile of
a kind that would make
him a person of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities on his return. I am also
not satisfied that the applicant
will face a real chance of harm from the Sri
Lankan authorities due to his actual or perceived Tamil ethnicity, his links to
D and family members or his past interactions with the Sri Lankan
authorities.”
37 There is no merit to Ground 1 of the Amended Application for Review. The
Authority appropriately considered all of the evidence
before it, and all of the
applicant’s claims both cumulatively and individually. The applicant
essentially disagreed with the
findings of the Authority, and sought an
impermissible merits review of that decision.
38 As to Ground 2, this ground again seeks a merits review of the decision of
the Authority. It is a complaint that because there
was certain evidence before
the Authority, the Authority ought to have made findings in favour of the
applicant. There is no merit
to such claim.
39 The Authority was not satisfied that the applicant would be regarded as
having a profile of such significance so as to warrant
any interest being taken
in him by the authorities. The Authority specifically so found at [17] of its
reasons based upon a sound
analysis of the evidence before it. The Authority had
examined the applicant’s claims about his association with D and S,
at [15] of its reasons as follows:
“[15] The applicant claims that as a consequence
his friendship with D and S, the police visited his home in November 2011
questioned him about his connections with them. Later, around March or April
2012 he claims he was detained by the SLA for approximately
two days along with
D and S during which time he was beaten and questioned about his association
with them and the LTTE. He told
the SLA that he did not know they were LTTE.
They were all released the next day. Country information indicates that during
war period the SLA was involved in the regular harassment of young
Tamils3. Tamils between the ages of eighteen and forty were required
to register
and report to the police station4. I accept that in 2012 the Eastern Province
was highly militarised and the general
Tamil population experienced harassment.
I consider it credible, and accept, that the applicant, as a young Tamil male,
been subject to monitoring and questioning on two occasions as he
claims and mistreated and detained. I accept that D and S also
may have been
detained overnight by the authorities, as Tamils, beaten and released after
their identity was established. However,
given the applicant’s claim that
he and D and S were released within two days and not arrested, prosecuted or
referred for
rehabilitation, I do not accept that, after second questioning, the
applicant was considered by the authorities to be associated
with the LTTE.
Further, the applicant has never claimed that he took part in any activities in
support of the LTTE.”
40 The Authority was entitled to find that the applicant’s claims
lacked credibility. It did not err in the way in which it
considered, and
subsequently rejected, such claims. As was said in
Applicant WAEE v Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCAFC 184
(2003) 236 FCR 593
– [47] per French, Sackville and Healy JJ:
“[46] It is plainly not necessary for the
tribunal to refer to every piece of evidence and every contention made by an
in its written reasons. It may be that some evidence is irrelevant to
the criteria and some contentions misconceived. Moreover, there
is a distinction
between the tribunal failing to advert to evidence which, if accepted, might
have led it to make a different finding
of fact (cf Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs v Yusuf
[2001] HCA 30
(2001) 206 CLR 323
–[97]) and a failure
by the tribunal to address a contention which, if accepted, might establish that
the applicant had a well-founded
fear of persecution for a Convention reason.
The tribunal is not a court. It is an administrative body operating in an
environment
which requires the expeditious determination of a high volume of
applications. Each of the applications it decides is, of course,
importance. Some of its decisions may literally be life and death decisions for
the applicant. Nevertheless, it is an administrative
body and not a court and
its reasons are not to be scrutinised “with an eye keenly attuned to
error”. Nor is it necessarily
required to provide reasons of the kind that
might be expected of a court of law.
[47] The inference that the tribunal has failed to consider an issue may be
drawn from its failure to expressly deal with that issue
in its reasons. But
that is an inference not too readily to be drawn where the reasons are otherwise
comprehensive and the issue
has at least been identified at some point. It may
be that it is unnecessary to make a finding on a particular matter because it
subsumed in findings of greater generality or because there is a factual premise
upon which a contention rests which has been
rejected. Where, however, there is
an issue raised by the evidence advanced on behalf of an applicant and
contentions made by the
applicant and that issue, if resolved one way, would be
dispositive of the tribunal's review of the delegate's decision, a failure
deal with it in the published reasons may raise a strong inference that it has
been overlooked.”
41 There is no merit to Ground 2 of the Amended Application for Review.
42 It cannot be said that no other rational or logical decision maker could
not have made the same decision as the Authority. As was
said by Crennan and
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS
at [130], [131] and [135]:
“[130] In the context of the Tribunal's decision
here, "illogicality" or "irrationality" sufficient to give rise to
error must mean the decision to which the Tribunal came, in
relation to the state of satisfaction required under
, is one at which no
rational or logical decision maker could arrive on the same evidence. In other
words, accepting, for the sake
of argument, that an allegation of illogicality
or irrationality provides some distinct basis for seeking judicial review of a
as to a jurisdictional fact, it is nevertheless an allegation of the
same order as a complaint that a decision is "clearly unjust"
or "arbitrary" or
"capricious" or "unreasonable" in the sense that the state of satisfaction
mandated by the statute imports a requirement
that the opinion as to the state
of satisfaction must be one that could be formed by a reasonable person. The
same applies in the
case of an opinion that a mandated state of satisfaction has
not been reached. Not every lapse in logic will give rise to jurisdictional
error. A court should be slow, although not unwilling, to interfere in an
appropriate case.
[131] What was involved here was an issue of jurisdictional fact upon which
different minds might reach different conclusions. The
complaint of illogicality
or irrationality was said to lie in the process of reasoning. But, the test for
illogicality or irrationality
must be to ask whether logical or rational or
reasonable minds might adopt different reasoning or might differ in any decision
finding to be made on evidence upon which the decision is based. If probative
evidence can give rise to different processes of reasoning
and if logical or
rational or reasonable minds might differ in respect of the conclusions to be
drawn from that evidence, a decision
cannot be said by a reviewing court to be
illogical or irrational or unreasonable, simply because one conclusion has been
to another possible conclusion.
[135] On the probative evidence before the Tribunal, a logical or rational
decision maker could have come to the same conclusion
as the Tribunal. Whilst
there may be varieties of illogicality and irrationality, a decision will not be
illogical or irrational
if there is room for a logical or rational person to
reach the same decision on the material before the decision maker. A decision
might be said to be illogical or irrational if only one conclusion is open on
the evidence, and the decision maker does not come
to that conclusion, or if the
decision to which the decision maker came was simply not open on the evidence or
if there is no logical
connection between the evidence and the inferences or
conclusions drawn. None of these applied here. It could not be said that the
reasons under consideration were unintelligible or that there was an absence of
logical connection between the evidence as a whole
and the reasons for the
decision. Nor could it be said that there was no probative material which
contradicted the first respondent’s
claims. There was. The Tribunal did
not believe the first respondent’s claim that he had engaged in the
“practice of
homosexuality” in the UAE and accordingly it was not
satisfied that he feared persecution if he returned to
43 Neither could the decision of the Authority be considered as legally
unreasonable, or one lacking an evident and intelligible justification,
respective concepts were considered by Hayne, Kiefel and Bell JJ in
for Immigration and Citizenship v Li
[2014] FCAFC 1
(2013) 249 CLR 332
where it was said:
“[66] This approach does not deny that there is
an area within which a decision-maker has a genuinely free discretion. That
resides within the bounds of legal reasonableness. The courts are conscious of
not exceeding their supervisory role by undertaking
a review of the merits of an
exercise of discretionary power. Properly applied, a standard of legal
reasonableness does not involve
substituting a court's view as to how a
discretion should be exercised for that of a decision-maker. Accepting that the
of reasonableness is not applied in this way does not, however, explain
how it is to be applied and how it is to be tested.
[76] As to the inferences that may be drawn by an appellate court, it was said
in House v The King that an appellate court may infer
that in some way there has
been a failure properly to exercise the discretion "if upon the facts [the
result] is unreasonable or
plainly unjust". The same reasoning might apply to
the review of the exercise of a statutory discretion, where unreasonableness is
an inference drawn from the facts and from the matters falling for consideration
in the exercise of the statutory power. Even where
some reasons have been
provided, as is the case here, it may nevertheless not be possible for a court
to comprehend how the decision
was arrived at. Unreasonableness is a conclusion
which may be applied to a decision which lacks an evident and intelligible
justification.”
44 The applicant has failed to establish jurisdictional error on the part of
the Authority.
45 The Applicant has failed to satisfy the Court that Order 3 of the Orders
of the Registrar made on 16 July 2018 ought to be set
aside pursuant to the
provisions of r. 16.05(2)(a) of the Rules.
46 Having considered on an impressionistic basis that the Amended Application
for Review was without merit, the Applicant’s
Application in a Case filed
on 31 March 2021 is without merit and is dismissed.
47 The Court will hear the parties as to costs.
I certify that the preceding forty-seven (47)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 31 August 2021
See paragraphs 5 and 6 of the
Affidavit of Mr Sharma filed on 11 May 2021 together with annexure AS-
AS-2 thereto.
See paragraph 8
of Affidavit of Mr Sharma filed on 11 May 2021 together with annexure AS-3
See paragraph 9 of
Sharma affidavit and annexure AS-4 thereto.
See paragraph 10 of Sharma
affidavit and annexure AS-5 thereto.
See paragraph 12 of Sharma
affidavit and annexure AS-6 thereto.
See paragraph 13 of Sharma
See paragraph 14
of Sharma affidavit and Annexure AS-7
Amended Application
for Review filed on 8 June 2021.
AON Risk Services
Australia Limited v Australian National University
(2009) 239 CLR 175.
RTF format (456 KB)
Signed PDF/A format