1906822 (Refugee) [2024] AATA 4181 (11 October 2024)
1906822 (Refugee)
[2024] AATA 4181
(11 October 2024)
DECISION RECORD
Migration & Refugee Division
CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
Phillippa Wearne
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant
a protection visa.
Statement made on 11 October 2024 at
REFUGEE – protection visa –
India – business supervisor employed workers from nearby refugee camp
– approached
by police to provide information about former LTTE members,
and by refugees about harassment, threats, assaults and drug trafficking
police – beaten and threatened by police – continuing approaches to
business owner/wife’s uncle – no attempt
to report police’s
actions – no travel to third country after visa issued – delay in
departing after new passport
issued – knowing provision of inaccurate
information about damage to/loss of previous passport – inconsistent
and evidence, and no supporting documentation provided – travel to
other countries and refusal of previous Australian visa
application not declared
– false information and fraudulent document provided in previous
application – country information
– decision under review
LEGISLATION
Migration Act 1958
(2)(a), (aa), (2A),
Regulations 1994
(Cth), Schedule
references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has been
omitted from this decision pursuant to section 431
Migration Act 1958
replaced with generic information which does not allow the identification of an
applicant, or their relative or other dependants.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
The applicant is a [Age]-year-old national of
He arrived in Australia [in]
April 2016 as the holder of a business visa (Subclass FA 600 visa) and lodged an
application for a protection
visa on 23 June 2016.
On 1 March 2019 a delegate for the Minister of Home Affairs refused to grant
the applicant a protection visa under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) (the Act). This is a review of that decision by the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal (the Tribunal).
CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
Protection visa application
According to his protection application, the applicant was born and resided in
[Tamil Nadu].
He states that he reads, writes and speaks English and Tamil. He gives his
religion as Hindu. He completed 12 years of education
and then a Bachelor
The applicant states that he married in 2001. His wife, 2 sons and a daughter
reside in [Tamil Nadu] at the family home where the
applicant resided from 2012
until he left for Australia. Two brothers and a sister also reside in India,
another 2 in [Country 1]
and 1 in [Country 2].
He indicates that he has not previously travelled to any other country in the
previous 30 years and that a previous passport (number
provided) was lost.
He indicates that he has never had an Australian visa refused.
The applicant made claims for protection which I have summarised as
After completing
his study, the applicant had difficulty finding office employment. He opened and
operated a [shop] from [Year]-2012.
uncle, K, a building contractor operated a business partnership with 5 of his
close friends. They employed the applicant
as a construction supervisor, even
though he didn't have building industry experience.
He supervised
the labourers’ work, found additional labourers when required, helped the
accountant pay their salary, assisted
engineers ordering materials and collected
building materials. He worked directly under K’s instructions.
The labourers
worked manually, carrying stones and mud to the work site. They broke stones
into smaller pieces. Most of the labourers
were women. Men tended to leave
before finishing or quit on the spot because it was hard work. The women stayed
working because they
needed work.
There were many
Sri Lankan Tamil refugees in refugee camps in Tamil Nadu. The partners wanted
the applicant to employ them because
they were hard working and paid less than
Indian employees.
These Sri Lankan
workers had to return to their camps by 6pm. They feared deportation if they
failed to return in time.
The partners
told the applicant to get permission from Q Branch Police to permit them to work
after 6pm as they wanted the work to
be completed on time.
applicant attended Q Branch, he was interrogated about his connection with the
refugees. The officers told the applicant
that they wouldn’t permit the
workers to work after 6pm because ex-president Rajiv Gandhi was murdered by a
Liberation Tigers
of Tamil Ealam (LTTE) cadre, a refugee in India at the
The police said
they were investigating former LTTE cadres living in the camps and told the
applicant he could help locate such individuals
by coaching information from the
refugees. To avoid further questioning, the applicant agreed to help. When the
applicant discussed
this visit the partners, they told him that they did not
want anything to do with a police investigation and that he should deal
refugees personally.
In August 2014,
when the applicant was waiting for at the refugee camp to take some refugees to
work, some Q Branch Police approached
and asked him why he was there. He
explained that he’d employed workers from the camp for the past 6 months.
The police told
him that the workers had to return by 6pm.
That same night
when the applicant dropped off the refugee workers, they told him about their
problems at the camp. They said they
were harassed and threatened with
deportation by Q Branch police, who made them perform sexual acts and do drug
trafficking. They
were told if they refused to help, they would be sent to
special camps or deported to Sri Lanka. The refugees asked the applicant
assist them by talking to politicians. The same police officers who had been at
the camp in the morning, noticed the applicant
talking to the refugees and asked
what they had been discussing. The applicant said that they were planning the
work. The officers started to beat the men and women workers
before they ran away to avoid harm.
The applicant
was ordered to attend the police station where he was beaten and kicked for
having talked to the refugee workers. He
felt pain in his back and was unable to
walk. He had excruciating pain in his back.
officers at the police station recognised the applicant from an earlier occasion
and told the others that the applicant
would be assisting the police to locate
the LTTE cadres. They asked the applicant whether the refugees had told him
anything about
Q Branch’s involvement in drug trafficking. He denied this.
They told him that he should not speak to the refugees again or
he would be sent
to prison for assisting the LTTE cadres in terrorist activities in India.
The police let
him go. He had to be admitted to surgery for his back injuries.
The applicant
was fearful of dealing with the refugees after this incident. For approximately
1 year, he never went near the camps.
Lorry drivers picked up the refugees from
In October 2015,
police officers from Q Branch arrived at the work site wanting to talk to the
applicant. They took details of the
employees working and asked about their
salaries. The police went to the applicant’s home. There they told the
applicant that
refugees working for him were involved in drug trafficking with
them and that the applicant should encourage all employees working
under him to
also traffic drugs. They offered to pay him for this. Q Branch police wanted
the applicant to travel to meet their
agents in Kerala, Mumbai, Delhi and
Calcutta. They said that they would protect him. The applicant knew that it was
wrong to be involved
in drug trafficking, which is injurious to health. He had
no way to escape from these officers. To escape, he said he knew ex-labourers
who could assist. The applicant spoke to his wife and K. K told him that
Q branch would blame the applicant for their
mistakes if they got caught, and the applicant would spend the rest of his life
bars. K wanted the applicant to leave India before becoming involved with
the Q Branch police trafficking.
applicant that the police officers could kill him if they found out he knew
refugees. K told the applicant to
move out of home until the applicant arranged a visa to go to any country. The
travel agent got
him the visa to travel to [Country 3] but warned that I would
not be able to obtain a permanent stay. He told the applicant to stay
got the visa to UK, Canada or Australia, so he could live permanently away from
India. The agent told the applicant that
he would not be able to help his travel
away from India if he travelled to [Country 3].
applicant was hiding at friends' places, his wife called him stating that the Q
Branch police officers asked about his whereabouts.
She said he was in Andhra
Pradesh. The police officers told her to tell him to report to Hyderabad police
He got a visa
for Australia and fled India before the Q Branch could locate
Before the Department interview, the applicant made the following additional
After he arrived
in Australia his wife told him that K, was facing problems from the Q Branch
police because they learned through
the applicant’s employees that the
applicant was related to K. They asked K whether he knew about their drug
trafficking proposal
made to the applicant. Although he knew all about it, K
told them he didn't know what they were talking about.
Q Branch police
continued to visit K and the partners questioning whether they knew anything
Lankan refugees] involvement with them. The
partners didn’t want anything to do with the police, so K's relationship
partners broke down. K opened his own business.
The Q Branch
police continued to visit K and asked him about whether the Sri Lankan workers
or the applicant had complained to K about
‘latter part of 2017’, Q Branch police arrested K and interrogated
him about his possible involvement with the
LTTE. They also told him most of the
Sri Lankan employees had been involved in drug smuggling for the LTTE and the
applicant had
been assisting them with drug transportation using company
vehicles. They blamed K for encouraging the applicant and the refugees
continue drug trafficking. K denied any involvement. The officers released K
after warning him that he had to bring the applicant
to the police if he
returned from overseas.
A few months
later the police abducted K and held him in an unknown location for a few weeks.
K’s wife was able to use her influence
on politicians to get K released. K
told the applicant’s wife that the police had asked him to assist with
their storing of
drugs at his business premises. He refused so that is why they
had detained him. The police threatened him with imprisonment for
involvement with drugs and LTTE in the past if he did not assist them.
The applicant's
wife told him never to return to India to assist K because his life would be
To avoid being
imprisoned, K lent his old truck to the police. He found it abandoned in
December 2018 with blood stains on it.
In January 2019,
K was arrested and questioned about the applicant by the [City] police. He told
them the applicant was overseas.
The police told K that the applicant had been
using K’s vehicles for drug trafficking and molesting Sri Lankan refugee
They ordered K to bring the applicant to Q Branch police on his return to
applicant that should he return, he will not be able to escape Q Branch. He will
end up as a drug dealer or would spend the
rest of his life behind
Department interview
The applicant attended a protection visa interview on 14 February 2019. During
the interview the applicant provided additional information,
including the
difficulty in departing India through Chennai Airport.
He found out
construction industry in India.
He wrote his own
claims for protection. This is why he's applying for protection in
The refugee camp
was near Chennai Airport and was called the Sri Lankan Refugee Camp.
couldn't find another job because Q Branch police thought he knew everything
illegal that they had been involved in and didn't
let him out of their
His wife and
children are currently safe because they're living with her parents.
If he goes back
to India, he will face the same problems and he will have to commit
The delegate referred to some of the applicant’s other evidence the
decision, some of which is discussed below in ‘Analysis,
reasons and
The applicant also submitted extracts from several articles:
sexual harassment persists in India, MSU 28 March 2016.
Two years on,
has Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace Act done any good to India. Anjana
Radhakrishnana
Building India
cities, silent workforce of women goes unrecognised. Reuters, January 2015.
exploitation in Indian modern society. International Journal of Scientific and
Research Publications, 2 February 2013.
Indian Q Branch
police arrest 63 Lankan refugees, Colombo Gazette, 21 January 2016.
Tamil refugees
arrested in Tamil Nadu. The Guardian, 8 April 2015.
Walking Dead, Leo Seemanpillai in the Indian refugee camps. 28 January
Tamils facing
new atrocities among The Walking Dead. Leo Seemanpillai in the Indian refugee
camps. 28 January 2015.
Sri Lankan Tamil
refugees treated worse than beasts in Tamil Nadu. Asian Tribune, 12 July
Asian Human
Rights Commission, Dealing with the tremendous problem of torture in India
Special Refugees
and India’s obsession with detention, Sreekumar Kodiyath, 12 March 2016,
Countercurrents.org
Women labourers
work at the construction site of a road in Kolkata, 8 January 2015. Reuters.
Reuters/Rupak De Chowdhuri.
The horror of
Indian jails, India Today Bhavna Vij-Aurora, 24 June 2011.
Status of female workers in the construction in India. A review. Babasaheb
Bhimrao. Status of Female Workers in Construction
Industry in India: A Review,
Kalpana devi & U.V.Kiran, Department of Human Development and Family
Studies, School for Home Sciences.
Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedker University,
delegate’s decision
The delegate did not find the applicant’s claims to be credible and
decided that:
the applicant
did not have a well-founded fear of persecution for those reasons set out in s
5J(1)(a) of the Act, and
There were not
substantial grounds for believing that as a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of being removed to India, there
was a real risk that the applicant
will suffer significant harm.
The applicant provided a copy of the decision record with the application for
The review application
On 22 March 2019, the applicant applied to the Tribunal for a review of the
delegate’s decision.
Pre-hearing submissions
On 10 September 2024 the applicant submitted a further
and supporting
documentation. The statement is summarised below:
The applicant
K about whether he personally knew
the Sri Lankan refugees the applicant
employed. K maintained that he never had any direct dealing with them as the
applicant oversaw
employing and paying them. K convinced them that the applicant
was employing labourers from the refugee camps and had never consulted
employing them. The police suspected that the applicant gave details to K about
the police officers’ involvement in
sexually molesting the refugees and
using them for drug trafficking. K convinced the police that the applicant had
personal dealings
with the refugees. The police officers ordered K to get the
applicant to India and hand him over to the police. However, K advised
applicant not to return to India as the police officers fear that he could
expose their Illegal activities.
His wife told him that Q Branch officers visited home last month and took
their son for interrogation. The son was asked repeatedly
whether the applicant
was living in India. When his son said he was living in Australia, they asked
when he would be returning from
there. They asked his son about whether he was
aware that the applicant had been involved in drug trafficking along with the
Lankan Tamil refugees in the camp. His son replied that he was not aware of
that. The officers warned his son, that if the applicant
ever attempted to
re-enter India, he would be taken away and sentenced for his involvement in
prostitution in refugee camps and for
drug trafficking along with the Tamil
refugees. His wife and K arranged release of his son through the Tamil
parliamentarians and
his wife is planning to send their son to [another
The applicant stated that Indian police, including Q Branch, are corrupt and
are involved in illegal activities such as rape and drug
peddling. He attached
an article,
Punjabi Police Report says 234 cops involved in the drug
The applicant also submitted the following articles: CBI raids on passport
offices: How do passport scams
108 Agents arrested
in incidents of visa and passport fraud in 6
The applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 11 September 2024 to give
evidence and present arguments. An interpreter in the Tamil
(Indian) language
assisted the Tribunal.
The applicant said that a Sri Lankan friend who is also a housemate assisted
him with his written statements in his application
for protection.
He confirmed that he had lived at the same address since arriving in Sydney in
2016. He said that he had worked at the same [company]
here for 8 years.
His wife and children live with his mother-in-law. He sends his family money
every month. His sons are aged [Ages] and his daughter
is [Age]. His older son
has just finished college.
Later in the hearing, I asked the applicant why he feared returning to India.
He replied that he is fearful because he knew everything
secrets. He clarified this to mean that he knew they were smuggling drugs and
sexually abusing the women in
the refugee camps. He said that Q Branch still
think that they will be in trouble because of him. He said that even now Q
is harassing K. However, he added that he thought that K ‘has come
out of that’ now. Now that the applicant’s son
has finished his
college studies, Q Branch are interrogating and troubling him, not K. If the
applicant returned to India, Q Branch
would put him in to the old case and there
is more chance that they harass and torture him. There is corruption everywhere
so people like the applicant are not protected.
The applicant confirmed that he had never been involved in smuggling,
transporting or selling drugs, despite Q Branch police pressuring
him to do so.
Nor had he ever been involved in any of the sexual abuse by Q Branch of the Sri
Lankan refugees. He also confirmed
that he hadn’t had any contact with
LTTE cadres or given Q Branch any information about them. The applicant also
that he had never reported Q Branch regarding its ‘secret
activities’ to any authorities. He added that he would not
do this because
corruption was entrenched within the authorities, and they would tell Q Branch.
I noted that the applicant had been in Australia for over 8 years. He’d
never reported Q Branch to the authorities, including
since coming to Australia.
According to his evidence, Q Branch would know that he’d not reported
them, and they would probably
assume that he’d never do so given his fear
of them. Accordingly, it was difficult for me to accept that Q Branch would
that the applicant would report Q Branch now if he returned to India. It
seemed to me that they would have no remaining adverse interest
in the applicant
after all this time has passed and no reports made against them. The applicant
replied that K was pursued for this
problem in 2019 and now his son is being
investigated; this shows that the problem is still going on. If there was a
problem in Q
Branch, they would blame the applicant. The applicant said that Q
Branch is currently involved in high level distribution of drugs
to colleges and
The applicant added that if he returned to India there was a chance that Q
Branch would get him involved again and harass him. They
are in his local area,
there is a chance they could find out about his past and they might force him to
get involved with drug deals.
He does not know why this trouble comes to him
when there are millions of people in India.
Where relevant, the applicant’s other oral evidence at the hearings is
referred to in the Tribunal’s analysis below.
Section 424A
The Tribunal sent a s 424A letter to the applicant after the
raising for comment
particular oral evidence given by the applicant in the interview which had not
been referred to in the Department
decision. This oral evidence related to the
timing of a particular event. This issue of inconsistent timing is not pursued
Tribunal (see para 41). However, other statements made in the
applicant’s response
424A letter are referred to below (see para 41).
CONSIDERATION OF
CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
The issue in this case is whether the applicant meets the refugee criterion
and, if not, whether he is entitled to complementary
protection.
Relevant law
The criteria for a protection visa are set out in s 36 of the Act and
Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) (the Regulations). An
applicant for the visa must meet one of the alternative criteria in
s 36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That
is, he or she is either a person in
respect of whom Australia has protection obligations under the
‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other ‘complementary
protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same family unit as such a
person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same class.
Section 36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the
applicant for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the
Minister is satisfied Australia has protection obligations because the person is
A person is a refugee if, in the case of a person who has a nationality, they
are outside the country of their nationality and,
owing to a well-founded fear
of persecution, are unable or unwilling to avail themselves of the protection of
that country: s 5H(1)(a).
In the case of a person without a nationality,
they are a refugee if they are outside the country of their former habitual
and, owing to a well-founded fear of persecution, are unable or
unwilling to return to that country: s 5H(1)(b).
Under s 5J(1), a person has a well-founded fear of persecution if they
fear being persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality,
membership of
a particular social group or political opinion, there is a real chance they
would be persecuted for one or more of
those reasons, and the real chance of
persecution relates to all areas of the relevant country. Additional
requirements relating
to a ‘well-founded fear of persecution’ and
circumstances in which a person will be taken not to have such a fear are
out in ss 5J(2)-(6) and ss 5K-LA, which are extracted in the
attachment to this decision.
If a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s 36(2)(a), he
or she may nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant
of the visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection obligations
because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of being
removed from
Australia to a receiving country, there is a real risk that he or
she will suffer significant harm: s 36(2)(aa) (‘the complementary
protection criterion’). The meaning of significant harm, and the
circumstances in which a person will be taken not to face
a real risk of
significant harm, are set out in ss 36(2A) and (2B), which are extracted in
the attachment to this decision.
Mandatory considerations
In accordance with Ministerial Direction No.84, made under s 499 of the
Act, the Tribunal has taken account of the ‘Refugee
Law Guidelines’
and ‘Complementary Protection Guidelines’ prepared by the Department
of Home Affairs, and country
information assessments prepared by the Department
of Foreign Affairs and Trade expressly for protection status determination
to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
Independent information
The following are extracts from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade
County Information Report India 2023 (the ‘DFAT
Report’) which
provide some background
information.
India hosts more than 90,000 Tamils from Sri Lanka, mostly in the state of Tamil
Nadu, which has a strong Tamil identity. India
does not recognise their refugee
status or have a legal framework for refugee protection, but the national and
state governments,
along with UNHCR and aid groups, provide basic services such
as food and basic housing, education and health care. Sri Lankan Tamils
Tamil Nadu can and do work after obtaining government permission but, according
to the US Department of State’s 2021 Human
Rights Report, the police
sometimes summon them back to camps at short notice, especially during election
periods or major events.
3.179 Sri Lankan Tamils in India can be broadly divided into two groups
– those who live in camps serviced by the government
(about 60,000 people,
but DFAT does not have exact numbers), and those who are integrated into and
live in the community (approximately
30,000, although DFAT cannot confirm exact
numbers). Those in camps receive education, housing, health care and
psychosocial support.
Many are highly educated, including degree holders.
Sources told DFAT that accommodation for Sri Lankan Tamils who are in the camps
is generally good with sanitation, food, health care, education and other
services provided...
3.188 Sources told DFAT that they are not aware of LTTE (Tamil armed
separatists) being active in the camps. DFAT is aware of media
reports about
the issue but cannot confirm details. Authorities question people if they
suspect that they are related to the LTTE
and monitor financial transactions
that, broadly, may be used to fund terrorism.
Unreliable identity documents and document fraud
5.40 In-country sources told DFAT identity documents in India are unreliable
because ‘breeder documents’ (which include
birth, marriage and death
certificates used to support applications for identity, residence and travel
documents) and other basic
government identity documents can be obtained
fraudulently. Easily-faked bank statements or utility bills can also be used to
demonstrate
residency. Verifying documents is time consuming and largely
unreliable given the ease of fraudulently obtaining genuine documents
5.41 Document fraud is a common criminal activity. It is not difficult to
obtain fraudulent documents. For example, a passport might
be based on only one
other form of identification. Organised networks of agents are known to provide
complete packages of fake documents.
For example, The Times of India reported in
February 2019 the arrest of five persons in Hyderabad for fabricating documents
and official
stamps, and helping people obtain visas for Western countries. The
accused allegedly took applicants’ original passports,
charging approx.
AUD 750-850 as a first instalment, and a further AUD7,500-8,500 if the visa was
successful. The process allegedly
involved tampering with original Indian
passports, and forging documents such as bank statements and seals, income tax
returns, identity
proofs, letter heads and logos, as well as rubber stamps of
government officials, immigration stamps used at Indian airports, and
immigration service stamps of Australia, the UK, the US and the UAE. Sources
told DFAT organised networks such as those arrested
in Hyderabad in 2019
provided complete packages of fake documents and charged significant fees for
the provision of fraudulent documents.
Exit procedures
5.24 The Bureau of Immigration undertakes immigration functions in India.
Indian nationals travelling abroad require a valid Indian
passport and travel
authority for the destination country. An Indian national, on re-entry to
India, requires a valid Indian passport
or travel document issued by the
Government of India.
5.28 India has a border alert mechanism, known as a Look-Out Circular (LOC),
that allows certain agencies to flag citizens and non-citizens
intervention on entry to or exit from the country. Authorities can request LOC
listing in cases where a person is a suspect,
accused or under investigation for
serious criminal offences under the Indian Penal Code or other penal laws. LOC
listing can prevent
a person from exiting the country (via airports, ports or
land border crossings), and allow for arrest in some cases (such as when
person is absconding). In other cases, immigration authorities may not prevent
LOC subjects from travelling, but originating agencies
will be informed about
the person’s departure or arrival. Generally, LOCs are valid for one year
from the date of issue. In
some cases validity can be longer (such as LOCs
issued at the request of courts or Interpol, those with a specified duration or
linked to impounding of passports). DFAT is not aware of details of who
would be placed on the list and is not aware of a pattern
of treatment of those
people that are.
Analysis, reasons and findings
For the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded that the decision under
review should be affirmed.
I have the following concerns about the applicant’s evidence regarding
his claims for protection.
Inconsistent information about
previous passport
The applicant’s current Indian passport was issued in [2015]. On the
protection application, the applicant declared that a
previous passport was
‘lost’. During the interview he claimed his previous passport had
been water damaged in a flood
and became unusable. When the reason for replacing his passport was raised with
him during the hearing, the applicant said that it
had been water damaged. He
said that if he told the Indian authorities that it was damaged it would have
been more difficult to get
a new passport, so he declared that it had been lost.
He said that because this reason was given to the Indian authorities, the same
information was given on the Australian protection application. In his
dated 30 September
2024, the applicant stated that he had not personally attended for the
replacement Indian passport, or personally
mentioned to the Indian authorities
that it was lost. It was the agent who had assisted him apply for the new
passport who told him
to state that it had been lost. He stated that he never
intended to mislead the Indian or Australian government. He claims he was
‘facing problems’ from the corrupt and unruly Q Branch and
‘urgently’ had to leave India, and this is why
he applied for the
new passport through an agent.
I note that the applicant did not leave India until about 10 months after the
new passport was issued. Accordingly, I don’t
accept this recent claim
that he urgently required the replacement passport. Further, in seeking to place
responsibility on his agent
for providing knowingly false information about what
happened to the previous passport, the applicant indicates that he attributes
personal responsibility or accountability for the inaccurate information
provided about his passport both on his application for
it and on the protection
application. I consider the applicant’s evidence on this issue
demonstrates a positive disregard to
providing correct information about
identity documents to Indian and Australian government authorities to achieve an
easier, faster
or desirable travel or migration outcome.
2014 attack
The applicant claims in his written statement that in August 2014, he was
caught by Q branch police officers talking to the construction
firm workers at
the refugee camp twice in one day. He was ordered to the police station where he
was questioned about whether he
had been discussing the police’s drug
trade with his workers. He claims that he was severely beaten and attacked by Q
officers at the police station causing such severe pain in his back he
was unable to walk, and as a result was admitted to surgery
for treatment.
However, when asked about this claimed event during the interview, he said that
he said that he had an MRI
taken, physiotherapy treatment for his back injuries but did not undergo
surgery. During the hearing I raised this inconsistent evidence
received for his injuries with the applicant. The applicant told me that he had
been ‘admitted into surgery’
but when told of the risks, he
postponed surgery and opted for physiotherapy. Then he cancelled the surgery. I
find that the applicant
has given inconsistent evidence about medical treatment
he purportedly received for injuries sustained during the attack by Q Branch
police. I also think his evidence on this issue indicates that he has the
capacity and willingness to return to an original claim
and rephrase his
evidence in an attempt to justify an inconsistency brought to his
Regarding the same claimed the severe attack on him by Q Branch police
officers, the applicant states he was so fearful of more
harm from them he
stayed away from the refugee camp for a year. Given the attack and his fear of Q
Branch, I asked the applicant
why he remained working with the construction firm
until April 2016. According to the applicant’s evidence, Q Branch police
officers knew where he worked and about his continuing connection to the refugee
camp workers. The applicant told me that he had
to stay working there because K
was looking after him and wanted him to stay working there. He felt like he was
still learning and
had a passion for the work and could earn more money at this
construction firm. He worked well and K trusted him, so he continued
there. I do not find his reasons for remaining in the same employment after the
severe attack and the continuing adverse
interest from Q Branch, to be
convincing and I don’t accept that the applicant had to keep working with
the same construction
firm as he claims. Given my concerns about the
applicant’s above evidence, including medical treatment for his back
I don’t accept that the applicant was severely beaten and
attacked by Q Branch officers at the police station in August 2014.
Q Branch searching for the applicant
As already observed, the applicant claimed in the protection application to
have continued working for the construction firm until
April 2016. He also
claimed in October 2015, Q Branch police officers came around to his home to
convince him to get involved with
drug trafficking. He started to stay at
friends’ places to keep safe. He claimed K had wanted him to leave India
at this time.
I asked why he hadn’t left at this time instead of waiting
until April 2016. I also asked if Q Branch police officers had been
looking for
him after October 2015, as he claims, surely, they would have been able to
locate him. The applicant said that although
he was very scared, he could not
leave as he had to look after his family. He said he only stayed on in India for
a ‘few months’
and then he came to Australia. He also added
inconsistently that it was only after he came to Australia that Q Branch police
During the interview that applicant said that he couldn't relocate in India
because the police could locate him in any other state.
I noted again if Q
Branch police did have this power why hadn’t they located him before he
left India when they were searching
for him? The applicant said he would somehow
be found if he moved interstate because the police had links in everywhere.
referred to country information that indicates procedures are in place
to prevent people of adverse interest to police from leaving
the country. I
noted that the applicant claimed to be pursued by Q Branch police, whom he also
claimed knew his every move and whom
he claimed were powerful with links, yet he
was able to exit India without a problem. The applicant said that the police had
put a case on him. The problem was with [the] Q Branch, it was just local
not national. He got a visa without the police knowing.
The exit alerts would be
for a First Information Report about a murder.
I find that the applicant has given inconsistent information about the extent
of Q Branch’s adverse interest in him, whether
they were searching for him
and his views about their capacity to locate him. I don’t accept the claim
that they would be able
to locate the applicant in another state yet were not
able to locate him in the area where he continued to work for the same firm
before he left India. Given this and my concerns already expressed about the
credibility of the applicant’s claims, I do not
accept that Q Branch were
looking for the applicant before he left India, as he claims.
[Country 3] visa
Copies of the applicant’s passport indicate that he was granted a
multiple entry visa for travel to [Country 3] issued on
29 December 2015, which
was valid for 12 months. The applicant claims to be increasingly fearful of Q
Branch officers after October
2015, that he had moved out of home after this,
and was staying at different friends’ places. In explaining why he
go to [Country 3] when he had the opportunity to leave India, the
applicant said during the interview, that his agent had advised
him not to go
because he couldn’t get permanent residency. During the hearing, I raised
this issue with him and asked why he
had not escaped the threats and harm and
gone to [Country 3]. The applicant said he could not get a protection visa or
any visa to
stay in [Country 3]. He also added that it was possible that Q
Branch could operate in [Country 3]. He said that he knew that there
dealing in [Country 3] as he’d seen it on the news.
I consider that if the applicant felt very scared and feared imminent serious
harm from Q Branch police officers, and also if K
was urging and helping him
leave, as he claims he was, the applicant would have left India at the first
opportunity he had. Instead,
he delayed leaving until April 2016.
Given the above, I don’t accept that the applicant was very scared of Q
Branch in his hometown, or that he moved out of home
in October 2015 to avoid
them. I don’t accept that he did not go to [Country 3] because he was
concerned about the possibility
of Q Branch operating being there. I also
consider that the applicant’s evidence on this issue reflects on his
credibility
adversely in regard to his other claims for protection.
Q Branch incriminate themselves
As I indicated to the applicant, it strains credulity that after the applicant
left India Q Branch police officers would ask K and
the applicant’s son
what they knew about Q Branch’s illegal drug activity and their sexual
misconduct with the Sri Lankan
refuges. For in doing so they would incriminate
themselves. The applicant said that they did so because they were trying to get
information from K and then from his son. They were feeding them with
information to get more information.
I don’t accept that Q Branch police would incriminate themselves to a
successful local businessman and the applicant’s
son by telling them about
their illegal activities, in an attempt to illicit more information about the
Q branch involved in illegal activities
The applicant submitted an article in support of his claim that Indian police
including Q Branch are corrupt and involved in illegal
activities.
Given the country
information available
that there can a problem with corruption in India including with the police. For
example, there are some reports that those
who have contacted police may well
have paid a bribe for the police to take
However, there is no
mention of Q Branch police in the article that he submitted to support his
claims about Q Branch. Also, as I
told the applicant, I had looked at country
information available to me and made searches of the internet and couldn’t
a reference or a mention that Q Branch was involved in, or linked to, or
rumoured to be so, corruption and the illegal activities
he claimed that they
are so involved with. In response, the applicant said that they weren’t
directly involved, they were distanced
from the illegal activities. They got
their commissions. They avoided trouble for themselves. The Indian government
would not put
this information on the Internet.
Reports of corruption and involvement in illegal activities are not limited in
their source to the Indian government. In the absence
of any supporting
information to the contrary, from any source, I don’t accept the
applicant’s claims that Q Branch police
is corrupt and involved the
illegal activities including drug trafficking and supply that the applicant
claims it is.
Family has move for their safety
During the hearing, the applicant stated that his wife and children had moved
from the family home to her mother's address for their
safety at the time the
applicant left for Australia in April 2016. I pointed out that this was
inconsistent with information he’d
provided in the protection application,
which states his wife was still at the family home when he made the protection
application
on 23 June 2016. The applicant then said that his wife and children
had continued to stay half the time at the family home and half
the time at her
mother’s home until she and the children completely moved in with her
mother completely in 2017. The applicant’s
evidence is that he is close to
and protective of his family. Their wellbeing was one of the reasons that
applicant claims he delayed
leaving in India. I find that the applicant has
provided inconsistent information about his family having to move to ensure
safety. I don’t accept that his family had to move for their safety
when he left as the applicant claims. I also find that
the applicant’s
evidence on this issue reflects adversely generally on his other claims for
protection.
K’s role and gaps in timeline of claimed
Another concern I have regarding the applicant’s evidence is with the
role of K. The applicant provided written claims before
the interview stating
that since the applicant left India, K opened and operated his own construction
business. Q Branch started
to become more interested in K and his relationship
with the applicant. In the later part of 2017, K was interrogated and later
The police asked K to assist them in their illegal drug distribution
activities for reward. According to the applicant’s written
K’s wife was able to get K released through her influence on politicians.
I asked given this why could she similarly
not use her influence to protect the
applicant if he returned to India. The applicant responded that it was not
‘influence’.
In India if you knew a member of council you can ask
for their help, and they will talk to the police and get the person released.
asked if they could help the applicant too then if he returned to India. The
applicant said this had happened after he came to
Australia, and for drug
dealing he would never get help. Anyway, now the politicians have changed.
Sometimes it works and sometimes
it doesn’t. It depends on who you know. I
consider that the applicant’s evidence on this issue is inconsistent
according to the applicant, K was asked to assist in the drug dealing,
yet he was assisted and released from abduction by the police.
I also asked the applicant why K had not also left if he received this claimed
adverse interest from Q Branch. The applicant replied
that K was scared and did
try to leave. However, he had a lot of business assets in his name so he
couldn’t go. Everything
would be lost. The applicant then said that K was
coming out of that adverse attention now. He said that after he came to
in 2016, they tortured K in 2018-2019. They gave him trouble and
arrested him. However, as K has been successfully working in construction,
has money and influence, and he is being left alone by Q Branch. I noted that if
K was protected from Q Branch now because of
his wealth and influence, he would
also be able to protect the applicant, so the applicant would have no problem
now if he were to
because K has [children] to look after. The applicant then said that it
because K had managed to convince Q Branch that had nothing to do with the
applicant that is why he had come out of that problem.
applicant’s evidence regarding the growing interest in K over a year after
he left for Australia, the subsequent
lapse of interest and reinterest and the
reasons for that to be unconvincing.
Specifically, regarding the timeline of claimed events, I noted to the
applicant that there were some long gaps in claimed events.
After he left in
India in April 2016, there was no claimed activity until ‘the later part
of 2017’. At that time, according
to the applicant’s claims, Q
Branch started focusing on his uncle, K. I noted that there were no claimed
events in 2018. However,
in January 2019, K is arrested and asked about the
applicant. After the Department decision in March 2019 there are not claimed
for the rest of 2019, none in 2020, none in 2021, none in 2022, none in
2023 and then around September 2024, the applicant claims
that Q Branch police
questioned K again and then the applicant’s son is now questioned. I
queried this lack of continuity in
claimed interest by Q Branch police as well
as lengthy gaps between claimed events. I indicated that I considered that the
timeline strained credulity. The applicant said maybe K got out
attention from Q Branch by bribes. But he knows the problem for him
continuing because Q Branch then spoke to his son.
Given my concerns about the credibility of the applicant’s claims noted
above and the lack of continuity of sustained interested
by Q branch, apart from
times that correspond to the Department interview or Tribunal hearing, I
don’t accept that Q Branch
has questioned K since the applicant left India
or that his son was recently questioned by Q Branch police officers regarding
Knowledge of protection visas
I noted that the applicant had variously claimed to have found out about
protection visas from the Sri Lankan refugees, from the
agent who organised the
visa to come to Australia and from K. He had also claimed during the interview
to have come to Australia
with the purpose of applying for a protection visa.
However, also during the interview, while seeking to explain the delay in
for a visa, he had claimed that he hadn't known ‘anything’
when he arrived in Australia, and he slowly started to find
out about protection
visas by speaking to different people. I told the applicant that I considered
his evidence about his knowledge
of protection visas to be inconsistent. The
applicant replied that K told him that he had to leave for overseas for safety.
The dealings
were between K and the agent. The agent did all the forms. The
applicant only met the agent at the airport.
I do not find the applicant’s explanation satisfactorily explains the
inconsistent evidence about his knowledge of protection
visas. Specifically, I
find the claim that he did not know anything about protection visas when he
arrived here to be untruthful.
Credibility concerns raised by
the delegate in Department decision
I also discussed concerns about credibility of the applicant’s claims
that were raised in the delegate’s decision.
of previous Australian visa application not declared
The Department decision record notes that the applicant lodged a business
visitor (FA-600) visa application on 17 March 2016, which
was refused on 21
March 2016. A second application was made on 29 March 2016 which was granted. In
the protection application, the
applicant answered ‘no’ to the
question asking whether he had ever had an Australian immigration visa refused
or cancelled.
When asked about this during the interview the applicant responded
that his migration agent obtained the visa for him. During the
hearing the
applicant told me that K had arranged the visa for him and got everything done
for him. The applicant gave the agent
his passport for this purpose. I said that
he would have presumably had to sign 2 different applications, so he would
therefore know
that he had made 2 visa applications. The applicant said he just
put his signature on whatever forms he was presented to sign. I
asked whether he
had checked the purpose of the declarations. The applicant said in India if you
get the visa that was enough for
them. He trusted K and K trusted the agent, so
the applicant just signed the forms.
I have already made some adverse credibility findings in respect of some of the
applicant’s claims for protection. I consider
that the applicant’s
evidence on the issue of not declaring a refused Australian visa demonstrates
that he is indifferent to
providing a truthful response in an application if it
achieves the migration outcome he seeks.
purpose of travel to Australia inconsistent
During the interview, the applicant claimed that his purpose of travel to
Australia was to apply for a protection visa. However,
in support of his visitor
visa application to enter Australia, the applicant provided a letter of support
from his employer, an invitation
letter from [Business organisation] and copies
of his personal income tax returns from 2013 to 2015. This visa application and
documents used to support clearly indicated that the applicant came to
Australia for a purpose other than seeking protection.
The applicant told the delegate that he just did what his agent had told him to
do. He added that it is very common in India to
be able to produce fraudulent
documents and very easy to obtain non genuine documents. Given the country
information available I
accept that this is the case. His agent advised him to
do certain things to process the visa and be able to leave India, so he did
whatever his agent instructed. The delegate asked the applicant whether he was
declaring that he had provided fraudulent or misleading
documents to the
Department in connection with applying for a visa. The applicant responded
‘no’. The asked why he would
allow his agent to provide false or
misleading documents to the Department. The applicant told the delegate that his
objective was to make money out of the visa application and this
way his agent could demand more money.
In his pre-hearing statement, the applicant stated the delegate refused to
accept that the agent who obtained the visa for him to
travel to Australia made
all the documentation and evidence to get his visa. K who is his uncle, had
direct contact with the agent
and made all arrangements with the agent to obtain
the visa. The agent must have obtained and submitted non-genuine tax documents
to secure the visa for the applicant. The applicant said that he did not
personally lodge any fraudulent documents to the Department.
The applicant said
that he was panicking about being taken away by Q Branch at the time the visa
was applied for, and he relied on
K to deal with the agent directly.
Given independent information available, I accept that fraudulent and
fraudulently obtained documents are available in
However, I have already
made some adverse credibility findings in respect of some of the
applicant’s claims for protection.
Specifically, I have not accepted that
he was very scared of Q Branch in his hometown, that he moved out of home in
October 2015
to avoid them or that Q Branch police were looking for him. Given
this, I don’t accept that the applicant was panicking about
being taken
away by Q Branch at the time he was applying for the visa. Further, I find that
the applicant’s evidence on the
issue of his declared purpose in coming to
Australia visa demonstrates that he is indifferent to providing a truthful
response in
an application or enabling someone else to do it on his behalf, as
long as it achieves the migration outcome he seeks.
supporting documentation of claimed employment
During the hearing the applicant confirmed claims on the protection application
that he operated a [shop] from [Year]-2012 and from
2012-April 2016 he worked as
a supervisor at the construction firm.
Construction firm
The delegate asked the applicant whether he had any evidence of his employment
at the construction company in India where he claimed
to have worked prior to
his arrival in Australia. He replied that he did not have any documents. He said
because K was a partner
at the company and family he didn't get an ID card for
the company. He was then asked to provide any pay slips that could support
claims of working at the construction company in India. The applicant replied
that he was paid by deposit of his salary into
his bank account and sometimes he
was paid in cash. He provided no supporting evidence of his employment.
In his pre-hearing statement, regarding his employment at the construction
firm, the applicant reiterated his claim of obtain employment
through K. As he
was under the direct control of K, he wasn’t provided with a company ID.
Further, the applicant employed and
supervised labourers, without much contact
with the partners. The applicant said the system in India if different. You
relative who invited you to work. The applicant was looked after by
his uncle. This is why he did not have payslips. It was like
cash in hand to
avoid income tax. This was the way it was in India.
The applicant told me that his [shop] did not have an individual name or a
business name. It was located within a group of other
shops collectively
referred to by the name of the street where the shops were located. He bought
[supplies] locally to avoid import
tax. He said that it’s different in
India. Income was low so no tax is paid. There are no tax records. He did not
Apart from the applicant’s claims that he did so, there is no supporting
evidence before me that he worked in the [shop] for
9 years or for the
construction firm for 4 years. Even with the employment informalities he
describes in India, which I accept do
exist to some extent, I note that his tax
records were provided to the Department in regard to his application for the
business visa.
I have already made some adverse credibility findings in respect of the
applicant’s claims for protection. Given this and
the lack of any
supporting documentation I don’t accept that the applicant operated the
[shop] or worked at the construction
firm as claimed.
travel to another country
In the protection application, responding to the question about whether he had
travelled to any country other than Australia in
the last 30 years, the
applicant responded ‘no’. However, information before the Department
indicated that the applicant
had previously travelled to [Country
and [Country 1]. When this
undeclared travel was brought to the applicant's attention for comment, he
stated that he had not travelled
to any other country. He said that an impostor
might have used his old passport to travel and that such incidents do happen in
In the pre-hearing statement, the applicant repeated he had not travelled
to another country. He postulated that corrupt Indian passport
officers who
issued his new passport after taking away his old, damaged passport may have
used it in illicit activities. His old
passport may have been given to an
unknown person after removing the damaged pages and this unknown person has
travelled abroad.
This malpractice is well known in India. The applicant said he
had provided an article about it.
Given independent information
, including the article
submitted by the applicant
accept that there at instances of passport fraud and scams. However, I have
already made some adverse credibility findings in respect
applicant’s core claims for protection. I consider that the
applicant’s evidence on the issue of undeclared previous
[Country 1] indicates that he is indifferent to providing a truthful response in
an application if it achieves the migration
outcome he seeks.
confirms employment at [Product 1 Company] for previous 8
The delegate informed the applicant that information he previously submitted to
the Department indicated that he was employed at
[Product 1 Company] and had
been since 2008. This employment was checked and confirmed by a Departmental
officer with [Product 1
Company] before the Visitor Business visa was granted in
March 2016. In response to this confirmed employment, the applicant stated
had travelled to Australia to seek protection and insisted that he had given his
agent details of his employment first at the
[shop] and then at the construction
During the hearing the applicant repeated that the agent had organised
everything. The applicant just wanted to leave. The applicant
said that he did
not know what mistakes were made and what false documents were used –
anything wrong he did the applicant
did not know about. With money the agent
would do anything. That is why there may be some errors. The applicant said that
claims is true, his own IQ as good as it was. Sometimes he forgets
I have already made some adverse credibility findings in respect of the
applicant’s core claims for protection. I consider
applicant’s evidence on previous claimed employment indicates that he is
indifferent to providing a truthful response
in an application, or having
someone else provides it on his behalf, as long as it achieves the migration
outcome he seeks. Further,
on the same basis of adverse credibility findings
already made in respect of the applicant’s claims, I don’t accept
inconsistencies in his evidence can be explained by his reduced IQ or that
sometimes he forgets things.
I noted that the applicant had claimed to the delegate that he would suicide if
he returned to India. I asked the applicant if had
depression. He said that when
he first came to Australia, he had nightmares sometimes and couldn’t get
did not expand on this or indicate that he was
taking any medication for depression. In the absence of any information to the
I do not accept that the applicant is depressed, is being treated for
depression or has thoughts of suicide.
Issues not pursued by the
In his written claims, the applicant consistently maintained that his wife's
uncle K recommended him for employment at the construction
firm, where he was a
partner. He claimed a continuing family and employment relationship with K.
However, the applicant was unable
to provide K’s full name. Given the
applicant had been married a lengthy time, had been provided employment by K,
and had working
for K for approximately 4 years, the delegate was concerned that
the applicant didn’t know K’s full name. In response
delegate’s concerns, the applicant said that it was not unusual not
knowing K’s full name. There was no need to
know it. The applicant
compared it to not knowing the uncle’s house number, although he knew
where the house was located. He
said most of his family members don’t
remember their relative’s family names. In Hindu culture, they know people
names only. Although, I too initially found it unusual that the
applicant did not know K’s full name given their strong connections,
independent information available to me indicates that in Tamil Nadu and Sri
Lanka the use of surnames is not
This is issue is
therefore not pursued by the Tribunal.
of the construction firm
The applicant claimed during the interview that the name of the construction
company in India was an acronym of the initials of
the business owner
The delegate said that the name of the construction firm had not previously
been provided, noting that the applicant had elsewhere
described it as a
partnership with several of K’s friends
The delegate was concerned
applicant said that it was like
a partnership. They had invested their money
into the business. But at the same time, they did not get involved. They had
other businesses
they operated. K has a private business as well as his company.
It is different in India. There was a landowner and then there were
construction
owners. This issue of identity of the construction firm is not pursued by the
NSW Work and Safety General Construction Induction
The delegate was concerned that the applicant had completed a ‘Safework
NSW Work and Safety General Construction Induction’
prior to lodging his
protection application. The applicant said that his Sri Lankan flatmates had
advised him to do so. He provided
the names of them after the interview. The
delegate came to conclusion that the applicant completed the course for the sole
of bolstering his claims for protection as a person who had worked in
the construction industry. The Tribunal does not pursue this
issue otherwise
than to accept the applicant’s evidence that he completed this course to
bolster his employment opportunities
in Australia.
in applying for protection in Australia
During the interview, the delegate was concerned that the applicant waited 2
months after arriving in Australia before lodging his
protection application.
This issue is not pursued by the Tribunal.
Finding of facts
Given all the above including findings already made, I do not accept that:
The applicant
worked for a construction firm as a supervisor in India where he recruited and
employed Sri Lankan refuges.
The applicant
was targeted by Q Branch or the police because of his conversations with and
employment of Sri Lankan refugees.
Q branch had,
has or will have any interest in the applicant for any reason he claims,
including implied political views or his knowledge
of their illegal
activities.
The applicant
was threatened or harmed by Q Branch officers or other police officers,
including the threat that he would be sent to
prison for assisting LTTE cadres
in terrorist activities.
requested him to get information about LTTE cadres from the Sri Lankan
Q branch asked
the applicant to assist them for reward in their illegal drug trafficking
activities, including by recruiting the Sri
Lankan workers to work in illegal
drug trafficking
The applicant
had a genuine fear of harm from Q Branch police or that he left India because he
feared harm from Q branch officers.
corruption everywhere in India so people like the applicant are not
That he did not
report Q Branch because corruption was entrenched within the authorities and the
authorities would tell Q Branch.
K was questioned
or detained by Q Branch or the [City] police about the applicant after the
applicant left India.
applicant’s son was recently questioned by Q Branch regarding the
applicant, including his whereabouts.
Q Branch has or
had any interest in K or his son for the reasons the applicant claims.
Q Branch is
involved in drug smuggling and trafficking. Specifically, that it is currently
involved in high level distribution of
drugs to colleges and other
institutions.
If the applicant
returned to India there is a chance that Q Branch would get him involved in
their illegal activities and harass him.
Q Branch or the
police will threaten or harm the applicant if he returns to India
applicant genuinely fears returning to India because he fears harm from Q Branch
officers or other police.
Given the findings above, there is no need to further consider the articles
that the applicant submitted to the Department and Tribunal.
Having rejected the applicant’s claims in regard to Q Branch’s or
other police officers’ adverse interest in him
at any time, I am not
satisfied that there is a real chance the applicant will suffer serious harm
from these people or anyone else
for this or any other reason if he were to
findings and
this conclusion it is unnecessary to address the issue of whether
the harm faced by the applicant is for a specified reason set out
in s 5J(1)(a).
For the above reasons I am not satisfied that the applicant meets the
requirements for recognition as a refugee as defined by s
5H of the Act and I am
not satisfied that he is person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under s.36(2)(a) of
Having concluded that the applicant does not meet the refugee criterion in s
36(2)(a), I have considered the alternative criterion
in s 36(2)(aa). Having
rejected the applicant’s claims regarding Q Branch’s or other police
officers’ adverse interest
in him at any time, I am not satisfied that he
is at risk of adverse interest or attention from them for reasons he claims upon
conclude that the applicant faces a real risk of arbitrarily
deprivation of his
life; or that the death penalty will be carried out on him; or that he will be
subjected to torture; or to cruel
or inhuman treatment or punishment; or to
degrading treatment or punishment if he is returned to India. I am, therefore,
not satisfied
that there are substantial grounds for believing that, as a
necessary and foreseeable consequence of being removed from Australia
as the receiving country, there is a real risk that the applicant will suffer
significant harm. I am not satisfied that
the applicant is a person in respect
of whom Australia has protection obligations under s
Family unit
There is no suggestion that the applicant satisfies s 36(2) on the basis
of being a member of the same family unit as a person
who satisfies
s 36(2)(a) or (aa) and who holds a protection visa. Accordingly, the
applicant does not satisfy the criterion in s
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant a protection
Phillippa Wearne
ATTACHMENT - Extract from
Migration Act 1958
5 (1) Interpretation
cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment
means an act or
omission by which:
(a) severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally
inflicted on a person; or
(b) pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on
a person so long as, in all the circumstances, the
act or omission could
reasonably be regarded as cruel or inhuman in nature;
but does not include an act or omission:
(c) that is not inconsistent with Article 7 of the Covenant; or
(d) arising only from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions that are
not inconsistent with the Articles of the Covenant.
degrading treatment or punishment
means an act or omission that
causes, and is intended to cause, extreme humiliation which is unreasonable, but
does not include an
act or omission:
(a) that is not inconsistent with Article 7 of the Covenant; or
(b) that causes, and is intended to cause, extreme humiliation arising only
from, inherent in or incidental to, lawful sanctions
that are not inconsistent
with the Articles of the Covenant.
means an act or omission by which severe pain or
suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a
(a) for the purpose of obtaining from the person or from a third person
information or a confession; or
(b) for the purpose of punishing the person for an act which that person or a
third person has committed or is suspected of having
committed; or
(c) for the purpose of intimidating or coercing the person or a third person;
(d) for a purpose related to a purpose mentioned in paragraph (a), (b) or (c);
(e) for any reason based on discrimination that is inconsistent with the
Articles of the Covenant;
but does not include an act or omission arising only from, inherent in or
incidental to, lawful sanctions that are not inconsistent
with the Articles of
the Covenant.
receiving country
, in relation to a non-citizen, means:
(a) a country of which the non-citizen is a national, to be determined solely by
reference to the law of the relevant country; or
(b) if the non-citizen has no country of nationality—a country of his or
her former habitual residence, regardless of whether
it would be possible to
return the non-citizen to the country.
5H Meaning of refugee
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person in Australia, the person is a
(a) in a case where the person has a nationality – is outside the country
of his or her nationality and, owing to a well-founded
fear of persecution, is
unable or unwilling to avail himself or herself of the protection of that
country; or
(b) in a case where the person does not have a nationality – is outside
the country of his or her former habitual residence
and owing to a well-founded
fear of persecution, is unable or unwilling to return to it.
Note: For the meaning of
well-founded fear of persecution
section 5J.
5J Meaning of well-founded fear of persecution
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, the person has a
well-founded fear of
persecution
(a) the person fears being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group or political
(b) there is a real chance that, if the person returned to the receiving
country, the person would be persecuted for one or more
of the reasons mentioned
in paragraph (a); and
(c) the real chance of persecution relates to all areas of a receiving country.
Note: For membership of a particular social group, see
sections 5K
(2) A person does not have a
well-founded fear of persecution
if effective protection measures are available to the person in a receiving
Note: For effective protection measures, see
section 5LA.
(3) A person does not have a
well-founded fear of persecution
if the person could take reasonable steps to modify his or her behaviour so as
to avoid a real chance of persecution in a receiving
country, other than a
modification that would:
(a) conflict with a characteristic that is fundamental to the person’s
identity or conscience; or
(b) conceal an innate or immutable characteristic of the person; or
(c) without limiting paragraph (a) or (b), require the person to do any of the
(i) alter his or her religious beliefs, including by renouncing a religious
conversion, or conceal his or her true religious beliefs,
or cease to be
involved in the practice of his or her faith;
(ii) conceal his or her true race, ethnicity, nationality or country of
(iii) alter his or her political beliefs or conceal his or her true political
(iv) conceal a physical, psychological or intellectual disability;
(v) enter into or remain in a marriage to which that person is opposed, or
accept the forced marriage of a child;
(vi) alter his or her sexual orientation or gender identity or conceal his or
her true sexual orientation, gender identity or intersex
(4) If a person fears persecution for one or more of the reasons mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a):
(a) that reason must be the essential and significant reason, or those reasons
must be the essential and significant reasons, for
the persecution; and
(b) the persecution must involve serious harm to the person; and
(c) the persecution must involve systematic and discriminatory conduct.
(5) Without limiting what is serious harm for the purposes of
paragraph (4)(b), the following are instances of
serious harm
for the purposes of that paragraph:
(a) a threat to the person’s life or liberty;
(b) significant physical harassment of the person;
(c) significant physical ill‑treatment of the person;
(d) significant economic hardship that threatens the person’s capacity to
(e) denial of access to basic services, where the denial threatens the
person’s capacity to subsist;
(f) denial of capacity to earn a livelihood of any kind, where the denial
threatens the person’s capacity to subsist.
(6) In determining whether the person has a
well‑founded fear of
persecution
for one or more of the reasons mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a), any conduct engaged in by the person in Australia is to
be disregarded
unless the person satisfies the Minister that the person engaged
in the conduct otherwise than for the purpose of strengthening the
person’s claim to be a refugee.
5K Membership of a particular social group
consisting of family
For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person (the
first person
), in determining whether the
first person has a well‑founded fear of persecution for the reason of
membership of a particular
social group that consists of the first
person’s family:
(a) disregard any fear of persecution, or any persecution, that any other member
or former member (whether alive or dead) of the
family has ever experienced,
where the reason for the fear or persecution is not a reason mentioned in
paragraph 5J(1)(a); and
(b) disregard any fear of persecution, or any persecution, that:
(i) the first person has ever experienced; or
(ii) any other member or former member (whether alive or dead) of the family has
ever experienced;
where it is reasonable to conclude that the fear or persecution would not
exist if it were assumed that the fear or persecution mentioned
paragraph (a) had never existed.
may be relevant for determining family relationships
for the purposes of this section.
5L Membership of a particular social group
other than family
For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, the person is to be treated as a member
of a particular
social group (other than the person’s family) if:
(a) a characteristic is shared by each member of the group; and
(b) the person shares, or is perceived as sharing, the characteristic; and
(c) any of the following apply:
(i) the characteristic is an innate or immutable characteristic;
(ii) the characteristic is so fundamental to a member’s identity or
conscience, the member should not be forced to renounce
(iii) the characteristic distinguishes the group from society; and
(d) the characteristic is not a fear of persecution.
5LA Effective protection measures
(1) For the purposes of the application of this Act and the regulations to a
particular person, effective protection measures are
available to the person in
a receiving country if:
(a) protection against persecution could be provided to the person by:
(i) the relevant State; or
(ii) a party or organisation, including an international organisation, that
controls the relevant State or a substantial part of
the territory of the
relevant State; and
(b) the relevant State, party or organisation mentioned in paragraph (a) is
willing and able to offer such protection.
(2) A relevant State, party or organisation mentioned in
paragraph (1)(a) is taken to be able to offer protection against
persecution
to a person if:
(a) the person can access the protection; and
(b) the protection is durable; and
(c) in the case of protection provided by the relevant State—the
protection consists of an appropriate criminal law, a reasonably
police force and an impartial judicial system.
36 Protection visas – criteria provided for by this Act
(2) A criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant for the visa
(a) a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection obligations because the person
is a refugee; or
(aa) a non-citizen in Australia (other than a non-citizen mentioned in paragraph
(a)) in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial grounds for believing that, as
a necessary and foreseeable
consequence of the non-citizen being removed from
Australia to a receiving country, there is a real risk that the non-citizen will
suffer significant harm; or
(b) a non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a
non-citizen who:
(i) is mentioned in paragraph (a); and
(ii) holds a protection visa of the same class as that applied for by the
applicant; or
(c) a non-citizen in Australia who is a member of the same family unit as a
non-citizen who:
(i) is mentioned in paragraph (aa); and
(ii) holds a protection visa of the same class as that applied for by the
(2A) A non‑citizen will suffer
significant harm
(a) the non‑citizen will be arbitrarily deprived of his or her life; or
(b) the death penalty will be carried out on the non‑citizen; or
(c) the non‑citizen will be subjected to torture; or
(d) the non‑citizen will be subjected to cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment; or
(e) the non‑citizen will be subjected to degrading treatment or
punishment.
(2B) However, there is taken not to be a real risk that a non‑citizen
will suffer significant harm in a country if the Minister
is satisfied that:
(a) it would be reasonable for the non‑citizen to relocate to an area of
the country where there would not be a real risk that
the non‑citizen will
suffer significant harm; or
(b) the non‑citizen could obtain, from an authority of the country,
protection such that there would not be a real risk that
the non‑citizen
will suffer significant harm; or
(c) the real risk is one faced by the population of the country generally and is
not faced by the non‑citizen personally.
Copies of pages of the
applicant’s Indian passport issued in [2015] are held on the Department
information for your consideration
, 11 February
Refugees” And India’s Obsession With Detention By Sreekumar Kodiyath
(countercurrents.org)
circumstances, statement
Police report says 234 cops involved in drug trade - Pakistan - DAWN.COM
https://www.dawn.com/news/1824584#:~:text=LAHORE%3A%20A%20shocking%20report%20compiled,drug%20business%20across%20the%20province
– accessed 11 September
Times of India, 30 June
New Delhi Television
Limited, 11 July 2024.
September 2024.
30 September
, 29 September 2023 – accessed 1 October
The Tribunal does not
pursue the issue of the year this happened, which was raised in a s 424A letter
sent after the hearing. The
Tribunal accepts that applicant’s response to
that letter that it was water damaged in
Response to the
Tribunal’s s 424A
The Tribunal does
not pursue the issue of the whereabouts of the MRI identified by the delegate in
the decision.
See footnote
DFAT Report 2.11,
DFAT Report
See paragraph 35,
The claimed travel to
[Country 4] is not pursued by the
See Country
information, above.
paragraph 17, above.
Hinduism, Culture and
fact sheets - Hinduism (nt.gov.au)
– accessed 26 September
RTF format (1.61 MB)
Signed PDF/A format