Evelyn Gilla & Ors on behalf of the Yugunga-Nya People #2 v Paleogold Limited and Another [2025] NNTTA 28 (25 September 2025)
NATIONAL NATIVE TITLE TRIBUNAL
Evelyn Gilla & Ors on behalf of the Yugunga-Nya People #2 v
Paleogold Limited and Another
[2025] NNTTA 28
(25 September 2025)
Application No:
WO2023/0837
IN THE MATTER of the
Native Title Act 1993
IN THE MATTER of an inquiry into an expedited procedure objection
application
Evelyn Gilla & Ors on behalf of the Yugunga-Nya People #2 (WC2022/003)
(native title party)
Paleogold Limited
(grantee party)
State of Western Australia
(Government party)
DETERMINATION THAT THE ACT IS AN ACT ATTRACTING THE EXPEDITED
Ms Nerida Cooley
Catchwords:
Native title – future act – proposed grant of exploration
licence – expedited procedure objection application –
whether act is
likely to interfere with the carrying on of community and social activities
– act is not likely to interfere
with community and social activities
– whether act is likely to interfere with areas or sites of particular
significance –
Mt Yagahong –
(Emu) Dreaming story
Wati Kutjara
(Two men) Dreaming story –
Dingo) Dreaming story – act is not likely to interfere with areas or sites
of particular significance – whether
act is likely to involve major
disturbance to lands and waters – act is not likely to involve major
disturbance – act
is an act attracting the expedited procedure
Legislation:
Heritage Act 1972
Title Act 1993
(Cth) ss 151, 237
Cheinmora v Striker Resources NL and Others; Dann v State of Western
Australia and Others
[1996] FCA 1147
(1996) 142 ALR 21
Dann v Western Australia and Another
[1997] FCA 332
(1997) 74 FCR 391
Gilla on behalf of the Yugunga-Nya People v State of Western Australia
Yugunga-Nya Determination
Wilma Freddie & Others on behalf of the Wiluna Native Title
Claimants/Western Australia/Kingx Pty Ltd
Little and Others v Oriole Resources Pty Ltd
; (2005) 146 FCR 576 (‘
Little v Oriole
Evelyn Gilla & Ors on behalf of the Yugunga-Nya People #2 v Mining
Equities Pty Ltd and Another
Mining Equities
Smith v Western Australia and Another
[2001] FCA 19
(2001) 108 FCR 442
Smith v Western
Yindjibarndi Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v FMG Pilbara Pty Ltd and
Yindjibarndi v FMG
Yugunga-Nya Native Title Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Kelro Pty Ltd
and Another
Representative of the native title party:
Franklin Gaffney, PBC Legal & Consultancy Services
Representative of the grantee party:
Martin Wiedemann, MKII Consulting Pty Ltd
Representatives of the Government party:
Julie Shields, State Solicitor’s Office; Paola O’Neill,
Department of Mines, Petroleum and Exploration
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Limited has applied for the grant of an exploration
north-easterly of Cue in Western Australia.
of Western Australia considers that the grant of the licence is an
act attracting the expedited procedure under the
Native Title
(Cth). If the expedited procedure applies, the licence
may be granted without first requiring negotiation in good faith between
the State and any native title parties for the licence area.
Yugunga-Nya
#2 registered native title claimant, which is a relevant
native title party, objects to the application of the expedited procedure
basis that it will directly interfere with the carrying on of community and
social activities, interfere with areas or sites
of particular significance and
involve major disturbance. Central to Yugunga-Nya’s case is the location
of a Dreaming path,
which it says passes through a corner of the licence area.
[4] The State
argues that interference or disturbance as alleged by Yugunga-Nya is not likely,
asserting that the evidence provided
by Yugunga-Nya is insufficient in a number
of respects. Paleogold relies on the State’s material.
[5] To determine
whether the expedited procedure applies, I must undertake a predictive
assessment by considering the likely consequences
from the grant of the licence
in the sense of a real, not remote, chance: see overview of approach in
Yindjibarndi v FMG
satisfied this matter can be adequately determined without a hearing:
Native Title Act
. On the basis of the evidence provided, I
am not satisfied that any of the consequences contended by Yugunga-Nya are
likely and I
have therefore determined that the grant of the licence is an act
attracting the expedited procedure. My reasons follow.
What are the issues?
are three key issues in this matter.
first is whether the grant of the licence is likely to interfere directly with
the carrying on of the Yugunga-Nya People’s
community or social
activities:
Native Title Act
. This involves a consideration of
both the extent of the community and social activities undertaken and whether
the grant of the
licence is likely to cause direct interference with those
activities. Trivial impacts are outside the scope of interference contemplated
by the section:
Smith v Western Australia
[9] The second
issue is whether the grant of the licence is likely to interfere with areas or
sites of particular significance to
Yugunga-Nya People:
Native Title
. For that to be the case, I must be satisfied of the identification and
location of such areas or sites and that the grant is likely
to result in
interference in accordance with Yugunga-Nya traditions.
[10] These first
two issues largely turn on evidence about the
Wati Kutjara
(Two men) and
(Dog, Dingo) Dreaming stories which Yugunga-Nya says pass through a
corner of the licence area. This is because the Dreaming path
for these stories
is identified as an area or site of particular significance to Yugunga-Nya
People and the reason for activities
undertaken to protect the Dreaming stories.
[11] The third
issue is whether the grant of the licence is likely to involve major disturbance
to any land or waters in accordance
, which Yugunga-Nya says it
does primarily due to its impact on water.
Is the grant of the licence likely to directly interfere with
the Yugunga-Nya People’s community or social activities?
[12] Yugunga-Nya
asserts that community and social activities related to the observance of the
Wati Kutjara
Dreaming stories occur within and in the
vicinity of the licence area, specifically the maintenance of and checking on
the stories.
[13] Yugunga-Nya
relies on evidence from Mr Colin ‘Tomorrow Tomorrow’ Peterson who is
a Western Desert traditional owner
top law man. Mr
Peterson is not a Yugunga-Nya person but says he has been given permission to
speak on behalf of Yugunga-Nya traditional
owners. He explains his long
association with and knowledge of Yugunga-Nya country, including that his wife
is a Yugunga-Nya elder.
[14] Mr Peterson
explains the paths of the
(Emu) Dreaming and the
Dreamings. Mr Peterson describes the path of the
Wati Kutjara
Dreamings coming from Warburton to the east
to Mt Russell, then on to Mt Yagahong, out to Montague Range and then over to
Brown Soak,
before going “down to Liru (Yarraquin) and Tjungara, which is
garden rock”.
description is similar to the description given in
Mining Equities
[12] and, according to the Tribunal’s online mapping tool, Native Title
Vision, the tenement considered in
Mining Equities
is located a short
distance north-easterly of the licence. In that determination at
[16]–[17], I observed that the locations
identified on the path did not
accord with the location of the tenement and, therefore, I did not accept that
the Dreaming path passed
through the tenement in question.
[16] In this
case, Mr Peterson’s written description is accompanied by a map with a
hand drawn path for the
Dreaming story and a separate path for
Wati Kutjara
Dreamings, including one section outside
of the licence where the two paths meet. I understand this to be the area around
Mt Yagahong
where Mr Peterson says the stories intersect. Only the path of
Wati Kutjara
Dreamings is shown as passing in or near
the licence area.
[17] However,
other than Meekatharra, none of the places mentioned in Mr Peterson’s
description are shown on the map. Further,
while the path of the
Dreamings shown on the map appears to dogleg into
the south-easterly corner of the licence area, the width of the line is so
drawn that it is difficult to be confident of its path in relation to
the licence area. The challenges in reconciling the written
description with the
location of the licence, as was the case in
Mining Equities
, also remain.
[18] Considering
the apparent inconsistencies between the description of the path and the
mapping, I do not have confidence in the
path of the Dreaming stories as it
relates to the licence. However, even if I were to accept that the Dreaming path
does pass in
or near the south-easterly corner of the licence area and that
Yugunga-Nya People undertake activities to protect and maintain the
including checking on the area and making sure the stories are safe, that is not
a sufficient basis to conclude that interference
within the meaning of
[19] Other than
his general description, Mr Peterson does not provide any details of the nature
of the activities undertaken or how
often, when and where they occur. As already
noted, the State also raises the insufficiency of the evidence.
[20] In reply,
Yugunga-Nya says that Paleogold being physically in the way of a traditional
owner desiring to conduct cultural practices
on any given day when Paleogold is
operating ought to be considered substantial interference, although it says this
could be mitigated
by its preferred heritage agreement.
[21] While that
may be a theoretical possibility, the evidence in this case does not support
such a conclusion because there is no
detail provided of the cultural practices
said to be undertaken.
[22] As noted at
above, interference for
requires direct and substantial interference. The limited evidence provided,
coupled with the ambiguity regarding the location of
the Dreaming path, does not
meet that threshold and I am not satisfied such interference is likely in this
Is the grant of the licence likely to interfere with areas
or sites of particular significance to Yugunga-Nya People, in accordance
their traditions?
[23] An area or
site of particular significance for
is one of special, or more than
ordinary, significance to the native title holders in accordance with their
traditions:
at page 35. Such an area or site must also be known
and be able to be located:
Yindjibarndi v FMG
[24] In its
contentions in relation to
, Yugunga-Nya explains the deep spiritual and
religious importance of Mt Yagahong and its connection to the
Wati Kutjara
Dreaming stories. The particular
significance of Mt Yagahong is not in dispute and has been recognised by the
Tribunal on many occasions:
at [42]–[46].
[25] The issue
is whether there are any areas or sites of particular significance in accordance
with Yugunga-Nya traditions associated
with the Dreamings with which the grant
of the licence is likely to interfere. It is not, as Yugunga-Nya suggests,
whether interference
can be ruled out.
[26] There are
two key aspects to Yugunga-Nya’s arguments on this issue.
[27] Firstly, it
asserts that the whole of the licence area is of particular significance because
the Dreamings intersect the licence,
but there is no evidence to support that
argument. The evidence suggests that, at most, the Dreaming path traverses only
corner of the licence and there is nothing in the evidence which would
support a finding in relation to the whole of the licence
area. As mentioned,
the way the path has been drawn on the map makes it very difficult to have
confidence in how the path relates
to the licence area.
[28] Secondly,
Yugunga-Nya contends there are significant landmarks all along the Dreaming
path, including artefact scatters in the
licence area. Mr Peterson says there
are “things on the ground in the [licence] that shows the dreaming story
goes that way”
but no further detail is given.
[29] In its
reply to the State’s contentions, Yugunga-Nya appears to accept that there
is no evidence of specific areas or sites
in the licence area but it says the
way to address that is by a heritage survey conducted by the traditional owners.
[30] Mr Peterson
also speaks at length about the hurt that arises from mining, the need for
Paleogold to speak to Yugunga-Nya first,
the need for cultural heritage surveys
and the risk of harm. He says a heritage survey is needed, even if it may have
occurred previously,
due to changes in the landscape over time.
appreciate and understand the sincere concerns expressed by Mr Peterson and
Yugunga-Nya’s desire for a heritage survey
to ensure heritage protection.
However, in order to conclude there is a likelihood of interference within the
, I must be satisfied that there is an identified area or
site of particular significance with which the grant of the licence is likely
interfere. In this case, despite Yugunga-Nya’s broad assertions about the
whole of the licence area and references to landmarks
along the path, the
concerns raised by Mr Peterson are, in the absence of specific evidence of those
matters, somewhat speculative.
[32] As was the
Mining Equities
, Yugunga-Nya also relies on the decision in
in which it says the
Wati Kutjara
Dreaming story was found
to be a site of particular significance for
However, as I explained in
Mining Equities
at [22], the Tribunal’s decision in
did not relate to the entirety of the Dreaming path but turned on specific
identified areas or sites, including landscape features,
associated with the
Dreaming story, the particular significance of which was explained. That is what
is lacking in the evidence in
[33] In its
reply, Yugunga-Nya speaks of the landscape as an “enduring whole”
which needs to be understood by the “universality
of the dreaming of the
Western Desert
”. Again, I understand and appreciate those
sentiments, as well as the significance of Yugunga-Nya country generally.
[34] However,
the limitations of the evidence in this case, coupled with the uncertainty about
the location of the path of the Dreaming
stories in relation to the licence
area, mean I am unable to make any findings in relation to the existence of
areas or sites of
significance to Yugunga-Nya People relevant
to the licence area. Accordingly, it is not necessary for me to further consider
question of likely interference.
Is the grant of the licence likely to involve major
disturbance?
is no information before me about Paleogold’s proposed activities. As the
State submits, I proceed on the basis that
Paleogold may utilise the full suite
of rights available to it under the licence. Even so, it does not necessarily
follow that major
disturbance is likely.
[36] In the
, major disturbance is to be given its ordinary meaning as
understood by the whole Australian community, including Aboriginal people:
Little v Oriole Resources
at [52]–[54]. I can also have regard to
the context of the relevant grant, including the history of mining and the
characteristics
of the land and waters to determine whether major disturbance is
at page 395 the word “major” is described as an adjective
of degree in respect of which the Tribunal must make a value
Yugunga-Nya asserts that the grant of the licence is likely to involve major
disturbance within the scope of
, relying on the connections to country
reflected in the
Yugunga-Nya Determination
, its contentions are
exceedingly general in nature, mainly referring to water having sustained
Yugunga-Nya People for centuries.
Mr Peterson does not directly address the
issue of major disturbance.
[39] The State
argues that Yugunga-Nya has not addressed the likely impact of Paleogold’s
activities in any specific way, to
which Yugunga-Nya replies that any
disturbance is too much disturbance. The Tribunal has observed previously that
such a generic
submission does not assist the predictive assessment for
Mining Equities
[40] The licence
is approximately 3,964 hectares in area. The underlying tenure is primarily
leasehold but includes road and reserve
areas. Native title has been determined
not to exist in relation to about 36% of the licence area: see
Yugunga-Nya
Determination
[41] The licence
will be subject to a number of conditions and endorsements provided by the
State, as well as regulatory controls,
such as those under the
(WA) and the
Aboriginal Heritage Act 1972
(WA). A number of
these relate to the taking of water and none have been addressed by Yugunga-Nya
which, as I have noted, simply makes
a number of very general contentions
regarding major disturbance.
[42] On the
material before me, I am not satisfied that the grant of the licence is likely
to involve major disturbance within the
meaning of s 237(c).
Determination
determine that the grant of E 20/1065 is an act attracting the expedited
Ms Nerida Cooley
RTF format (251 KB)
Signed PDF/A format