L v Commonwealth Agency [2010] PrivCmrA 14 (24 December 2010)
Case Citation:
L v Commonwealth Agency
[2010] PrivCmrA 14
Subject Heading:
Improper disclosure of personal information
Information Privacy Principle 11 in Part III Division 2 of the
The following case was decided by the Privacy Commissioner prior to 1
November 2010. On 1 November 2010 all the powers of the Privacy
Commissioner under the
were conferred on the Australian Information
Commissioner.
The complainant made adverse comments in the media and on a blog about the
way an Australian government agency handled an application
they had made. The
agency received several enquiries from the media about the issues and disclosed
the complainant’s personal
information in responding to those enquiries. A
journalist included that information in an article.
The complainant alleged that the agency improperly disclosed their personal
information to the journalist.
IPP 11 prohibits agencies from disclosing personal information to anyone
other than the individual concerned, unless an exception
The exception at IPP 11.1(a) permits disclosure where the individual
concerned is reasonably likely to have been aware, or made aware
under Principle
2, that information of that kind is usually passed to that person, body or
The Commissioner investigated this matter under
section 40(1)
The Commissioner’s
Plain English Guidelines to Information Privacy
Principles 8-11
provide examples of when an individual may be considered to
be reasonably likely to be aware that information may be disclosed under
11.1(a). The Guidelines state:
a person who complains publicly about an agency in relation to their
circumstances (for example, to the media) is considered to be
reasonably likely
to be aware that the agency may respond publicly – and in a way that
reveals personal information relevant
to the issues they have raised.
The Commissioner took into account that the complainant had complained
publicly about the agency’s handling of their application.
The information
provided by the agency was confined to responding to the issues raised publicly
by the complainant. The Commissioner
considered that the complainant was
reasonably likely to have been aware that the agency may respond, in the way it
did, to the issues
raised. Therefore, the Commissioner took a preliminary view
that IPP 11.1(a) permitted that disclosure.
The complainant subsequently withdrew the complaint and the matter was
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
RTF format (120 KB)
Signed PDF/A format