O'Neill v Chief of Army [2017] ADFDAT 6 (3 November 2017)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
O’Neill v Chief of Army
Appeal from:
Defence Force Magistrate
File number:
DFDAT 1 of 2017
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), LOGAN (DEPUTY PRESIDENT) AND HILEY (MEMBER)
Date of decision:
Catchwords:
– appeal from a decision of a
Defence Force Magistrate (“DFM”) – where appellant found
guilty of assault
occasioning actual bodily harm contrary to
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(ACT) – whether the DFM erred in the application of the relevant
test for self-defence – whether the DFM erred in finding
prosecution had negatived self-defence – whether the conviction is
unreasonable and/or cannot be supported having
regard to the evidence and the
factual findings on the evidence – whether, in all the circumstances of
the case, the conviction
is unsafe or unsatisfactory and should be quashed
Legislation:
Constitution
Crimes Act 1900
Criminal Code 2002
Criminal Law Act 1967
Defence Act 1903
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Cases cited:
AK v Western Australia
(2008) 232 CLR 438
[2008] HCA 8
Angre v Chief of Navy (No 3)
[2017] ADFDAT 2
Burdett v Abbot
[1812] EngR 191
(1812) 4 Taunt. 401
Burkhart v Bradley
(2013) 33 NTLR 79
[2013] NTCA 5
Dal Cortivo v The Queen
(2010) 204 A Crim R 55
[2010] ACTCA
Davis v Chief of Army
[2011] ADFDAT 1
Douglass v The Queen
(2012) 86 ALJR 1086
[2012] HCA 34
Filippou v The Queen
(2015) 256 CLR 47
[2015] HCA 29
Fleming v The Queen
(1998) 197 CLR 250
[1998] HCA 68
Groves v The Commonwealth
(1982) 150 CLR 113
Harafias v R
[2016] NSWCCA 268
Lin v Tasmania
(2015) 252 A Crim R 64
[2015] TASCCA 13
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
[2002] HCA 53
Millar v Bornholt
(2009) 177 FCR 67
[2009] FCA 637
Miller v The Queen
(2016) 90 ALJR 918
[2016] HCA 30
(1993) 69 A Crim R 92
R v Forsyth
[2013] ACTSC 174
[2015] ACTSC 408
(1994) 35 NSWLR 294
R v Jones (Margaret)
[2007] 1 AC 136;
[2006] UKHL 16
(1995) 79 A Crim R 528
[1970] SASR 302
Re Aird; Ex parte Alpert
(2004) 220 CLR 308
[2004] HCA 44
Re Tracey; Ex parte Ryan
[1989] HCA 12
(1989) 166 CLR 518
[2017] NSWCCA 40
SKA v The Queen
(2011) 243 CLR 400
[2011] HCA 13
[2014] NSWCCA 110
Zecevic v Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic)
[1987] HCA 26
(1987) 162 CLR
Date of hearing:
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Appellant:
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Salerno Law
Counsel for the Respondent:
J Woodward and J Nottle
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Director of Military Prosecutions
DFDAT 1 of 2017
KELLY THOMAS
CHIEF OF ARMY
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), LOGAN (DEPUTY PRESIDENT) AND
HILEY (MEMBER) JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
appellant be granted leave to lodge his appeal after the prescribed period.
appeal be dismissed.
REASONS FOR
TRACEY AND HILEY JJ:
INTRODUCTION
12 May 2016 PTE Kelly O’Neill was found guilty by a Defence Force
Magistrate (“DFM”) of assault occasioning actual
bodily harm
contrary to
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(“the DFDA”) and
Crimes Act 1900
(Charge 1). The assault underlying that offence was the
head-butting by the appellant of the complainant, PTE Kieran Gorey, on 6
October 2014. The appellant was acquitted of a second charge of assault
contrary to
of the DFDA (Charge 2). That charge involved an allegation
that the appellant had punched the complainant shortly prior to the head-butting
appellant identified the following grounds of appeal in his notice of appeal and
written submissions:
(1) The DFM erred in the application of the relevant
test for self-defence;
(2) The DFM erred in finding that the prosecution had negatived
self-defence;
(3) The conviction is unreasonable and/or cannot be supported having regard to
the evidence and the factual findings on the evidence;
(4) In all the circumstances of the case, the conviction is unsafe or
unsatisfactory and should be quashed.
appeal was lodged out of time. The respondent does not oppose an order under
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
extending the time for the lodgement of the application. We make such an
the beginning of the hearing of the appeal counsel for the appellant stated
that, despite there being four separate grounds of
appeal, the appeal involves a
“single contention”, namely, that “on the evidence, the
learned Defence Force magistrate
either misapplied the common law test on
self-defence and/or his ultimate conclusion is one that is not
sustainable”.
Summary of relevant evidence
relevant events occurred on 6 October 2014 in the car park outside the Cazalys
Palmerston Club (“Cazalys”) at Palmerston
in the Northern Territory.
The appellant, the complainant (PTE Gorey), PTE Peter Milde and PTE
Francis Deague were all friends.
All but PTE Milde lived in the same
complex. They decided to go out for a meal together after ceasing duty for the
day, something
they had previously done several times. They travelled to
Cazalys in PTE Milde’s car and ate dinner. Little alcohol was
Gorey testified that during the meal there was some light-hearted bantering
between him and PTE O’Neill. PTE O’Neill
told him that he was weak.
PTE Gorey took offence to this and said: “At least I can do my job to a
good standard.”
PTE O’Neill took offence to that and said:
“Say that again and I’ll knock you out.” In reply PTE Gorey
said: “Okay, do it then.” He said PTE O’Neill then stood up
in an aggressive manner, flailing his arms around.
PTE O’Neill then went
outside. PTE Milde followed him.
Gorey said that he then got up and went to the toilet. He then went outside
towards the car. He walked towards the left-hand
rear door of the car. PTE
O’Neill was standing on the right-hand driver’s side of the vehicle
at the back of the vehicle.
As PTE Gorey approached the vehicle, PTE
O’Neill walked in front of him and blocked his way. PTE Gorey said
that PTE O’Neill’s
body language was aggressive as he moved towards
him. PTE O’Neill got to within striking distance of him. PTE Gorey said
to PTE O’Neill: “What are you doing? Whatever you're about to do
could cost you your job.” PTE O’Neill
said: “Don’t
threaten me with my job.” There was then “a bit of staunching and
posturing off” by PTE
O’Neill; he moved closer to PTE Gorey and
puffed out his chest. PTE Gorey said: “Come on, follow through with
or get out of my way.”
Gorey said PTE O’Neill then delivered a short quick jab to his solar
plexus and winded him. He said he did not consent
to this. This incident was
the subject of Charge 2. He also said that he had not touched PTE
O’Neill. PTE Gorey said to
PTE O’Neill: “That was
pathetic” and “Is that all you’ve got?” He said there
was more “posturing
off and staunching” with PTE O’Neill
puffing out his chest and standing over him. He denied striking PTE
at any time. PTE Gorey said that he had his hands by his side and
was standing his ground. He said: “Come on follow through
with that or
back down.” He then “received a blow to the nose from PTE
O’Neill’s head” and “woke
up on the ground” with
PTE O’Neill standing over him. His nose began to bleed and he felt it
swell. He also bit through
his lip. This “head-butt” was the
subject of Charge 1. PTE Milde drove him to the hospital.
Milde said that the banter started between PTE O’Neill and PTE Gorey
inside the restaurant. PTE Gorey was commenting on
PTE O’Neill’s
soldiering abilities and calling him a malingerer because of a shoulder injury.
They both made comments
to each other and became agitated. PTE O’Neill
said: “Stop. You’re really getting on my nerves. If you
stop I’ll hit you.” PTE Gorey said: “I want you
to hit me because if you hit me your career’s over.”
O’Neill removed himself from the restaurant and went outside to have a
cigarette. PTE Milde told PTE Gorey to “let
it go”, but PTE
Gorey claimed he had done nothing wrong. PTE Milde also went outside for a
cigarette. He saw PTE O’Neill
and also told him to “let it
go”. They were leaning against the car.
Milde testified that PTE Gorey then came out of the restaurant with PTE Deague
and moved to about 10 metres from PTE O’Neill.
PTE Gorey said to PTE
O’Neill: “What’s your problem?” They argued again.
PTE O’Neill moved about
two metres towards PTE Gorey. PTE
O’Neill told PTE Gorey to back off or he would hit him. PTE Gorey said:
you to hit me. If you hit me ... [y]our career is going to be
over”. PTE O’Neill said, “Just stop talking, Gorey.
I’ve had enough” and they came together. PTE O’Neill
pushed PTE Gorey away from him. PTE Gorey moved forward
again. PTE Deague
tried, unsuccessfully, to defuse the situation. As PTE Gorey moved back in
towards PTE O’Neill, PTE O’Neill
“grabbed him around the
collar, head-butted him and then let go”. PTE Gorey took some steps
back and sat down.
cross-examination PTE Milde agreed that once they were outside PTE Gorey was the
agitator. He agreed that there was some pushing
between them but he did not
agree that PTE Gorey put his hands on PTE O’Neill. He said PTE Gorey
had moved into PTE O’Neill’s
personal space and, when he moved
forward after being pushed by PTE O’Neill, he said: “Do it
again. Come on, do it again.”
After that, he was hit with the head-butt.
PTE O’Neill had given PTE Gorey several warnings to back off before the
Deague did not give evidence-in-chief but was cross-examined. He was living
with PTE O’Neill at the time of the incident.
He was friends with
both PTE O’Neill and PTE Gorey. The three of them served together in
Malaysia, where the appellant badly
injured his shoulder. PTE Deague said that,
at the restaurant, PTE Gorey was making negative comments towards PTE
concerning his ability as a soldier and suggesting that he was a
malingerer in relation to the injury to his shoulder. Eventually
O’Neill warned PTE Gorey that if he continued to say these things he
was going to hit him. PTE Deague said that PTE Gorey
became louder and
angrier in response to being asked to stop by PTE O’Neill. PTE
Deague sent PTE O’Neill outside to
have a cigarette and cool down and,
together with PTE Milde, tried to convince PTE Gorey to “drop it and calm
down himself”.
Deague said that as he and PTE Gorey left the restaurant together PTE Gorey
continued to accuse PTE O’Neill of being a malingerer
and a hopeless
soldier. PTE Gorey appeared to be aggressive. PTE O’Neill had been
standing by the car apparently waiting
to get into the car. He came around
towards PTE Gorey. PTE Gorey poked PTE O’Neill to the chest with his
finger possibly
more than once. PTE Gorey also pushed PTE O’Neill in an
aggressive way. PTE O’Neill also pushed back when PTE Gorey
got too close
he was in close proximity to the other three men at the time and would have seen
and heard what happened next, PTE Deague
was not asked any further questions
particular, he was not
asked about the verbal exchanges that followed, whether
he saw PTE O’Neill strike PTE Gorey in his solar plexus, or whether
the head-butt or PTE Gorey fall to the ground.
O’Neill gave evidence in his defence. He said PTE Gorey became
increasingly aggressive towards him when they were outside.
PTE Gorey had,
earlier that evening, “had a go” at him about his soldiering
abilities and his injuries, calling him
a “linger” and a
“shit soldier”. PTE Gorey continued with this even when the
appellant asked him to stop.
PTE O’Neill said that, when PTE Gorey
came outside, he was angry and walked quickly towards PTE O’Neill. When
to PTE O’Neill, PTE Gorey “was poking” him and
waving his arms around and speaking loudly. PTE O’Neill told
stop or he would hit him. There was pushing between the two of them. PTE Gorey
came towards him again and the accused told
him to “fuck off” and
head-butted him. PTE O’Neill said that, before he pushed PTE Gorey
away, PTE Gorey had grabbed
him and he had grabbed PTE Gorey. He said he
could not use his left arm because it was only recently out of a sling, where it
earlier been for 12 weeks because of the injury. He assumed PTE Gorey was
going to do something to him and his aim was to get PTE
Gorey away. He could
not use his arm so he head-butted him. During cross-examination he was asked
and escalation-of-force.
DFM’s findings and conclusions
DFM found the accused not guilty of Charge 2 on the basis that he could not be
satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that the punch
to PTE Gorey’s solar
plexus occurred and further, even if it did, that consent had been
DFM found the complainant to be “an honest and broadly reliable
witness”. He also found that the complainant suffered
a severe blow to
the face, as a result of which his ability to recall events closely surrounding
the blow accurately and in detail
was likely to have been significantly
affected. He would be hesitant before acting on PTE Gorey’s
uncorroborated evidence
in relation to events around the time of the
DFM found that PTE Milde was “an honest and reliable witness and the
closest to [a] dis-interested witness in this case”.
The DFM inferred
that PTE Deague was on more friendly terms with PTE O’Neill than he was
with PTE Gorey and noted that the
crossexamination of him by PTE
O’Neill’s counsel was not such as to probe or test his credibility
or reliability. He
found that, despite some qualification in his ability to
observe PTE Deague in the normal way when witnesses are examined and
cross-examined,
PTE Deague too was “an honest and reliable
DFM found that PTE O’Neill was, “on most points, an honest and
reliable witness”. He made appropriate concessions,
including that
he threatened to hit PTE Gorey if he continued to taunt him, that he was
uncertain as to who initiated the pushing
and grabbing, and that he delivered
the head-butt.
DFM found that the four men were friends who worked together and often
socialised out of hours. There was no evidence of previous
strong animosity or
recent issues between PTE Gorey and PTE O’Neill. PTE Gorey did make
a comment early in the evening that
had upset PTE O’Neill. In the scheme
of things that did not seem like an extraordinary comment.
DFM found that “for whatever reason Gorey proceeded to and continued to
disparage [PTE O’Neill’s] soldiering
abilities”. The
appellant indicated his distress to the complainant, most likely simply at
first, and then, as the night went
on, with more animation and emotion. As part
of this the appellant told the complainant on more than one occasion that, if he
with this conduct, he would hit him. The DFM found that the
PTE Gorey was aware of PTE O’Neill’s distress. PTE
went outside to get away from PTE Gorey and to calm down. PTE
O’Neill was clearly disturbed by the events. PTE Gorey knew
went outside. As the four men had travelled in the same vehicle, there was
nothing unsurprising about the fact that PTE
Gorey walked in the direction of
the car where PTE O’Neill was standing, presumably so that they could
travel home together.
DFM found it likely that PTE Gorey made the first verbal remark. The exchange
of words was found to have “escalated to
the two being in each
other’s faces, to standing off, to staunching, and so forth.” Each
was essentially repeating himself
to the other – PTE Gorey was being
insulting and PTE O’Neill was telling him to stop or he would hit
DFM then said:
It is around this point that O’Neill says that
Gorey was poking him. This is supported by Deague. Milde did not see this,
although he did see O’Neill push Gorey. Gorey says his arms were by his
side. This is in a context of O’Neill saying
that he would hit Gorey and
Gorey baiting him to that effect. Indeed O’Neill says that they were
pushing each other.
DFM expressed reservations about PTE Gorey’s assertion that his arms were
by his side while facing off a person who was
threatening to hit him when they
were face-to-face and in very close proximity. However, he noted that young
male infantry soldiers
do sometimes act in unusual ways. He repeated his
reluctance to rely on PTE Gorey’s memory of events close to the head-butt
in the absence of corroboration. He found there was some corroboration that
showed some physical contact between the complainant
and the appellant.
However, he was not satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that that physical contact
amounted to a punch, a blow,
or some other significant degree of force, so as to
equate to the conduct alleged in Charge 2. In any event, whatever degree of
within the consensual facing off of [sic] pushing and
shoving between Gorey and
DFM then turned his attention to Charge 1. It was not contested that PTE
O’Neill headbutted PTE Gorey, that this caused
the particularised
injuries, and that those injuries at law amounted to actual bodily harm. The
only issue therefore was self-defence.
DFM made a number of factual findings. These included that:
(a) The head-butt occurred in the context of
the verbal taunting by PTE Gorey, and PTE O’Neill’s verbal responses
up or be hit. This was a loud and aggressive exchange.
(b) PTE O’Neill was still recovering from a shoulder injury and
reconstructive surgery. Although his left arm was no longer
in a sling he was
not fully recovered.
(c) PTE Gorey was slightly the taller of the two and more heavily built.
However the difference between the two was a matter of
small degree.
(d) Both PTE Milde and PTE Deague were in the immediate vicinity, physically
able and fit.
(e) In PTE O’Neill’s mind, PTE Gorey was behaving strangely. Prior
to this evening there had been no history of purported
violence between PTE
O’Neill and PTE Gorey, or any propensity for violence by PTE Gorey. Nor
was there any earlier physical
altercation this evening, beyond the pushing that
immediately preceded the head-butt.
(f) PTE O’Neill had warned PTE Gorey repeatedly that, if Gorey did not
shut up, PTE O’Neill would hit him. PTE Gorey
responded with further
taunting, including whether or not PTE O’Neill would hit
DFM then said:
I find that O’Neill’s recounting of his
deliberative process prior to the head-butt to that of a well-trained soldier
giving evidence after the fact. For example, and taking what is purely a
hypothetical in this case, if private O’Neill was
asked what he did when
confronted with a stoppage of his Steyr rifle, no doubt, he would calmly and
clearly outline his thought process
and physical actions with respect to an
[Immediate Action] drill. I also suspect that at the time of the stoppage he
acted somewhat instinctively.
DFM proceeded to discuss the law in relation to self-defence. In the context of
this particular charge it is common ground that
the common law applies. This is
because s 42 of the
Criminal Code 2002
(ACT), which provides for a
statutory defence of self-defence, did not apply in relation to
Crimes Act 1900
(ACT) at the time: see
Angre v Chief of Navy (No 3)
[2017] ADFDAT 2
(Tracey (President), Logan (Deputy President) and
Brereton (Member) JJ);
Davis v Chief of Army
[2011] ADFDAT 1
(Tracey J (President), White JA (Deputy President) and Mildren J (Member)).
noted that the starting point for dealing with self-defence at common law in
Australia is the test expressed by the High Court
Zecevic v Director of
Public Prosecutions (Vic)
[1987] HCA 26
(1987) 162 CLR 645.
At 661, Wilson, Dawson and
Toohey JJ stated:
The question to be asked in the end is quite simple. It
is whether the accused believed upon reasonable grounds that it was necessary
self-defence to do what he did. If he had that belief and there were reasonable
grounds for it, or if the jury is left in reasonable
doubt about the matter,
then he is entitled to an acquittal.
... that is the common law test as set out in the High
Court case of
Zecevic v DPP
... per their Honours, Wilson, Dawson and
Toohey. The test is whether the accused believed, upon reasonable grounds, that
necessary in self-defence to what he did.
There is well known two elements to this test. First, the accused must have
believed at the time that he committed the relevant
act that what he was doing
was necessary, the subjective element; and second, that that belief must have
been based on reasonable
grounds, the objective element.
When considering self-defence, I must look at all the surrounding circumstances.
I have set out the circumstances in my factual findings.
Consistent with
authority, the option for the [sic] retreat is but one factor to be considered
in looking at whether the accused
believed, on reasonable grounds, that what he
did was necessary. It is not a positive requirement to have retreated as far as
first. Also, the accused can act first if he believes, on reasonable
grounds, that he is about to be the subject of an attack.
Per the decision of Hunt CJ at CL in
[1993] 69 A Crim R 92
A person defending himself from a
threatened attack and who has to react instantly to imminent danger cannot be
expected to weigh
precisely the exact measure of self-defensive action which is
... See also ...
Dziduch v The Queen
[1990] 47 A
For the prosecution to negate
self-defence the prosecution must remove any reasonable doubt that the act was
not done in self-defence.
DFM then said:
The questions I must ask myself are: is there a
reasonable possibility that the accused believed that what he did was necessary
defend himself? And if yes, is there a reasonable possibility that the
accused had reasonable grounds for such a belief? In considering
this, I must
take into account O’Neill’s circumstances including the fact he was
recovering from a shoulder reconstruction.
If the prosecution failed to
disprove at least one of these elements, the accused will be entitled to an
DFM proceeded to make the following findings in relation to the first of those
I find that O’Neill honestly believed what he did
was necessary. He had received escalation of force training and was putting
into effect. He perceived a threat and he wished to negate that threat. He
believed a head-butt was necessary to negate the
then made the following findings in relation to the second question:
However, I find he had no reasonable grounds for such a
belief. It is not just a question of was there a threat, but what was the
or nature of the threat. The altercation is between two mates, well known to
each other. It was and had been principally
verbal and had been going on for a
lengthy period. The physical aspect was, up until that point, no more than
pushing at, at the
highest, a mutual grabbing. Two mutual mates were standing
There are no reasonable grounds for perceiving a level of threat, i.e. a degree
of physical harm about to be caused to O’Neill,
that warranted
O’Neill delivering a head-butt to the face of Gorey, an action that was
always likely to be a significant use
of force, as being a necessary response
in the circumstances as I have found them
His response was out of
all proportion to any attack that he could reasonably have believed was
threatened by Gorey.
It is not enough that he perceived that there was a threat, but what was the
nature of that threat and the level of that threat.
Accordingly, I find the
prosecution has negated or disproved self-defence beyond reasonable doubt.
(Underlining and emphasis in italics added.)
DFM proceeded to find the appellant guilty of Charge 1.
Ground 1 – the wrong test?
for the appellant agreed that the test to be applied was that set out in
. He contended that the DFM erred in his application of the
“second limb” of the test. His appeal focuses upon the words
underlined in the passage quoted in paragraph 33 above. His written submissions
quoted part of the passage quoted in paragraph 33
above. However those
submissions did not quote from, or refer to, what the DFM said immediately after
the words which we have underlined.
In particular, the written submissions did
not refer to those words which we have italicised.
appellant’s written submissions stated:
1.6 The DFM erred in his application of the
‘second limb’ by failing to consider whether the head-butt was
necessary in
the circumstances
as the Appellant perceived
them to be,
rather than in the circumstances as the DFM ‘found them’.
1.7 A correct application of the common law test for self-defence should have
involved a consideration by the DFM of the evidence
of the Appellant as to the
circumstances as the Appellant perceived at the relevant time, and then making a
determination as to whether
the Appellant’s response was proportionate to
the circumstances, as the Appellant had perceived them.
(Underlining in original.)
submissions referred to passages in a number of authorities which are to the
effect that the second limb does require the relevant
tribunal to consider the
circumstances as the accused perceived them: see
R v Forsyth
(Penfold J);
[2015] ACTSC 408
[15]-[16] (Penfold J) and
Harafias v R
[2016] NSWCCA 268.
question then, in the second limb of the test, is whether there were reasonable
grounds for the accused’s belief that it
was necessary in self-defence to
do what he did, based as it was on those circumstances. As Hunt CJ at
CL (Simpson and Bruce JJ
agreeing) said in
(1994) 35 NSWLR 294
... it is the belief of the accused, based upon the
circumstances as he perceived them to be, which has to be reasonable, and not
the belief of the hypothetical person in his position.
passage and the surrounding discussion was recently endorsed by the New South
Wales Court of Criminal Appeal in
where Meagher JA (Rothman and
Button JJ agreeing) said, at [5]:
It follows that had that common law test applied to the
appellant, to eliminate there being any reasonable possibility that he was
acting in self-defence, the Crown would have had to prove
did not believe that it was necessary in self-defence to do what was done
that there were no reasonable grounds for that belief. The first
matter was concerned with the accused’s actual belief based
circumstances as he perceived them. The second was concerned with whether there
were reasonable grounds for that belief,
based as it was on those circumstances:
see, for example,
(1994) 35 NSWLR 294
at 305-306 (Hunt CJ at
CL, Simpson and Bruce JJ agreeing).
(Emphasis in original.)
Burkhart v Bradley
(2013) 33 NTLR 79
[2013] NTCA 5
, where the
Northern Territory Court of Appeal said, at 84 [23]:
The common law requires two things for the defence of
self-defence to be made out: first, a belief in the mind of the accused;
that the belief of the accused, based on circumstances as he perceived
them to be, must be reasonable.
test in the second limb is partly objective. But it necessarily requires the
tribunal to consider the circumstances as the accused
perceived them to be. In
, Wilson, Dawson and Toohey JJ said, at 662-663:
For example, it will in many cases be appropriate for a
jury to be told that, in determining whether the accused believed that his
actions were necessary in order to defend himself and whether he held that
belief on reasonable grounds, it should consider whether
the force used by the
accused was proportionate to the threat offered. However the whole of the
circumstances should be considered,
of which the degree of force used may be
only part. ... No doubt it will often also be desirable to remind the jury that
context of self-defence it should approach its task in a practical manner
and without undue nicety, giving proper weight to the predicament
of the accused
which may have afforded little, if any, opportunity for calm deliberation or
detached reflection.
Dal Cortivo v The Queen
(2010) 204 A Crim R 55
[2010] ACTCA 14
Australian Capital Territory Court of Appeal said, at 57 [15]:
It is clear that the grounds must actually exist or be
objectively so perceived as “reasonable”.
In support of that proposition, the Court cited
at 652-654 (Mason
CJ) and 661 (Wilson, Dawson and Toohey JJ).
(1993) 69 A Crim R 92
at 98-99 Hunt CJ at CL said, in relation to
the second limb of the test, that:
The Crown ... argued that the decision as to whether
there were reasonable grounds for any belief on the part of the accused that
was necessary in self-defence to do what he did was a completely objective one.
But it is clear from the formulation of the issue
Zecevic v DPP
it is the belief of the accused, and not that of the hypothetical reasonable
person in the position of the accused, which has
to be reasonable. ... The
submission by the Crown that the decision is a completely objective one is
[T]he mixed objective and subjective nature of the assessment as to whether the
accused’s belief was based on reasonable grounds
means that account must
be taken of those personal characteristics of this particular accused which
might affect his appreciation
of the gravity of the threat which he faced and as
to the reasonableness of his response to that danger
relation to the second limb of self-defence, Meagher JA (Rothman and Button JJ
agreeing) said
Under the common law the further inquiry was as to
whether the accused had reasonable grounds for that belief [that it was
in self-defence to do what he or she did]; and included whether there
were reasonable grounds for the accused’s belief that
the conduct was
necessary in self-defence, as well as whether there were reasonable grounds for
the accused having responded with
the degree of force
J directed herself in
at [115] as follows:
(a) The prosecution needs to establish, beyond
reasonable doubt, that at the time the accused acted:
(i) the accused did not believe that it was
necessary in self-defence to do what he did; or
(ii) there were no reasonable grounds, in the circumstances as he perceived them
to be, for such a belief.
(b) Whether the accused had reasonable grounds for his
belief is to be assessed having regard to the circumstances as he perceived
to be at the time of that conduct, but as the Court of Appeal explained
Dal Cortivo
It is clear that the grounds
must actually exist or be objectively so perceived as
“reasonable”.
(c) That is, the reasonableness of the accused’s
grounds for any belief is to be assessed objectively.
(d) Among the various circumstances to be considered in determining whether the
accused believed upon reasonable grounds that what
he did was necessary in
self-defence are:
(i) the scope for the accused to retreat
from the apprehended attack; and
(ii) the degree of force used by the
(e) Neither of those considerations is decisive, but
each of them may be relevant to whether the accused had the necessary belief
to whether there were reasonable grounds for that
quoting the passages in
appellant contended in his written submissions that:
1.11 When addressing the second limb of the common law
test, the DFM (at TT212) erred by:
(a) reviewing the Appellant’s
defensive response by reference to ‘the circumstances
as I have found
’ (line 36) – rather than by reference to the circumstances
as the Appellant had perceived them
(b) applying his own objective assessment of the circumstances (lines 24 –
30) – rather than an objective consideration
of the Appellant’s
actions by reference to the circumstances as the Appellant subjectively
perceived them to be;
(c) finding ‘there are no reasonable grounds for perceiving a level of
threat ie. a degree of physical harm ...’ (line
32) – rather than
considering whether, in the circumstances as the Appellant perceived them, there
were reasonable grounds
for the Appellant to believe (as the DFM found he did,
in fact, believe) it was necessary he do what he did;
(d) finding ‘his response was out of all proportion to any attack that he
could reasonably have believed was threatened by
Gorey’ (lines 36-38)
– because the test is what did the Appellant believe*, not what the
Appellant should have reasonably
(*Based on the Appellant’s
subjective belief as to the circumstances, the question should be: Was there
reasonable grounds
for the belief that the response was a necessary one?
Proportionality should be considered as part of that
assessment.)
(e) by applying the wrong assessment of the
proportionality of the response – because it was by reference to the
objective assessment of the circumstances, rather than by reference
to the accused’s subjective perception of the circumstances;
(f) by unduly inflating the issue of proportionality – rather than
considering the necessity of the response by reference to
the circumstances as a
whole and as perceived by the Appellant, as required by
... it will in many cases be
appropriate for a jury to be told that, in determining whether the accused
believed that his actions
were necessary in order to defend himself and whether
he held that belief on reasonable grounds, it should consider whether the force
used by the accused was proportionate to the threat offered. However, the whole
of the circumstances should be considered, of which
the degree of force used may
be only part.
(Emphasis in
Consideration
underlying basis of the appellant’s contentions is misconceived. The
contentions wrongly assume that the DFM applied his
own objective assessment of
the circumstances and ignored the appellant’s perception of the
circumstances. This assumption
is based on the words of the DFM underlined in
the passage quoted in paragraph 33 above: “the circumstances as I
assumption is wrong, for several reasons. First, it is clear that the DFM was
considering PTE O’Neill’s actual belief
as well as the relevant
objective circumstances. So much is apparent from the DFM’s express
references to PTE O’Neill’s
belief and perception in the two
sentences that we have italicised in the passage quoted in paragraph 33 above
that immediately followed
the critical words relied upon by the appellant
(namely the underlined words). It is also apparent from the first sentence of
passage quoted in paragraph 33 above. Secondly, although the DFM’s
findings set out in the first paragraph of the passage
quoted in paragraph 33
above were findings of objective circumstances they were circumstances known to
and perceived by PTE O’Neill
at the time. So too were most of the
circumstances found by the DFM in the earlier part of his reasons, referred to
in paragraphs
20 to 24 above. Thirdly, the DFM’s findings quoted in
paragraph 32 above, although relevant to the first limb, were also findings
relation to PTE O’Neill’s perception of his circumstances. They
were findings that the DFM would have had in mind
when referring to “the
circumstances as I have found them” in his consideration of the second
limb of the test.
the DFM could have used slightly different language to emphasise his intended
meaning. For example, in the first sentence
of the paragraph that contains the
words underlined, he could have said something like “There were no
reasonable grounds for
the appellant’s perception of the level of threat,
i.e the degree of physical harm about to be caused to him, that warranted
delivering a head-butt to the face ...” and omitted the words “as I
have found them”. But, in our opinion,
there is no doubt about the
processes by which the DFM applied the two limbs of the test, particularly when
one looks beyond the
five words (“as I have found them”) and
considers the rest of his reasons. As the respondent pointed out, it is
insufficient to point to a particular sentence, or in this case
particular words in a sentence, in isolation, as one might when construing
statute or formal legal document. The reasons should be read as a whole: cf
[1970] SASR 302
at 306 (Bray CJ, Zelling and Wells JJ);
[2015] TASCCA 13
(2015) 252 A Crim R 64
[2015] TASCCA 13
J, Wood and Pearce JJ agreeing); and
[2017] NSWCCA 40
(Leeming JA, Schmidt and Wilson JJ).
DFM applied the correct test.
Ground 2 – erroneous finding that the prosecution had
negatived self-defence
his written submissions counsel for the appellant contended that:
2.1 The DFM failed to provide a reasoned basis for
finding the prosecution had discharged its onus of disproving self-defence
a reasonable doubt. In this regard, the DFM said
‘It is not enough that he
perceived that there was a threat, but what was the nature of that threat and
the level of that threat.
Accordingly, I find the prosecution has negated or
dis-proved self-defence beyond reasonable doubt.’ (TT212, lines
2.2 While the DFM identified the burden of proof (TT221,
lines 22-25), he did not integrate his consideration of the burden of proof
the elements the prosecution was required to disprove.
2.3 The prosecution carried the onus of proving beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused did not act in self-defence. To negative
self-defence, the prosecution
must prove beyond a reasonable doubt:
(a) that the accused did not believe it was
necessary in self-defence to do what he did; or
(b) that there were no reasonable grounds, in the circumstances as the accused
perceived them, for him to hold such a
2.4 Respectfully, the DFM did not identify the basis on
which the prosecution had discharged its burden of disproving the second limb
– noting that the DFM had found the accused had a particular belief
(thereby, at least inferentially, acknowledging the ‘first
not be disproved by the prosecution).
2.5 The DFM made a determination without proper consideration or regard to the
applicable onus of proof, and then described his determination
in terms of what
the prosecution had negated. In this regard, the DFM did not identify a basis
for having (apparently) applied the
onus of proof to the legal test he was
considering by reference to facts that were proven beyond a reasonable
2.6 For the reasons outlined above and following, the DFM’s determination
that the prosecution had disproved self-defence was
not supported by the
evidence, and wrong in law. It follows that the resulting conviction was also
wrong, and ought be quashed.
is no proper basis for these contentions. The passage referred to in paragraph
[2.1] of the appellant’s written submissions
was the final and concluding
paragraph of the DFM’s reasons. It was not the “only” thing
the DFM said about the
discharge by the prosecution of its onus of disproving
self-defence beyond a reasonable doubt.
concluding paragraph was preceded by the DFM’s assessment of the
credibility of each witness, his findings of fact, his
identification of the
relevant legal principles including those pertaining to the onus and burden of
proof, and his findings in respect
of each of the two limbs of self-defence. He
had given careful consideration to the events leading up to the head-butt and in
the appellant’s evidence about those events, considered all
relevant circumstances, directed himself correctly in relation
to the law and
made findings in relation to each of the two limbs.
particular, he made the findings quoted in paragraph 33 above, which culminated
in the finding that “[PTE O’Neill’s]
response was out of
all proportion to any attack that he could reasonably have believed was
threatened by Gorey.” These findings
included the finding that there were
no reasonable grounds for perceiving a level of threat on the part of PTE Gorey
that warranted
PTE O’Neill head-butting the complainant. Indeed there was
no evidence, even from PTE O’Neill, that he feared that PTE
Gorey would
inflict any physical harm upon him.
agree with the respondent’s contentions that the findings made by the DFM
were reasonable and supported by the evidence before
him. The prosecution and
defence counsel had the opportunity to adequately examine witnesses and,
importantly, the accused gave evidence
in his defence. For all intents and
purposes, the evidence before the tribunal could not have been more
also agree that a judge is not required to record every consideration which has
been taken into account in reaching a determination
of guilt, nor expressly
refer to all the matters that would need to be stated to a jury: see
(1995) 79 A Crim R 528
at 531 (Kirby ACJ). A judge trying a
matter alone must include a statement of the principles of law and expose a
reasoning process
that shows, at least by implication, how those principles were
applied: cf
Fleming v The Queen
(1998) 197 CLR 250
[1998] HCA 68
(Gleeson CJ, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Callinan JJ);
AK v Western
[2008] HCA 8
(2008) 232 CLR 438
at 445-446, 453-454, 467-468, 480-481;
(Gleeson CJ and Kiefel J), [44], [48] (Gummow and Hayne JJ), [85],
[107] (Heydon J);
Douglass v The Queen
[2012] HCA 34
(2012) 86 ALJR 1086
at 1088-1089;
[2012] HCA 34
(French CJ, Hayne, Crennan, Kiefel and Bell JJ);
[2014] NSWCCA 110
(Bathurst CJ, Hoeben CJ at CL and Bellew J
agreeing). This is what the DFM did in this case.
Grounds 3 and 4
Ground 3, the appellant contends that the conviction is unreasonable and cannot
be supported on two bases:
(a) First, the DFM’s factual findings are such that the appellant’s
assertion that he acted in self-defence cannot be
(b) Secondly, the DFM did not have proper regard of the evidence. Had he done
so, he would have found that self-defence had not
be negatived.
Ground 4, the appellant contends that, in all the circumstances of the case, the
conviction is unsafe or unsatisfactory and should
be quashed. In his written
submissions, the appellant asserted that the DFM’s determination that
self-defence had been negatived
was at odds with his general acceptance of the
evidence of PTE Milde and PTE Deague, the fact that he found the
appellant’s
evidence “broadly consistent with that of the three
prosecution witnesses”, and his finding that the appellant “honestly
believed what he did was necessary”.
is convenient to deal with Grounds 3 and 4 together. As the Chief of Army noted
in his written submissions, Grounds 3 and 4 reflect
respectively, of the
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Little distinction can be drawn between them: see
Fulton v Chief of Army
[2005] ADFDAT 1
(Heerey J (President), Underwood CJ (Deputy
President) and Duggan J (Member)).
role for this Tribunal, in relation to Grounds 3 and 4, is to make an
independent assessment of the evidence: cf
Filippou v The Queen
[2015] HCA 29
at 53-54, 75-76;
[2015] HCA 29
(French CJ, Bell, Keane
and Nettle JJ), [82]-[83] (Gageler J). It was not contested, and we are
satisfied that, PTE O’Neill
engaged in the impugned conduct such as
to satisfy the elements in
Crimes Act 1900
The issue for determination is whether there was sufficient evidence for the DFM
to conclude that self-defence was negatived
beyond reasonable doubt or whether
that finding was otherwise unreasonable, unsafe or unsatisfactory.
of the appellant’s submissions seem to assume that, because the appellant
honestly believed that what he did was necessary,
as found by the DFM in the
passage quoted in paragraph 32 above, the DFM should have had a reasonable doubt
in relation to the second
limb. Such an assumption is flawed because it does
not allow for the objective element of whether there were reasonable grounds
that belief, in the circumstances as the appellant perceived them. That
question is not concluded by reference to the opinion
of the accused that his
belief was reasonable. Clearly the appellant’s belief and perceptions
must be taken into account,
but so too must other factors such as
proportionality and whether there existed opportunities to retreat.
Regard to the evidence
for the appellant took this Tribunal to a number of the DFM’s findings of
fact and to various parts of the evidence.
These included evidence and findings
injured arm and
his ability as a soldier, the escalation of that taunting in the
car park including aggressive body language on the part of PTE Gorey,
O’Neill’s reactions to that taunting and his threats to hit
PTE Gorey if he continued, PTE O’Neill’s
evidence that PTE
Gorey was poking him in the chest, evidence about some pushing and grabbing, PTE
O’Neill’s inability
to use his left arm, and evidence about
escalation of force training.
for the appellant contended that the DFM was heavily influenced by the fact that
the conduct involved was a head-butt and
that he paid insufficient attention to
other matters. Those other matters included the events immediately preceding
the head-butt,
in particular the alleged chest-poke and PTE Gorey’s
increasingly aggressive conduct. He also failed to take proper notice
evidence concerning the appellant’s training in relation to selfdefence
and escalation-of-force, and he wrongly concluded
that the administration of the
head-butt constituted excessive force in the circumstances.
the outset, we note that the DFM did consider each of those matters, albeit not
expressing his views and reaching his conclusions
in the manner contended for by
the appellant’s counsel.
of those matters were clearly relevant to PTE O’Neill’s subjective
belief of the necessity of his conduct and to
the DFM’s consideration of
the first limb of self-defence. In relation to the second limb, those
matters were also relevant
to PTE O’Neill’s perception of the
circumstances. However, with the exception of the head-butt itself, those
had little if any relevance to the objective aspects of the second
is particularly so in the absence of any evidence, from PTE O’Neill, to
the effect that he had a real fear that unless
he took the action that he did,
namely head-butting PTE Gorey, he felt in danger of any harm.
reject counsel’s characterisation of the head-butting as
“pre-emptive self-defence”.
Chest-poking
for the appellant submitted that the DFM failed to give proper consideration to
PTE O’Neill’s evidence that Gorey
poked him in the chest.
was in fact very little evidence about the so-called chest-poking. The
appellant mentioned it in passing, as a reason for him
thinking that PTE Gorey
was angry, not as a reason for him later head-butting PTE Gorey. After giving
evidence about the heated
discussion inside the restaurant, the appellant talked
verbally taunt him.
of PTE O’Neill’s evidence about what happened then appears in the
following exchange, which occurred in the course
evidence-in-chief:
DEFENDING OFFICER: When he was speaking to you as he was
walking towards you, what tone of voice was he using? — Yes. He seemed
What made him seem angry? — Just because he was walking really quick
towards my direction and I was still telling him to stop,
but he just kept
What words were you using? — The same, “Stop or I’m going to
So you’ve said he was walking towards you fast. Was there anything else
was angry? — When he
he was poking me
Just for the start just as he moved towards you? — Yes, he was waving his
hands around when he was talking as well.
What was the level of his voice? — It was loud.
Was he speaking normally? — No, he was speaking really quick, yes.
You said you were telling him to “Stop”. Did he stop? — No,
When he got to you what, if anything, happened then? — We both moved
towards each other. I probably stepped out a metre from
the car. He kept
coming towards me then it was still going on, that conversation, that argument,
and we moved towards really close
to each other.
When you say “that argument” can you just reiterate what you mean by
that? — What he was saying, the previous dialogue
with the (indistinct)
shit soldier stuff and I’m telling him to “Stop”.
What were you saying? — Saying, “Stop or I’m going to hit
So after he got to you and you were both standing close to each other, what
happened then? — There’s some pushing.
When you say some pushing who pushed who? — It was both of us.
What happened next? — Then he come over towards me, and again when I was
telling him to “Fuck off” and the head-butt
When you say “the head-butt happened”, can you indicate what
happened directly before that? — So he come up to
– again after I
pushed him away.
Yes? — And at that point he’d already grabbed me and I’d
grabbed him. I only had one arm because my left shoulder
was still injured at
that time. And at that point that’s when the head-butt happened.
DEFENDING OFFICER: So just to reiterate what you’ve said, you’ve
indicated that there was some pushing to start with?
By both of you? — Yes.
That you pushed PTE Gorey away? — Yes, ma’am.
At the time you also told him to “Fuck off”? — Yes.
And PTE Gorey proceeded to come back towards you? — Yes, ma’am.
That’s what I found really strange at that point
because he just
wouldn’t stop coming.
How did you feel at that point? — At that point I didn’t know, like
I said, before what his angle was. I thought we were
mates and he’s coming
at me like that. And it was kind of – I didn’t – I felt
really agitated and I, kind
of, felt vulnerable because I didn’t have
really my whole body to work with and I was trying to protect myself as much,
When you say you didn’t have the use of your whole body to work with, can
you just explain what you mean by that? — Well,
I couldn’t use my
left arm to push him away. Yes.
What state was Gorey in at that point? — He was really angry at that
point. He kept coming back, especially after the first
couple of pushes.
Well can I just clarify, you’ve said — you’ve indicated that
he seemed angry and he kept coming back towards you?
— Yes, ma’am.
What was going through your mind at that time? — At that point I just
wanted him to stop because I didn’t know whether
he was going actually do
anymore, because he kept coming towards me and I couldn’t really react as
well as what I could with
How were you feeling in relation to PTE Gorey’s behaviour? — Well,
if he kept coming at me after I was pushing him away,
I assumed he was going to
do something, so.
What was the aim at that point? — To get away from him.
After that happened, what did you observe PTE Gorey to do? — He grabbed me
– well we grabbed each other first. I was,
kind of, going backwards at
that point and then that’s when I decided I couldn’t use my arm to
actually push him away,
so I head-butted him.’
(Underlining added.)
have underlined the appellant’s (only) evidence about being poked.
appellant’s evidence about PTE Gorey poking him was supported by evidence
of PTE Deague during cross-examination by the
Defending Officer. PTE
Deague referred to PTE Gorey’s aggressive behaviour as he approached PTE
O’Neill. The following
exchange took place:
At some stage did the two men come together? —
Did PTE Gorey touch PTE O’Neill at that stage? — Yes, I believe he
was poking him and he pushed him. There was pushing
involved, yes.
So to reiterate, PTE Gorey poked PTE O’Neill? — Chest poked,
With his finger? — Yes.
Was it more than one poke? — I believe so.
Then PTE Gorey pushed PTE O’Neill? — Yes.
DEFENCE FORCE MAGISTRATE: Can I just ask for clarification — Some people
have different ideas of what a chest poke is. In
your mind, does a chest poke
involve making contact with the finger or the chest? — Yes.
Or pushing close to someone’s chest? — No, there was contact. It
was a few successions of (witness demonstrates). While
he’s getting the
point across, his finger touched him. A few successions as he was saying what
he was trying to get across
to PTE O’Neill.
Now, you said that in addition to the chest poke, PTE Gorey also pushed PTE
O’Neill? — Yes.
Where were you when the chest poke and the push occurred? — About a metre
Was there anything restricting your view of PTE O’Neill and PTE Gorey?
Did you see what happened after PTE Gorey pushed PTE O’Neill? — I
believe at one point Kelly pushed back when Gorey got
too close to him.
Did that look like a defensive response to you? —
Defending Officer did not ask PTE Deague about what happened next, although one
would think that he must have seen the subsequent
pushing and shoving and
eventually the head-butt.
Milde did not refer to any “chest-poking” in his description of the
events, although he agreed that some pushing occurred
between the two men.
PTE Gorey did not say that he poked PTE O’Neill in the chest and was
not asked about it in cross-examination.
In examination-in-chief he denied
that he touched PTE O’Neill prior to the head-butt.
Under cross-examination PTE Gory conceded
that there was some “some
shaping up” between the two of them.
for the appellant submitted that the DFM should have rejected PTE Gorey’s
denial, in light of his reluctance to accept
PTE Gorey’s evidence as
reliable in the absence of corroboration. Counsel was also critical of the DFM
for not making a finding
as to whether or not PTE Gorey poked PTE O’Neill
in the chest. It was submitted that he should have taken into account that
chest-poking as part of the circumstances which would have been in PTE
O’Neill’s mind when he head-butted PTE Gorey.
note that, when addressing the DFM, the Defending Officer only made passing
reference to chest-poking as one of the many events
that occurred in the short
time prior to the headbutt and did not ask the DFM to make an express finding
noted, (in paragraph 23 above) the DFM did in fact refer
to the chest-poking in his reasons.
if there was some chest-poking, it appears to have been relatively
insignificant. PTE O’Neill only referred to it once
and only in the
context of describing PTE Gorey’s angry disposition. PTE Deague described
it as PTE Gorey touching PTE O’Neill’s
chest with his finger. There
is no suggestion that the poke or poking caused any discomfort, even
momentarily, to PTE O’Neill.
such chest-poking as there might have been was temporally distant from the
head-butt. After the alleged chest-poking there
was pushing and shoving which
included PTE O’Neill pushing PTE Gorey. This was followed by further
verbal exchanges and then
the head-butt. This evidence appears in the
transcript quoted in paragraph 70 above.
as we have pointed out, there was no evidence from PTE O’Neill that the
chest-poke, or any other of PTE Gorey’s
conduct, made him fear that he was
going to be assaulted in any way. As appears from the evidence quoted in
paragraph 70 above,
PTE O’Neill “felt vulnerable”
and “assumed [PTE Gorey] was going to do something.” He did
what he assumed PTE Gorey was going to do. In particular, he did
not say that he assumed PTE Gorey was going to assault him.
even if PTE Gorey did poke PTE O’Neill in the chest and even if this was a
basis for PTE O’Neill forming a reasonable
belief that it was necessary to
head-butt Gorey (in relation to the first limb of the test), that did not
objectively justify PTE
O’Neill responding as he did (in relation to the
second limb of the test).
its highest there was some chest-poking and some pushing of a harmless nature.
Even if some or all of those additional things
occurred, there was no
justification for PTE O’Neill head-butting PTE Gorey.
was no need for the DFM to make the express findings asserted by the appellant,
including in relation to whether the chest-poke
occurred, and there was thus no
error in him failing to do so.
Training in self-defence
for the appellant contended that the DFM misused or misapplied the evidence
before him concerning PTE O’Neill’s
training, particularly in
self-defence and escalation-of-force. He referred to what the DFM had said
quoted at paragraph 27 above. Counsel contended
that the DFM erred in two respects:
(a) First, the DFM was unfairly sceptical about PTE O’Neill’s
evidence about this topic. He failed to say why he was
sceptical about that
evidence, particularly where there was no evidence of the kind sometimes
tendered that explains the circumstances
in which such an aggressive response is
appropriate, or any evidence to show that the application of force in this
instance went
beyond, or was inconsistent with, the pattern of training.
(b) Secondly, the DFM should have used the evidence in the appellant’s
favour, as providing a reasonable explanation for his
were only two references to self-defence or escalation-of-force training in the
evidence. The first was introduced by the Defending
Officer during his
cross-examination of PTE Deague. The second reference was introduced by
the prosecutor in the course of her cross-examination
of PTE O’Neill.
topic was introduced during the cross-examination of PTE Deague immediately
after his evidence about the chest-poking referred
to in paragraph 72
Did you see what happened after PTE Gorey pushed PTE
O’Neill? — I believe at one point Kelly pushed back when Gorey got
too close to him.
Did that look like a defensive response to you? — Yes.
PTE Deague, how long have you been in the army? — Just about four
In that time you’ve had some training, haven’t you, in relation to
self-defence principles? — Self-defence (indistinct),
How many times have you received that sort of training since being in the army?
— It was a week course during our [Initial
Employment Training] period at
School of Infantry at Singleton.
What do you understand to be a defensive response? — Defensive response
would first be verbally to clearly and loudly tell
an individual to back off,
stop, get back, get back. Then to
take the lowest means of aggression
towards someone, maybe a push or something along those lines. Then to the
if you felt your life was threatened
, you would react in a way
that would stop the escalation.
Based on that training and your understanding, do you consider that PTE
O’Neill’s response here was a defensive response?
And that was in response to the aggression from PTE Gorey. To agree with that?
(Underlining added.)
Deague’s evidence about a defensive response is clearly related to his
evidence about PTE O’Neill’s conduct
when PTE O’Neill
“pushed back when Gorey got too close to him.” PTE Deague did not
say anything at all about the
subsequent events, in particular about the
head-butting. Even if such training was thought to be relevant to
PTE O’Neill’s
subsequent conduct, in particular the head-butt,
there was never any suggestion that PTE O’Neill felt his life was
threatened.
Nor was there any suggestion by PTE Deague that he felt that
PTE O’Neill was in any danger of being physically harmed in any
by PTE Gorey, let alone having his life threatened. Had PTE Deague had any
such concerns, he and PTE Milde were able to intervene
immediately. PTE
Deague’s evidence about this topic was irrelevant.
having previously introduced this topic through PTE Deague, the Defending
Officer did not attempt to elicit any evidence from
PTE O’Neill about his
training and its possible relevance to PTE O’Neill’s reason or
explanation for head-butting
PTE Gorey. PTE O’Neill’s only
evidence-in-chief about the events immediately leading up to the headbutting and
was going through his mind at the time of reacting in the way that he did
was that which we have quoted in paragraph 70 above.
the topic was introduced by the prosecutor during her cross-examination of
PTE O’Neill:
PTE Deague spoke about the training you receive and the
self-control that you are intended to have as a result of that training? —
Yes, ma’am.
The escalation of force course that you do while you’re at Singleton?
— Yes, ma’am.
The fact that, as a professional soldier, you should understand layers of
graduation in your responses to situation? — Yes,
That’s right isn’t it? — Yes, ma’am.
You take pride in your soldierly ability, don’t you? — Yes,
ma’am, that’s why I acted proportionally.
They didn’t teach you to head-butt on that course though, did they?
— Yes, they did ma’am. Military self-defence
in 2012 taught
head-butting, ma’am.
They didn’t teach you to head-butt a fellow soldier in a car park after
you’d been out to dinner, did they? — We
don’t have scenarios,
No, because they don’t envisage that you will be head-butting one of your
platoon mates, do they? — No, ma’am.
O’Neill’s only other reference to that training occurred at the end
of his crossexamination during the following exchange:
You were saying, “If you don’t stop
I’ll hit you”, weren’t you? — That’s a warning.
ma’am, a verbal warning, like we’re taught in force escalation,
verbal first.
little was said about this topic, and its possible relevance, by counsel during
their addresses to the DFM. The Defending Officer
So the learned prosecutor has talked a lot about there
being a deliberate and calm and measured approach to a response. Well, I accept
that, I guess the – what you might draw from the evidence of PTE
O’Neill is that he’s been trained in matters of
selfdefence and
he’s had some training. So in any response that he brought to such an
incident as this, that there might be
an instinctive response to bear those
issues in mind, to have consideration to those issues whether he knew it or not.
we accept there’s some evidence of him saying he was considering
his response or endeavouring to.
Defending Officer later said:
It was put to him that he was giving as good as he got.
PTE O’Neill said:
No, I gave him a verbal warning as per
force escalation as we’re
PTE O’Neill did give evidence about his
understanding of applying a proportionate escalation of force and self-defence,
referred specifically to having been taught about the use of the head-butts
in self-defence.
topic was of little, if any, relevance as it was not raised by PTE O’Neill
in his evidencein-chief as a reason for him head-butting
PTE Gorey. The DFM was
entitled to be dismissive of the belated attempt to refer to it as some kind of
justification for PTE O’Neill’s
reject the contentions summarised in paragraph 83 above. The DFM was entitled
to have reservations about the applicability of
such training, and the
appropriateness of the head-butt, in circumstances where the assailant was not
an enemy potentially about
to inflict lethal force.
was the case in relation to the chest-poke contentions, although his training
may have had some relevance to him giving PTE Gorey
the “verbal
warnings”, none of the evidence went to the objective reasonableness of
him inflicting the head-butt. This
is particularly so in the present
circumstances where his putative assailant was not an enemy soldier who might be
him, but a good friend who had been taunting him without any
threat of violence.
Excessive force
reject the appellant’s contention that the DFM was not entitled to
conclude that the headbutt was excessive force in the
circumstances (as PTE
O’Neill perceived them). Counsel contended that there “was almost
no evidence as to the degree
of force”. The single blow inflicted by
PTE O’Neill upon PTE Gorey was sufficient to knock him to the ground
fracture his nose and cause him to bite through his lip. The DFM did not
require expert or other evidence to enable him to conclude
beyond reasonable
doubt that the force used was unreasonable in the circumstances.
addition to the interaction between PTE Gorey and PTE O’Neill prior to the
head-butt, the DFM was entitled to take into account
other circumstances. These
included the alternative actions open to PTE O’Neill by way of response to
PTE Gorey’s conduct
or any threatened conduct. As the DFM observed, the
four soldiers were friends. The DFM also observed that PTE Milde and
were standing close by at the time of the incident. They were
very close at hand if there was any real prospect of the verbal arguments
the pushing and shoving escalating towards physical violence on the part of
PTE Gorey. They had both intervened earlier, by
telling PTE O’Neill
to go outside and cool down, and by telling PTE Gorey to back off. Clearly
they would have intervened
if either of them thought there was any risk of
PTE Gorey’s conduct developing into something more physical towards
PTE O’Neill.
The DFM was entitled to take into account that it was
open for PTE O’Neill to rely on his friends to assist him to negate
threat that might arise with a lower level of force, instead of resorting to a
Conclusions
Gorey was continuing to cruelly and inappropriately taunt PTE O’Neill
after they both left the restaurant. PTE O’Neill
was feeling frustrated
and upset, partly because of the taunting and his physical disability and partly
because PTE Gorey continued
to taunt him. He was clearly provoked into
doing what he did. But he did not say that he was fearful of PTE Gorey
striking him
or otherwise inflicting some kind of physical harm on him.
There was no evidence that PTE Gorey was threatening any such action
more importantly, that PTE O’Neill felt that any such action was being
threatened.
Notwithstanding
PTE Gorey’s poor behaviour and the DFM’s reluctance to rely on
uncorroborated parts of his evidence of
the events immediately leading up to the
head-butt because of the effect that the head-butt may have had on the
reliability of such
evidence, the facts were such as to enable the DFM to reach
the conclusions that he did reach, in particular that the prosecution
negatived self-defence.
was, “upon the whole of the evidence ... open to the [DFM] to be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that the accused was guilty”:
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
at 493 (Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson, Toohey JJ);
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
at 614, 623-624;
[2002] HCA 53
(Gleeson CJ, Hayne and Callinan JJ), [55]-[59] (McHugh, Gummow and Kirby JJ);
SKA v The Queen
[2011] HCA 13
(2011) 243 CLR 400
at 405-406;
[2011] HCA 13
(French CJ, Gummow and Kiefel JJ);
Filippou v The Queen
[2015] HCA 29
(2015) 256 CLR 47
at 53-54, 75-76;
[2015] HCA 29
(French CJ, Bell, Keane and Nettle
JJ), [82]-[83] (Gageler J).
was not unreasonable, unsafe or unsatisfactory for the DFM to conclude that
PTE O’Neill’s conduct by inflicting the
head-butt was excessive
in the circumstances despite the conduct of PTE Gorey. In other words, it was
not unreasonable for the DFM
to find that the prosecution had proved beyond
reasonable doubt that the appellant did not have reasonable grounds for his
that it was necessary to defend himself by way of a head-butt with such
force as to break the nose of the complainant.
DISPOSITION
of the grounds of appeal has been made out. The appeal will be
POST SCRIPT
preparing these reasons we have had the opportunity to read the reasons for
decision prepared by Logan J. We would express
our agreement with his
I certify that the preceding one hundred and two (102) numbered paragraphs
are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision herein of the
Honourable Justices
Tracey and Hiley.
Dated: 3 November 2017
have had the benefit of reading in draft the reasons of Tracey and Hiley JJ. I
agree with their Honours’ proposed disposition
of the appeal and with
their reasons.
a consequence of an exchange which occurred with counsel in the course of
submissions in relation to observations made by Lord
Hoffmann (with which Lords
Rodger of Earlsferry, Carswell and Mance expressly agreed) in
[2007] 1 AC 136 at 171;
[2006] UKHL 16
and following
under the heading, “The limits of self-help”, I wish to add the
Tracey and Hiley JJ record, it was common ground on the appeal that, in relation
to Charge 1, the content of any defence of self-defence
was governed by the
common law. It was for the Chief of Army, as prosecutor, to negative any
such defence beyond reasonable doubt.
Necessarily,
the requirement is to look the content of the defence of self-defence according
to the common law of Australia.
Miller v The Queen
(2016) 90 ALJR 918
[2016] HCA 30
offers a recent reminder (in the context of the doctrine of
complicity in the criminal law known as “extended common purpose”
“extended joint criminal enterprise”) that the understanding of the
content of common law criminal law doctrines,
offences and defences may differ
as between the High Court of Australia (whose role it is to declare the common
law of Australia)
and the courts of the United Kingdom or other countries.
Where there is a need to look to the common law, the requirement mentioned
applies just as much to appeals to this Tribunal and to service tribunals trying
service offences as it does to courts exercising
the judicial power of the
Commonwealth or in solely State jurisdictions. Hence the necessary survey of
Australian authority by Tracey
and Hiley JJ and, in particular, the reference to
Zecevic v Director of Public Prosecutions (Vic)
[1987] HCA 26
(1987) 162 CLR 645.
possibility of a different Australian understanding is one reason why United
Kingdom authority in relation to the content of the
common law must, in
Australia and in modern times, be approached with a careful eye as to whether a
judgement of the High Court has
made that possibility manifest.
relation to Lord Hoffmann’s observations in
cautionary note is sounded by the fact that his Lordship’s observations
. Yet another is that they were made with particular
reference to the content of s 3 of the
Criminal Law Act 1967
(“the 1967 Act”), which provides:
3. Use of force in making arrest, etc.
(1) A person may use such force as is reasonable in the circumstances in the
prevention of crime, or in effecting or assisting in
the lawful arrest of
offenders or suspected offenders or of persons unlawfully at large.
(2 ) Subsection (1) above shall replace the rules of the common law on the
question when force used for a purpose mentioned in the
subsection is justified
by that purpose.
principal purpose of that Act was to abolish the distinction at common law
between felonies and misdemeanours. Another was simplification
arising from that division and its abolition. As Lord Hoffmann explained (at
169 [54]), that Act was responsive and gave
effect to recommendations made in
the Seventh Report of the Criminal Law Revision Committee, Felonies and
Misdemeanours, published
in May 1965. A feature of the report of that committee
(at paragraphs 20-23) was a recommendation “against any attempt to
the degree of force which could be used or the circumstances in which it could
be justified” in relation to the use
of force to prevent a crime and a
suggestion that it should make clear that there was no difference as to whether
the crime was once
a felony or a misdemeanour. The related clause in the
committee’s draft became s 3 of the 1967 Act.
respect to s 3 of the 1967 Act, Lord Hoffmann observed (at 174 [73]):
I am willing to assume that, in judging whether the
defendant acted reasonably, it must be assumed that the facts were as he
believed them to be. But the question remains as to whether in such
circumstances his use of force would be reasonable. And that
is an objective
question. ... [S]ection 3 of the 1967 Act does not excuse a defendant if he uses
such force as he himself thinks
to be reasonable. It must actually have been
reasonable.
was put to counsel that this formulation was consistent with
Each accepted this. At the time, I considered that this mutual acceptance was
correct in its understanding of what amounted to
self-defence but it must be
said that there was no opportunity then for either counsel or me to study s 3 of
the 1967 Act. The focus
of that section is not on the use of force in
self-defence but for other purposes.
is not necessary, in order to resolve this appeal, to explore the extent to
which the formulation does indeed accord with the common
law of Australia in
relation to self-defence. What is more important for present purposes is that,
in enunciating why, in terms
of English legal history, a circumspect approach
has always been taken as to the lawful limits of selfhelp, his Lordship makes
reference to self-defence and its limits. An objective element is a
common feature of each.
speaking of the statutory formulation of lawful help in relation to the
prevention of crime, Lord Hoffmann observed (at 174-175
... when Parliament speaks of a person being entitled to
use such force as is reasonable in the circumstances, the court must, in
what is reasonable, take into account the reason why the state claims the
monopoly of the legitimate use of physical force.
A tight control of the use of
force is necessary to prevent society from sliding into anarchy, what Hobbes
, ch 13) called the state of nature in
“men live without other security, than
what their own strength, and their own invention shall furnish them withal. In
condition, there is no place for Industry; because the fruit thereof is
uncertain: and consequently no culture of the earth; no navigation,
commodities that may be imported by sea; no commodious building; no instruments
of moving, and removing such things as
require much force; no knowledge of the
face of the earth; no account of time; no arts; no letters; no society; and what
of all, continuall feare, and danger of violent death; And the life of
man, solitary, poore, nasty, brutish, and
same understanding surely underpins the common law, for it is the Nation State
(and subordinate polities in a federation) which
“claims the monopoly
of the legitimate use of physical force”: Lord Hoffmann at 174 [77]. In
constitutional monarchies,
such as the United Kingdom and Australia, it is the
Nation State which has the primary responsibility for the preservation,
domestically,
of the Queen’s Peace. That is why the prosecution on
indictment of those alleged to have breached that peace is brought by
Correspondingly,
it is the Nation State which has primary responsibility for the Defence of the
Realm. That is why
Constitution
vests the command in chief
of the Australian Defence Force (“the ADF”) in the Governor-General,
as the Queen’s
representative. We have neither vigilantes nor
mercenaries in Australia. And, as will be seen, that the ADF is established and
maintained by parliamentary authority also reflects our heritage.
it is the Nation State which has primary responsibility for the preservation of
peace has ramifications for when and the extent
to which the use of force by a
private individual is lawful. The following explanation of these ramifications,
offered by Lord Hoffmann
(at 175 [78]-[80]), highlights the
interplay between self-help and self-defence in relation to legitimate use of
principle, therefore, the state entrusts the power to use force only to the
armed forces, the police and other similarly trained
and disciplined law
enforcement officers. Ordinary citizens who apprehend breaches of the law,
whether affecting themselves, third
parties or the community as a whole, are
normally expected to call in the police and not to take the law into their own
Southwark London Borough Council v Williams
[1971] Ch 734
Edmund Davies LJ said: “the law regards with the deepest suspicion any
remedies of self-help, and permits those remedies
to be resorted to only in very
special circumstances.”
are exceptions when the threat of serious unlawful injury is imminent and it is
not practical to call for help.
The most obvious example is the right of
self-defence.
As Hobbes said (
“No man is supposed at the
making of a Common-wealth, to have abandoned the defence of his life, or limbes,
where the Law cannot
arrive time enough for his
assistance.”
But, he went on to say:
“To kill a man, because
from his actions, or his threatnings, I may argue he will kill me when he can,
(seeing I have time,
and means to demand protection, from the Soveraign Power)
is a Crime.”
the same spirit as Hobbes, Lord Upjohn said in
Burmah Oil Co (Burmah Trading)
Ltd v Lord Advocate
[1964] UKHL 6
[1965] AC 75
“No doubt in earlier times
the individual had some ... rights of self-help or destruction in immediate
emergency, whether caused
by enemy action or by fire, and the legal answer was
that he could not in such circumstances be sued for trespass on or destruction
of his neighbour's property. Those rights of the individual are now at least
obsolescent. No man now, without risking some action
against him in the courts,
could pull down his neighbour’s house to prevent the fire spreading to his
own; he would be told
that he ought to have dialled 999 and summoned the local
fire brigade.”
(Emphasis added.)
O’Neill’s resort to a head-butt as a self-help, self-defence remedy
was, in the circumstances prevailing, out of all
reasonable proportion as a
response. This remained so even though there was evidence that PTE
O’Neill had received escalation
training and training in self-defence
which included this particular response to a threat.
such training is a feature of the profession of arms, especially, within the
Army, for members of combat and combat support arms
is unremarkable in itself.
But an understanding that what is apt for the battlefield or even, in the agony
of the moment, in life
threatening situations if ever deployed in aid of the
civil power, is not apt during periods of stand down out of barracks is also
essential feature of the profession of arms.
part of our constitutional heritage is the requirement for parliamentary
authority for the establishment and maintenance of the
ADF and the subordination
of the military to the civil power. That is recognised in an express grant of
legislative power to the
Commonwealth Parliament by
Constitution
to make laws with respect to naval and military defence,
pursuant to which the
Defence Act 1903
(Cth) has been enacted. It is
that Act (Part III, Division 1), not
Constitution
provides lawful authority for the establishment and maintenance of the ADF.
a statutory provision is a contemporary, Australian manifestation of the sequel
century England to the Restoration and the Glorious
Revolution. I discussed this subject in greater detail in
[2009] FCA 637
(2009) 177 FCR 67
[2009] FCA 637
[21]. It is not
necessary here to repeat that detail.
part of our heritage is the basal proposition that membership of the military
does not confer exemption from civil law, with
our understanding of martial law
being confined to military discipline, i.e. only that which is necessary for the
maintenance of
the discipline of the ADF:
Groves v The Commonwealth
(1982) 150 CLR 113
at 125-126, where,
inter alios
, the following
observation made by Lord Mansfield CJ in
Burdett v Abbot
[1812] EngR 191
(1812) 4 Taunt.
at 449-450;
[1812] EngR 191
at 403 was cited with approval by Stephen, Mason,
Aickin and Wilson JJ:
[A] soldier is gifted with all the rights of other
citizens ... the mistake should be corrected which supposes that an Englishman,
by taking upon him the additional character of a soldier, puts off any of the
rights and duties of an Englishman.
with an Englishman, so with an Australian such as PTE O’Neill who takes on
the additional character of a soldier.
1 alleged an offence which could have been prosecuted under either the civil law
or under the DFDA
There has always been a recognition that the
legitimate reach of military discipline extends to the maintenance of orderly
by soldiers during periods of stand down in relative proximity to
barracks. Subject to limitations (
Re Aird; Ex parte Alpert
[2004] HCA 44)
unnecessary to discuss, the DFDA, by
, permissibly
Re Tracey; Ex parte Ryan
[1989] HCA 12
(1989) 166 CLR 518
at 545 per Mason CJ,
Wilson and Dawson JJ) incorporates by reference and makes a service offence
if committed by a “defence
member” a body of norms of conduct
constituting civil law criminal offences. It would be completely
antithetical to the constitutional
heritage mentioned to afford the DFDA or
those incorporated norms a meaning and application which extended to exculpatory
self-defence
including, in every circumstance in Australia, conduct which
manifested military escalation training and training in self-defence.
present case offers a useful opportunity to recall and emphasise these features
of the system of laws by which we and, in particular,
our military, are
I certify that the preceding twenty-two (22)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Decision herein of the
Justice Logan.
Dated: 3 November 2017
RTF format (681 KB)
Signed PDF/A format