1410919 [2015] RRTA 323 (28 May 2015)
[2015] RRTA 323
(28 May 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Bruce Henry
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the
direction that the applicant satisfies s.36(2)(a) of the Migration Act.
Statement made on 28 May 2015 at
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration to refuse to grant the applicant
a Protection visa under
Migration Act 1958
applicant, who claims to be a citizen of Iraq, applied for the visa [in] January
2013 and the delegate refused to grant the visa
[in] June 2014.
applicant was represented in relation to the review by his registered migration
THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK
criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An applicant for the visa must
meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That is,
the applicant is either a person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the ‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other
‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same
family unit as such a person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same
36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant
for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the Minister is
satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status
of Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to
the Status of Refugees (together, the Refugees Convention, or the
Convention).
is a party to the Refugees Convention and generally speaking, has protection
obligations in respect of people who are refugees
as defined in Article 1 of the
Convention. Article 1A(2) relevantly defines a refugee as any person
owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group
or political opinion, is
outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is
unwilling to avail himself
of the protection of that country; or who, not having
a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence,
unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to
a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a), he or she may
nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant of
a protection visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
being removed from Australia to a receiving country, there is a real
risk that he or she will suffer significant harm: s.36(2)(aa)
complementary protection criterion’).
accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the Act, the
Tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines
prepared by the
Department of Immigration –PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Complementary
Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee
and humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines
– and any country information assessment prepared by the Department of
Foreign Affairs
and Trade (DFAT) expressly for protection status determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded that the matter should be
remitted for reconsideration.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS
Tribunal has before it the departmental file which contains the
applicant’s claims and a copy of the recording of his interview
applicant provided documents to the Department including an Iraqi passport and
identity card which indicate that he holds Iraqi
citizenship. In the absence of
any evidence that indicates otherwise, the Tribunal accepts he is an Iraqi
national (as did the delegate)
and has assessed his claims against Iraq as his
country of nationality and his receiving country.
applicant was born in [year] in Kirkuk, Iraq and claims to have lived in in
Kirkuk other than during his time at university from
[year] to [year] when he
studied at [a university]. His identity documents state that he was born in
Iraq. He came to Australia in
November 2008 to study for a [postgraduate degree]
at [a] [University] on a scholarship from the Iraqi government. He was granted
further student visas in 2011 and 2012, and continued to receive Iraqi
government scholarships at the time.
Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant is an Iraqi citizen and does not have a
right to enter and reside in a third country.
applicant set out his claims in a statement attached to his application as
Prior to moving to Australia, I was born and raised in
[a] district mostly populated by Arabs in the province of Kirkuk, Northern
On a recent trip to Iraq, from [September] to [November] 2012, I have faced
serious discrimination and threats. There are a
number of reasons behind these
discriminations and threats and among them are my beliefs and racial background.
I have secular beliefs
and a mixed racial [decent] and because of that, I found
myself a target of bigot groups.
Kirkuk has always been one of the most dangerous places in Iraq. This
attributes to the fact that Kirkuk is a disputed area between
several ethnic and
religious groups. When I left Iraq in 2008, I thought that the violence and the
discriminations will disappear
by the time I return to Iraq after finishing my
[study]. Unfortunately, that was not the case, but on contrary, the violence and
discrimination have exacerbated as it is shown in current news and reports about
Kirkuk (attached).
During my last visit to Kirkuk particularly in the last two weeks of my
stay, I received threats from a party which I could not identify.
At first, our
[neighbour] who has lived in the adjoining property to my family's house in [our
district] for 20 years told my mother
that two men came to the street where I
was staying and asked her some questions about me. She said that the two men
asked her where
I lived now and where I lived in the last few years. She
described them as middle-aged men who looked Kurdish and their Arabic dialect
wasn't fluent. A couple of days later, there was a knock on our door around 9
am. Only my mother and I were home and my mother was
asleep at the time. Without
realising who it was and believing that it was one of my visiting friends, I
opened the door. There were
two armed men at the door and they told me that they
belonged to Kirkuk's emergency force and that they needed to take me to their
headquarters for questioning. I was terrified as I couldn't identify whether or
not they were telling the truth. I felt that I had
no choice except to go with
them as they were armed and I left with them while my mother was asleep. They
walked me to the end of
the street where a four-wheel drive was waiting with a
We travelled in the vehicle for around 20 minutes and they didn't talk to
me at all during the trip but they spoke to each other in
Kurdish which made me
speculate about the true identity of this group At this stage, I didn't believe
that they belonged to Kirkuk's
emergency force as they claimed, but rather to
the Asayesh (the Kurdish intelligence agency) and Pashmerga (the Kurdish Army).
made me very uneasy and fearful for my life as I recalled incidents in 1990
and 2005 where these two Kurdish organisations jailed
and killed many of the
young Arabs in the area where I grew up as revenge of what the old Iraqi regime
did to them. In 2005, groups
of young Kurdish men with weapons attacked Arabs in
an effort to force them to flee the province. The Asayesh and Peshmerga were
supporting these activities by conducting random arrest operations against young
As I wasn't familiar with all of Kirkuk's areas, I didn't know where we
were travelling. I noticed that they weren't travelling through
main roads and
when we arrived closer to the destination, they were travelling on unpaved, dirt
roads. The vehicle stopped in front
of what appeared to be a fenced residential
property. It was located in a new development with very few houses, most of
not completely built and the area was missing basic amenities,
including paved roads. As soon as the vehicle arrived in front of
the property,
someone inside the property opened the gate for the vehicle to enter. As we
entered, I saw that the person who opened
the gate was also armed. The two armed
men who travelled with me then led me to a room separated from the main
residential building.
One of them stayed with me while the other left the room
and returned a few minutes later with the interviewer. The interviewer asked
several questions such as why I was having so many visitors lately (during the
period when I was in Kirkuk). I told him that they
were friends and family who
were visiting as I was studying overseas for a few years. I was hesitant to tell
him details of where
I was studying as I was worried that the group was part of
the Al Qadda regime. He was very interested in where and why I was studying
overseas and I told him nervously that I was in Australia and that I have
completed a degree but that I was back in Iraq permanently
as I was afraid to
tell him that I was returning to Australia for further study. He asked me if I
once belonged to the dissolved
Ba'ath party and I said that I had no affiliation
with them and I was young when they were around. He was writing notes as I
After questioning me, he told me that since I am of Arabic descend, I have
to leave Kirkuk immediately as it belongs to the Kurds
now. I told him that my
family is originally from Kirkuk and I was born and raised in Kirkuk and I have
nowhere else to go but he
told me that they will have their excuse to arrest,
torture and even kill me if I do not leave Kirkuk as it doesn't belong to the
Arabs anymore. He told me that it was for the sake of the Eid celebration
(Muslim celebrations) which coincided with the time that
they will let me go
without arrest but he emphasized that if I opt not to leave Kirkuk, they would
not let me see another sunrise.
He also threatened me that if I or any of my
family members made any complain to the police about this incidence they will
and there will be serious consequences to me and my family so I should
not report this incidence to the representative of the Arabs
in the Kirkuk
Provincial Council. I was then returned to one of the main roads near the
children's hospital in Kirkuk, which was
located about [number] minutes walking
distance to our home in [our district].
I was left with no choice, so shortly after this horrifying experience
with this Kurdish group, I booked the earliest flight back
to Australia ([in]
November 2012), even though my first intention was to spend the winter with my
family and then go back to Australia
[in] January 2013 to continue my [studies].
I spent the last days before returning to Australia hiding in my [sibling]'s
house which
was located in a different neighbourhood to my family's house. My
family and I went through a state of depression and fear during
the waiting time
before I had to travel.
applicant also claimed in his statement that he had suffered discrimination
during his studies at the hands of [a certain government
ministry] in Baghdad
because he is a Sunni and the ministry is run by Shias.
the decision record of the delegate setting out her reasons for rejecting the
applicant’s claims, a copy of which was provided
to the Tribunal with the
application, the delegate said (errors in original):
considering the pervasive and escalating nature of ethnically motivated violence
between Kurdish, Arab, and Turkmen elements
in Kirkuk, I do deem it to be
plausible that the applicant may have been questioned and threatened by a group
of Kurdish militants
independent from the Pashmerga or the Asayesh. I note that
the applicant has [siblings], all of whom currently live in Kirkuk, and
of whom has been the victim of ethnically motivated violence in 2003, which when
coupled with the convenient timing of this
alleged incident in 2012, leads me to
question the veracity of his claim that he was differentially targeted by a
Kurdish militant
group. However, in light of the country information concerning
the contentious and volatile nature of Kirkuk, I am willing to afford
applicant the benefit of the doubt.
Overall Assessment
The applicant claims has broadly iterated that he will face harm because
extremist groups "make assumptions about people that speak
English ... and lived
in a Western country are traitors to Iraq" and that he will face 'similar
threats' for reasons of his secular
In consideration of the applicant's residency history and language
proficiency, I accept the applicant holds the characteristics as
speaking Iraqi that has resided in a Western country, and I will consider these
claims in Part B. In consideration of
relevant country information that many
Iraqis' hold secular beliefs, and the applicant's consistency in claiming to be
accept his claim in this regard to be credible.
I summary, I accept the following as fact:
I accept the applicant attempted to submit his thesis for appraisal
on a Shi'ite day of mourning, and as a result, had an argument
with [ministry]
officials, who made threatening statements regarding the applicant's Sunni
Muslim heritage.
I accept the applicant attempted to meet with the head of assessments
on multiple occasions, but was turned away.
I do not accept the applicant sent his friend to check on the
progress of his thesis assessment; I do not accept the applicant's thesis
unjustly evaluated for sectarian reasons.
I accept the applicant was taken for questioning by a group posing as
the Kirkuk Emergency Force while in Iraq on a break from his
Australia; I do not accept the applicant's captors were the Peshmerga or
Asayesh; I accept the applicant was questioned,
and threatened with being killed
if he did not leave Kirkuk.
I accept the applicant holds secular beliefs, speaks English and has
resided in a Western country
discussing the applicant’s claims to have been questioned and threatened
by the Kirkuk Emergency Force the delegate referred
to the following report from
the Kurdish Rudaw Media
forces in the volatile Iraqi city of Kirkuk are overwhelmed by armed gangs,
which brazenly carry out attacks and kidnappings
without fear of police
confrontation, an important provincial police chief said.
Brigadier General Sarhad Qadir, police chief of the towns and districts of
Kirkuk, said that the armed gangs, belonging to radical
groups, are better
trained and more powerful than the city's security forces, which are untrained
for the types of hit-and-run tactics
employed by the attackers.
The security situation in multi-religious and multiethnic Kirkuk has been
plummeting, as in the rest of Iraq, save the autonomous
Kurdistan Region in the
north, whose three provinces have remained a haven of calm and growing
prosperity.
Oil-rich Kirkuk province contains large tracts of so-called "disputed
territories" that are claimed both by the Kurds in Erbil and
the Arab central
government in Baghdad.
"The armed groups can carry out attacks anytime and anywhere they choose
because they are unhindered. These groups have grown so powerful
that they can
carry out attacks on the same location repeatedly," said Qadir, who is one of
the prominent security officials in Kirkuk.
He said it was "their increasing intelligence capabilities" that made the
armed groups powerful, against security forces inadequately
trained or equipped
to adapt to the new tactics.
"Big armies are not useful in combating suicide car bombs," Qadir said. He
said intelligence means having prior information, enabling
"raids on bases
before the car bombs can be planted."
Kirkuk's 16 security units have been virtually helpless before the spiral
of violence. The latest security measure by authorities
is digging a security
trench around Kirkuk to prevent terrorists and car bombs from entering the
"They carry out attacks outside and inside the city, plant bombs, kidnap
people and raid police headquarters, which is the strongest
security apparatus
in Kirkuk," Qadir said.
"They even threaten the governor and the police chief and free prisoners.
They no longer hide, but strike in broad daylight," he added.
noted above, the Tribunal has a copy of the recording of his interview with the
delegate as well as his written claims. Notwithstanding
the acceptance of
applicant’s claims that he was apprehended, questioned, and threatened
with being killed if he did not leave
Kirkuk by Kurdish militants in Kirkuk by
the delegate, his claim was rejected by the delegate on the basis of the country
information
available at the time of the decision.
country information
Information
before the Tribunal clearly establishes that the situation in Iraq in general
and Kirkuk in particular has deteriorated
greatly since the decision under
, to which the
Tribunal is required to have regard, states:
2.40 In June 2014,
the peshmerga forces of the KRG took control of a range of disputed areas in
northern Iraq, including parts of
Ninewa, Erbil, Kirkuk and Diyala Governorates.
The security situation in these areas remains unclear. The city of Kirkuk has
regular vehicle-borne and other explosions since early 2013, resulting
in dozens of fatalities.
Jane's Sentinel Security Assessment - The Gulf States
posted in January
Fatalities are highest among the Iraqi civilian
population. Growing anti-government and anti-Shia sentiment within Sunni
constituencies
is serving to expand the insurgency in Anbar, Salaheddine,
Nineveh, Kirkuk, Diyala, Babil and Baghdad. Sunni insurgents have predominantly
utilised IEDbased and shooting attacks to target security forces, government
officials, Shia individuals, neighbourhoods and religious
sites in those
background to the current situation in Iraq, and particularly in Kirkuk, is well
explained in a very recent report from the International
Crisis Group
first asserted itself in Iraq in early 2014, then expanded its territorial hold
throughout predominantly Sunni Arab-populated areas.
On 5 January, militants
entered the city of Falluja in Anbar governorate. Four months later, moving with
lightning speed from across
the Syrian border, the group captured Mosul, Tikrit
and many of the surrounding areas, as Iraqi army units melted away. By July,
Iraq’s map had become dramatically fragmented: the central government had
lost control over much of the country, save the capital
and the south; IS ruled
Sunni Arab-populated areas in central and north-western Iraq; while the Kurdish
regional guard force (peshmergas)
capitalised on the army’s disintegration
to seize some of the disputed territories, including the city of Kirkuk.
IS’s dramatic military advances plunged Baghdad into political
disarray. The ethnic and sectarian tensions that had catalysed
emergence deepened, with Shiite and Kurdish factions rallying supporters in the
name of defending their own communities
to confront the threat emanating from
predominantly Sunni Arab areas. As militants threatened to march south, Grand
Ayatollah Ali
al-Sistani, the Shiite world’s paramount leader, issued a
call to arms resulting in the mobilisation of thousands of Shiite
into self-defence militias, called “popular mobilisation” (hashed
alshaabi). In Baghdad, Prime Minister Nouri
al-Maliki, victorious in the April
2014 parliamentary elections and poised to extend his tenure despite his poor
and divisive governance
record, solicited support among Iraqi Shiites by openly
supporting the popular mobilisation and declared a state of emergency. In
north, Masoud Barzani, president of the Kurdish region, proclaimed himself
commander in chief of the Kurdish armed forces and
declared that independence
was now the Kurds’ goal.
Sunni Arab politicians continued to elicit deep scepticism and distrust
from their purported constituents, who appear paralysed by
an unpalatable choice
between two perceived evils – the radical IS versus the Shiite-Islamist
government in Baghdad –
leading some to reiterate the on-again, off-again
demand for their own autonomous region. Iran stepped up its presence in Iraq,
Revolutionary Guard Corps officers assuming command of military operations
and propping up Shiite militias that quickly supplanted
conventional Iraqi army
units in reinforcing the capital’s defences and deploying along the front
lines against IS.
In August, a second IS military thrust, this time in territories directly
adjacent to the Kurdish region, ended several weeks of standoff
between jihadis
and Kurdish fighters along an undefined line of more than 1,000km across
northern Iraq from the Syrian to the Iranian
border. On 3 August, IS stormed
into Kurdish-controlled areas inhabited by the Yazidi minority in Sinjar
governorate (whom Kurdish
parties consider to be Kurds) and the mixed
Arab-Kurdish area around the town of Makhmour, overrunning Kurdish defences and
within spitting distance of the Kurdish region’s boundary and,
reportedly, as close as 45km from its capital, Erbil. While
there is no evidence
to suggest that Erbil and other parts of the Kurdish region were IS’s
target – its success has hinged
on mobilising support in Sunni Arab areas
based on deep-seated local grievances – its speed and proximity caused
(references deleted from original)
report’s analysis of the current situation highlights the fraught
situation for Sunni Arab residents in cities such as Kirkuk
Since the coalition has so far resisted arming locals
in IS-controlled areas for fear of their joining the enemy, its military aid
tipped the precarious Arab-Kurdish balance in the disputed territories in the
latter’s favour. In the absence of any attempt
to promote local
cooperation, this in turn may strengthen IS as the only player on the ground
perceived as capable of pushing back
against Kurdish land grabs. The
Kurds’ and Shiite militias’ military gains against IS enable them to
promote their own
preferred personalities in administration and security in
governorates with Sunni Arab populations (Ninewa, Salaheddin, Diyala, Kirkuk),
further polarising an already volatile situation and loosening ties with
Indeed, since IS’s arrival, the Kurds have made unprecedented
strides beyond their region’s formal boundary, the Green
Line. The dispute
between the KRG and the capital over these territories has lasted a decade,
their forces arrayed along a virtual
“trigger line” that bisects the
territories. During 2013, the conflict between Sunni Arabs and the Shiite-led
government allowed the Kurds to push back against the army, whose June
2014 collapse in the north left Kurdish forces with exclusive
control over most
mixed-population areas outside the Green Line. Kirkuk city and its surrounding
area were the most important of
these strategically, due to Kirkuk oil field and
several others (notably Bai Hassan), whose installations KDPaffiliated forces
Some Sunni Arab districts in the disputed territories became battlefields
and were depopulated; others that fell to IS have been denied
state services and
targeted by airstrikes, displacing more civilians, so changing area
demographics. The cities of Erbil and Suleimaniya
now host many prominent Sunni
Arabs, including Ninewa Governor Atheel al-Nujayfi, and leaders of minority
groups, all left with few
options other than to fall back to the Kurdish region.
This has further increased Kurdish sway over Sunni Arab affairs in the disputed
territories and adjacent areas.
The KDP and PUK follow similar, though uncoordinated, strategies to
further dominance in their areas of influence: the KDP in the
Ninewa plain and
points of access to neighbouring Kurdish-populated areas of Syria, the PUK in
Kirkuk and Diyala governorates. Along
the front line within the PUK’s
zone, Shiite militias often have thwarted Kurdish ambitions, sidelining local
Sunni Arab leaders
by recruiting Sunni forces under Shiite militia leadership in
preparation of these areas’ recapture from IS.
Seeking compromise with the Kurds or, at times, with Shiite armed factions
remains the best bet for local leaders who want to recruit,
train, arm and
organise fighters against IS, but any such arrangement has a price.
Kurdish forces make sure to “liberate” Sunni Arab-populated
areas only after striking deals with local leaders that solidify
their control
by imposing their own leadership and making the local figures dependent on them
for the protection and services essential
for return of the displaced. A Ninewa
tribal leader at the KDP-controlled front highlighted the dilemma in the
disputed territories:
We [Sunni Arab tribes] need serious partners to acquire the resources we
need to liberate our land. Today there is no central state
to engage with, and
Sunni leaders in Baghdad have become irrelevant. The only option we have is to
talk to the Kurds. But we cannot
sell out to the Kurds either. Who is going to
guarantee me they are not going to impose themselves and oppress my people? We
what the Kurds want: they want our land. We have started discussing issues
related to the local budget, services and agriculture.
The problem now is how to
convince our [Sunni] people that this is the only way forward.
Such guarantees are elusive. Any Kurdish- (or Shiite-) led campaign
against IS provides them further sway over local institutions.
And just as Sunni
exclusion from the Baghdad government created fertile ground for IS’s
control and recruitment in the areas
it conquered, Kurdish hegemony in Sunni
Arab-populated parts of the disputed territories bodes ill for the area’s
future stability.
ASSESSMENT OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
Tribunal must assess the risk of harm to the applicant if he were to return to
Iraq, not whether he has previously been harmed:
VBAO v MIMA
[2006] HCA 60
, and the Tribunal considers that there is a real chance that the
applicant would suffer systematic and discriminatory conduct as
required by
s.91R(1)(c) of the Act.
applicant’s claims as to his treatment by Kurdish militants when he
returned to Kirkuk in 2012 have been consistently made
throughout the processing
of his application, and are consistent with the available country information.
The situation for Sunni
Arabs in Kirkuk has clearly deteriorated considerably
since the city was seized by the Kurdish militias, and in the Tribunal’s
view a Sunni Arab such as the applicant who has already come to the attention of
the Kurdish militants in the city is at risk of
serious harm if he returns.
Accordingly,
on the basis of the up to date country information set out above, particularly
the report from the ICG on the current
situation in Kirkuk, the Tribunal is
satisfied that the applicant faces a real chance of serious harm because of his
mixed [ethnicity],
as well as because of his Sunni religion, should he return to
State Protection
that the harm feared by the applicant is from Kurdish militant groups rather
than Iraqi state authorities, the Tribunal must
consider whether he would be
able to obtain protection from those state authorities were he to seek such
protection. Under Australian
law an unwillingness to seek protection from State
authorities is justified for the purposes of Article 1A(2) where the state fails
to meet the level of protection which citizens are entitled to expect according
to ‘international
standards’.
feared ‘persecution’ of which Art 1A(2) speaks exhibits certain
qualities. The first of these qualities relates to
the source of the
persecution. A person ordinarily looks to ‘the country of his
nationality’ for protection of his fundamental
rights and freedoms but, if
‘a well-founded fear of being persecuted’ makes a person
‘unwilling to avail himself
of the protection of [the country of his
nationality]’, that fear must be a fear of persecution by the country of
the putative
refugee’s nationality or persecution which that country is
unable or unwilling to prevent.
Department’s
Refugee Law Guidelines
, to which the Tribunal is
required to have regard as noted above,
State encourages or appears to be powerless to prevent it, persecution by
private individuals or groups may bring a person within
the Convention
definition. A fear of persecution is one ‘...that is official, or
officially tolerated or uncontrollable by
the authorities of the country of the
refugee’s nationality.’ ...
In some circumstances, persecution may be established if the State
tolerates or turns a blind eye, for a Convention reason, to personally
violent or discriminatory acts.
Guidelines then refer to Gleeson CJ in
Where persecution consists of two elements, the criminal
conduct of private citizens, and the toleration or condonation of such conduct
by the State or agents of the State, resulting in the withholding of protection
which the victims are entitled to expect, then the
requirement that the
persecution be by reason of one of the Convention grounds may be satisfied by
the motivation of either the criminals
or the State.
regard to these principles, and given the complex issues surrounding the
sectarian violence referred to in the ICG report,
for example, the Tribunal is
satisfied that the Kurdish militants feared by the applicant are at present
either operating with the
tacit support of the Iraqi authorities in their
targeting of Sunni Arabs such as the applicant, or alternatively that given that
Kirkuk is now under the control of the Kurds, Iraqi state authorities would not
be able to provide the applicant with protection
from the harm that he fears
from Kurdish militants were he to seek such protection.
light of these findings, the Tribunal also considered whether the applicant may
be able to relocate out of Kirkuk where his family
lives, and live elsewhere
within Iraq.
Department’s
Refugee Guidelines
provide the following commentary on
the issue of internal relocation:
Kirby J noted
the textual basis in the Refugees Convention for the relocation test in
Australia is ‘well-founded’. The
question for decision makers is
whether the applicant’s fear of persecution for a Convention reason is
well-founded in relation
to the country as a whole. The High Court has provided
an approach for determining whether internal relocation is viable by looking
the individual circumstances of each case and determining that it must be
reasonable in the sense of practicable, for an applicant
to relocate in their
country to a region where, objectively, there is no appreciable risk of the
occurrence of the feared persecution.
Tribunal is satisfied from the country information set out above that the
applicant’s fear of persecution is well-founded
for the whole of Iraq. The
evidence is clear, in the Tribunal’s view, that he would face a real
chance of serious harm wherever
he lived in Iraq, given the escalating sectarian
violence throughout the country, the increased targeting of Sunni Arabs by Shia
militia in areas of Iraq where the Sunnis are in the minority and the ISIS
related violence in the Sunni dominated parts of the country.
the reasons given above, the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant is a
person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the
Refugees Convention. Therefore the applicant satisfies the criterion set out in
s.36(2)(a).
Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the direction that the
applicant satisfies
Migration Act
Bruce Henry
Hiwa Husamaddin,
Rudaw Media Network,
Kirkuk Police 'We are Overwhelmed by Armed Groups'
24 August 2013, available at
http://rudaw.net/english/kurdistan/24082013
accessed 27 May
Country Report Iraq
, 13 February
Jane's Sentinel Security Assessment - The Gulf States
January 2015
International Crisis Group (ICG),
Arming Iraq's Kurds: Fighting IS, Inviting
, 12 May 2015, Middle East Report N°158, at pp.
available at:
http://www.refworld.org/docid/555300df4.html
accessed 27 May
Respondents
[2004] HCA 18
190 CLR 225 at 233. See also at 258 per McHugh J.
RTF format (142 KB)
Signed PDF/A format