Master Builders Australia Limited [2012] FWAFB 10080 (12 December 2012)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Fair Work (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Act 2009
Sch. 5, Item 6 - Review of all modern awards (other than modern enterprise and State PS awards) after first 2 years
Master Builders Australia Limited
(AM2012/48)
Building, metal and civil construction industries
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HAMBERGER
COMMISSIONER CARGILL
MELBOURNE, 12 DECEMBER 2012
Award modernisation - work, health & safety issues - Building and Construction General On-site Award 2010.
Fair Work (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments)
(the Transitional Provisions Act) provides that Fair Work Australia must conduct a review of all modern awards as soon as practicable
after 1 January 2012 (the 2012 Review). Fair Work Australia has issued two statements dealing with the general conduct of the
2012 Review
and a decision concerning the preliminary issue as to which legislative provisions are applicable to the
2012 Review.
The statement of 17 November 2011 called for applications to be made to vary modern awards as part of the 2012 Review. Paragraph
4 of the statement said:
“The review will be based mainly on applications to vary modern awards. In some cases Fair Work Australia may also propose variations.
It is likely that these proposed variations will be limited to technical and drafting matters.”
One of the 283 applications received was made by Master Builders Australia Limited (MBA). It was an application to vary the
Building and Construction General On-site Award 2010
(the On-site Award) in various respects, one of which was to remove provisions which purport to regulate work health and safety (hereafter
referred to as occupational health and safety (OHS)) on the ground that they are not lawful. In this respect, the MBA application
identified a number of provisions in the On-site Award, together with various provisions within other modern awards.
This aspect of the MBA application was initially included amongst the range of matters to be dealt with by Senior Deputy President
Watson as a single Member. However in a directions hearing on 1 August 2012, it became apparent that the issue raised by the MBA
concerning OHS provisions had relevance beyond the On-site Award, causing Senior Deputy President Watson to confer with the President
with a view to constituting a Full Bench to deal with those issues in order that persons or organisations with an interest in any
potentially affected modern award would have an opportunity to put submissions.
In a prelude to directions issued on 3 August 2012 in relation to the On-site Award, Senior Deputy President Watson advised that:
“A Full Bench will be constituted to hear and determine that part of the Master Builders Australia Limited (MBA) application
in AM2012/48, concerning the legal proposition that provisions which purport to regulate work health and safety matters are not lawful
and therefore should not be included in modern awards. Given the broader relevance of the issue to other modern awards, a general
advice to interested parties will issue. As a result, this part of the MBA application in AM2012/48 will not be the subject of the
proceedings before Senior Deputy President Watson. All other aspects of the MBA application currently before Senior Deputy President
Watson will be dealt with by him, subject to the directions below.”
The Full Bench dealing with the OHS issue made directions for the conduct of the hearing on 20 September 2012 (amended on 1 October
2012). Arising from the directions, written submissions were received from:
• the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry (ACCI);
• the Australian Federation of Employers and Industries (AFEI);
• the Housing Industry Association Ltd (HIA);
• the Australian Business Industrial (ABI);
• The Australian Industry Group (Ai Group);
• the Australian Government (the Government);
• the Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU);
• the Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union (ASU);
• the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU);
• The Maritime Union of Australia (MUA);
• the Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia (CEPU);
• the Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association (SDA);
• The Australian Workers’ Union (AWU);
• the “Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union” known as the Australian Manufacturing
Workers’ Union (AMWU) (AMWU);
• the Textile, Clothing and Footwear Union of Australia (TCFUA); and
• the Transport Workers’ Union of Australia (TWU).
A hearing was conducted on 30 November 2012, at which oral submissions were made.
SUBMISSIONS
The MBA case
The MBA case was built on the contention that the
Fair Work Act 2009
(the Act) does not displace OHS laws of the States and Territories and that modern awards do not and should not have the function
or purpose of directly regulating OHS.
The MBA submitted that the Act first indicates in
that the “Act is intended to apply to the exclusion of all State or Territory industrial laws so far as they would otherwise
apply in relation to a national system employee or a national system employer”.
then sets out certain State and Territory laws that might otherwise be excluded but for its provisions.
of the Act makes it clear that the laws dealt with by the terms of
but for the provisions of
are not intended to apply to national system employers and national system employees.
Section 29(1)
of the Act then says that a “modern award or enterprise agreement prevails over a law of a State or Territory, to the extent
of any inconsistency”. However,
then says despite the provisions of
, “a term of a modern award or enterprise agreement applies subject to . . . any law of a State or Territory so far as it is
covered by paragraph 27(1)(b), (c) or (d)”. This means that the provisions of a modern award would apply subject to any OHS
law of a State or Territory because OHS is mentioned in
which is a non-excluded matter as expressed in
s.27(1)(c).
Hence, the general provisions of the Act clearly do not contemplate that the Act’s jurisdiction will encompass regulation of
OHS but that State and Territory laws will prevail.
The MBA submitted that modern awards now contain a number of provisions that deal with OHS inclusive of provisions that, illegitimately,
directly regulate the subject area.
The MBA submitted that even if its contentions regarding the incapacity of Fair Work Australia to directly regulate the subject area
of OHS are rejected, such provisions should, in any case be deleted because they do not advance OHS or the modern awards objective;
they in fact contradict the need to consider the regulatory burden per
s.134(1)(f)
of the Act.
The MBA submitted that the subsections within
of the Act have different purposes; one sets the broad parameters within which the Fair Work Australia exercises its functions and
the other establishes the matters that can be included in modern awards. It submitted that a number of modern awards contain provisions
regarding minimum rest periods required after the performance of excessive overtime, which clearly have an OHS rationale and it could
reasonably be argued that such provisions fall within
s.139(1)(c)
of the Act. It submitted, however, that the On-site Award
includes provisions which appear to impose direct OHS requirements on an employer, citing clause 22.2(e)(ii), which provides that
an “apprentice with less than two years’ experience must not use a swing scaffold or bosun’s chair” and clause
20.1 of the On-site Award
which imposes obligations on employers to either provide certain personal protective equipment or reimburse workers for the purchase
of personal protective equipment. The MBA submitted that clauses of this nature do not fall within any of the allowable matters in
of the Act and run the risk of being inconsistent with requirements in OHS legislation, such as the
Work Health and Safety Acts
which were legislated and operated from 1 January 2012 through Commonwealth legislation and in New South Wales, Queensland and both
Territories,
or at best duplicate those requirements, rendering them obsolete.
The MBA submitted that the matters it raises are not confined to the On-site Award, with a number of other modern awards containing
clauses, for example, dealing with safety/protective clothing and equipment. The MBA also raised for consideration the extent to
which modern awards can contain procedures for consultation, representation and dispute settlement about OHS matters. The
MBA contended procedures for consultation,
representation and dispute settlement must be limited in their reach to other allowable award terms and, to the extent that they deal
with OHS matters, cannot be included in modern awards.
The MBA’s submissions reflected a policy preference for performance based OHS regulation over award prescription. In this regard,
the MBA submitted:
“We say that that [sic] links with the policy issue of having a complete performance based system in place through the State
and Territory harmonised model awards, and that modern awards do not need to reflect OHS concerns and should not, both as a matter
of law and as a matter of policy when the nature of occupational health and safety law, that is performance based general duties
based legislation is considered against the prescriptive nature about what must and must not appear in modern awards.”
The MBA submitted that it was difficult to separate power and “policy” issues.
Ai Group submitted that in the past, under the
Workplace Relations and Other Legislation Amendment Act 1996
(s.89A) awards were only permitted to contain “allowable award matters”. OHS was not prescribed as an allowable matter
and, therefore, many terms which regulated OHS matters were removed from awards during the award simplification process between 1996
It submitted that under the Act, what can (and cannot) be included in modern awards is detailed in Division 3 - Terms of modern awards,
- Modern Awards of the Act. OHS matters are not included as matters which modern awards must deal with or may deal with. Therefore,
to the extent that any modern award provisions are about OHS matters these provisions should be removed from the award.
Ai Group submitted that if the Full Bench accepts Ai Group’s arguments about the effect of
, the interaction rules in ss.26, 27 and 29 of the Act are not particularly relevant. However, it submitted that interaction rules
highlight the dangers of including OHS provisions in modern awards. The inclusion of such provisions would have the potential to
disturb State and Territory OHS laws, given the manner in which ss.26, 27 and 29 appear to operate.
It submitted that the fundamental point is that OHS provisions cannot be included in modern awards as they are not matters which
modern awards must deal with or may deal with under Division 3 of
of the Act and to the extent that any modern award provisions are about OHS matters these provisions must be removed from the relevant
ABI submitted that Division 3 of
of the Act regulates the content of modern awards. Section 136 of the Act (in Subdivision A) identifies the allowable content of
modern awards by reference to Subdivisions B, C and D. It submitted that Fair Work Australia’s power is further conditioned
by s.138, ss.140-142 supplement s.139 by setting out other allowable matters, ss.143-149 set out terms that must be included in the
modern awards and Subdivision D prohibits the inclusion of various terms in modern awards on the basis that they are objectionable,
discriminatory, relate to right of entry or long service leave, or discriminate between States and Territories.
ABI submitted that the Act thereby establishes a simple test. The permissibility or “lawfulness” of a provision may be
determined simply by asking:
“(a) is the provision nominated as allowable under Subdivision B?
(b) is the clause necessary to achieve the modern awards objective? and
(c) is the provision proscribed by Subdivision D?”
ABI submitted, in relation to that test, that if the first two questions are answered yes and the third no, the provision may be
included in a modern award, bringing an end to the analysis for present purposes. It submitted that the fact that a clause regulates,
or purports to regulate, or otherwise deals with OHS has no bearing upon its character as a term “about” a permitted
matter and that the contrary proposition that a law (or by analogy an award provision) can have only one character has been described
by the High Court as having been “long-discarded”.
ABI submitted that if a provision is about a matter nominated in Subdivision B or C of Division 3 of
of the Act, it matters not that it is also a term about OHS; nor is it material to ask whether a provision imposes a direct or indirect
OHS requirement. It submitted that the reference in the award modernisation request to “the safety, health and welfare of employees”
is a consideration relevant to the making of modern awards. That reference amounts to an acknowledgement that the terms of modern
awards may validly have some impact upon safety, health and welfare. It further submitted that if it were to be assumed that any
provision touching on a matter not named in Subdivisions B and C (right of entry, for example) is ipso facto
impermissible, there would be no need to proscribe the particular matters in Subdivision D and the Subdivision would be redundant.
ABI conclude that although the MBA submission commences by posing a question of construction going to jurisdiction, it also touches
on a range of matters going to the merit of particular clauses, raising difficulties arising as a consequence of duplication and/or
inconsistency between award provisions and provisions of OHS law. ABI submitted that there is prima facie merit in those submissions,
and they identify matters undoubtedly relevant to the exercise of Fair Work Australia’s discretion in varying modern awards,
but submitted that they are best addressed by reference to specific clauses read in context, rather than by a global examination
of the lawfulness of clauses touching on OHS.
Other submissions in support of the MBA
ACCI, AFEI and HIA filed submissions generally adopting and supporting the submissions of the MBA. In addition, AFEI submitted that
some of the OHS terms in the On-site Award, are unnecessary, potentially wrong, obsolete or appear to sanction unsafe work.
The Government
The Government submitted that a modern award or enterprise agreement applies to a national system employer and employee subject to
State and Territory laws dealing with certain non-excluded matters, including OHS as set out in s.27(2)(c) (s.29(2)) of the Act.
These provisions operate in so far as the terms of these instruments conflict with the provisions of applicable State or Territory
laws. It submitted that, as noted in the Explanatory Memorandum
Fair Work Bill 2008
, this means that “a modern award or enterprise agreement cannot diminish, but may supplement, rights and obligations under
these laws”, subject to the rules regarding the content of those instruments otherwise provided by the Act, in Subdivision
B, Division 3 of
The Government submitted that the question before the Full Bench be resolved on the basis that provisions which fall within the parameters
of s.139 (and generally Division 3 of
) of the Act are capable of inclusion in modern awards. The Government submitted that all of the specific provisions identified by
the MBA in its application are provisions supported by s.139. The Government noted that s.142 of the Act expressly permits the inclusion
of terms that are “incidental to a term that is permitted or required to be in the modern award” and “essential
for the purpose of making a particular term operate in a practical way” (s.142(1)). It submitted that in order to set allowances
(a permitted matter under s.139 of the Act) under modern awards, it is necessary to define the specific circumstances under which
an allowance becomes payable to an employee.
In relation to the interaction rules within the Act, the ACTU submitted that, contrary to what has been put by the MBA, Division
2 - Interaction with State and Territory laws, of
- Application of this Act, of the Act does not deal with the lawfulness of content in modern awards or any other instruments made
under the Act. It merely provides interaction rules to operate in conjunction with ss.109 and 122 of the
Commonwealth of Australia
Constitution
Constitution
). It submitted that
of the Act, is merely an express statement of an intention to cover a field and
sets out the exceptions to the field of exclusivity set out in
, neither adding to nor detracting from the matters which may lawfully be contained in a modern award.
The ACTU submitted that
of the Act have much in common with
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(WR Act). It contended that none of the discussion of the numerous challenges mounted against those predecessor provisions in
New South Wales and others v The Commonwealth
suggests that those provisions had any bearing on the content which may or may not be included in the instruments made under the Act
as it then was. It submitted that
of the Act is manifestly concerned with what is to occur when the terms of State or Territory laws and the terms of instruments made
under the Act conflict and if a direct conflict is identified,
will permit the State or Territory law to prevail over the conflicting terms of the modern award, but it will not pass judgment on
whether the terms of the modern award under consideration were or are lawful, or whether the same result would ensue in different
facts or circumstances.
In respect of
, the ACTU submitted that the MBA submission is convoluted and contradictory, relying on a notion that there is some distinction between
award provisions that directly regulate health and safety, and those that do so only indirectly. On one hand, MBA submits that if
a clause in an award touches on a matter that is specifically listed as a matter that a modern award may include terms “about”
, such as “arrangements for when work is performed, including hours of work, rostering, notice periods, rest breaks and variations
to working hours”, yet also has a bearing on health and safety, it is permissible but, on the other hand, MBA suggests that
terms that require the payment of allowances to meet the expense of purchasing personal protective equipment not supplied by the
employer is said to be impermissible, notwithstanding that
also lists allowances (without limitation) as being a matter that a modern award may include terms “about”.
The ACTU submitted that even ignoring both the generality of the word “about” as it used in
and also the import of
dealing with incidental matters, it is beyond doubt that an award term, or a term of any other law, can be described as dealing with
more than one subject matter. The ACTU concluded that the critical question is not whether any of the impugned clauses are connected
in some way with matters touched on in State or Territory health and safety laws, it is whether they are entirely disconnected from
the matters which may (or must) be included in a modern award under Division 3 of
of the Act.
The CFMEU submitted that terms in modern awards that “regulate” or “deal with” OHS are “lawful”
- that is, are within power - so long as the relevant terms fall within one or other of the matters listed in the catalogue of matters
with which modern awards may deal found in Division 3,
of the Act. It submitted that
of the Act confirm its submission about the permissibility of OHS matters within modern awards. Further, it submitted, those sections
are concerned with resolving issues relating to inconsistency of laws under
Constitution
and have nothing to do with the lawfulness or otherwise of what may be contained in a modern award. It submitted that to the extent
that the question can be answered, the answer is that provisions of modern awards regulating OHS matters can be included in modern
awards but if their effect is to diminish relevant State and Territory laws about OHS they are inoperative.
The CFMEU submitted that the “lawfulness” of a modern award term is established by consideration of what may be contained
in a modern award in
of Chapter 2 of the Act.
It submitted that a term of a modern award prescribing an allowance associated with an identified disability relevant to work performed
by an employee is a term “about allowances” (see s.139(1)(g), noting the express reference to “disabilities”
in s.139(1)(g)(iii)). An allowance associated with the reimbursement for the expense of having to purchase safety boots whilst at
work would be permitted to be included in a modern award, referable to s.139(1)(g)(i), a clause about processes for consultation
supervised or rostered to work with supervisors would clearly come within s.139(1)(c). The CFMEU submitted that merely because a
clause in some way (no matter how remote) deals with, has some connection with or relates to OHS does not render it “unlawful”
or outside of the catalogue of matters about which a term of a modern award may deal.
The CFMEU then addressed the interaction rules in the Act, submitting that, having found the power to include matters that may have
some nexus to OHS in modern awards, it is next necessary to ascertain whether such matters are otherwise excluded by the Act. It
submitted that there is no specific exclusionary power to be found in the Act.
Sections 26
of the Act do not speak of the unlawfulness of any terms of modern awards. They are not concerned with unlawfulness at all, being
concerned only with the relationship between Federal legislation, constituted by the Act, the
Fair Work Regulations 2009
and modern awards, on the one hand and State and Territory laws on the other hand. It submitted that the effect of the interaction
rules in the Act is not to make terms of modern awards that regulate OHS unlawful but, to the extent that they diminish the operation
of State and Territory laws concerning OHS, to render them inoperative. It submitted that no such terms have been identified by the
MBA and no such terms are to be found in the modern awards under consideration.
The CEPU submitted that it is not unlawful for OHS matters to be included in modern awards. It submitted that ss.26 and 27 of the
Act do not limit matters that can be contained in modern awards. Those sections provide, inter alia, that laws dealing with OHS matters
contained in State and Territory industrial laws (as defined) are not excluded by the Act. It submitted that the fact that s.27 provides
that laws dealing with OHS matters are “non-excluded” matters, is entirely consistent with the proposition that OHS matters
may be dealt with by the Act. If the matters were not able to be dealt with, there would be no need for the exclusion.
The CEPU submitted that the fact Subdivision D of Division 3 of
of the Act contains terms that must not be included in modern awards and does not refer to terms dealing with workplace health and
safety matters weighs heavily against any argument that such matters are unable to be included in modern awards.
The SDA put submissions supporting those of the ACTU and CFMEU. In addition, it noted that disability type allowances do not reward
employees for being exposed to hazards because a worker should not be working in an unsafe workplace which exposes them to hazards.
It submitted that the requirement to work in conditions warranting a disability payment do not render the work unsafe. Rather, it
submitted, allowances are paid for such work in recognition of the disabling nature of the work that is performed, compensating a
person who is working in a difficult environment. The allowance is associated with the difficulty of doing that work not the safety
of that work.
The AMWU put submissions supporting those of the ACTU and CFMEU, submitting that the Full Bench should only be concerned that the
matters satisfy the requirements of the
of the Act. It also raised the consideration of what impact (if any) these proceedings may have on the allowable content of an enterprise
agreement, noting that both are statutory instruments given statutory force and governed by the Act and subject to comparable content
requirements.
The AMWU also directed our attention to “important overarching provisions found in s 134” of the Act, which are relevant
to considering what may or may not be included in a modern award, focussing on the provision of “a fair and relevant minimum
safety net of terms and conditions”.
It submitted that the history of awards well establishes that a Commission or Tribunal may have regard to health and safety matters
when making a modern award “setting fair and reasonable conditions of employment”.
The AMWU submitted that to now suggest, after years of industrial jurisprudence to the contrary, that awards cannot (or in the words
of the MBA “should not”) contain provisions that regulate or deal with work health safety is a dramatic shift and one
that Fair Work Australia is asked to do with no substantive evidence to support this position.
The TWU submitted that a provision may be included in a modern award and is “lawful” if it is about a matter that may
or must be included in a modern award under Division 3 of
of the Act. This is so whether or not it could also be characterised as dealing with or regulating health and safety and whether
or not health and safety considerations were considered in the determination of the content of the particular provision.
In addition to illustrations of modern award provisions which fall within Subdivision D of Division 3 of
of the Act, although they have some relationship to OHS considerations, the TWU pointed to minimum rates of pay and methods of payment
such as piece rates and incentive-based payments which have the potential to impact upon the health and safety of employees, particularly
in industries such as the Road Transport Industry. Provisions dealing with hours of work, rostering and rest breaks have the potential
to affect the health and safety of employees by minimising the potential for fatigue-related accidents or other risks to health and
The TWU submitted that in relation to the Road Transport Industry, the link between rates of pay and methods of remuneration and
safety has been known for many years and recognised in numerous reports and inquiries and, more recently, by the enactment of the
Road Safety Remuneration Act 2012
The TWU submitted that there is no basis in the Act for the contention that, so long as a provision can be said to be “about”
a matter which is capable of being included in a modern award, it is otherwise unlawful because it might also be characterised as
dealing with or regulating health and safety and whether or not health and safety considerations were considered in the determination
of the content of the particular provision. It submitted that
of the Act are not concerned with the unlawfulness of provisions of Fair Work Australia instruments such as modern awards. It submitted
that, at most, a term of a modern award or enterprise agreement may be rendered inoperative if it derogates from a State or Territory
law dealing with the matters referred to in
ss.27(1)(b)
, (c) or (d) because it operates subject to that law. It concluded that whether a State or Territory law prevails over a provision
of a modern award could only be considered by examination of particular modern award provisions in the context of particular State
or Territory legislation and, in any event, could not result in a finding that the provision was not “lawful” or could
not be included in a modern award.
Other submissions against the MBA case
Submissions against the MBA case were also put by the ASU, the MUA, the AWU and the TCFUA, drawing on and supporting the submissions
of the ACTU and the CFMEU.
CONSIDERATION
The President has referred to this Full Bench the MBA application in AM2012/48, to the extent that it concerns the legal proposition
that provisions which purport to regulate OHS matters are not lawful and therefore should not be included in modern awards.
It is that matter which we will determine.
Some submissions raise the proposition that some of the provisions raised by the MBA, in respect of the On-site Award or other modern
awards should be amended or removed because they do not meet the modern awards objective.
These are matters for consideration and determination by single members dealing with the relevant modern award to the extent that
they have been raised in the relevant proceedings.
The MBA relied on evidence of Mr S J Janssen, Managing Director, J&S Janssen Bricklaying Pty Ltd, which was admitted without
cross-examination, to show that the modern award regulation of OHS is irrelevant to the day-to-day practices of a builder seeking
to properly apply OHS law to their operations. That evidence went to an assessment of the “practical reality” of the
On-site Award provisions against the modern awards objective rather than to the jurisdictional issue before us.
To the extent that the MBA submission was based on the premise that the modern
Work Health and Safety Acts
reflect performance based OHS management and are preferable to prescriptive modern award regulation as a matter of policy, it raises
issues of the proper characterisation of the basis of relevant modern award terms and, of immediate relevance, issues going to the
modern awards objective ground in the 2012 Review, rather than issues of power.
The MBA also submitted
that it is not possible to isolate the power and modern awards objective issues. In our view, there is a clear and readily applied
distinction. This decision deals with and determines the questions of power (lawfulness). The issues concerning Item 6 of Schedule
5 of the Transitional Provisions
Act are before and will be determined by Senior Deputy President Watson to the extent that they are in issue in relation to particular
modern award terms and there is sufficient material before him.
The MBA advances its proposition that certain provisions in the On-site Award and other modern awards, which appear to have some
relevance to OHS, are unlawful or beyond power on two bases:
• it is said that the provisions of Division 2 of Part 1-3 of the Act, which concern the interaction between the Act and the
instruments made under it with various State and Territory laws, have the effect that provisions which “directly regulate”
health and safety may not lawfully be included in modern awards;
• it is said that such provisions are not lawful because they fall outside of the matters that may be included in modern awards
under s.139 of the Act.
Division 2 of Part 1-3 of the Act
The MBA submission in relation to Division 2 of Part 1-3 of the Act mischaracterises its purpose and effect. It is necessary to examine
the interaction between the Act, awards and agreements and laws regulating OHS. Section 26 of the Act provides that it applies to
the exclusion of State and Territory industrial laws so far as they would otherwise apply in relation to a national system employee
or a national system employer. Section 27, however, provides that a number of State and Territory laws are not excluded by s.26.
In particular s.27(1)(c) provides that State and Territory laws in relation to specified “non-excluded matters” are not
excluded. Section 27(2)(c) deals with OHS, including it as a “non-excluded matter”.
Section 29 is relevant. It reads:
29 Interaction of modern awards and enterprise agreements with State and Territory laws
(1) Modern award or enterprise agreement prevails over a law of a State or Territory, to the extent of any inconsistency.
(2) Despite subsection (1), a term of a modern award or enterprise agreement applies subject to the following:
(a) any law covered by subsection 27(1A);
(b) any law of a State or Territory so far as it is covered by paragraph 27(1)(b), (c) or (d).
(3) Despite subsection (2), a term of a modern award or enterprise agreement does not apply subject to a law of a State or Territory
that is prescribed by the regulations as a law to which modern awards and enterprise agreements are not subject.”
While s.29(1) of the Act provides that, as a general rule, modern awards prevail over State and Territory laws to the extent of any
inconsistency, s.29(2) provides an exception in relation to a term of an enterprise agreement which is inconsistent with, relevantly,
a law of a State or Territory covered by s.27(1)(c). Section 27(1)(c), as we have already noted, refers to non-excluded matters,
one of which is OHS.
The effect of these provisions is that in the event of inconsistency between a term of a modern award dealing with OHS and State
and Territory OHS legislation the latter prevails. To the extent that a provision in a modern award purports to reduce an entitlement
under the relevant State and Territory legislation, the provision is of no legal effect. As the Government noted, this is consistent
with paragraph 149 of the Explanatory Memorandum:
“149. However, subclause 29(2) provides that a modern award or enterprise agreement is subject to any of the State or Territory
laws that are saved by clause 27, as well as any State or Territory laws prescribed by the regulations. This means that a modern
award or enterprise agreement cannot diminish, but may supplement rights and obligations under these laws.”
Provided that a modern award term must or may be included in modern awards under Division 3 of Part 2-3 of the Act, its inclusion
is lawful, even if it reduces an entitlement under the relevant State and Territory legislation saved by s.27. Division 2 of Part
1-3 of the Act does not render such a term unlawful, rather it renders the provision to be of no legal effect. Although it is unnecessary,
we note for completeness, we are not persuaded that any of the provisions identified by the MBA in the On-site Award or other modern
awards reduces an entitlement under the relevant State and Territory legislation saved by s.27.
It is clear that Division 2 of Part 1-3 of the Act does not deal with the lawfulness of the content in modern awards or any other
instruments made under the Act. Its purpose is to provide interaction rules to operate in conjunction with
Constitution
providing an express statement of an intention to cover a field and
setting out the exceptions to that exclusivity set out in
Sections 26
are not directed to nor have the effect of enlarging or confining the matters which may lawfully be contained in a modern award.
They are concerned with resolving issues relating to inconsistency of laws under
Constitution
and have nothing to do with the lawfulness or otherwise of what may be contained in a modern award.
We reject the proposition that Division 2 of
of the Act has the effect that provisions which “directly regulate” health and safety may not lawfully be included in
modern awards. Division 2 of
of the Act raises no question of power or lawfulness of such provisions in modern awards.
In relation to the question of power or lawfulness concerning the interaction rules in
of the Act, the Ai Group raised a broader interpretation question, submitting that the effect of
was that OHS provisions in modern awards prevailed over State and Territory OHS laws to the extent of any inconsistency. The Ai Group
argument was based on the proposition that OHS laws were not a “State or Territory industrial law” for the purposes of
and the exclusion in
, such that the primacy of modern awards and enterprise agreements over State and Territory laws in
had effect. That proposition was contested by some parties and not addressed by others on the basis that it was unnecessary to do
so for the purpose of determining the issues before us.
The Victorian Government corresponded with the Full Bench in relation to this contention of Ai Group, seeking an opportunity for
it and other State and Territory Governments to put submissions if the Ai Group interpretation was relevant to the determination
of the matter before us.
At the commencement of the hearing on 30 November 2012, this Full Bench made the following statement (now edited) in relation to
the Victorian Government correspondence:
“. . . we received correspondence from the acting director of the Victorian Department of Business and Innovation suggesting
that the AI Group submission raises a broader issue going to the construction of
sections 26
of the Act, which relates to the interaction between modern awards and enterprise agreements in State and Federal legislation, going
to the relationship between State and Territory Work Health and Safety Laws and the definition of ‘State and Territory Industrial
of the Act.
He suggests this issue appears to fall outside of the scope of the legal proposition we are required to determine but if we are inclined
to deal with the broader issue the States and Territories should be given an opportunity to be heard. In respect of that, we can
confirm the acting director’s understanding of the issue appears to fall outside the scope of the legal proposition we have
been asked to determine. Our remit only goes to the question of the interaction rules in Division 2 of
of the Act and to the extent it is suggested that they render certain modern award provisions unlawful.
We have not been asked to address broader construction issues in respect of the interaction rules, accordingly we see no need to delay
the matter before us at this stage to invite States and Territories to address us on any broader construction issue.
If, in the course of our deliberations on our decision, we come to a view that it is necessary to deal with broader issues concerning
the interaction rules in order to determine the matters before us we will afford the States and Territories an opportunity to put
submissions on the broader point and, of course, an opportunity for other interested parties to these proceedings, an opportunity
to respond.
Finally, we would indicate that we have read each of the comprehensive submissions filed. We ask the parties to proceed on the basis
that the submissions filed can be taken as read and limit their submissions this morning to points of emphasis in reply to the submissions
of others where there has been no opportunity for reply and for questioning by the Full Bench.
We do not want parties to simply repeat what is before us in written submissions, which the Bench has had the opportunity to digest.
We will proceed on that basis.”
We now confirm that our preliminary view is that it is unnecessary to address or determine the broader construction issue raised
by the Ai Group for the purposes of our decision. The effect of the Ai Group interpretation, if correct, is that the interaction
of the Act raise no question of power or lawfulness of OHS provisions in modern awards. Given our finding to that effect, for different
reasons, it is unnecessary, for the purposes of our decision, to determine whether or not the Ai Group interpretation is correct.
Not lawful because they fall outside of the matters that must or may be included in modern awards under Division 3 of
The content, or terms, which must be, may be and must not be contained in modern awards are prescribed in Division 3 of
of the Act:
• Subdivision B sets out terms that may be included in modern awards;
• Subdivision C sets out terms which must be included in modern awards; and
• Subdivision D sets out terms that must not be included in modern awards.
There is no power to include within a modern award a provision which falls within one of the matters set out in Subdivision D. Provisions
which fall within the scope of the matters set out in Subdivision C must be included in modern awards.
The second issue raised by the MBA application goes to Subdivision B. In that regard, modern award provisions which fall within the
scope of Subdivision B, and in the circumstances of the current matter, ss.139 and 142, may be included in a modern award and are
within power.
Section 139, headed Terms that may be included in modern awards—general, states:
“(1) A modern award may include terms about any of the following matters:
(a) minimum wages (including wage rates for junior employees, employees with a disability and employees to whom training arrangements
apply), and:
(i) skill-based classifications and career structures; and
(ii) incentive-based payments, piece rates and bonuses;
(b) type of employment, such as full-time employment, casual employment, regular part-time employment and shift work, and the facilitation
of flexible working arrangements, particularly for employees with family responsibilities;
(c) arrangements for when work is performed, including hours of work, rostering, notice periods, rest breaks and variations to working
(d) overtime rates;
(e) penalty rates, including for any of the following:
(i) employees working unsocial, irregular or unpredictable hours;
(ii) employees working on weekends or public holidays;
(iii) shift workers;
(f) annualised wage arrangements that:
(i) have regard to the patterns of work in an occupation, industry or enterprise; and
(ii) provide an alternative to the separate payment of wages and other monetary entitlements; and
(iii) include appropriate safeguards to ensure that individual employees are not disadvantaged;
(g) allowances, including for any of the following:
(i) expenses incurred in the course of employment;
(ii) responsibilities or skills that are not taken into account in rates of pay;
(iii) disabilities associated with the performance of particular tasks or work in particular conditions or locations;
(h) leave, leave loadings and arrangements for taking leave;
(i) superannuation;
(j) procedures for consultation, representation and dispute settlement.
(2) Any allowance included in a modern award must be separately and clearly identified in the award.”
Section 142, headed Incidental and machinery terms, states:
“Incidental terms
(1) A modern award may include terms that are:
(a) incidental to a term that is permitted or required to be in the modern award; and
(b) essential for the purpose of making a particular term operate in a practical way.
Machinery terms
(2) A modern award may include machinery terms, including formal matters (such as a title, date or table of contents).”
For the purpose of the second basis of jurisdictional objection by the MBA, its application to amend or remove the provisions in
the On-site Award and the other modern awards as beyond power must be tested on the basis of considering and determining whether
the particular provision is a term about any of the matters listed in s.139 or is an incidental or machinery term within s.142.
7_45889" name="P337_45890">21 As we have already found, this test is to be applied whether or not the term touches upon OHS matters or “directly regulates”
Building and Construction General On-site Award 2010
Clause 9.6: Dispute resolution
The MBA did not argue that this provision falls outside the terms which must or may be included in modern awards under Division 3
of the Act, submitting that it is questionable as to whether the clause is required
and “a further question for consideration is the extent to which modern awards can contain procedures for consultation, representation
and dispute settlement about occupational health and safety”.
MBA did not raise or propose a variation to a particular provision in the On-site Award or any modern award.
Accordingly, this modern award term does not raise the issue of power we are required to determine. In any case, we are satisfied
that the term is clearly incidental to a term that is permitted or required to be in the modern award and essential for the purpose
of making a particular term operate in a practical way (ss.142(1)(a) and (b) and 146).
Clause 15.3(a): Apprentices: Overtime and shiftwork
We are satisfied that this clause is about the type of employment, such as “shift work” (s.139(1)(b)).
Clauses 20.1(b), 20.1(b)(iv), 20.1(b)(vi), 20.1(b)(vii), 20.1(b)(viii), 20.1(c) and 20.1(d): Reimbursement or provision of particular
protective equipment
We are satisfied that each clause, providing for the reimbursement of expenses of employees in providing particular protective clothing,
unless provided by the employer, is about allowances, including expenses incurred in the course of employment (s.139(1)(g)(i)).
Clauses 20.1(d)(iii): Reimbursement of the cost of an x-ray in specified circumstances; 20.3(a): Compensation for clothes and tools;
20.3(d): Reimbursement for hardened lenses
We are satisfied that each clause is about allowances, including expenses incurred in the course of employment (s.139(1)(g)(i)).
Clauses 21.2: Industry allowance; 21.3(a): Underground allowance; 21.4: Multistorey allowance; 21.7: Carpenter-diver allowance; 21.8:
Refractory bricklaying allowance; 21.9: Coffer dam worker; 21.11: Air-conditioning industry and refrigeration industry allowance;
22.2(a): Insulation; 22.2(b): Hot work; 22.2(c): Cold work; 22.2(d): Confined space; 22.2(e): Swing scaffold; 22.2(f): Explosive
powered tools; 22.2(g): Wet work; 22.2(h): Dirty work; 22.2(i): Toxic substances; 22.2(j): Fumes; 22.2(k) and (l): Asbestos and Asbestos
eradication; 22.2(m): Furnace work; 22.2(n): Acid work; 22.2(o): Heavy blocks; 22.2(p): Bitumen work; 22.2(q): Height work; 22.2(r):
Suspended perimeter work platform; 22.2(s): Employee carrying fuels, oils and greases; 22.3(a): Towers allowance; 22.3(b): Cleaning
down brickwork; 22.3(c): Bagging; 22.3(d): P
laster or composition spray; 22.3(e): Slushing; 22.3(f):
Dry polishing of tiles; 22.3(g): Cutting tiles; 22.3(i): Roof repairs; 22.3(l): Brewery cylinders—painters; 22.3(n): Spray application—painters;
Pneumatic tool operation; 22.3(p): Bricklayer operating cutting machine; 22.3(q): Hydraulic hammer; 22.3(r): Waste disposal; 22.4(a):
Pipe enamelling; 22.4(b): Powdered lime dust; 22.4(c): Sand blasting; 22.4(d): Live sewer work; 22.4(e): Timbering; 22.4(f): Special
work; 22.4(g): Compressed air work; 22.4(h): Cutting stone
We are satisfied that each clause is about allowances, including disabilities associated with the performance of particular tasks
or work in particular conditions or locations (s.139(1)(g)(iii)). The proposition alluded to by the MBA that such allowances sanction
work in unsafe conditions, is inconsistent with employer obligations under OHS legislation and is untenable. The allowances are paid
to compensate for the disability associated with the work in particular conditions, which work is presumed safe but subject to disabilities
nonetheless, in circumstances where the disabilities/conditions are not otherwise taken into account through the rates of pay provided
in the modern award.
Clause 22.2(e)(ii): Restriction on apprentice using swing scaffold
We are satisfied that the clause is incidental to minimum wages (including wage rates for junior employees) and skill-based classifications,
with the restriction relating to a lack of experience (ss.139(1)(a) and 142(1)(a)).
Clause 33.1(d): Working hours and conditions of employees working in compressed air
We are satisfied that the clause is about arrangements for when work is performed, including hours of work (s.139(1)(c)). To the
extent that the MBA contends that the provision is redundant or at least out of date by reference to current standards, the issue
is not one of power but one of meeting of the modern awards objective, which has been raised and should be progressed in the single
Member proceedings before Senior Deputy President Watson.
Other modern award provisions identified in the MBA submissions
The terms identified by the MBA as requiring reconsideration
in other modern awards can be categorised into two broad groups.
1. Reimbursement for protective clothing/equipment and/or uniforms
Airport Employees Award 2010
]: clause 21.3: Reimbursement for uniforms/protective clothing;
Black Coal Mining Industry Award 2010
]: clause A.8.2: Reimbursement in respect of working clothes and safety boots;
Concrete Products Award 2010
]: clause 16.10: Boot allowance;
Dry Cleaning and Laundry Industry Award 2010
]: clause 15.3: Protective clothing allowance;
Fast Food Industry Award 2010
]: clause 19.2: Protective or special clothing (e.g. uniform);
Gardening and Landscaping Services Award 2010
]: clause 15.4: Clothing and equipment;
Maritime Offshore Oil and Gas Award 2010
]: clause 14.3: Industrial and protective clothing;
Oil Refining and Manufacturing Award 2010
]: clause 15.4(c): Protective clothing and equipment allowance;
Pest Control Industry Award 2010
]: clause 15.8: Safety clothing and equipment;
Stevedoring Industry Award 2010
]: clause 14.14: Safety footwear and clothing allowance.
We are satisfied that each clause, providing for the reimbursement of expenses of employees in providing particular protective clothing,
unless provided by the employer, is about allowances, including expenses incurred in the course of employment (s.139(1)(g)(i)).
2. Allowances for disabilities associated with the performance of particular tasks or work in particular conditions or locations
Joinery and Building Trades Award 2010 [
]: clause 24.3(u): Toxic substances;
Mining Industry Award 2010 [
]: clause 14.3: Allowances for disabilities associated with the performance of particular tasks or work in particular conditions or
Quarrying Award 2010 [
]: clause 18.6: Payment for wet weather;
Sugar Industry Award 2010 [
]: clause 22.1: Applying obnoxious substances.
We are satisfied that each clause is about allowances, including disabilities associated with the performance of particular tasks
or work in particular conditions or locations (s.139(1)(g)(iii)).
This aspect of the MBA application to vary the On-site Award and other modern awards is dismissed.
We make one final observation.
Parts of the On-site Award are complex and possibly outdated, reflecting the fact that they are a product of the variation of predecessor
awards at various points of time. This is evident in some of the provisions raised by the MBA and other employer associations in
the context of power questions raised in the current proceedings, most particularly in relation to the extensive allowance provisions
in the On-site Award.
Our observation, in this regard, is not new. During the Award Modernisation process through which the modern award was made, the
Full Bench of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission made the following statement concerning, in part, allowances in the
building and construction industry:
In a number of industries there are many different allowances in federal awards and NAPSAs, some of quite small amounts. It is often
difficult to know the origin and purpose of the allowances and whether they are still relevant. In some cases the allowance will
not be appropriate for inclusion in a safety net award because it is outmoded, is the result of enterprise bargaining or for some
other reason.
In some industries there is a strong case for rationalising allowances. The manufacturing and building and construction industries
are examples. We encourage parties to give attention to the number, amount and purpose of allowances with a view to rationalising
them and eliminating those that are no longer relevant.”
We have deleted cl.20.6 from the exposure draft. That provision was based on rates payable under the Building and Construction Award
but applied only to forepersons in Tasmania and bridge and wharf carpenters in New South Wales. Transitional arrangements may be required
in respect to these State based payments. Otherwise, we have retained the allowances provisions in the exposure draft. They reflect
current award provisions. We have referred above to our preference for a rationalisation of such allowances, as expressed at paragraphs
[20] and [21] of our statement of 23 January 2009. Notwithstanding, efforts by the MBA to address this issue, most recently in its
eleventh submission (dated March 2009), we have not received sufficient material and input from interested parties to allow us to
attempt to rationalise allowances at this stage. Such an exercise should, however, be given some priority in any future review of
the modern award.”
In their applications to the 2012 Review the MBA, HIA and other employer associations have sought to review and amend (or delete)
various allowance provisions within the On-site Award. Addressing the issue referred to us for determination - the lawfulness question
in relation to provisions said to raise OHS matters - we have decided that there is power to include the particular award terms in
question. However, there do remain questions as to whether such provisions and others (which do not deal with OHS) require review
by reference to the considerations which arise from Item 6 of Schedule 5 of the Transitional Provisions
Act. This question arises, for example, in relation to propositions put to us that some terms of the On-site Award include reference
to outdated regulation,
protective clothing which is no longer sanctioned,
or relate to practices no longer occurring.
The desirability of a rationalisation of allowance terms in the On-site Award raised by the Australian Industrial Relations Commission
Full Bench in January 2009 remains. This may occur in the context of the 2012 Review of the On-site Award, which remains before Senior
Deputy President Watson,
to the extent that the particular terms are in issue and there is sufficient material and input from interested parties before him
in relation to those particular terms. To the extent that particular terms which might benefit from review are not before his Honour
or there is insufficient material for the purpose of the 2012 Review, any outstanding rationalisation of allowances in the On-site
Award could occur in the 2014 Review.
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
R Calver for Master Builders Australia Limited.
S Smith for The Australian Industry Group.
A Doyle for Australian Association of Employers and Industries.
M Adler for the Housing Industry Association.
O Fagio for Australian Business Industrial and Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
R Reitano for the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union.
M Gibian for the Transport Workers’ Union of Australia.
T Clarke for the Australian Council of Trade Unions.
G Starr for the “Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union” known as the Australian
Manufacturing Workers’ Union (AMWU).
A Kentish for the Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia.
Z Angus for The Australian Workers’ Union.
A Grayson for The Maritime Union of Australia.
M Worsley for the Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association.
P Cully for the Australian Government.
M Rizzo for the Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union.
Hearing details:
Sydney (via video to Melbourne and Canberra):
November 30.
The statements are dated 17 November 2011 (
[2011] FWA 7975
) and 27 April 2012 (
[2012] FWA 3514
Decision - Preliminary issue
[2012] FWAFB 5600
- AM2012/8 and others - 29 June 2012.
Table 1 in para 9.22 of the Master Builders Australia Limited (MBA) 7 March 2012 submissions in support of its application and para
7.1 of the MBA 17 October 2012 submission in relation to the Joinery and Building Trades Award 2010 [MA000029].
Transcript at paras 2346-2349.
Transcript, at para 2466.
Transcript, at paras 2258 and 2277.
Outline of Australian Business Industrial submissions dated 19 October 2012.
New South Wales and Others v The Commonwealth
[2006] HCA 52
(2007) 231 ALR 1
Section 576B(g) of Division 2 of
Workplace Relations Act 1996
Explanatory Memorandum, at para 149.
[2006] HCA 52
at paras 348-379;
[2006] HCA 52
(2007) 231 ALR 1.
“Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union” known as the Australian Manufacturing
Workers’ Union (AMWU) submission of 15 November 2012, at para 12
Re Operational Ambulance Officers (State) Award
[2001] NSWIRComm 331
[2001] 113 IR 384.
Road Safety Remuneration Act 2012
Item 6(2)(a) of Schedule 5 of the
Fair Work (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Act 2009
. See, for example, Master Builders Association of the Northern Territory trading as Master Builders Northern Territory submission
of 17 October 2012 at para 5.1 and 5.12 and Australian Federation of Employers and Industry submission of 18 October 2012 at para
Transcript at para 2258.
MBA submission of 17 October 2012, at paras 4.1, 5.12 and 9.22.
Section 27(2)(c)
Fair Work Act 2009
Transcript, at paras 2237-2240.
No issue arises for present purposes in respect of
- Outworker Terms - or
- Industry-Specific Redundancy Schemes.
Amended attachment to Application for review of modern award, filed by the MBA on 26 November 2012.
MBA submission of 17 October 2012, at para 9.17.
Transcript, at paras 2450 and 2465.
MBA submission of 17 October 2012, at para 9.22.
Statement concerning Stage 2 exposure drafts
[2009] AIRCFB 50
, 23 January 2009.
Decision making Stage 3 Awards,
[2009] AIRCFB 345
, 3 April 2009.
Clause 33.1(d) of the Building and Construction General On-site Award 2010 (the On-site Award).
Clause 20.1(b)(viii) of the On-site Award.
Clause 20.1(d)(iii) of the On-site Award.
For example, working in proximity to hazardous materials.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, MA000020 PR531828 >
No downloadable files available