Commissioner of Taxation v ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in liquidation) [2025] FCAFC 146 (24 October 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Commissioner of Taxation v ACN 154 520
199 Pty Ltd (in liquidation)
[2025] FCAFC 146
Appeal from:
HNMF and Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2023] AATA 4067
(2023) 117 ATR
File number:
NSD 1580 of 2023
Judgment of:
DERRINGTON, GOODMAN AND FEUTRILL JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– goods and services tax
– taxable supplies – GST liabilities – creditable
acquisitions – input tax
credits – precious metal – GST-free
– input taxed – anti-avoidance provisions – third parties
into or carried out dishonest scheme for creation of taxable supplies of
precious metal ending with non-payment of GST liabilities
– taxpayer got
GST benefits from scheme – Administrative Appeals Tribunal found getting
taxpayer a GST benefit from the
scheme was not the dominant purpose or principal
effect of the scheme – Tribunal found getting taxpayer a GST benefit was a
facilitative purpose of an ultimate (dishonest) dominant purpose of non-payment
of GST liability – Tribunal found that principal
effect of scheme was
changing the form of precious metal – whether Tribunal misconstrued and
misapplied the statutory tests
for dominant purpose and principal effect –
whether the Tribunal failed to take into account the object or purpose of Div
as a mandatory relevant consideration – whether Tribunal failed to
consider if getting taxpayer a GST benefit and non-payment
of GST liability were
composite dominant purposes – whether Tribunal failed to consider the
importance of the taxpayer getting
input tax credits to the economic feasibility
of the scheme
ADMINISTRATIVE LAW
– appeal on a question of
law – consideration of questions of law and questions of fact –
whether notice of appeal
raises a question of law
Administrative Appeals Tribunal review of taxation objections – taxpayer
onus of proof – whether informed participation
in scheme was a relevant
circumstance to be taken into account in the application of the dominant purpose
test – whether Tribunal
was bound to conclude the taxpayer entered into or
carried out the scheme with the dominant purpose of getting the taxpayer a GST
benefit because the taxpayer failed to discharge the onus of proving it was not
an informed participant in the scheme
Legislation:
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Cases cited:
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (In Liq) and
Commissioner of Taxation (Taxation)
[2019] AATA 5981
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in liq) v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2020] FCAFC 190
(2020) 282 FCR 455
Applicant WAEE v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
(2003) 236 FCR 593
Automotive Invest Pty Ltd v Federal of Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] HCA 36
(2024) 98 ALJR 1245
Azzopardi v Tasman UEB Industries Ltd
(1985) 4 NSWLR 139
Binetter v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2016] FCAFC 163
(2016) 249 FCR 534
Brown v The Repatriation Commission
(1985) 7 FCR 302
CIC Insurance Ltd v Bankstown Football Club Ltd
(1997) 187 CLR
Collector of Customs v Pozzolanic Enterprises Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 456
(1993) 43 FCR
Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia v Consolidated
Press Holdings Ltd
[2001] HCA 32
(2001) 207 CLR 235
Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia v Consolidated
Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
(2012) 250 CLR 503
Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia v Hart
[2004] HCA 26
(2004) 217 CLR 216
Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia v Sharpcan Pty
[2019] HCA 36
(2019) 269 CLR 370
Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia v Spotless
Services Ltd
[1996] HCA 34
(1996) 186 CLR 404
Commissioner of Taxation v Complete Success Solutions Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 19
Commissioner of Taxation v Cooper
[1991] FCA 190
(1991) 29 FCR 177
Commissioner of Taxation v
Zoffanies Pty Ltd
[2003] FCAFC 236
(2003) 132 FCR
Comptroller-General of Customs v Pharm-A-Care Laboratories Pty Ltd
[2020] HCA 2
(2020) 270 CLR 494
Corporation of the City of Enfield v Development Assessment
[2000] HCA 5
(2000) 199 CLR 135
Craig v South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
(1995) 184 CLR 163
Dranichnikov v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
(2003) 197 ALR 389
EHF17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] FCA 1681
Equality Australia Ltd v Commissioner of the Australian Charities and
Not-for-profits Commission
[2024] FCAFC 115
(2024) 305 FCR 189
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Ludekens
(2013) 214 FCR 149
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Trail Bros Steel & Plastics Pty
[2010] FCAFC 94
(2010) 186 FCR 410
v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2015] FCAFC 92
(2015) 233 FCR
Hayes v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1956] HCA 21
(1956) 96 CLR 47
Hope v The Council of the City of Bathurst
[1980] HCA 16
(1980) 144 CLR 1
Jackson v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1989] FCA 170
(1989) 20 ATR 611
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Le v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2025] HCASJ 33
Manikantan v Secretary, Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
[2024] FCAFC 116
Mills v Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia
[2012] HCA 51
(2012) 250 CLR 171
Minerva Financial Group Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
(1986) 162 CLR
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZMTA
[2019] HCA 3
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
185 CLR 259
N.S.W. Associated Blue-Metal Quarries Limited v Federal Commissioner of
[1956] HCA 80
(1956) 94 CLR 509
News Ltd v South Sydney District Rugby League Football Club Ltd
[2003] HCA 45
(2003) 215 CLR 563
Plaintiff M1/2021 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 27
(2022) 275 CLR
Plaintiff S22/2025 v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] HCA 36
(2025) 99 ALJR 1378
Professional Admin Service Centres Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
[2013] FCA 1123
(2013) 94 ATR 445
Rana v Repatriation Commission
[2011] FCAFC 124
(2011) 126 ALD 1
RCLN v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2025] FCAFC
Re HNMF and Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2023] AATA 4067
(2023) 117 ATR
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte
Applicant S20/2002
[2003] HCA 30
(2003) 198 ALR 59
STNK and Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2021] AATA 3399
(2021) 113 ATR
Selliah v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
Sharp Corporation of Australia Pty Ltd v Collector of Customs
The Australian Gas Light Company v The Valuer-General
(1940) 40 SR
The Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia v Myer
Emporium Ltd
[1987] HCA 18
(1987) 163 CLR 199
TNT Skypak International (Aust) Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
(1988) 82 ALR 175
Vetter v Lake Macquarie City Council
(2001) 202 CLR 439
Waterford v The Commonwealth of Australia
[1987] HCA 25
(1987) 163 CLR 54
Wills v Chief Executive Officer of the Australian Skills Quality
[2022] FCAFC 10
(2022) 289 FCR 175
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
18 – 19 November 2024
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr E Wheelahan KC with Ms C Pierce SC and Mr E Moore
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Australian Government Solicitor
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr B Walker SC with Mr B Jones SC and Ms J Vogan
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Polczynski Robinson
NSD 1580 of 2023
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION
ACN 154 520 199 PTY LTD (IN
LIQUIDATION)
DERRINGTON, GOODMAN AND FEUTRILL JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
appeal be allowed.
decision of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal given on 30 November 2023 be set
respondent’s application for review of the applicant’s objection
decision in respect of the respondent’s objections
to assessments issued
to it of net amounts under
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999
(Cth), declarations under Division 165 of the GST Act and assessments of
administrative penalties be remitted to the Administrative
Review Tribunal for
determination according to law.
respondent pay the applicant’s costs of the appeal.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
DERRINGTON J:
have had the advantage of considering the respective draft reasons of both
Goodman and Feutrill JJ. I agree with the orders proposed
by Feutrill J for the
reasons which his Honour
I certify that the preceding one (1) numbered
paragraph is a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 24 October 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
A. INTRODUCTION
B. THE GST ACT
C. BACKGROUND
C.1 The taxpayer’s business
C.2 The notices of assessment and
amended assessment, the objection and the objection decision
C.3 The First Tribunal
C.4 The Full Court ACN
C.5 The Second Tribunal
C.6 The Full Court decision in
Complete Success Solutions
D. THE SECOND TRIBUNAL
E. THE APPEAL
E.1 Introduction
E.2 Identification of questions
E.3 The first four questions
E.3.1 The Second
Tribunal’s consideration of s 165-5(1)(c)(i) of the GST
E.3.2 The Commissioner’s
Consideration
E.4 The fifth question –
principal effect
E.4.1 The Second
Tribunal’s consideration of s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) of the GST
E.4.2 The Commissioner’s
Consideration
E.5 The sixth question –
treatment of the object and purpose of the GST Act
E.5.1 The Second
Tribunal’s consideration of s 165-15(1)(c) of the GST
E.5.2 The Commissioner’s
Consideration
E.6 The ninth question –
whether a taxpayer can prove that s 165-5(1)(c)(i) is not satisfied absent proof
that the taxpayer
was not an informed participant in the arrangements
constituting each scheme
E.6.1 The Second
Tribunal’s consideration of the question of the taxpayer’s informed
participation
E.6.2 The Commissioner’s
challenge to the Second Tribunal’s findings
Consideration
F. CONCLUSION
A. INTRODUCTION
underlying dispute between the applicant Federal
Commissioner
of Taxation
and the respondent
concerns notices of assessment and amended
assessment issued by the Commissioner negating the taxpayer’s claimed
entitlement
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999
) to input tax credits in an amount exceeding $72.95
dispute has a long history, which is described in Part C below, including a
judgment of the Full Court of this Court (Perram,
Moshinsky and Thawley JJ) in
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in liq) v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2020] FCAFC 190
(2020) 282 FCR 455
Full Court ACN
upheld an earlier appeal from the taxpayer and remitted the matter for
redetermination by the Administrative Appeals
Tribunal subsequently found in favour of the taxpayer and the Commissioner now
appeals pursuant to
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
) from that decision, the reasons for which were
published as
Re HNMF and Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2023] AATA
(2023) 117 ATR 513
Second Tribunal Decision
the reasons set out below, the appeal should be dismissed.
B. THE GST ACT CONTEXT
addressing the detail of the appeal, it is important to identify the statutory
context in the GST Act. That context is conveniently
described in
at 461 [16] to 466 [36] in terms which address the salient provisions
relevant period
, namely 1 February 2012 to 30 June 2014, and
which is respectfully adopted and reproduced as follows:
key relevant provision of the GST Act are as follows. The relevant version of
the GST Act is that in force during the relevant
period (1 February 2012 to 30
June 2014). It does not appear that there were any material amendments during
that period. For ease
of expression, we will refer to the provisions of the GST
Act in present tense, even though we are referring to the provisions as
stood during the relevant period.
s 7-1(2) of the GST Act, entitlements to input tax credits relevantly arise on
“creditable acquisitions”.
9-30 is headed “Supplies that are
or input taxed”.
Section 9-30(1) provides that a supply is GST-free if (relevantly) it is
GST-free under Div 38 or under a
provision of another Act. Section 9-30(2)
provides that a supply is input taxed if (relevantly) it is
input taxed
under Div 40 or under a provision of another Act. Under the GST Act, if a supply
is input taxed, no GST is payable on the supply,
and there is no entitlement to
an input tax credit for anything acquired or imported to make the supply.
9-30(3) addresses the situation where a supply would otherwise be considered to
be both GST-free and input taxed. The subsection
provides that, to the extent
that a supply would, apart from the subsection, be both GST-free and input
(a) the supply is GST-free and not input taxed, unless the provision under which
it is input taxed requires the supplier to have
chosen for its supplies of that
kind to be input taxed; or
(b) the supply is input taxed and not GST-free, if that provision requires the
supplier to have so chosen.
11 of the GST Act deals with creditable acquisitions. In s 11-1 it is explained
that a taxpayer is entitled to input tax
credits for the taxpayer’s
creditable acquisitions
. Section 11-5 defines a “creditable
acquisition” as follows:
11-5 What is a creditable
acquisition?
You make a creditable acquisition if:
(a) you acquire anything solely or partly for a *creditable purpose; and
(b) the supply of the thing to you is a *taxable supply; and
(c) you provide, or are liable to provide, *consideration for the supply; and
(d) you are *registered, or *required to be registered.
expression “creditable purpose” is defined in s 11-5, which
relevantly provides:
11-5 Meaning of creditable purpose
(1) You acquire a thing for a creditable purpose to the extent that you acquire
it in *carrying on your *enterprise.
(2) However, you do not acquire the thing for a creditable purpose to the extent
(a) the acquisition relates to making supplies that would be *input taxed; or
(b) the acquisition is of a private or domestic nature.
Thus, if an acquisition relates to making supplies that would be
, the taxpayer does not acquire the thing for a creditable purpose.
11-20 deals with
is entitled to input tax credits for creditable
acquisitions. It provides that the taxpayer is entitled to the input tax credit
any creditable acquisition that the taxpayer makes.
11-25 deals with the amount of the input tax credits for creditable
acquisitions. Generally, the amount of the input tax credit
for a creditable
acquisition is an amount equal to the GST payable on the supply of the thing
acquired. However, the amount of the
input tax credit is reduced if the
acquisition is only partly creditable.
38 is headed “GST-free supplies”. It is explained in s 38-1 that, if
a supply is GST-free: no GST is payable
on the supply; and an entitlement to an
input tax credit for anything acquired or imported to make the supply is not
affected. Subdivision
38-L is headed “Precious metals” and comprises
one section, s 38-385. That section provides:
38-385 Supplies of precious
A supply of *precious metal is GST-free if:
(a) it is the first supply of that precious metal after its refining by, or on
behalf of, the supplier; and
(b) the entity that refined the precious metal is a *refiner of precious metal;
(c) the *recipient of the supply is a *dealer in precious metal.
Note: Any other supply of precious metal is input taxed under section
expression “precious metal” is defined in s 195-1 as
precious metal
(a) gold (in an investment form) of at least 99.5% fineness; or
(b) silver (in an investment form) of at least 99.9% fineness; or
(c) platinum (in an investment form) of at least 99% fineness; or
(d) any other substance (in an investment form) specified in the regulations of
a particular fineness specified in the regulations.
It should be noted that, while para (a) of the definition of “precious
metal” refers to gold in an investment form of
fineness, the present case generally concerns gold of at least
fineness (four nines gold).
“refiner of precious metal” is defined in s 195-1 as “an
entity that satisfies the Commissioner that it regularly
converts or refines
precious metal in carrying on its enterprise”.
“dealer in precious metal” is defined in s 195-1 as “an entity
that satisfies the Commissioner that a principal
part of carrying on its
enterprise is the regular supply and acquisition of precious metal”.
expression “investment form”, which is used in the definition of
“precious metal”, is not defined in the
GST Act. As noted at [30] of
the Tribunal’s reasons, the Commissioner articulated a definition in
GSTR 2003/10: Goods and Services Tax: What is “precious metal”
for the purposes of GST?
That document stated at [29]:
... for gold, silver or platinum
to be in an investment form for the purposes of the GST Act, it must be in a
is capable of being traded on the
international bullion market, that is, it must be a bar, wafer or coin;
bears a mark or characteristic accepted as identifying and guaranteeing its
fineness and quality; and
is usually traded at a price that is determined by reference to the spot
price of the metal it contains.
It was common ground before the Tribunal that the above view of what constitutes
“investment form” was generally accepted;
the parties also agreed
that, absent a recognised mark and indication of fineness, a gold bar will not
be “precious metal”
irrespective of its degree of metallic purity:
see the Tribunal’s reasons, [31].
40 is headed “Input taxed supplies”. Subdivision 40-D is headed
“Precious metals” and comprises only
one section, s 40-100. That
section provides:
40-100 Precious
A supply of *precious metal is
input taxed
Note: If the supply is the first supply of precious metal after refinement, the
supply is GST-free under section 38-385.
the extent that there is inconsistency between s 38-385 and s 40-100,
this is resolved by s 9-30(3), referred to above. The effect
provision is that, if a supply of precious metal falls in s 38-385, it will
be GST-free rather than input taxed.
165 of the GST Act contains anti-avoidance provisions. As explained in
s 165-1, the object of the Division is to deter schemes
to give entities
benefits by reducing GST, increasing refunds or altering the timing of payment
of GST or refunds.
165-5 deals with when Div 165 operates. It provides in part:
165-5 When does this Division operate?
General rule
(1) This Division operates if:
(a) an entity (the
) gets or got a *GST benefit from a
*scheme; and
(b) the GST benefit is not attributable to the making, by any entity, of a
choice, election, application or agreement that is expressly
provided for by the
*GST law, the *wine tax law or the *luxury car tax law; and
(c) taking account of the matters described in section 165-5, it is reasonable
to conclude that either:
(i) an entity that (whether alone or with others) entered into or carried out
the scheme, or part of the scheme, did so with the
sole or dominant purpose of
that entity or another entity getting a *GST benefit from the scheme; or
(ii) the principal effect of the scheme, or of part of the scheme, is that the
avoider gets the GST benefit from the scheme directly
or indirectly; and
(d) the scheme:
(i) is a scheme that has been or is entered into on or after 2 December
(ii) is a scheme that has been or is carried out or commenced on or after that
day (other than a scheme that was entered into before
expressions “GST benefit” and “scheme” are defined in
s 165-10 as follows:
165-10 When does an entity get a
GST benefit
from a scheme?
(1) An entity gets a
GST benefit
from a *scheme if:
(a) an amount that is payable by the entity under this Act apart from this
Division is, or could reasonably be expected to be, smaller
than it would be
apart from the scheme or a part of the scheme; or
(b) an amount that is payable to the entity under this Act apart from this
Division is, or could reasonably be expected to be, larger
than it would be
apart from the scheme or a part of the scheme; or
(c) all or part of an amount that is payable by the entity under this Act apart
from this Division is, or could reasonably be expected
to be, payable later than
it would have been apart from the scheme or a part of the scheme; or
(d) all or part of an amount that is payable to the entity under this Act apart
from this Division is, or could reasonably be expected
to be, payable earlier
than it would have been apart from the scheme or a part of the scheme.
(a) any arrangement, agreement, understanding, promise or undertaking:
(i) whether it is express or implied; and
(ii) whether or not it is, or is intended to be, enforceable by legal
proceedings; or
(b) any scheme, plan, proposal, action, course of action or course of conduct,
whether unilateral or otherwise.
GST benefit can arise even if no economic alternative
(3) An entity can get a *GST benefit from a *scheme even if the entity or
entities that entered into or carried out the scheme, or
a part of the scheme,
could not have engaged economically in any activities:
(a) of the kind to which this Act applies; and
(b) that would produce an effect equivalent (except in terms of this Act) to the
effect of the scheme or part of the scheme;
other than the activities involved in entering into or carrying out the scheme
or part of the scheme.
165-15 sets out matters to be considered in determining purpose or effect:
165-15 Matters to be considered in determining purpose or effect
(1) The following matters are to be taken into account under section 165-5 in
considering an entity’s purpose in entering into
or carrying out the
*scheme from which the avoider got a *GST benefit, and the effect of the scheme:
(a) the manner in which the scheme was entered into or carried out;
(b) the form and substance of the scheme, including:
(i) the legal rights and obligations involved in the scheme; and
(ii) the economic and commercial substance of the scheme;
(c) the purpose or object of this Act, the
Customs Act 1901
(so far as it
is relevant to this Act) and any relevant provision of this Act or that Act
(whether the purpose or object is stated
expressly or not);
(d) the timing of the scheme;
(e) the period over which the scheme was entered into and carried out;
(f) the effect that this Act would have in relation to the scheme apart from
this Division;
(g) any change in the avoider’s financial position that has resulted, or
may reasonably be expected to result, from the scheme;
(h) any change that has resulted, or may reasonably be expected to result, from
the scheme in the financial position of an entity
) that has or had a connection or dealing with the avoider,
whether the connection or dealing is or was of a family, business or other
(i) any other consequence for the avoider or a connected entity of the scheme
having been entered into or carried out;
(j) the nature of the connection between the avoider and a connected entity,
including the question whether the dealing is or was
at arm’s length;
(k) the circumstances surrounding the scheme;
(l) any other relevant circumstances.
(2) Subsection (1) applies in relation to consideration of an entity’s
purpose in entering into or carrying out a part of a
*scheme from which the
avoider gets or got a *GST benefit, and the effect of part of the scheme, as if
the part were itself the *scheme
from which the avoider gets or got the GST
165-40(a) (s 165-40(1)(a) from 1 July 2012) provides that, for the
purpose of negating a GST benefit, the Commissioner may
make a declaration
stating (relevantly) the amount that is (and has been at all times) the
avoider’s net amount for a specified
tax period that has ended.
165-40(2) (which commenced on 1 July 2012) requires the Commissioner to
take such action as he or she considers necessary
to give effect to a
declaration made under the
(emphasis in original)
similar effect, see
Commissioner of Taxation v
Complete Success
[2023] FCAFC 19
(2023) 116 ATR 9
at 14 to 17 ([25] to
[41]) (Moshinsky, Thawley and Hespe JJ).
C. BACKGROUND
background to the present appeal is set out below.
C.1 The taxpayer’s business dealings
the relevant period, the taxpayer was a “refiner of precious metals”
as defined by s 195-1 of the GST Act and was
engaged in a business which
included the following steps:
, the acquisition of refining materials. In this regard:
(a) the taxpayer acquired refining materials from various entities, including
four groups of entities described in the Second Tribunal
interchangeably as the
Division 165
Supplying Entities
Fraudulent Suppliers
. For convenience and
consistent with the approach taken by the Full Court in
Full Court ACN
the former expression will be adopted in these reasons for judgment;
(b) to a large extent, the refining materials that the Division 165 Supplying
Entities sold to the taxpayer had been acquired by
the Division 165 Supplying
Entities as gold satisfying the definition of “precious metal” in s
195-1 of the GST Act but
subsequently adulterated (via processes such as
melting, cutting or otherwise damaging the gold) by the Division 165 Supplying
so that the gold ceased to be “precious metal” (with a
commensurate decrease in its value) before it was sold to the
(c) the taxpayer paid to the suppliers of the refining materials (including the
Division 165 Supplying Entities) a price that included
a component for goods and
services tax (
). GST was payable because the gold was not
“precious material”. Despite receiving the GST component, the
Division 165
Supplying Entities failed to comply with their obligation to remit
that component to the Commissioner. The retention by the Division
165 Supplying
Entities of the GST component overcame the losses that those entities suffered
by dint of their adulteration of the
gold described in the previous
sub-paragraph;
(d) the taxpayer claimed input tax credits for the GST it had paid upon its
acquisition of refining materials;
, the refining of the refining materials that the taxpayer
had acquired, so as to produce “precious metal” as defined
195-1 of the GST Act in the form of gold bars of 99.99 per cent fineness that
were stamped with a hallmark; and
, the sale of such refined gold to entities each of which was
a “dealer in precious metal” as defined in s 195-1 of the
The majority of such sales were to a related party. Such sales did not attract
C.2 The notices of assessment and amended assessment, the
objection and the objection decision
8 April 2016, and following an audit, the Commissioner made declarations under s
165-40 of the GST Act and issued notices of assessment
and amended assessment to
the taxpayer for the relevant period, negating input tax credits that had been
claimed in an amount in
the order of $122 million. The Commissioner’s
primary position was that the relevant supplies of precious metals by the
to the dealers did not satisfy the requirements of s 38-385 of the GST
Act and as such were input taxed supplies, with the consequence
taxpayer was not entitled to claim the relevant input tax credits.
Commissioner’s alternative position was based upon the application of
Division 165 of the GST Act. The Commissioner contended
that the taxpayer was
not entitled to input tax credits totalling $72,953,611 because each of those
credits was a “GST benefit”
which the taxpayer had obtained from a
“scheme” which had: (1) been entered into or carried out by one or
more entities
for the dominant purpose of giving the taxpayer such benefits; or
(2) the principal effect of the taxpayer obtaining such benefits.
28 April 2016, the taxpayer lodged an objection against the notices of
assessment and amended assessment and, on 21 September 2016,
the Commissioner
decided to disallow that objection (
objection decision
). On 18 November
2016, the taxpayer applied to the Tribunal for review of the objection
C.3 The First Tribunal Decision
September 2018, the Tribunal (
First Tribunal
) heard the review
application. Before that Tribunal (and subsequently – see T[24]) the
Commissioner relied upon the following
schemes for the purposes of Division 165
of the GST Act:
(1) a “wider” scheme, being:
... the following transactions and course of action:
(a) the supply by [the taxpayer] to ABC NSW and Ainslie (the
gold of 99.99% fineness in investment form for an amount roughly equivalent to
the prevailing spot price for gold;
(b) the purchase by the
Intermediaries
from the Dealers and/or other
sources of gold of 99.99% fineness in investment form;
PARTICULARS
This step consisted of the
purchase of precious metal by:
(i) the IPJ Group entities from ABC NSW and/or other sources;
(ii) the Majid Group entities from Ceylon and/or other sources;
(iii) MAK from YPP, USH and/or other sources;
(iv) YPP from Ainslie and/or other sources;
(v) Australian Bullion Company (Aust) Pty Ltd (
) from ABC NSW
and/or other sources;
(vii) USH from
ABC(A) and/or other sources.
(c) the scratching, melting or altering of the gold referred to in paragraph (b)
above such that, while still of 99.99% fineness,
the gold was no longer in
investment form for the purposes of the definition of “precious
metal” in s 195-1 of the GST
PARTICULARS
This step consisted of the
scratching, melting or altering of precious metal by the IPJ Group entities, the
Majid Group entities (or
Mr Faraj), Gold Buyers (or Mr Faraj), MAK, YPP/ Mr
Bourke, USH/Mr Calabrese and/or ABC(A).
(d) the supply of the gold referred to in paragraph (c) by the Division 165
Supplying Entities to [the taxpayer] for an amount that
was less than the
prevailing spot price for gold, before the addition of GST; and
PARTICULARS
This step consisted of the sales
to [the taxpayer] of non-precious metal by the IPJ Group entities, the Majid
Group entities (by Mr
Faraj purportedly on their behalf), Gold Buyers (to the
extent they were made by Mr Faraj purportedly on their behalf) and MAK. In
relation to MAK, the gold it sold to [the taxpayer] was obtained by it from
YPP/Mr Bourke and USH/Mr Calabrese.
(e) the refining by [the taxpayer] of the gold referred to in paragraph (d) to
produce ‘precious metal’ as defined.
(2) a “narrower scheme” comprising the transactions and courses of
action referred to in paragraphs (b), (c) and (d)
20 December 2019, the First Tribunal affirmed the objection decision and
published its reasons for doing so as
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (In Liq) and
Commissioner of Taxation (Taxation)
[2019] AATA 5981
First Tribunal
). The First Tribunal accepted the Commissioner’s primary
position, with the result that the taxpayer was not entitled to input
credits in the order of $122 million. The First Tribunal went on to consider the
Commissioner’s alternative position and
also accepted that position, such
that had it been necessary to do so, the First Tribunal would have found that
the taxpayer was
disentitled, by dint of the operation of Division 165 of the
GST Act, to input tax credits to the extent of $72,953,611.
the course of its consideration of the Commissioner’s alternative position
under Division 165 of the GST Act, the First Tribunal
relevantly:
(1) relied upon two emails and a transcript of a compulsory examination in
making findings as to the knowledge of Mr Cochineas, the
managing director and principal witness, who was cross-examined at length;
(2) explained at [266] to [268]:
[taxpayer’s] position was that it is not reasonable to conclude any
participant in the alleged scheme (in either of its
formulations) entered into
or carried out the scheme, or part of the scheme, for the dominant purpose of
the [taxpayer] getting a
GST benefit. [The taxpayer] accepted, based on the
evidence produced, that certain rogue suppliers altered gold to make taxable
to [the taxpayer], collected GST-inclusive prices from [the taxpayer]
and then fraudulently retained that GST. However, [the taxpayer]
itself from that fraudulent conduct and argued its dominant purpose, having
regard to the listed matters, was not to secure
input tax credits but to acquire
scrap gold it needed to produce precious metal. It said it is irrational to
suggest the dominant
purpose of a taxpayer acquiring a taxable supply of goods
that are critical to its business is not to obtain the goods themselves
simply to obtain the input tax credits. In any event, [the taxpayer] argued the
availability of input tax credits to [the taxpayer]
was an expected and natural
incident of the payment of GST-inclusive prices.
[the taxpayer] submitted it was not the principal effect of the scheme that [the
taxpayer] received the GST benefit: it submitted
the principal effect was to
enable the rogue suppliers to sell scrap gold to third-party purchasers
including [the taxpayer] as a
taxable supply, thereby enabling those suppliers
to recover GST-inclusive prices and fail to remit that GST to the Commissioner.
[The taxpayer] says that is the step which cannot be explained other than by
reference to tax evasion on the part of the Division
165 Supplying Entities, and
the availability of input tax credits to [the taxpayer] was irrelevant to the
purpose and effect of any
scheme participant.
taxpayer’s] arguments have a superficial appeal, but the reality is that
the [taxpayer’s] entitlement to the input
tax credits was more important
to the operation of the scheme than the GST liabilities evaded by the Division
165 Supplying Entities
. The input tax credits paid by the Commonwealth to
[the taxpayer] funded the round-robin arrangements because, in simple terms, it
was only economically feasible for [the taxpayer] to pay those
GST-inclusive prices to the Division 165 Supplying Entities in the
knowledge that [the taxpayer] would receive the input tax credits. Without the
entitlement to the input tax credits, [the taxpayer]
would not have paid those
prices to the Division 165 Supplying Entities and, consequently, there
would have been no acquisition of
precious metal by the third-party suppliers
(including the Division 165 Supplying Entities) from the Dealers. There would
no defacing of that precious metal, no taxable supplies in altered
form to [the taxpayer], no processing of the metal by [the taxpayer],
sale of an equivalent amount of precious metal back into the market by [the
taxpayer] to the Dealers, and so on. In other
words, the round robin
arrangements would have fallen over if [the taxpayer] had not been able to claim
the input tax credits. It
was the GST benefit in the form of the larger input
tax credits payable by the Commonwealth to [the taxpayer], because of the
165 Supplying Entities making taxable supplies to [the taxpayer], that
underpinned the scheme.
(emphasis added)
C.4 The Full Court ACN Decision
January 2020, the taxpayer lodged an appeal to the Full Court of this Court
pursuant to s 44 of the AAT Act.
6 November 2020, the Full Court made orders upholding the appeal and remitting
the matter to the Tribunal. Relevantly, the Full
Full Court ACN
(1) the First Tribunal erred in its construction of s 38-385 of the GST Act and
thus in accepting the Commissioner’s primary
position at 461 [15(a)], 486
to 493 ([131] to [158]);
(2) the First Tribunal, when considering the operation of Division 165 of the
GST Act, failed to afford procedural fairness to the
taxpayer when it relied
upon the emails and transcript in making material findings as to the knowledge
of Mr Cochineas, in circumstances
where Mr Cochineas was not a party to the
emails or cross-examined on the emails or transcript and those documents were
not the subject
of submissions by the taxpayer or the Commissioner (at 461
[15(b)], 494 to 503 ([165] to [188]); and
(3) as a result, the matter ought be remitted for redetermination by the
Tribunal, differently constituted.
Full Court noted that its conclusion that there had been a failure by the First
Tribunal to afford procedural fairness to the
taxpayer was a sufficient basis
from which to set aside the First Tribunal’s conclusion that Division 165
applied and to remit
to the Tribunal the question of the operation of Division
165 for redetermination; and that it was strictly unnecessary to deal with
remainder of the notice of appeal (503 to 504 [189]). Nevertheless, the Full
Court decided to do so briefly, for the sake of
completeness.
the course of doing so, the Full Court addressed a question numbered 7, which
the Full Court described at 510 [213] as being in
summary whether any entity had
entered into the scheme, or part of the scheme, for the dominant purpose of the
taxpayer getting a
GST benefit (i.e. the input tax credits). One of the grounds
relied upon by the taxpayer in support of question 7 was ground 25,
that the First Tribunal’s finding at paragraph 268 of its reasons
(reproduced at [14(2)] above) that “[the
taxpayer’s] entitlement to
the input tax credits was more important to the operation of the scheme than the
GST liabilities
evaded by the Division 165 Supplying Entities” was not
open to the First Tribunal.
512 ([219] to [220]), the Full Court expressed the view that, procedural
fairness considerations aside, the taxpayer had not established
that the First
Tribunal had adopted a wrong approach, or made an error of law, in its
consideration of dominant purpose and principal
effect for the purposes of s
165-5 of the GST Act; and that to a large extent, the taxpayer’s
submissions took issue with the
merits of the First Tribunal’s conclusions
as to dominant purpose and principal effect rather than identifying a wrong
or an error of law. The Full Court then addressed at 512 [221] the
taxpayer’s submissions concerning question 7 and ground
Insofar as [the taxpayer] contends that there was “no evidence” for
the Tribunal’s finding (at [268]) that [the
taxpayer’s] entitlement
to the input tax credits was “more important to the operation of the
scheme than the GST liabilities
evaded by the Division 165 Supplying
Entities”, this finding needs to be read in the context of the whole of
[268] (see [123]
above). As the Tribunal stated in that paragraph, without the
entitlement to the input tax credits, [the taxpayer] would not have
prices that it did to the Division 165 Supplying Entities and, consequently,
there would have been no acquisition of precious
metal by the Division 165
Supplying Entities from the Dealers. Further, the Tribunal stated, there would
have been no defacing of
that precious metal, no taxable supplies in altered
form to [the taxpayer], no processing of the metal by [the taxpayer], and no
sale of an equivalent amount of precious metal back into the market by [the
taxpayer] to the Dealers.
Having regard to these matters, it was reasonably
open to the Tribunal to make the finding.
(emphasis added)
513 to 514 ([224] to [226]), the Full Court stated:
as [the taxpayer] submits that the dominant purpose of the scheme was for the
Division 165 Supplying Entities to obtain the
GST (which they would fail to
remit to the Commissioner), rather than for [the taxpayer] to obtain input tax
credits, this submission
seems to go to the merits of the Tribunal’s
conclusion.
In any event, we consider that it was open to the Tribunal to
view the obtaining (by [the taxpayer]) of the input tax credits and
obtaining (by the supplying entities) of the GST as comprising
, in circumstances where the two were inextricably linked: cf
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Ludekens
(2013) 214 FCR 149
[the taxpayer’s] submission has echoes of the position rejected by the
High Court in
. In that case, as Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey,
Gaudron, Gummow and Kirby JJ noted at 414, the majority of the Full Federal
that Pt IVA of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
(on which Div 165 of the GST Act is modelled, albeit there are some
differences) did not apply to the scheme. The majority in
the Full Federal Court
decided that the “dominant purpose” of the taxpayers was to obtain
the maximum return on the money
invested after the payment of all applicable
costs, including tax, and not to obtain a “tax benefit”. After
setting out
passages from the judgment of Cooper J (who formed part of the
majority in the Full Federal Court), including a passage referring
“rational commercial decision”, the plurality in the High Court
stated (at 415):
The references in this passage
on the one hand to a “rational commercial decision” and on the other
to the obtaining of
a tax benefit as “the dominant purpose of the
taxpayers in making the investment” suggest the acceptance of a false
... A person may enter into or carry out a scheme, within the meaning
of Pt IVA, for the dominant purpose of enabling the relevant
taxpayer to
obtain a tax benefit where that dominant purpose is consistent with the pursuit
of commercial gain in the course of carrying
on a business.
the facts are very different, this passage nevertheless tends to indicate the
flaw in [the taxpayer’s] submission.
The fact that the
Division 165 Supplying Entities were pursuing their own (dishonest) gain is
not necessarily inconsistent with a
conclusion that it would be reasonable to
conclude that an entity that entered into or carried out the scheme did so with
the dominant
purpose of [the taxpayer] obtaining the input tax
(bold emphasis added)
C.5 The Second Tribunal hearing
accordance with the orders made by the Full Court, the matter was remitted and
heard by the Tribunal as differently constituted
Second Tribunal
hearing occurred in late May and early June 2022. Before the Second Tribunal,
the taxpayer primarily contended that taking
into account the matters set out in
s 165-15 of the GST Act (
s 165-15 factors
(1) no person entered into or carried out a scheme for the sole or dominant
purpose of giving a GST benefit in the form of the input
tax credits to the
taxpayer; and
(2) the principal effect of any scheme was not to give such a GST benefit to the
hearing before the Second Tribunal proceeded on the basis of the evidence that
was before the First Tribunal without further evidence
being adduced or further
cross-examination.
C.6 The Full Court decision in Complete Success
to the hearing before the Second Tribunal and before delivery of the Second
Tribunal Decision, the Full Court of this Court
delivered judgment in
Complete Success Solutions
. That judgment
also involved an appeal from a decision of the Tribunal concerning the operation
of Division 165 of the GST Act upon
a scheme with some similar features. The
Tribunal’s reasons for that decision were published as
and Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2021] AATA 3399
(2021) 113 ATR 966.
The company in the position of the present taxpayer and
which had claimed input tax credits was referred to as “CSS”;
the company in the position of the Division 165 Supplying Entities and which
received but failed to remit GST was referred to
Tribunal in
had relevantly decided that it could not reasonably be
concluded that any entity had a dominant purpose of securing CSS’s
entitlement
to input tax credits, or that the principal effect of the scheme was
the obtaining of such credits.
the Full Court in
Complete Success Solutions
described at [61(5)] and
[62], the Tribunal in
(1) as part of its consideration of dominant purpose:
...rejected the Commissioner’s submission that the input tax credits
were “the engine that drove the scheme”, namely,
that “it was
only because [CSS] was able to obtain [input tax credits] that [CSS] was able to
pay a GST-inclusive price to
PMMS which in turn funded the earlier transactions
in the chain”: at T [165]. In this regard, the Tribunal distinguished what
the Tribunal had stated in
154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in liq) and
Commissioner of Taxation
[2019] AATA 5981
, recorded in
520 199 Pty Ltd (in liq) v Commissioner of Taxation
[2020] FCAFC 190
282 FCR 455
at 484–5 [123] (Perram, Moshinsky and Thawley JJ)
(emphasis in original)
(2) expressed the following conclusion as to the principal effect of the scheme:
Similarly, the principal effect of the scheme is, in my view, the non-payment
of GST and not [CSS] obtaining the [input tax credits].
It is true that [CSS]
obtaining [input tax credits] is an effect of the scheme and I accept it is not
an insignificant effect. But
measured against the non-payment of GST by Manila
Exchange, and seen [in] its proper context as effectively a GST-neutral return
of GST embedded in the price of [CSS]’s business acquisitions, I am unable
to accept that [CSS]’s [input tax credit]
entitlement is the principal
effect of the scheme. I am satisfied that it was not.
the outset of its consideration of the Commissioner’s notice of appeal,
the Full Court in
Complete Success Solutions
Commissioner’s grounds of appeal largely take issue with the merits of the
Tribunal’s conclusions as to dominant purpose
and principal effect rather
than identifying a wrong approach or an error of law.
Commissioner of Taxation v Zoffanies Pty Ltd
[2003] FCAFC 236
(see also Hely J at [92]–[94]), Hill J said in
relation to Part IVA of the
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
of the Act clearly
requires a conclusion to be drawn by reference to the matters set out in s
177D(b). Those matters are factual
and the conclusion required to be drawn is
itself a conclusion of fact.
task required by s 165-5(1)(c) is similar. The task requires the drawing of
conclusions of fact and an ultimate conclusion about
dominant purpose and
principal effect, also being a conclusion of
(emphasis added; the reference to Hely J should be to Gyles J)
passage is addressed again at [56] to [61] below when considering whether the
present appeal raises a question of law.
Full Court in
Complete Success Solutions
allowed the appeal on the basis
that the Tribunal had failed to complete its statutory task because it failed
to: (1) separately
examine each entity’s purpose; and (2) examine the
principal effect of the various parts of the scheme (at [80]). At [82] to
the Full Court made the following observations which are of some relevance to
the present appeal:
Manila Exchange
is no question that Manila Exchange’s involvement in the scheme was an
important aspect of the scheme as a whole. It participated
in the scheme to
benefit from receiving and not remitting GST. There is little doubt, therefore,
that it was a central purpose of
Manila Exchange to create a taxable supply by
adulterating the bullion that it had purchased. That does not mean that other
had that purpose or that the principal effect of various parts of the
scheme could be put to one side.
the scheme to enable Manila Exchange to commit its fraud, Manila Exchange needed
to charge a GST-inclusive price. By adulterating
the gold bullion it had
acquired, Manila Exchange was able to on-sell what had become scrap gold in
taxable supplies. Pursuant to
s 9‑75 of the GST Act, the value of a
taxable supply is 10/11
of the consideration received. The creation
of a taxable supply had two interrelated consequences:
(1) Manila Exchange became entitled to receive a price higher than the value of
the goods it supplied. This was critical to Manila
Exchange’s ability to
profit from adulterating gold bullion because its action in adulterating the
gold bullion destroyed value.
Unlike normal business operations which add value
in a supply chain, Manila Exchange’s operations involved lowering the
of goods it acquired. Manila Exchange was able to profit from
value-lowering operations only because of its fraud on the Commissioner,
constituted by charging but not remitting GST.
(2) GST became embedded in the purchase price paid by subsequent purchasers of
the scrap gold. If later purchasers acquired the scrap
gold in the course of an
enterprise involving the making of taxable supplies or GST‐free supplies,
those purchasers became
entitled to an input tax credit, subject to Div 165. For
the scheme as a whole to work as it did, the last supply in the chain (that
by CSS) needed to be a GST‑free supply in order to provide CSS with a GST
refund. This is particularly important to an
analysis of that part of the scheme
in which PMMS was most directly involved.
84 One of the questions of law raised by the Commissioner on appeal was:
Whether under s 165-5(1)(c) of
the GST Act, there is a necessary dichotomy between the purpose and/or effect of
an entity getting
a GST benefit from the scheme, and the purpose and/or effect
of another entity avoiding the payment of GST as a part of the scheme?
would be an error to assume that, because Manila Exchange wanted to obtain (and
not remit) the GST embedded in its supplies of
scrap gold, it was not possible
that its purpose, ascertained in accordance with Div 165, was to ensure that CSS
could obtain input
tax credits on a GST‑free sale.
As the Full Court
(Perram, Moshinsky and Thawley JJ) stated in
at 514 [226], the
purpose of obtaining (and not remitting) GST “is not necessarily
inconsistent with” a conclusion that
the dominant purpose was obtaining
the relevant input tax credits. Indeed, it would be open to conclude that the
purpose of obtaining
(and not remitting) GST and the purpose of obtaining input
tax credits for CSS were one purpose if the facts showed them to be inextricably
at 513 [224]. Such a conclusion might be open, for
example, if it were concluded that it was important to Manila Exchange that the
scheme end with a GST-free supply by an entity which would be refunded input tax
credits, so that the scheme as a whole would work
by being sufficiently funded.
It is not clear that the Tribunal reached its factual conclusion about Manila
Exchange’s dominant
purpose by excluding the possibilities just
The Tribunal’s distinguishing of ACN FC
Tribunal distinguished the decision in
, concluding that the
obtaining of input tax credits was not the “engine which drove the
scheme” and that there was no
imperative for any entity in the chain to
secure CSS’s input tax credit entitlements: at T [165], [166].
applicant in ACN, like CSS here, had argued that the principal effect of the
scheme was not that the applicant receive the GST
benefit, but that the
“rogue suppliers” create taxable supplies so that they could charge
GST which would not be remitted.
The Full Court in
[123] referred to what the Tribunal had said at first instance in ACN at [267]
Tribunal in the present case set out the Tribunal’s decision in
at [268] but distinguished the case before it on the basis that
concerned a “surging” turnover of sales (see
at [97]) arising out of circular and repeated transactions: at
T[155] and [157]. The Tribunal was correct to observe that the facts
were different in various respects to those in the present case. At
the core, however, the same essential elements existed:
(a) the deliberate adulteration of gold bullion by a fraudulent party in order
to supply scrap gold in transactions which attracted
(b) the non-remittal of the GST;
(c) GST being embedded in subsequent supplies of the scrap gold; and
(d) a GST-free transaction at the end of the series of transactions by an entity
whose input tax credits for the acquisition of the
scrap gold would be refunded
out of consolidated revenue.
different facts in
are not such as would distinguish the comments
made by the Tribunal in
. In the present case, similarly to the
position in
it was only economically feasible for CSS to
pay GST inclusive prices for the scrap gold it acquired if it were to receive a
of the input tax credits from the Commissioner; and
without an entitlement to a refund of input tax credits, CSS could not have
paid the prices it did for the supply of scrap gold and
this might call into
question whether any of the preceding sales could or would have
The significance of the input tax credits
Commissioner contended that CSS’s “profit was dependent upon the
input tax credit entitlements that were created by
the scheme and the resultant
GST refund to [CSS]” and that “[w]ithout the refund there was no
profit to [CSS]”.
the Full Court explained in
at 508 [206], input tax credits merely
reflect GST that has been paid to a supplier and the claiming of the input tax
credits is therefore
strictly neutral from a profit perspective. The profit that
the Commissioner identified relied upon a false comparison, namely the
difference between a GST‐free sale price and a GST inclusive purchase
price. Under the GST scheme, the profit of a person carrying
on an enterprise
making GST‐free or taxable supplies is properly determined by examining
the GST exclusive cost of inputs.
Otherwise, generally, it might be said that
the profit of any person carrying on an enterprise that, on a GST exclusive
basis, generates
a margin of less than 10% is attributable to the input tax
credits claimed. Nevertheless, as the Full Court explained in
That is not to say that ACN
154’s turnover, and its actual profit, did not increase as a result of the
business model that it
adopted and the transactions that it entered into; it is
to say that there was no evidence for the proposition that it made its profit
from the input tax credits that it claimed.
importance of the input tax credits to CSS was as follows. Given its low margin
business, and because CSS was selling on a GST‐free
basis, it could not
obtain a purchase price from its export customer which covered its GST inclusive
purchase costs. Its sale price
was insufficient to cover its GST inclusive
purchase costs such that its business model only worked if it received a cash
from the Commissioner. CSS needed a cash refund from the Commissioner to
cover the purchase price of the scrap gold.
Notwithstanding
the foregoing, it is important to emphasise that the mere fact that a taxpayer
involved in making GST‐free supplies
requires a refund of GST it pays on
its inputs in order to remain viable does not of itself answer the question
posited by s 165-5
of the GST Act. It is part of the legislative scheme that
those involved in making GST‐free export sales are not to be disadvantaged
in competing in the export market by reason of the fact that Australia imposes
GST. The conclusion as to dominant purpose or principal
effect must be reached
after taking into account each of the matters described in s
(bold emphasis added)
taxpayer and the Commissioner each took the opportunity afforded to them by the
Second Tribunal to provide further written submissions
concerning the
application of
Complete Success Solutions
D. THE SECOND TRIBUNAL DECISION
30 November 2023, the Second Tribunal set aside the objection decision and
allowed the taxpayer’s objections. The Second
Tribunal Decision, which
sets out the Second Tribunal’s reasons for making such orders, is detailed
and lengthy occupying 147
pages, including 108 pages of primary reasoning and
three appendices. For present purposes, the following summary of the salient
aspects of the Second Tribunal Decision suffices, noting that the impugned
aspects of the Second Tribunal Decision are described
in greater detail in Part
E below when the questions and grounds of appeal set out in the supplementary
notice of appeal are addressed.
Second Tribunal identified that the primary matter for determination was whether
Division 165 applied (T[1], [18], [23], [27]
and [146]). At T[23], the Second
Tribunal recorded that:
The Tribunal’s task is to determine whether [the taxpayer] has discharged
the burden of proving that, taking into account the
matters described in s
165-15, it is not reasonable to conclude that:
(a) an entity that entered into or carried out a scheme or part of the scheme
did so with the sole or dominant purpose of [the taxpayer]
getting a GST benefit
- the Contested ITCs - from the scheme; or
(b) the principal effect of the scheme, or of part of the scheme, was that [the
taxpayer] got a GST benefit, being the Contested
ITCs, from the scheme directly
or indirectly.
Second Tribunal then identified at T[24] the schemes asserted by the
Commissioner, as set out at [12] above.
summarising the competing positions of the taxpayer and the Commissioner at
T[28] to [47], the Second Tribunal turned to “Evidence
and Findings of
Fact”. At T[48], the Second Tribunal recorded that the parties had
provided a “Statement of Facts that
are Agreed” (which was
reproduced as Appendix 2 to the Second Tribunal Decision). The Second Tribunal
indicated that it was
satisfied that the evidence supported those facts as
agreed, and treated those facts as found.
Second Tribunal expressed the view that the agreed facts did not provide a
sufficient basis from which to understand the setting
in which the issues to be
determined arose. It then set out in considerable detail what it described at
T[50] as a more expansive
exposition of the facts needed to determine the issues
requiring determination. Those facts included, at T[64], the adoption of some,
but not all, of the facts as found by the First Tribunal.
dealing with some forensic accounting evidence (T[65] to [93]), the Second
Tribunal made a series of observations concerning
whether, and if so what,
findings should be made as to the knowledge of the taxpayer concerning the
arrangements constituting the
schemes (T[94] to [96]).
Second Tribunal next considered other factual matters (T[110] to [139]), before
addressing “[t]he legislative scheme in
which Division 165 sits”.
The Second Tribunal noted that the general legislative scheme within the GST Act
is varied by Division
165 of that Act where it applies (T[142]), and provided
the following overview of Division 165:
is readily apparent that the scheme of the GST anti-avoidance provisions is very
similar to the scheme of the anti-avoidance provisions
in Part IVA of the 1936
Assessment Act. Neither party disputes that the principles from the Part IVA
authorities inform the construction
of Division 165.
165, in particular s 165-40, allows the Commissioner to make a declaration
negating the benefits obtained from a scheme where
the Division operates. For
Division 165 to operate, it is necessary that there be a scheme, that there be a
GST benefit from the
scheme and that either the sole or dominant purpose of a
person who entered into or carried out the scheme, or part of it, was to
obtain the GST benefit or the principal effect of the scheme, or part of it, was
that the avoider got or obtained the GST
Division operates where each of the four matters specified in s 165-5(1) are
satisfied. They are:
(a) an entity (the
) gets or got a
GST benefit
scheme; and
(b) the GST benefit is not attributable to the making, by any entity, of a
choice, election, application or agreement that is expressly
provided for by the
GST law, the
wine tax law or the
tax law; and
(c) taking account of the matters described in section 165-15, it is reasonable
to conclude that either:
(i) an entity that (whether alone or with others) entered into or carried out
the scheme, or part of the scheme, did so with the
sole or dominant purpose of
that entity or another entity getting a
GST benefit from the scheme;
(ii) the principal effect of the scheme, or of part of the scheme, is that the
avoider gets the GST benefit from the scheme directly
or indirectly; and
(d) the scheme:
(i) is a scheme that has been or is entered into on or after 2 December 1998;
(ii) is a scheme that has been or is carried out or commenced on or after that
day (other than a scheme that was entered into before
(Emphasis as in original)
present task, having regard to these matters, is to answer the question posed by
s 165-5(1)(c). The parties have largely conducted
the dispute on the footing
that the battle ground lies in whether the requisite dominant purpose or
principal effect ought to be
found. That said, it is still necessary to identify
the relevant scheme and GST benefit because without them any test of purpose
effect cannot be undertaken in the required way.
Second Tribunal then returned to the schemes described at T[24] and set out at
[12] above. It noted at T[147] to [148] that the
taxpayer did not contend that
the schemes propounded by the Commissioner were not schemes against which the
purpose and effect tests
could be considered.
making some observations concerning the input tax credits and noting that there
was no apparent challenge from the taxpayer
to the proposition that the input
tax credits were each a “GST benefit” (T[149] to [152]) the Second
Tribunal turned
to “the purpose or effect of the scheme”. At T[153]
and [154], the Second Tribunal identified that:
are two limbs to the test, one of which, at least, must be satisfied before
Division 165 can apply; the sole or dominant purpose
limb (s 165-5(1)(c)(i)) and
the principal effect limb (s 165-5(1)(c)(ii)).
matters to be taken into account in determining purpose or effect are set out in
s 165-15(1) of the GST Act in the following terms...
Second Tribunal then noted (at T[155]) that the “Part IVA
authorities”, and more recently the “Division 165
authorities”, inform the “correct purpose and effect
analysis”. The Second Tribunal addressed Division 165 of the
GST Act and
those authorities in some detail at T[156] to [163] and noted, of particular
relevance, that:
(1) the inquiry as to purpose required consideration of the objective purposes
of each person that entered into or carried out the
scheme or part of the scheme
(2) following the decisions of the Full Court of this Court in
Complete Success Solutions
, a matter for consideration was
whether the Division 165 Supplying Entities’ purposes of: (a) obtaining
and not remitting GST
non-remittance of GST purpose
); and (b) ensuring,
by selling refining materials to the taxpayer, that the taxpayer was in a
position to obtain input tax credits
input tax credits purpose
(together, the
two purposes
), should be found to be a single composite
purpose (T[158] to [161]);
(3) in an appropriate case the two purposes might be regarded as a composite
purpose. However, this did not exclude the possibility
of the non-remittance of
GST purpose being the dominant purpose (T[161]); and
(4) it considered that the Full Court in
Complete Success Solutions
[85] contemplated the possibility of finding of such a single composite purpose,
but did not mandate that such a finding be made
Second Tribunal next considered both the purpose and effect limbs of s
165-5(1)(c) of the GST Act by addressing each of the s
165-15 factors (T[164] to
[206]). The Second Tribunal then made a series of further observations under the
heading “Purpose
or effect-further observations” in which it
considered whether the two purposes of the Division 165 Supplying Entities
be considered as a single composite purpose, and reasoned that they
should not (T[207] to [211]).
T[215] to [219], the Second Tribunal returned to the question whether the
taxpayer knew of (or turned a blind eye to) the activities
of the Division 165
Supplying Entities. In doing so, the Second Tribunal expressed the following
(1) it was reasonable to conclude that the non-remittance of GST purpose was the
Division 165 Supplying Entities’ dominant
purpose (T[218]);
(2) it was not reasonable to conclude that the dominant purpose of any entity
was the input tax credits purpose (T[218]);
(3) that conclusion would not change even if the taxpayer was an informed
participant in co-ordinated arrangements because even if
there was informed
participation by the taxpayer, the requisite conclusion would still be that the
dominant purpose of the Division
165 Supplying Entities was the non-remittance
of GST purpose and the dominant purpose of the taxpayer remained securing its
profit (T[219]); and
(4) informed participation by the taxpayer could not change the principal effect
of either scheme or a part thereof (T[219]).
Second Tribunal expressed its ultimate conclusions as follows:
the reasons indicated in the foregoing consideration of the s 165-15 factors, it
would not be reasonable to conclude any entity
entered into either scheme or a
part of either scheme identified by the Commissioner with the sole or dominant
purpose of, or that
the principal effect of either scheme or any part of either
scheme was, [the taxpayer] obtaining the Contested ITCs.
follows that the power to make the declarations under s 165-40 negating the GST
benefit being the Contested ITCs is not enlivened
and the assessments of net
amount are excessive.
objection decision relating to the assessments of net amount, the declarations
and the assessments of administrative penalty must
therefore be set aside and a
decision substituted allowing the objections in full.
summary, the Second Tribunal was
satisfied that it would be
reasonable to conclude that:
(1) any entity entered into or carried out either scheme (or part thereof) with
the sole or dominant purpose of the taxpayer obtaining
the income tax credits,
(a) the Division 165 Supplying Entities had the non-remittance of GST purpose,
which was their dominant purpose;
(b) the taxpayer had a purpose of securing a profit from refining, which was its
dominant purpose; or
(2) the principal effect of either scheme (or part thereof) was that the
taxpayer became entitled to receive the input tax credits,
because the principal
effect of the schemes was the transformation and change of ownership of the
E. THE APPEAL
E.1 Introduction
the outset of the hearing of the present appeal, senior counsel for the
Commissioner sought, and was granted, leave to file a supplementary
appeal, pursuant to which the Commissioner abandoned the questions numbered 7 to
8, and 10 to 11 and the grounds of appeal
numbered 4, 7, 9 to 12 and 15 to 16 in
the Commissioner’s original notice of appeal.
extant questions and grounds of appeal challenge the following four aspects of
the Second Tribunal Decision:
(1) the Second Tribunal’s conclusion, for the purposes of s 165-5(1)(c)(i)
of the GST Act, that it would not be reasonable
to conclude that any entity
entered into or carried out either scheme or part of either scheme with the sole
or dominant purpose
of the taxpayer receiving the income tax credits (questions
1 to 4; grounds 1 to 3 and 5);
(2) the Second Tribunal’s conclusion, for the purposes of s
165-5(1)(c)(ii) of the GST Act, that it would not be reasonable
to conclude that
the principal effect of either scheme or part of either scheme was that the
taxpayer became entitled to receive
the input tax credits (question 5 and ground
(3) the Second Tribunal’s treatment of s 165-15(1)(c) which requires that
account be taken, when considering questions of purpose
and effect under s
165-5(1)(c) of the GST Act, of the purpose and object of that Act (question 6
and ground 8); and
(4) whether the Second Tribunal’s finding that it was not reasonable to
conclude that the taxpayer had the requisite purpose
under s 165-5(1)(c)(i) of
the GST Act was available in circumstances where the taxpayer did not establish
that it was not an informed
participant in the arrangements constituting the
schemes (question 9; grounds 13 and 14).
central issue on the appeal is the extent to which the Commissioner’s
supplementary notice of appeal raises any questions
of law (as the Commissioner
contended) or merely takes issue with the merits of the Second Tribunal’s
conclusions as to purpose
and effect (as the taxpayer contended). Thus, before
considering the questions described in that notice, it is appropriate to address
some principles relevant to the identification of questions of law.
E.2 Identification of questions of law
appeal, under s 44 of the AAT Act, is an application in the original
Tribunal’s decision:
Wills v Chief Executive Officer of the Australian
Skills Quality Authority
[2022] FCAFC 10
(2022) 289 FCR 175
(Perry J; Griffiths and Logan JJ agreeing);
Equality Australia
Ltd v Commissioner of the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission
[2024] FCAFC 115
(2024) 305 FCR 189
(Wheelahan, Hespe and
Kennett JJ);
Manikantan v Secretary, Department of Employment and Workplace
[2024] FCAFC 116
(Collier, Raper and Shariff JJ).
44 of the AAT Act provided that a party to a proceeding before the Tribunal may
appeal to this Court on a “question
of law” from the
Tribunal’s decision in that proceeding. This Court’s jurisdiction
depends upon the existence of
a question or questions of law and the ambit of
the appeal is limited to the determination of such a question or questions:
Brown v The Repatriation Commission
[1985] FCA 236
; (1985) 7 FCR 302 at
304 (Bowen CJ, Fisher and Lockhart JJ);
Commissioner of Taxation
[2015] FCAFC 92
(2015) 233 FCR 315
at 348 to 349
[85] (Allsop CJ, Kenny, Besanko, Robertson and Mortimer JJ).
, the Full Court explained at 384 [194]:
We restate that the subject matter of an appeal under s 44 is a question or
questions of law. We also restate that the appeal is
not by way of rehearing; it
is the exercise of original jurisdiction. Neither is it sufficient that the
appeal merely involves a
question of law. The correct approach, in our opinion,
is to ask directly the question whether the appeal is on a question of law,
without being diverted by whether or not the appeal raises a mixed question of
fact and law. As the High Court said in
, the purpose of limiting an
appeal to a question of law is to ensure that the merits of the case are dealt
with not by the Federal
Court but by the Tribunal. This distribution of function
is critical to the correct operation of the administrative review process.
at 430 where Gibbs CJ, Wilson and Dawson JJ said that
on an appeal under s 44 the appellate body should not usurp the fact-finding
function of the Tribunal. But such fact finding is an entirely different
exercise from the evaluation of the fact-finding process
of the Tribunal (as
fact-finder) to decide upon its legality.
to the determination of this appeal are the following well-established
propositions concerning the identification of questions
is that although there is no error of law in making a wrong finding
of fact, a finding of fact can be erroneous in law if it is reached
through the
application of a wrong legal test:
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Trail
Bros Steel & Plastics Pty Ltd
[2010] FCAFC 94
(2010) 186 FCR 410
(Dowsett and Gordon JJ; Edmonds J agreeing);
Corporation of Australia Pty Ltd v Collector of Customs
[1995] FCA 707
(1995) 59 FCR 6
at 12 to 13 (Davies and Beazley JJ; Hill J agreeing) ;
at 360 to 361 [126];
Comptroller-General of Customs v
Pharm-A-Care
Laboratories Pty Ltd
[2020] HCA 2
(2020) 270 CLR 494
(Kiefel CJ, Bell, Gageler, Keane and Gordon JJ).
is that the question whether material facts, as found, satisfy a
particular statutory provision is
a question of law. In
Hayes v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1956] HCA 21
(1956) 96 CLR 47
Fullagar J explained at 51:
There are decisions in taxation cases, including decisions of the House of
Lords, which, to my mind, create serious difficulty in
relation to the
distinction, which often has to be drawn, between “ questions of fact
“ and “ questions of law
“. For present purposes, however, I
think it sufficient to refer to what was said by Lord Parker of Waddington in
Farmer v. Cotton’s Trustees
, in a passage quoted by
Commissioner of Taxation v. Miller
. His Lordship said :-
“The views from time to time expressed in this House have been far from
unanimous, but in my humble judgment
where all the material facts are fully
found, and the only question is whether the facts are such as to bring the case
provisions properly construed of some statutory enactment, the
question is one of law only”. With the greatest respect, this
seems to me
to be the only reasonable view. The distinction between the two classes of
question is, I think, greatly simplified,
if we bear in mind the distinction, so
clearly drawn by
, between the
factum probandum
ultimate fact in issue) and
facta probantia
(the facts adduced to prove
or disprove that ultimate fact). The “facts” referred to by Lord
in the passage quoted are the
facta probantia
. Where the
factum probandum
involves a term used in a statute, the question whether
facta probantia
establish that
factum probandum
generally – so far as I can see, always – be a question of law.
(citations omitted)
proposition operates as a qualification to the second. If the
statutory provision uses words according to their ordinary meaning,
question whether the material facts as found satisfy the statutory provision is
a question of fact. In
v The Council of the City of
[1980] HCA 16
(1980) 144 CLR 1
at 7 to 8, Mason J (with whom Gibbs
and Stephen JJ, Murphy J and Aickin J agreed) explained:
Many authorities can be found to sustain the proposition that the question
whether facts fully found fall within the provisions of
a statutory enactment
properly construed is a question of law. One example is the judgment of Fullagar
Hayes v. Federal Commissioner of Taxation
However, special considerations apply when we are confronted with a statute
which on examination is found to use words according
to their common
understanding and the question is whether the facts as found fall within these
Brutus v. Cozens
was just such a case. The only question raised
was whether the appellant’s behaviour was “insulting”. As it
not unreasonable to hold that his behaviour was insulting, the question was
one of fact.
(citations omitted)
approach taken in
has been applied subsequently: see, e.g.,
Collector of Customs v
Enterprises Pty Ltd
(1993) 43 FCR 280
at 287 to 288 (Neaves, French and Cooper JJ);
Pharm-A-Care
at 513 [41];
Equality Australia
at 194 [20] and 195
([25] to [26]); and was confirmed by the High Court of Australia in
v Lake Macquarie City Council
[2001] HCA 12
(2001) 202 CLR 439
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Callinan JJ) as stating the law on this
topic in this country.
well-established proposition is that where the facts as found are
necessarily within
necessarily outside
the description of a
word or phrase used in a statute (itself a question of law), then the Court may
infer that any other conclusion
is the product of an error of law, but where the
facts as found are
capable of falling either within or outside
description used in the statute then the question as to which side of that line
they fall is a question of fact not law: see,
The Australian Gas Light
Company v The Valuer-General
(1940) SR (NSW) 126
at 138 (Jordan CJ);
N.S.W. Associated Blue-Metal Quarries Limited v Federal Commissioner of
[1956] HCA 80
(1956) 94 CLR 509
at 512 (Kitto J);
TNT Skypak International (Aust) Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
[1988] FCA 198
(1988) 19 ATR 1067
at 1073 (Gummow J);
Commissioner of Taxation v Cooper
[1991] FCA 190
(1991) 29 FCR 177
at 194 to 195 (Hill
at 12 to 13;
at 450 to 451 ([24] to [27]) per
Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Callinan JJ and 477 to 478([107] to [108]) per Hayne J;
at 360 to 362 ([126] to [128]), 376 to 378 ([172] to [174])
and 384 to 385 ([195] to [201]).
are two judgments of the Full Court of this Court of particular relevance to the
identification of questions of law for the
purposes of s 44 of the AAT Act, in
the context of Division 165 of the GST Act.
Commissioner of Taxation v
[2003] FCAFC 236
(2003) 132 FCR 523
involved an appeal from a
decision of the Tribunal as to the applicability of the provisions of Pt IVA of
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
, is an analogue of s 165-5 of the GST Act (when read with
s 165-15). Section 177D requires consideration of the matters set out in
177D(b) of the ITAA 1936 and of whether having regard to those matters “it
would be concluded that the person, or one of
the persons, who entered into or
carried out the scheme or any part of the scheme did so for the purpose of
enabling the relevant
taxpayer to obtain a tax benefit in connection with the
scheme or of enabling the relevant taxpayer and another taxpayer or other
taxpayers each to obtain a tax benefit in connection with the scheme ...”.
In that case, Hill J (with whom Hely and Gyles JJ
relevantly agreed) decided
that the Commissioner’s appeal ought be upheld. However, Hill J
rejected an invitation from senior
counsel for the Commissioner to affirm the
underlying assessment and instead decided that the matter should be remitted to
the Tribunal
for redetermination. In doing so, his Honour observed at 541 [66]
that the case before the Full Court was not one which permitted
only one outcome
and that Part IVA of the ITAA 1936 requires the relevant conclusion to be drawn
by reference to the matters set
out in s 177D(b) of that Act. His Honour then
observed that “[t]hose matters are factual and the conclusion required to
drawn is itself a conclusion of fact”.
second Full Court judgment of particular relevance is
Complete Success
. The salient passage from that judgment is reproduced at [26]
above. The Full Court cited at [66] the observations of Hill J in
and explained at [67] that the task required by s 165-5(1)(c)
is similar to that required under Part IVA of the ITAA 1936 and “requires
the drawing of conclusions of fact and an ultimate conclusion about dominant
purpose and principal effect, also being a conclusion
Commissioner in his written submissions in chief did not cavil with the views
expressed by the Full Courts in
Complete Success Solutions
, and deployed
paragraph [67] of
Complete Success Solutions
in those submissions. This
may explain the lack of notice of intention to challenge the correctness of
those decisions, as is required
by paragraph 6 of the Practice Note APP 1: Case
Management of Full Court and Appellate Matters. However, in his written
submissions
in reply and in his oral submissions the Commissioner submitted
that the statement of the Full Court in
Complete Success Solutions
the conclusion about dominant purpose in s 165-5(1)(c) is one of fact needs to
be qualified by the following statement of Gummow
Jackson v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1989] FCA 170
(1989) 20 ATR 611
Section 177F(1) vests power in the Commissioner to make certain determinations.
The power is conditional in that it may be exercised
only if certain
circumstances exist. These are:
(i) a taxpayer has obtained a "tax benefit" or would obtain such a benefit but
for s 177F, and
(ii) the tax benefit has been obtained or would be obtained by the taxpayer "in
connection with a scheme" to which Pt IVA applies.
The integers comprising conditions (i) and (ii) are defined in some detail in
those provisions of Pt IVA which precede s 177F.
Whether these conditions are
satisfied in any given case will be something to be ascertained by the
application of objective criteria,
comprising mixed law and fact.
illustration, counsel for the respondent pointed to the manner in which s 177D
is cast and to the expression "where ...
having regard to [eight enumerated
matters] it would be concluded" that there had been the necessary purpose. In
proceedings in this
court by way of "appeal" against a decision by the
Commissioner on an objection, it will be open to the taxpayer to establish that,
in truth, neither condition (i) nor condition (ii), as I have identified them,
relevantly applied to him, with the result that s
177F had no operation, and it
was not open to the Commissioner to make any determinations under s 177F(1).
The conditions are "self-operating" or "self-executing" in the sense that their
fulfilment in a particular case is not dependent
upon the Commissioner having a
particular satisfaction or holding a particular opinion. Nevertheless,
process of assessment requires the application of the Act (including the
conditions) to the facts
as known to and accepted by the Commissioner, and
as part of that process the Commissioner must adopt a view of the facts.
(Commissioner’s emphasis)
Commissioner also submitted that:
(1) the purpose referred to in s 165-5(1)(c) is not an actual purpose which can
be identified solely as a matter of fact and is instead
a “statutory
purpose attributed to a person” according to an objective standard of
reasonableness. Similarly, the term
“principal effect” takes its
meaning from the context in which it appears, being an anti-avoidance provision
with fiscal outcomes, and which overrides the ordinary operation of
the Act. Each of purpose and effect must be examined having
regard to certain
prescribed matters; and
(2) it follows that s 165-5(1)(c) lays down a legal test. The words “it
is reasonable to conclude” make it sufficient
if the statutory purpose or
principal effect can be found as a reasonable inference. A failure correctly to
decide whether the facts
found fall within the provision is an error of law.
statement of the Full Court in
Complete Success Solutions
conclusion about dominant purpose in s 165-5(1)(c) is one of fact – and
thus, the statement of the Full Court in
which was adopted in
Complete Success Solutions
– should not be qualified in the manner
suggested by the Commissioner. There is no suggestion that the words used in s
– and in particular “reasonable to conclude”,
“dominant” and “principal” – are used
in any sense
other than their normal meaning, from which it follows that the question whether
the material facts as found in considering
the s 165-15 factors satisfy s
165-5(1)(c) is one of fact: see [53] to [58] above. Respectfully, the approach
taken by the Full Courts
Complete Success Solutions
– both of which involved appeals under s 44 of the AAT Act – was
orthodox and correct (and not plainly wrong). In any
event, absent a direct
challenge to the correctness of the views expressed in
Complete Success Solutions
, those decisions should be followed.
that background, I turn now to the extant questions and the attendant grounds of
appeal set out in the supplementary notice
E.3 The first four questions – purpose
is convenient to adopt the course taken by the parties of addressing the first
four questions together. Those questions and the
first to third and fifth
grounds of appeal concern the Second Tribunal’s conclusions as to the
purposes of participants in
the schemes.
E.3.1 The Second Tribunal’s consideration of s
165-5(1)(c)(i) of the GST Act
the Second Tribunal noted (at T[23] and [27]), its task under s 165-5(1)(c)(i)
of the GST Act was to determine whether the taxpayer
had proven, taking into
account the s 165-15 factors, that it was not reasonable to conclude that any
entity that entered into or
carried out either scheme did so with the sole or
dominant purpose of the taxpayer obtaining the input tax credits.
Second Tribunal addressed this task as follows.
it noted the competing positions of the parties at T[28] to [47].
it noted at T[153] to [154] and [157(b)] that the s 165-15 factors are to be
taken into account in assessing whether any of the
persons who entered into the
schemes or any part thereof did so with the specified purpose.
at T[156] to [157] the Second Tribunal made the following
observations:
Division 165 and commercial transactions
sales of Refining Materials by the Division 165 Supplying Entities to the
applicant were transactions which changed ownership
of very valuable commodities
and at least in that sense can be regarded as commercial transactions. However,
even if a transaction
might be described as a commercial transaction, that fact,
assuming it can be made out, does not, of itself, put the transaction
reach of Division 165. Accordingly, even if the ultimate objective of the
transaction is not a tax objective or the transaction
producing the GST benefit
also delivers a desired non-tax outcome, Division 165 may still operate.
Adopting and adapting reasoning
from the High Court decision in
Division 165 might apply if there is enough in the way in which a
transaction is entered into or carried out, viewed through the
prism of the
matters listed in s 165-15(1), that it would reasonably be concluded that
the purpose of obtaining the GST tax benefit
is properly regarded as dominant.
Similar conclusions can be drawn if the way the transaction has been entered has
“no explanation
other than ... fiscal consequences ... contrived by the
particular form of the ... transaction”.
Whose purpose?
question posed by s 165-5 in conjunction with s 165-15 is whether, having regard
to all of the twelve factors to be considered,
it is reasonable to conclude that
any of the persons who entered into or carried out the scheme or any part of the
scheme did so
for the sole or dominant purpose of enabling the relevant taxpayer
to obtain the GST benefit. In this regard:
(a) the focus of the enquiry is on the purpose of the persons who entered into
or carried out the scheme. It is not an enquiry into
any purpose of the scheme;
(b) the actual subjective purpose of those persons is irrelevant. There are
twelve objective matters to be addressed listed in s165-15(1)
conclusions as to dominant purpose (and principal effect – addressed
later) are to be drawn and they do not require
or even permit enquiries
concerning subjective motives of taxpayers or their associates or advisors. The
question is whether, having
regard only to the twelve listed factors, “it
is reasonable to conclude” that one of the persons had the necessary sole
or dominant purpose. The tests are objective tests;
(c) the objective tests must be undertaken by reference to the time of entering
into or carrying out the scheme or the part of the
scheme; and
(d) the inquiry into purpose must be directed to each entity that entered into
or carried out the scheme or part of the scheme.
at T[158] to [163], the Second Tribunal addressed the question whether the two
purposes of the Division 165 Supplying Entities could
be regarded as a single
composite purpose:
A single composite purpose or non-dominant incidental purposes
facilitating a dominant purpose?
the Full Court
Complete Success Solutions
decisions, it is
necessary to address whether purposes of a supplier creating a taxable supply
and therefore creating (or creating
and not paying) a GST liability and for the
recipient of the supply of a corresponding ITC entitlement are effectively
sides of the one coin, so to speak, such that they could be regarded
as a single composite purpose. Both decisions involved Division
165 declarations
negating ITCs where taxable supplies of gold materials were made after defacing
gold bullion and the suppliers failed
to pay the GST on those supplies.
decision expressed the principle in this way:
Insofar as [the taxpayer]
submits that the dominant purpose of the scheme was for the Division 165
Supplying Entities to obtain the
GST (which they would fail to remit to the
Commissioner), rather than for [the taxpayer] to obtain input tax credits, this
seems to go to the merits of the Tribunal’s conclusion. In any
event, we consider that it was open to the Tribunal to view
the obtaining (by
[the taxpayer]) of the input tax credits and the obtaining (by the supplying
entities) of the GST as comprising
one purpose, in circumstances where the two
were inextricably linked: cf
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Ludekens
(2013) 214 FCR 149
cited passage from
In assessing the purpose and evaluating its importance, and whether it is
dominant, one must appreciate that it is the scheme in
question to which the
enquiry is directed, not a general state of affairs other than the scheme.
Persons engaged in trade and commerce
do so for personal gain. The purpose of
all commercial arrangements is, in a broad sense, the making of profit . . .
Here the respondents
undoubtedly wished to make profits from the purchase of
woodlots and from running a foreign exchange business. They chose the Plan
effect that. Integral to the Plan was that the entities acquiring woodlots on 30
June 2007 . . . would obtain scheme benefits
from the GST refunds from the
purchase of the woodlots and that the Secondary Investors would obtain scheme
benefits from tax deductions
and tax refunds from their participation. Those are
not two purposes: they comprise one purpose – that scheme benefits in
of lowered tax-related liabilities and increased amounts that the
Commissioner must pay or credit (s 284- 50(1)(a) and (b)) would
flow to them and
others. Those two streams of funding, together with the commission from Gunns,
were to be used to prop up the foreign
exchange business . . .
is, perhaps, not difficult to contemplate purposes of creation of a taxable
supply, a GST liability and a corresponding ITC entitlement,
in appropriate
circumstances, being regarded as a single purpose. But that, of course, would
not exclude the possibility of non-payment
of the GST liability and retaining
the relevant cash being the dominant purpose. The first three events, so to
speak, might be seen
as a means to an end. However,
Complete Success
takes the matter a little further:
Indeed, it would be open to conclude that
the purpose of obtaining (and not
remitting) GST and the purpose of obtaining input tax credits
for CSS were
one purpose if the facts showed them to be inextricably linked: ACN FC at 513
[224]. Such a conclusion might be open,
for example, if it were concluded that
it was important to Manila Exchange that the scheme end with a GST-free supply
by an entity
that would be refunded input tax credits, so that the scheme as a
whole would work by being sufficiently funded.
(Emphasis added.)
the Full Court contemplates the possibility of the obtaining
amounts referrable to GST
the obtaining of ITCs being
collectively a single purpose. The Court did not mandate that there was such a
Recognising
the analysis is focused on a different statutory setting and test, Gageler
J’s comments in
regarding the standing of facilitative steps
toward an ulterior and ultimate goal inform the characterisation of steps in a
chain of events. There his Honour said:
is, in the Explanatory Memorandum for s 177EA as originally inserted into the
ITAA 1936 in 1998, already quoted, a very clear
statement that “[a]
purpose is an incidental purpose when it occurs fortuitously or in subordinate
conjunction with another
purpose, or merely follows another purpose as its
natural incident.” The statement, repeated in the Supplementary
Explanatory
Memorandum, employed the word “or” disjunctively because
a purpose may be in subordinate conjunction with another purpose
or may do no
more than follow another purpose as the natural incident of that other purpose
without necessarily being fortuitous.
The statement accords with standard
definitions of the word “incidental” to be found in mainstream
dictionaries and with
a natural reading of the statutory text, “an
incidental purpose”, in the context of s 177EA(3)(e). The adoption of the
meaning conveyed by the statement as the proper construction of the statutory
text produces the result that a purpose of a person,
in entering into or
carrying out the scheme for the disposition of equity interests, of enabling a
holder to obtain a franking credit
is "an incidental purpose" outside the scope
of s 177EA(3)(e) if that purpose does no more than further some other purpose or
from some other purpose. ....
(Emphasis added)
purpose can be incidental even where it is central to the design of a scheme if
that design is directed to the achievement of
another purpose. Indeed, the
centrality of a purpose to the design of a scheme directed to the achievement of
another purpose may
be the very thing that gives it a quality of subsidiarity
and therefore incidentality. That is not impermissibly to confine the scope
177EA(3)(e) to a dominant purpose: the categories of "dominant" and "incidental"
are not exhaustive. The parenthesised words
in s 177EA(3)(e) make clear that a
dominant purpose of enabling a holder to obtain a franking credit is sufficient
but not necessary
for the requisite jurisdictional fact to exist, but it does
not follow that a purpose which does no more than further or follow from
dominant purpose is incidental. Second, counterfactual analysis is not
antithetical to the statutory inquiry mandated by s 177EA(3)(e).
Purpose is a
matter for inference and incidentality is a matter of degree. Consideration of
possible alternatives may well assist
the drawing of a conclusion in a
particular case that a [requisite] purpose ... does or does not exist and, if
such a purpose exists,
that the purpose is or is not incidental to some other
(emphasis in
at T[165] to [206], the Second Tribunal considered each of the s 165-15 factors.
In the course of doing so, the Second Tribunal
made the following observations
relevant to the determination as to purpose required by s 165-5(1)(c)(i) of the
(1) as to the manner in which the scheme was carried out (s 165-15(1)(a)):
a case where the relevant competition or comparison is between pursuit of
commercial ends and pursuit of a GST benefit, the existence
of steps that are
uncommercial or extraordinary in the manner or execution of the scheme might
suggest pursuit of the GST benefit
is dominant. However, where the relevant
comparison is between pursuit of a dishonest end and pursuit of a GST benefit,
extraordinary,
or irrational or uncommercial steps might be expected in the
sequence of events. In that setting such steps might more appropriately
indicate, as part of the analysis of the manner of execution of a scheme, that
that other goal was either the sole or dominant purpose
of a participant in the
adulteration of gold bullion, in many respects the relevant transactions were
carried out in the way of ordinary transactions.
The steps taken were largely as
would be expected in arm’s length sales of Refining Materials and gold
bullion. Indeed, aside
from the one respect noted immediately below, but for the
non-payment of GST by the suppliers the transactions would likely have
regarded as unremarkable from a fiscal perspective.
was extraordinary that the Fraudulent Suppliers adulterated bullion, destroyed
some of its value and then, ignoring GST effects,
sold what had become Refining
Materials at prices that were less than their acquisition costs. But those
prices at which they transacted
were not remarkable as a bargain struck between
the suppliers and [the taxpayer]
for Refining Materials
taxpayer] paying dollar for dollar amounts as components of GST-informed
purchase prices, in a setting where for [the taxpayer],
only refining profits
were generated, suggests the manner of execution test does not point to a
dominant purpose of [the taxpayer]
or any other participant in entering into or
carrying out the scheme that [the taxpayer] obtain ITC entitlements.
pricing issue is, of course, linked to the adulteration of bullion which is
certainly out of the usual. However, in the Tribunal’s
view that part of
the scheme is explicable by the Fraudulent Suppliers’ purpose of securing
a GST-informed amount of money
and non-payment of GST. It does not suggest a
separate dominant purpose of [the taxpayer] obtaining ITCs.
the AFP raids, the manner of execution of the scheme included internal steps
directed to the legitimacy of suppliers. That fact,
while it says nothing of the
purposes of the Fraudulent Suppliers, reflects on the purposes to be attributed
to [the taxpayer].
these reasons, the manner in which the scheme was entered into or carried out
does not support a conclusion that any entity entered
into the scheme or any
part of the scheme with the dominant purpose of [the taxpayer] obtaining the
Contested ITCs. Even if, contrary
to the conclusion above, [the taxpayer] was an
informed participant in the scheme, the manner in which it was carried out would
support a conclusion that the Fraudulent Suppliers had a dominant if not
sole purpose of defrauding the Commonwealth. It would not
support a conclusion
that [the taxpayer], ABC NSW or any other entity had a dominant purpose of [the
taxpayer] obtaining the Contested
ITCs. [The taxpayer] would still have obtained
refining profits only
(bold emphasis added) ;
(2) as to the form and substance of the scheme (s 165-15(1)(b)):
legal form of the transactions was not consistent with the economic and
commercial substance. What was precious metal in investment
form was not altered
so much in terms of chemical composition but its appearance so that it no longer
conformed to the “in
investment form” standard. It was an appearance
alteration that facilitated a different attribute in the marketplace that
a different trading price structure which in turn facilitated a
receipt of money that the Fraudulent Suppliers would keep. Where
purpose is to effectuate a fraud, it can be expected that trickery or facades
may be involved and that form and substance
might differ.
Tribunal does not consider the form and substance of the scheme support a
conclusion that any entity entered into or carried out
the scheme or a part of
the scheme with the dominant purpose of [the taxpayer] obtaining ITCs.
(emphasis added) ;
(3) as to the purpose or object of the GST Act (s 165-15(1)(c)):
far as [the taxpayer] obtained the Contested ITCs on the acquisition of taxable
supplies in the course of its enterprise, that
is an unremarkable outcome under
the GST Act. It is well-known that, with limited exceptions, GST on acquisitions
is intended to
have a neutral impact on a GST-registered taxpayer’s costs.
That is a fundamental feature of value-added taxation systems throughout
It does not support a conclusion that any entity entered into the
scheme or a part of the scheme with the dominant purpose of [the
obtaining ITCs.
artificial creation of a GST liability, and corresponding ITC entitlement, by
defacing bullion may be seen as not an object of
the GST Act. However, a
liability arising on a taxable supply is an intended outcome under GST law
regardless of the circumstances
giving rise to the liability. Even illegal
supplies may be taxable supplies. Once the gold was no longer precious metal its
supply being taxable was unremarkable and an intended outcome under
the GST Act.
purpose or object of the GST Act includes, fundamentally, to create a liability
for GST on taxable supplies. That is what occurred
here. It is the failure to
pay the GST that departs from the object of the GST Act, not the allowance of
ITCs on business-to-business
acquisitions which is the standard and intended
object of value-added taxation.
factor does not suggest a conclusion that producing the GST benefit was the
dominant purpose of the scheme for these supplies.
(bold emphasis added) ;
(4) as to the timing of the scheme and the period over which it was entered into
and carried out (ss 165-15(1)(d) and (e)):
does not appear to be any timing aspect of the scheme that suggests a dominant
purpose or principal effect of securing the ITCs
for [the taxpayer]. If
anything, the timing aspects suggest the contrary.
The scheme continued
after the time when the AFP raids occurred and with a different manner of
execution after that time. Continuing
[the taxpayer’s] activities after
the AFP raids on a similar footing to before the raids points against the
requisite purpose
or effect for Division 165 to apply.
the extent it happened, the round robin nature of the movement of the same gold
from [the taxpayer] to and through the Fraudulent
Suppliers and back to [the
taxpayer] and the timing of those steps suggest that the scheme was structured
to be, to the extent of
this circularity, self-contained and possibly
self-perpetuating. The timing of the circular steps suggests, if anything,
of the fraudulent purpose.
factors do not suggest a conclusion that producing the GST benefit was the
dominant purpose of any entity entering to or carrying
out the scheme or any
part of the scheme.
continuation after the AFP raids suggests that [the taxpayer’s] purposes
were not pursuit of taxation goals or effects.
(bold emphasis added) ;
(5) as to the effect that the GST Act would have in relation to the scheme apart
from Division 165 (s 165-15(1)(f)):
conventional analysis is that this test necessarily reveals that, absent the
operation of Division 165, less GST would be payable,
or a bigger refund
would ensue. Just because a transaction has an effect of lowering tax liability
or increasing a credit does not
necessarily attract an inference that the
parties to the transaction entered into it or carried it out for the sole or
dominant purpose
of obtaining that tax consequence. This is particularly so when
other benefits and taxation liabilities are also produced by the
identified. Under this conventional analysis, little weight would be attached to
this factor. This is so because the mere
fact of a GST benefit cannot lead to
the result that the dominant purpose of the relevant scheme was to secure that
benefit. If it
did there would be no need for the other factors to be
alternative approach rests on a premise that any test ought be capable of
pointing in either a positive or negative way in the
analysis required and
should be capable of supporting or contradicting the requisite conclusion in
different settings. There seems
little point in having a test factor which can
only point in one direction. Under the alternative approach, it is necessary to
to whether the outcome of the scheme transactions absent Division 165
applying is consistent with the operation as intended by the
the GST Act intends to allow an ITC to an entity carrying on an enterprise that
has paid for an acquisition, and paid dollar
for dollar for it, in a
business-to-business transaction under a practical business tax system that
places great reliance on the
use and acceptance of tax invoices. On that
footing, absent the operation of Division 165, the outcome in the present
circumstances
is entirely consistent with an intended outcome of the GST Act.
This factor, analysed this way, suggests that the dominant purpose
participants in the scheme was not to secure a GST benefit. This is not a case
where, by some artifice on the part of the taxpayer,
a GST benefit ensues
without the full cost of securing it having been paid.
Tribunal considers that either little weight ought to be given to this factor,
or it should suggest a non-GST benefit purpose.
is true that if one considers only the part of the scheme that is the defacing
of bullion before its sale to [the taxpayer], that
part of the scheme causes a
change in the GST status of the commodity and its subsequent sale. But that is a
change that causes GST
to become payable where it would not otherwise have been
payable. And, more importantly, the economic impact is neutral because of
taxpayer’s] entitlement to ITCs.
That supports a conclusion that the
dominant purpose of the Fraudulent Suppliers was to secure for themselves money
and to evade payment
of GST rather than for any entity to obtain ITCs.
(bold emphasis added) ;
(6) as to any change in the taxpayer’s financial position that has
resulted, or may reasonably be expected to result, from
the scheme (s
165-15(1)(g)):
[the taxpayer’s] perspective, namely an enterprise that produced precious
metal and sold it thus making GST-free supplies:
(a) ITC entitlements arose in respect of all of its inputs to that process that
were taxable supplies to it including all of the
contested Division 165
transactions;
(b) for each of the contested transactions it paid a price that was informed by
the fact that they were taxable supplies and that
exceeded the price that would
have been payable had the supplies not been taxable, and that excess equalled
the ITC entitlement mentioned
(c) [the taxpayer] enjoyed enhanced turnover from its participation in the
scheme and resultant trading profits from that enhanced
globally, the only potentially measurable financial benefit was enhanced
profitability from enhanced trading.
Commissioner’s submissions to the contrary, namely that [the taxpayer]
profited by the refund of the GST and without that
refund the transactions made
no sense, must be rejected. The Full Court
decision made clear that
availability of ITCs has a neutral effect on profit which is determined net of
GST considerations. Mere
availability of ITCs cannot be regarded as a source of
(7) as to any change that has resulted, or may reasonably be expected to result
from the scheme in the financial position of any
entity connected to the
taxpayer (s 165‑15(1)(h)):
is no question that the Fraudulent Suppliers were financially disadvantaged by
the scheme if the non-payment of GST, which does
not form part of either of the
Commissioner’s articulated schemes, is ignored. That is because their
sales prices for the Refining
Materials were less than they paid for bullion in
investment form.
it would be artificial to ignore the non-payment of GST. It is objectively clear
that without that non-payment their participation
in the scheme would have made
no sense and would not have happened. The artificiality in ignoring the
non-payment by the Fraudulent
Suppliers probably explains the extensive evidence
led by the Commissioner of the financial affairs of the intermediaries and their
GST compliance, or lack thereof.
Fraudulent Suppliers were, if outstanding liabilities are not taken into
account, enriched in a cash sense by not paying the GST
they were liable to pay.
That enrichment swamped the spot price differential between what they paid for
bullion and what they sold
the Refining Materials for. That suggests those
entities had a dominant purpose of enriching themselves by collecting but not
GST – that was the sole source of their enrichment.
are no identifiable financial changes for any other entity that could
conceivably be regarded as supporting a conclusion that
an entity had a dominant
purpose of [the taxpayer] obtaining the Contested ITCs
. It may be the case,
but it is not established on the evidence, that ABC NSW enjoyed an enhanced
turnover and profitability from
the scheme, but that came with its own risks as
evidence of Ms Simpson’s concerns with going long on gold payments
Accordingly,
the Tribunal concludes that any changes in the financial position of the other
parties would not support a conclusion
that any entity entered into or carried
out the scheme or a part of it with the dominant purpose of [the taxpayer]
obtaining the
(emphasis added) ;
(8) as to other consequences for the taxpayer or a connected entity of the
scheme having been entered into or carried out, and the
nature of the connection
between the taxpayer and the connected entity including whether the dealing is
or was at arm’s length
(ss 165-15(1)(i) and (j)):
is no suggestion that the dealings between the Division 165 Supplying
Entities and [the taxpayer] and/or ABC NSW were other
than at arm’s length
in both the relationship sense and in the sense that commercial prices were paid
for the relevant supplies.
The latter is not surprising since there is no common
ownership between the Division 165 Supplying Entities and [the taxpayer] or
factor does not support a conclusion that any entity entered into the scheme or
a part of the scheme with the dominant purpose
of ... [the taxpayer] obtaining
the Contested ITCs
(emphasis added) ; and
(9) as to the circumstances surrounding the scheme and any other relevant
circumstances (ss 165-15(1)(k) and (1)):
such circumstance, excluded by the Commissioner from his articulated schemes, is
the fraudulent non-payment of the Fraudulent
Suppliers’ GST
liabilities.
circumstance points in favour of a conclusion that the dominant purpose of the
Division 165 Supplying Entities participating
in the scheme or a part of
the scheme was those suppliers enriching themselves by defrauding the
Commonwealth. It does not support
a conclusion that any entity entered into the
scheme or a part of the scheme with the dominant purpose of ... [the taxpayer]
the Contested ITCs
(emphasis added)
at T[207] to [211] the Second Tribunal made the following further observations
concerning whether the two purposes of the Division
165 Supplying Entities
should be regarded as a single composite purpose:
Purpose or effect – further observations
further observations are called for.
A single composite purpose or non-dominant incidental purposes
facilitating a dominant purpose?
passages from
Complete Success Solutions
above indicate that a single purpose may appropriately be found in some
circumstances. They did not go on and consider
whether those purposes were
facilitative of an ultimate purpose in the sense contemplated by Gageler J in
also noted above. The
analysis is apposite in the
present circumstances for two reasons: first, creating taxable supplies that
also produced GST-informed
prices being paid and ITC entitlements to arise, was
a necessary preliminary to an ulterior and ultimate goal as contemplated by
Honour’s analysis, and second because His Honour suggests that the text of
the Explanatory Memorandum under discussion
confirmed the ordinary meaning of
language and natural reading of statutory text. Thus, the hierarchy of
incidental and dominant
purposes to which His Honour refers can and should have
wider application. This analysis informs how facilitative steps in a wider
design ought to be characterised. Viewed through this lens, any purpose of
obtaining ITCs in the present circumstances, assuming
there was one, was a
purpose properly regarded as central to the design of a scheme directed to
achieving an ulterior and ultimate
purpose, and therefore any purpose of
obtaining ITCs was incidental and not dominant.
the present case, what was essential for the scheme to operate was the creation
of a product that the marketplace traded at a GST-informed
price, and the
Fraudulent Suppliers receiving that price and not paying the GST to the
Commissioner, or more fundamentally, for the
Fraudulent Suppliers not to pay
their GST liability having received a market driven price that assumed they
would. As already noted,
without that feature there would not have been ongoing
sales by the suppliers, as they would have traded at a loss. The availability
the ITCs was an ordinary incident of a purchase of a taxable commodity on
commercial terms by a GST-registered entity in the course
of its enterprise.
those circumstances, the non-payment of amounts referrable to GST stands aside
from the creation of the GST liability and the entitlement
to corresponding
ITCs. Even if the transactions were conducted in a co-ordinated way with the
knowledge of [the taxpayer] (which
the Tribunal has not found) it would remain
the case that the non-payment of GST is the central feature upon which the
of the suppliers’ unlawful endeavours rested. [The
taxpayer’s] entitlement to ITCs was not dependent on that action,
upon the acquisition of gold in a taxable supply for which it paid a full
commercial price for what it acquired.
short, even if it would be correct to view the making of taxable supplies and
obtaining of ITCs as a single purpose, that single
purpose was a step in a wider
process. The Tribunal sees the Fraudulent Suppliers’ non-payment of GST as
a separate and ulterior
and ultimate purpose to any purpose of making taxable
supplies and [the taxpayer] obtaining ITCs.
(emphasis in original)
at T[215] to [219], the Second Tribunal expressed the following views:
of the remittal hearing was taken up with whether [the taxpayer] knew or turned
a blind eye to the activities of the Fraudulent
Suppliers, or participated in
co-ordination of the transactions. However, ultimately what must be confronted
is this: the Fraudulent
Suppliers entered into the arrangements to profit, and
did profit in precisely the way they intended to profit, by failing to pay
on the taxable sales they made to [the taxpayer]. In this regard, the term
profit is used in a cash flow profit sense only. Properly
calculated, they made
no profit from their scheme because profit ought be determined net of the impact
of GST. To make their profit,
the Fraudulent Suppliers needed to create or
procure a system or process where they outlaid less money than they received. In
present setting that entailed two steps: first, they needed to acquire the
goods they sold at a price not informed by GST, and, second,
they needed to sell
those goods at GST-informed prices. It can be accepted that [the taxpayer] would
not rationally have paid GST-informed
priced for the Refining Materials in
question had there not been an entitlement to ITCs.
In those circumstances,
is it reasonable to conclude that the dominant purpose of any entity entering
into the scheme or a part of
the scheme, or the principal effect of the scheme
or part of the scheme, was for [the taxpayer] to obtain, or that [the taxpayer]
did obtain, the Contested ITCs?
a search for an alternative purpose is not the Division 165 test, the
existence of such a purpose throws light on whether the
requisite GST benefit
purpose conclusion should be reached. When looking at a scheme, or a part
thereof, if there is an alternative
dominant purpose of any participant, or an
alternative principal effect, then it is unlikely that the dominant purpose test
be satisfied in respect of that participant or that the principal effect
test will be satisfied. If that alternative dominant purpose
of a participant
in, or alternative principal effect of, a scheme or a part thereof was that the
Fraudulent Suppliers benefit from
their fraud, or to place an inflated,
GST-informed, price or amount of money into the hands of the Fraudulent
Suppliers so as to
set up the possibility of the fraud being executed
profitably, it is unlikely that it would be reasonable to conclude that that
participant
had the requisite dominant purpose or that the scheme had the
requisite principal effect.
summary, in the Tribunal’s view, the proper conclusion is that the
dominant purpose of the Fraudulent Suppliers was to execute
their fraud by first
obtaining and then retaining the GST-informed prices they charged [the
. Their participation in the transactions made no sense unless they
committed that fraud.
if the creation of the taxable supplies to [the taxpayer] and [the
taxpayer’s] entitlement to ITCs are viewed as a single
purpose, that
would, in itself, achieve no benefit for either [the taxpayer] or the Fraudulent
Suppliers. As already noted, for the
Fraudulent Suppliers, it would achieve a
loss because they were selling gold at a price (before GST considerations) that
than they paid for it. It was only by failing to pay their GST
liabilities that the Fraudulent Suppliers were able to profit in any
explains the scheme. While it is not the statutory question to be addressed, an
alternative purpose suggested by the weighing
of the requisite factors assists
the requisite process.
In the present circumstances there is an alternative
purpose suggested by the requisite factors.
It is reasonable to conclude
that defrauding of the Commonwealth was the Fraudulent Suppliers’ dominant
purpose. Taking into
account the required factors, it is not reasonable to
conclude that the dominant purpose of any entity was for [the taxpayer] to
obtain the Contested ITCs
conclusion would not change even if [the taxpayer] was, as the Commissioner
asserts, an informed participant in co-ordinated arrangements.
anything concerning purpose conclusions changes by assuming [the taxpayer] had
relevant knowledge. In the Tribunal’s
view, it would still not be
reasonable to conclude that the dominant purpose of the Fraudulent Suppliers was
for [the taxpayer] to
obtain ITCs. Even if there was informed participation and
co-ordination by [the taxpayer], the requisite conclusion would still be
the dominant purpose of those suppliers was to receive but not pay amounts
referable to their GST liabilities. The taxable supplies
and connected ITCs were
merely steps in an ultimate plan that would remain the same. [The taxpayer] paid
dollar for dollar for the
ITCs it became entitled to. That remains the same.
The dominant purpose of [the taxpayer] remains securing its refining
. Informed coordination could not change the principal effect of the
scheme or a part of the scheme.
(emphasis added)
at T[226], the Second Tribunal expressed the conclusion that, for the reasons
indicated in its consideration of the s 165-15 factors,
it would not be
reasonable to conclude that any entity entered into either scheme or part of
either scheme with the sole or dominant
purpose of the taxpayer obtaining the
income tax credits.
E.3.2 The Commissioner’s challenge
first four questions described in the supplementary notice of appeal are (as
the Tribunal correctly applied the test required by s 165-5(1)(c) of the GST
in taking account of the matters described in s 165-15, and determining whether
it was reasonable to conclude under s 165(1)(c)
that one or more of the entities
that entered into or carried out each scheme, or part of each scheme, did so
with the sole or dominant
purpose of the Respondent getting a GST benefit from
the scheme, the Tribunal correctly applied
Mills v Commissioner of Taxation
[2012] HCA 51
(2012) 250 CLR 171
and distinguished
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in
liquidation) v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2020] FCAFC 190
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Complete Success Solutions Pty
Ltd ATF Complete Solutions Trust
[2023] FCAFC 19?
on the authority of ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in liquidation) v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2020] FCAFC 190
(2020) 282 FCR 455
and Federal
Commissioner of Taxation v Complete Success Solutions Pty Ltd ATF Complete
Solutions Trust
[2023] FCAFC 19
, the Tribunal erred in concluding (at
[208]-[211]) that the purpose of making taxable supplies and creating
entitlements to input
tax credits in the Respondent was separate from and
preliminary to an ulterior and ultimate purpose of the Fraudulent Suppliers not
paying GST?
the Tribunal correctly took account of the matters described in s 165-15, as
required by s 165-5(1)(c)?
Commissioner relies upon the following grounds of appeal in support of the above
questions (as written):
Tribunal erred in concluding at [208]-[211] that the purpose of making taxable
supplies and creating entitlements to input tax
credits in the Respondent was
separate from and preliminary to an ulterior and ultimate purpose of the
Fraudulent Suppliers not paying
concluding that the purpose of making taxable supplies and creating entitlements
to input tax credits in the Respondent was separate
from and preliminary to an
ulterior and ultimate purpose of the Fraudulent Suppliers not paying GST the
Tribunal misapplied
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in liquidation) v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2020] FCAFC 190
(2020) 282 FCR 455
Commissioner of Taxation v Complete Success Solutions Pty Ltd ATF Complete
Solutions Trust
[2023] FCAFC 19
Mills v Commissioner of Taxation
[2012] HCA 51
250 CLR 171.
the authority of ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in liquidation) v Federal Commissioner
of Taxation
[2020] FCAFC 190
(2020) 282 FCR 455
, Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Complete Success Solutions Pty Ltd ATF Complete Solutions Trust
[2023] FCAFC 19
, the Tribunal ought to have found that the Fraudulent
Suppliers’ purpose of obtaining (and not remitting) GST was not
inconsistent
with the conclusion that the dominant purpose was obtaining the
relevant input tax credits for the Respondent and that the purpose
of obtaining
(and not remitting) GST and the purpose of obtaining input tax credits for the
Respondent were one purpose.
or in the alternative, the Tribunal failed properly to address s 165-(1)(c)
(a) failing to consider whether the purpose of obtaining (and not remitting) GST
and the purpose of obtaining input tax credits for
the Respondent were
inextricably linked, as required by
Commissioner of Taxation v
Complete Success Solutions Pty Ltd ATF
Complete Solutions Trust
[2023] FCAFC 19
(b) distinguishing between the pursuit of a dishonest end and the pursuit of a
GST benefit as the relevant comparison at [165];
E.3.3 Consideration
is plain, the questions and grounds set out above address the Second
Tribunal’s findings as to the purposes of the Division
165 Supplying
Entities; and do not address the Second Tribunal’s findings as to the
purposes of the taxpayer.
are several strands to the Commissioner’s submissions on the
above-mentioned questions and grounds. The first strand is
a submission to the
effect that the Second Tribunal erred by disregarding the reasoning in the
judgments of the Full Court in
Full Court ACN
(at 512 [221] and 514
Complete Success Solutions
(at [85] to [89]).
submission must be rejected. It is not supported by either
Full Court ACN
Complete Success Solutions
. Those judgments did not, and did not
purport to, set out any legal test to be applied by the Tribunal (such that a
failure to apply
such a test could be considered an error of law). Rather, the
observations made by those Full Courts related to the availability
Tribunal of particular findings on the facts of the individual cases.
Full Court in
Full Court ACN
(1) at 512 [221] rejected a submission by the taxpayer that the First Tribunal
erred by making a finding, without evidence, that
the taxpayer’s
entitlement to the input tax credits was more important to the operation of the
scheme than the evasion of the
GST liability. In the course of doing so, the
Full Court noted various features of the scheme which meant that the First
finding was “reasonably open” on the facts before
it (see [19] above);
(2) at 513 [224] noted that it was “open” to the First Tribunal to
view the two purposes of the Division 165 Supplying
Entities as comprising one
purpose (see [20] above); and
(3) at 514 [226] noted that the fact that the Division 165 Supplying Entities
had the non-remittance of GST purpose was “not
necessarily inconsistent
with” a conclusion that it would be reasonable to conclude that an entity
that entered into or carried
out the scheme did so with the dominant purpose of
the taxpayer obtaining the input tax credits (see [20] above).
Full Court in
Complete Success Solutions
(1) at [85] referred to the comments of the Full Court in
Full Court ACN
at 514 [226] that the existence of the non-remittance of GST purpose was
“not necessarily inconsistent with” a conclusion
that the dominant
purpose was to obtain the input tax credits and expressed the view that it would
be “open” to conclude,
if particular circumstances existed, that the
two purposes in that case were inextricably linked. Their Honours also noted
was not clear that the Tribunal in
had reached its factual
conclusion as to the dominant purpose of Manila Exchange by excluding particular
possibilities (see [28]
above). Contrary to the Commissioner’s
submissions, the Full Court in
Complete Success Solutions
suggesting that a conclusion as to the two purposes being inextricably linked
inexorably follows; nor was it suggesting that
the relevant decision-maker must
reason to a determination as to purpose using a process requiring the exclusion
of particular possibilities;
observed at [86] to [89] that the facts of that case were not so
different to the facts as found by the First Tribunal as to distinguish
made by the First Tribunal that the input tax credits were more important than
the wrongful retention of GST was to the
operation of scheme (see [28] above).
However, it does not follow that the Second Tribunal was bound to find that the
two purposes
of the Division 165 Supplying Entities were “inextricably
linked”, and the Full Court in
Complete Success Solutions
suggest that the Tribunal in that case, much less in any other case, was bound
to reach such a conclusion. So much is plain
from the observations of the Full
Complete Success Solutions
at [93] (see [28] above).
observations made by each of the Full Courts, and the remittal in each case of
the matter to the Tribunal for redetermination,
demonstrate that more than one
conclusion as to purpose was available and that the determination of that
conclusion, a factual question,
was one for the Tribunal (cf [55] above).
Second Tribunal resolved the factual question as to purpose in a manner which
included a finding that the Division 165 Supplying
Entities’ two purposes
were not inextricably linked and that the non-remittance of GST purpose was
their dominant purpose (T[208]
to [211] and [218]). That conclusion was open to
the Second Tribunal and within its “zone of discretion”: see
Corporation of the City of Enfield v Development Assessment Commission
[2000] HCA 5
(2000) 199 CLR 135
at 152 to 153 [43] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby
and Hayne JJ) and
at 384 to 385 [201].
also follows that the Commissioner’s submissions that the Second Tribunal
did not explain why it did not follow
Full Court ACN
Success Solutions
are misconceived.
second strand to the Commissioner’s submissions is the somewhat surprising
submission that the Second Tribunal did not consider
whether or not the Division
165 Supplying Entities’ two purposes were “inextricably
linked” in the sense referred
Full Court ACN
Success Solutions
. That submission is directly contrary to the consideration
of this issue by the Second Tribunal at T[158] to [162], [165] to [206],
to [211] and [218] (see [69] to [72] above).
third strand to the Commissioner’s submissions is the contention that the
Second Tribunal erred at T[163] and [208] in applying
the reasoning of Gageler J
v Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of
[2012] HCA 51
(2012) 250 CLR 171
at 202 to 203 ([64] to
[65]) (see [69] and [71] above). In this regard, the Commissioner submitted that
was not a case concerning the test for determining for the purposes
of s 165-5 whether the obtaining (by a refiner) of the input
tax credits and the
obtaining (by the supplying entities) of the GST comprise one purpose or
separate purposes, and instead concerned
the operation of s 177EA of ITAA 1936
where the issue before the Court was whether a purpose was “an incidental
The Commissioner also submitted that the High Court of Australia
held that on the facts that purpose was incidental to another purpose;
was no contest in that case that the purposes were separate and discrete.
the Second Tribunal’s reasons are read fairly as a whole, they disclose no
error of law on the part of the Second Tribunal,
for the following reasons.
it is trite that the reasons of the Second Tribunal are to be read fairly as a
whole, and not construed minutely and finely with
an eye keenly attuned to the
perception of error: see, e.g.,
Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
[1996] HCA 6
(1996) 185 CLR
at 271 to 272 (Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh and Gummow JJ);
M1/2021 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 17
(2022) 275 CLR 582
(Kiefel CJ, Keane, Gordon and Steward JJ);
Plaintiff S22/2025 v Minister
for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] HCA 36
Edelman and Jagot JJ). A Court should not assume that a decision-maker did not
apply the correct test unless that appears
clearly from the
decision-maker’s reasons:
Le v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2025] HCASJ 33
(Steward J), citing
Selliah v Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs
[1999] FCA 615
correct approach was recently summarised by a Full Court of this Court (Perry,
Sarah C Derrington and Abraham JJ) in
RCLN v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FCAFC 113
The starting point in considering the grounds of appeal is, as the Minister
submitted, that the Tribunal’s reasons must be
read fairly and as a whole:
Plaintiff M64/2015 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2015] HCA 50
(2015) 258 CLR 173
–[60]. Thus, it is well
established that the reasons of an administrative decision-maker “
not to be construed minutely and finely with an eye keenly attuned to the
perception of error
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
v Wu Shan Liang
(1996) 185 CLR 259
at 271–2 (Brennan CJ, Toohey,
McHugh and Gummow JJ (quoting with approval
Collector of Customs v Pozzolanic
Enterprises Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 456
(1993) 43 FCR 280
at 287)). As such, “
commonsense and realistic approach should be taken to understanding the
reasons as a whole to see what it was that the Tribunal was
Fang Wang v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous
[2003] FCA 1044
–[15] (Allsop J (as his Honour then
it is plain from the Second Tribunal’s reasons – at T[23], [27],
[144] to [146], [153] to [154], [157] – that
the Second Tribunal
understood that its task was to determine whether the taxpayer had proven,
taking into account the s 165-15 factors,
that it was not reasonable to conclude
(1) an entity that entered into or carried out a scheme or part of the scheme
did so with the sole or dominant purpose of the taxpayer
getting a GST benefit
in the form of input tax credits from the scheme; or
(2) the principal effect of the scheme, or of part of the scheme, was that the
taxpayer received such a GST benefit from the scheme.
the reasons of the Second Tribunal demonstrate that it carried out that task. It
considered each of the s 165-15 factors in some
detail and their impact upon the
prescribed task.
as the analysis at [70] above demonstrates, in the course of doing so, the
Second Tribunal reached the views that:
(1) most of the s 165-15 factors did not support a conclusion that any entity
entered into the scheme with the dominant purpose of
the taxpayer obtaining
input tax credits (see T[171], [174], [177], [183], [185], [200], [201], [204],
[206] and [226]); and
(2) some of the factors – namely s 165-15(1)(f), (k) and (l) –
supported a conclusion that the non-remittance of GST
purpose, and not the input
tax credits purpose, was the dominant purpose of the Division 165 Supplying
Entities (see T[192] and [206]).
See also the expression of this conclusion at
T[217] to [219].
Tribunal did not find that any of the s 165-15 factors supported a conclusion
that any entity entered into the scheme with the
dominant purpose of the
taxpayer obtaining the input tax credits.
the Second Tribunal, having considered all of the mandatory s 165-15 factors,
concluded that those factors did not support a
conclusion that any entity
entered into the scheme with the dominant purpose of the taxpayer obtaining
input tax credits. It also
concluded that the dominant purpose of the Division
165 Supplying Entities was the non-remittance of GST purpose rather than the
input tax credits purpose.
the Second Tribunal at T[163] expressly acknowledged that
a different statutory setting and test.
in the context of the above matters, the Second Tribunal’s references to
and the analysis of purpose by reference to the cited paragraphs
from that decision are properly to be regarded as the Second Tribunal
illustrating, by reference to the reasoning process in
conclusion that it had reached that the non-remittance of GST purpose was the
dominant purpose of the Division 165 Supplying
Entities and that the input tax
credits purpose was non-dominant (whether it be described as ancillary or
incidental or otherwise).
In other words, on a fair reading of the Second
Tribunal Decision, the conclusion as to dominant purpose was not reached by
, but rather through the Second Tribunal’s
thorough and detailed consideration of the s 165-15 factors.
fourth strand to the Commissioner’s submissions is that the Tribunal erred
when at T[165] (see [70(1)] above) it referred
to the relevant comparison being
between the “pursuit of commercial ends and pursuit of a GST
benefit”. The Commissioner
submitted that if the Second Tribunal had
applied the law as set out at T[156] (see [68] above) then it would have
concluded that
the dominant purpose of the Division 165 Supplying Entities in
carrying out the schemes was for the taxpayer to receive the income
tax credits.
reference to the law as set out at T[156] is a reference to the Second
Tribunal’s recognition of the observations of the
plurality of the High
Court of Australia (Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron, Gummow and Kirby JJ) in
Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia v
Services Ltd
[1996] HCA 34
(1996) 186 CLR 404
at 416, where the
plurality noted that a particular course of action may be both “tax
driven” and be commercially rational,
but the presence of the latter does
not determine the question of dominant purpose; and to similar observations in
Commissioner of Taxation of the Commonwealth of Australia v Hart
(2004) 217 CLR 216.
In other words, the presence of a commercial purpose
does not prevent a finding that the tax driven purpose was dominant, or as
Full Court in
Full Court ACN
put it at [226], the fact of a pursuit of a
(dishonest) commercial gain is “not necessarily inconsistent” with a
that it would be reasonable to conclude that an entity that entered
into or carried out the particular scheme did so with the dominant
the taxpayer obtaining a GST benefit.
suggestion in the Commissioner’s submissions that the Second Tribunal
stated at T[165] that the relevant comparison was
between the “pursuit of
commercial ends and pursuit of a GST benefit” is not a fair reading of
T[165]. As the next sentence
of that paragraph indicates, the Second Tribunal
instead considered the relevant comparison to be between “the pursuit of a
dishonest end and the pursuit of a GST benefit”. The “dishonest
end” was the non-remittance of GST purpose (rather
than some broader
commercial objective). In other words, the Second Tribunal did not find an
overarching commercial or non-fiscal
purpose on the part of the Division 165
Supplying Entities (cf.
at 414.8 to 415.8). Rather, it
identified that the scheme facilitated:
(1) a GST benefit to the Division 165 Supplying Entities, by dint of their
non-payment of GST (the non-payment of taxation being
benefit” within the definition of that term in s 165-10(1)(a) of the GST
Act; see also
at 413.1); and
(2) a GST benefit to the taxpayer in the form of the income tax credits.
any event, the concept of a comparison of purposes is at the kernel of the
statutory directive to identify which purpose is dominant
where more than one
purpose has been identified, and is not contrary to
plurality went on to say in
at 416, “[m]uch turns on the
identification, among various purposes, of that which is
‘dominant’”. As is
plain from the Second Tribunal Decision,
the Second Tribunal by the application of the s 165-15 factors, determined that
the dominant
purpose of the Division 165 Supplying Entities was to obtain the
GST benefit which benefitted them, rather than the GST benefit which
the taxpayer. A conclusion that the Division 165 Supplying Entities had a
primary purpose consistent with self-interest
is unremarkable.
counsel for the Commissioner emphasised that the schemes as framed by the
Commissioner did not include the step of non-payment
of the GST by the Division
165 Supplying Entities. However, this is of no moment when, as senior counsel
for the Commissioner correctly
acknowledged during argument, the fact of
non-payment of the GST is nevertheless a matter that may be taken into account
as a circumstance surrounding the scheme (s 165-15(1)(k)) or as
another relevant circumstance (s 165-15(1)(l)). This was recognised
Second Tribunal at T[25], where the Second Tribunal noted that neither scheme
identified the fraud perpetrated by the Division
165 Supplying Entities, but
nothing turned on this, because that circumstance was “undoubtedly a
relevant consideration”.
As is clear from the Second Tribunal’s
consideration of the s 165-15 factors (see [70] above, and in particular
[70(9)]), the
Second Tribunal took into account the failure of the Division 165
Supplying Entities to remit the GST component to the Commissioner.
conclusion of relevance reached by the Second Tribunal and its subsequent
consideration of the non-payment of the GST were not
challenged in the
supplementary notice of appeal.
final strand to the Commissioner’s submissions involved the submission
that the accepted facts before the Second Tribunal
established that the Division
165 Supplying Entities’ two purposes were inextricably linked.
submission, which asks this Court to reach a factual conclusion different to
that reached by the Second Tribunal, does not raise
a question of law; rather it
impermissibly invites merits review of the Second Tribunal Decision and must be
rejected. The Commissioner
did not contend on this appeal that the Second
Tribunal erred in law because the facts as found necessarily satisfied the
of s 165-15(1)(c)(i): cf [55] above. In any event, such a contention
would have been unsustainable. In this regard, the Commissioner’s
contention that the schemes were “funded” by the income tax credits
cannot be accepted in the absence of a finding to
this effect by the Second
E.4 The fifth question – principal effect
fifth question and the sixth ground of appeal described in the supplementary
notice of appeal concern the Second Tribunal’s
conclusions as to the
principal effect of the schemes.
E.4.1 The Second Tribunal’s consideration of s
165-5(1)(c)(ii) of the GST Act
the Second Tribunal noted, its task under s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) of the GST Act was
to determine whether the taxpayer had proven, taking
into account the s 165-15
factors, that it was not reasonable to conclude that the principal effect of
either scheme (or of part
of either scheme) was that the taxpayer became
entitled to receive the input tax credits.
Second Tribunal addressed this task in conjunction with its task under s
165-5(1)(c)(i) of the GST Act which is discussed at E.3.1
above. Hence, there is
some overlap in the analyses in these reasons for judgment.
noting the competing positions of the parties and the need to consider the s
165-15 factors in assessing the principal effect
of the schemes (or part
thereof), the Second Tribunal considered each of those factors. In the course of
doing so, the Second Tribunal
made the following observations relevant to the
determination required by s 165-15(1)(c)(ii) of the GST Act:
(1) as to the manner in which the scheme was carried out (s 165-15(1)(a)):
adulteration of gold bullion, in many respects the relevant transactions were
carried out in the way of ordinary transactions.
The steps taken were largely as
would be expected in arm’s length sales of Refining Materials and gold
bullion. Indeed, aside
from the one respect noted immediately below, but for the
non-payment of GST by the suppliers the transactions would likely have
regarded as unremarkable from a fiscal perspective.
was extraordinary that the Fraudulent Suppliers adulterated bullion, destroyed
some of its value and then, ignoring GST effects,
sold what had become Refining
Materials at prices that were less than their acquisition costs. But those
prices at which they transacted
were not remarkable as a bargain struck between
the suppliers and [the taxpayer]
for Refining Materials
the Tribunal does not identify any aspect of the manner in which the scheme was
entered into or carried out that supports
a conclusion that the principal effect
of the scheme or any part of the scheme was [the taxpayer] obtaining ITCs. The
principal effects
of the scheme as a whole were the change of ownership of very
high values of gold and after that the fraud on the Commissioner. The
effect of the adulteration aspect of the manner of execution was to transform
the character of the relevant gold and to
devalue it.
(bold emphasis added) ;
(2) as to the form and substance of the scheme (s 165-15(1)(b)):
legal form of the transactions was not consistent with the economic and
commercial substance. What was precious metal in investment
form was not
altered so much in terms of chemical composition but its appearance so that it
no longer conformed to the “in
investment form” standard. It was an
appearance alteration that facilitated a different attribute in the marketplace
attracted a different trading price structure which in turn facilitated a
receipt of money that the Fraudulent Suppliers would keep.
Where an actual
purpose is to effectuate a fraud, it can be expected that trickery or facades
may be involved and that form and
substance might differ.
the Tribunal does not consider that the difference between the form and
substance of the scheme leads to a conclusion that
the principal effect of the
scheme or any part of the scheme was for [the taxpayer] to obtain ITCs.
system of levying GST on dealings in gold substances is very much form driven.
Metal in substance, i.e. chemically and atomically,
identical, may be treated
differently depending on its presentation or its form. Producing something that
is in form different to
its substance and transacting in it, as has happened
here, transformed the character and transferred the ownership of the highly
valuable commodity.
This was the principal effect to be recognised
(bold emphasis added) ;
(3) as to the purpose or object of the GST Act (s 165-15(1)(c)):
far as the applicant obtained the Contested ITCs on the acquisition of taxable
supplies in the course of its enterprise, that is
an unremarkable outcome under
the GST Act. It is well-known that, with limited exceptions, GST on
acquisitions is intended to have
a neutral impact on a GST-registered
taxpayer’s costs. That is a fundamental feature of value-added taxation
systems throughout
the world. It does not support a conclusion that any entity
entered into the scheme or a part of the scheme with the dominant purpose
applicant obtaining ITCs.
artificial creation of a GST liability, and corresponding ITC entitlement, by
defacing bullion may be seen as not an object of
the GST Act. However, a
liability arising on a taxable supply is an intended outcome under GST law
regardless of the circumstances
giving rise to the liability. Even illegal
supplies may be taxable supplies. Once the gold was no longer precious metal
its subsequent
supply being taxable was unremarkable and an intended outcome
under the GST Act.
purpose or object of the GST Act includes, fundamentally, to create a liability
for GST on taxable supplies. That is what occurred
here. It is the failure to
pay the GST that departs from the object of the GST Act, not the allowance of
ITCs on business-to-business
acquisitions which is the standard and intended
object of value-added taxation.
is there anything in the object of the GST Act that suggests the principal
effect of the scheme or a part of the scheme was for
[the taxpayer] to obtain
(4) as to the timing of the scheme and the period over which it was entered into
and carried out (ss 165-15(1)(d) and (e)):
does not appear to be any timing aspect of the scheme that suggests a ...
principal effect of securing the ITCs for [the taxpayer].
If anything, the
timing aspects suggest the contrary. The scheme continued after the time when
the AFP raids occurred and with a
different manner of execution after that time.
Continuing [the taxpayer’s] activities after the AFP raids on a similar
to before the raids points against the requisite purpose or effect for
Division 165 to apply.
the extent it happened, the round robin nature of the movement of the same gold
from [the taxpayer] to and through the Fraudulent
Suppliers and back to [the
taxpayer] and the timing of those steps suggest that the scheme was structured
to be, to the extent of
this circularity, self-contained and possibly
self-perpetuating. The timing of the circular steps suggests, if anything,
of the fraudulent purpose.
Tribunal is unable to identify any basis on which timing matters could support a
conclusion that the principal effect of the scheme
or a part of the scheme was
[the taxpayer] obtaining ITCs. ;
(5) as to the effect that the GST Act would have in relation to the scheme apart
from Division 165 (s 165-15(1)(f)):
is true that if one considers only the part of the scheme that is the defacing
of bullion before its sale to [the taxpayer], that
part of the scheme causes a
change in the GST status of the commodity and its subsequent sale. But that is a
change that causes GST
to become payable where it would not otherwise have been
payable. And, more importantly, the economic impact is neutral because of
taxpayer’s] entitlement to ITCs. ... It does not support a conclusion that
the principal effect of the scheme or a part
of the scheme was for [the
taxpayer] to obtain ITCs. ;
(6) as to any change in the taxpayer’s financial position that has
resulted, or may reasonably be expected to result, from
the scheme (s
165-15(1)(g)):
[the taxpayer’s] perspective, namely an enterprise that produced precious
metal and sold it thus making GST-free supplies:
(a) ITC entitlements arose in respect of all of its inputs to that process that
were taxable supplies to it including all of the
contested Division 165
transactions;
(b) for each of the contested transactions it paid a price that was informed by
the fact that they were taxable supplies and that
exceeded the price that would
have been payable had the supplies not been taxable, and that excess equalled
the ITC entitlement mentioned
(c) [the taxpayer] enjoyed enhanced turnover from its participation in the
scheme and resultant trading profits from that enhanced
globally, the only potentially measurable financial benefit was enhanced
profitability from enhanced trading.
Commissioner’s submissions to the contrary, namely that [the taxpayer]
profited by the refund of the GST and without that
refund the transactions made
no sense, must be rejected. The Full Court
decision made clear that
availability of ITCs has a neutral effect on profit which is determined net of
GST considerations. Mere
availability of ITCs cannot be regarded as a source of
Tribunal also considers this factor does not support a conclusion that the
principal effect of the scheme or a part of the scheme
was [the taxpayer]
obtaining the Contested ITCs. The obtaining of the ITCs had a neutral impact on
[the taxpayer] since it was matched
by the obligation, which it met, to pay a
price for the Refining Materials that was informed by a corresponding GST
(emphasis added) ;
(7) as to any change that has resulted, or may reasonably be expected to result
from the scheme in the financial position of an entity
connected to the taxpayer
(s 165-15(1)(h)):
is no question that the Fraudulent Suppliers were financially disadvantaged by
the scheme if the non-payment of GST, which does
not form part of either of the
Commissioner’s articulated schemes, is ignored. That is because their
sales prices for the Refining
Materials were less than they paid for bullion in
investment form.
it would be artificial to ignore the non-payment of GST. It is objectively clear
that without that non-payment their participation
in the scheme would have made
no sense and would not have happened. The artificiality in ignoring the
non-payment by the Fraudulent
Suppliers probably explains the extensive evidence
led by the Commissioner of the financial affairs of the intermediaries and their
GST compliance, or lack thereof.
Fraudulent Suppliers were, if outstanding liabilities are not taken into
account, enriched in a cash sense by not paying the GST
they were liable to pay.
That enrichment swamped the spot price differential between what they paid for
bullion and what they sold
the Refining Materials for. That suggests those
entities had a dominant purpose of enriching themselves by collecting but not
GST – that was the sole source of their enrichment.
this factor does not support a conclusion that the availability of the ITCs was
the principal effect of the scheme or a
part of the scheme. A financial effect
of ITCs would be illusory when, as here, matched by a liability to pay a price
that includes
a corresponding amount of GST.
(emphasis added) ;
(8) as to other consequences for the taxpayer or a connected entity of the
scheme having been entered into or carried out, and the
nature of the connection
between the taxpayer and the connected entity including whether the dealing is
or was at arm’s length
(ss 165-15(1)(i) and (j)):
is no suggestion that the dealings between the Division 165 Supplying
Entities and [the taxpayer] and/or ABC NSW were other
than at arm’s length
in both the relationship sense and in the sense that commercial prices were paid
for the relevant supplies.
The latter is not surprising since there is no common
ownership between the Division 165 Supplying Entities and [the taxpayer] or
factor does not support a conclusion ... that the principal effect of the scheme
or any part of the scheme was,. [the taxpayer]
obtaining the Contested ITCs.
(9) as to the circumstances surrounding the scheme and any other relevant
circumstances (ss 165-15(1)(k) and (l)):
such circumstance, excluded by the Commissioner from his articulated schemes, is
the fraudulent non-payment of the Fraudulent
Suppliers’ GST
liabilities.
circumstance ... does not support a conclusion ... that the principal effect of
the scheme or any part of the scheme was, [the
taxpayer] obtaining the Contested
Second Tribunal next set out at T[207] to [211] and [215] to [219] some further
observations relevant to,
, the principal effect of the
schemes. Those observations have been reproduced at [71] and [72] above.
T[226], the Second Tribunal expressed the conclusion that, for the reasons
indicated in its consideration of the s 165-15 factors,
it would not be
reasonable to conclude that the principal effect of either scheme or any part of
either scheme was the taxpayer obtaining
the input tax credits.
E.4.2 The Commissioner’s challenge
fifth question described in the supplementary notice of appeal is:
Whether under s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) the Tribunal correctly applied the meaning of
the principal effect of the scheme, or part of the
question is supported by the sixth ground, as follows:
Further or in the alternative, in concluding at [172] and [176] that the
principal effects of the scheme were to transform the character
of the gold, to
transfer the ownership of it and after that the fraud on the Commissioner, the
Tribunal failed to apply correctly
the meaning of the principal effect of the
scheme, or part of the scheme under s 165-5(1)(c)(ii).
E.4.3 Consideration
Commissioner’s first submission was that the Second Tribunal erred in
failing to recognise that the transformation of the
character of the gold and
the transfer of its ownership to the taxpayer was not inconsistent with the
creation of income tax credits
for the taxpayer on its purchase of the
adulterated gold.
proposition that the Second Tribunal did not recognise that the transformation
and transfer of ownership of the gold was not inconsistent
with the creation of
the income tax credits is a conclusion, for which the Commissioner has not
provided any basis. Such a conclusion
would not readily be reached as a matter
of inference, particularly in view of the comprehensive nature of the Second
Tribunal Decision:
Applicant WAEE v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs
[2003] FCAFC 184
; (2003) 236 FCR 593 at
604 to 605 [47] (French, Sackville and Hely JJ). Such a conclusion should not be
drawn in the present case.
It is unnecessary to consider whether such a
conclusion, if drawn, would reveal an error of law.
Commissioner’s second submission was that the Second Tribunal erred in not
undertaking an assessment of the importance of
the creation of the input tax
credits to the scheme and each part of it as “required” by
Complete Success Solutions
submission is not accepted. The Second Tribunal did not fail to recognise the
creation of entitlements in the taxpayer to input
tax credits. The Second
Tribunal expressly considered this aspect of the schemes, but was not persuaded
that such entitlements were
the principal effect of the schemes, deciding
instead that the principal effect was the change of ownership of very high
gold and subsequently the fraud on the Commissioner (T[172] and
[176]). These findings of fact were well open to the Second Tribunal
weight to be given to the entitlement to input tax credits when considering the
principal effects of the schemes was a matter
for the Second Tribunal.
Commissioner’s third submission was that on the facts, the creation of the
input tax credits for the taxpayer upon the adulteration
of the gold and the
transfer of that gold to the taxpayer was the chief and critical effect of the
schemes, and in particular the
part of the schemes that consisted of the
adulteration of gold by the Division 165 Supplying Entities and the transfer of
by them to the taxpayer for a GST inclusive price.
submission does not raise a question of law, and is another invitation to this
Court to engage with the merits of the Second
Tribunal’s decision. Again,
such an invitation must be declined.
E.5 The sixth question – treatment of the object and
purpose of the GST Act
sixth question and the eighth ground of appeal described in the supplementary
notice of appeal concern the Second Tribunal’s
treatment of one of the s
165-15 factors, namely s 165‑15(1)(c). That sub-section relevantly
provides that when considering
an entity’s purpose in entering into or
carrying out a scheme and the effect of a scheme under s 165-5, account must be
of the purpose or object of the GST Act and any relevant provision of that
Act (whether the purpose or object is stated expressly
E.5.1 The Second Tribunal’s consideration of s
165-15(1)(c) of the GST Act
T[166], as noted above, the Second Tribunal stated:
Absent adulteration of gold bullion, in many respects the relevant transactions
were carried out in the way of ordinary transactions.
The steps taken were
largely as would be expected in arm’s length sales of Refining Materials
and gold bullion. Indeed, aside
from the one respect noted immediately below,
but for the non-payment of GST by the suppliers the transactions would likely
been regarded as unremarkable from a fiscal perspective.
Second Tribunal addressed s 165-15(1)(c) at T[177] to [181]:
far as [the taxpayer] obtained the Contested ITCs on the acquisition of taxable
supplies in the course of its enterprise, that
is an unremarkable outcome under
the GST Act. It is well-known that, with limited exceptions, GST on acquisitions
is intended to
have a neutral impact on a GST-registered taxpayer’s costs.
That is a fundamental feature of value-added taxation systems throughout
world. It does not support a conclusion that any entity entered into the scheme
or a part of the scheme with the dominant purpose
of [the taxpayer] obtaining
artificial creation of a GST liability, and corresponding ITC entitlement, by
defacing bullion may be seen as not an object of
the GST Act. However, a
liability arising on a taxable supply is an intended outcome under GST law
regardless of the circumstances
giving rise to the liability. Even illegal
supplies may be taxable supplies. Once the gold was no longer precious metal its
supply being taxable was unremarkable and an intended outcome under
the GST Act.
purpose or object of the GST Act includes, fundamentally, to create a liability
for GST on taxable supplies. That is what occurred
here. It is the failure to
pay the GST that departs from the object of the GST Act, not the allowance of
ITCs on business-to-business
acquisitions which is the standard and intended
object of value-added taxation.
factor does not suggest a conclusion that producing the GST benefit was the
dominant purpose of the scheme for these supplies.
is there anything in the object of the GST Act that suggests the principal
effect of the scheme or a part of the scheme was for
[the taxpayer] to obtain
E.5.2 The Commissioner’s challenge
sixth question described in the supplementary notice of appeal is:
Whether under s 165-15(1)(c) the Tribunal was correct in its determination and
consideration of the purpose or object of the GST
Act and any relevant provision
of the GST Act?
is supported by the eighth ground of appeal, as follows:
Further or in the alternative, in determining and considering the purpose and
object of the GST Act, the Tribunal erred by failing
to take into account the
purpose and object of Division 165 of the GST Act (being to deter schemes to
give entities benefits by reducing
GST, increasing refunds or altering the
timing of payment of GST or refunds) and by failing to consider that object and
purpose having
regard to the matters set out in s 165-15(1)(c).
E.5.3 Consideration
ground of appeal is framed as failure to take into account the purpose and
object of the GST Act. For the reasons set out at
[112] above and from a reading
of the Second Tribunal Decision (and in particular T[177] to [181] reproduced at
[119] above), no
conclusion that the Second Tribunal failed to take into account
the purpose and object of the GST Act should be drawn.
Commissioner submitted that:
Complete Success Solutions
at [103], the Full Court stated that
“it is not consistent with the object or policy of the Act for GST to
become embedded
in a supply of goods that has been deliberately devalued”;
(2) contrary to
Complete Success Solutions
, the Second Tribunal at T[178]
and [179] found that the allowance of input tax credits on the supply of gold
that had been deliberately
defaced was an intended outcome and object of the
Act, and erred in doing so.
submission cannot be accepted for the following reasons:
Complete Success Solutions
at [103], the Full Court stated:
In considering the objects of the GST Act (s 165-15(1)(c)), the Tribunal
correctly observed at T [128] that, generally, a purpose
of the GST Act is to
relieve GST-registered businesses involved in making taxable or GST-free
supplies of GST costs on their inputs
through the mechanism of input tax
credits. The Commissioner is also correct to observe that it is not consistent
with the policy
or object of the GST Act for GST to become embedded in a supply
of goods which have been deliberately devalued. ;
(2) thus, the Full Court in
Complete Success Solutions
accepted as
correct the following two propositions:
(a) generally, a purpose of the GST Act is to provide relief by way of input tax
credits to GST-registered businesses involved in
making taxable or GST-free
supplies; and
(b) it is not consistent with the policy or object of the GST Act for GST to
become embedded in a supply of goods which have been
deliberately devalued;
(3) the Second Tribunal, at T[178] and [179], on any fair reading, agreed with
both of these propositions and took them into account.
The Second Tribunal also
noted that there had been a departure from the object of the GST Act by dint of
the failure of the Division
165 Supplying Entities to remit to the Commissioner
the GST they had collected; and
(4) on no fair reading of T[178] and [179] could it be concluded that the Second
Tribunal made a finding that the allowance of input
tax credits on the supply of
gold that had been deliberately defaced was an intended outcome and object of
the GST Act.
E.6 The ninth question – whether a taxpayer can prove
that s 165-5(1)(c)(i) is not satisfied absent proof that the taxpayer
informed participant in the arrangements constituting each scheme
ninth question described in the supplementary notice of appeal is whether the
Second Tribunal erred in finding that it was not
reasonable to conclude that the
taxpayer had the requisite purpose under Division 165 of the GST Act in
circumstances where the taxpayer
failed to establish that it was not an informed
participant in the arrangements constituting each scheme.
E.6.1 The Second Tribunal’s consideration of the
question of the taxpayer’s informed participation
Second Tribunal addressed the question of the taxpayer’s knowledge of
arrangements that included the sale of deliberately
adulterated gold to the
taxpayer and the interaction of the answer to that question with the tasks
required by s 165-5(1)(c) at various
places in the Second Tribunal
at T[94] to [96] the Second Tribunal made the following observations:
significant but related issues emerged from the parties’ submissions
concerning factual findings.
(a) The first relates to whether, and if so what, knowledge findings the
Tribunal should make. A knowledge finding of the First Tribunal
was at the core
of the matter being remitted. As already noted, the Commissioner does not allege
[the taxpayer] participated in the
fraud on the Commonwealth perpetrated by the
Fraudulent Suppliers. However, the Commissioner does maintain [the taxpayer]
or was at the very least wilfully blind to, the activities of those
entities, in particular the deliberate adulteration of bullion
before its sale
to [the taxpayer].
The Commissioner ultimately submitted that it is not
necessary for the Tribunal to determine whether [the taxpayer] had such
in order for Division 165 to apply
. But if [the taxpayer]
maintained that it neither knew, nor ought to have known, of those activities,
the Commissioner would contest
that assertion.
(b) The second is whether, and to what extent, the transactions that gave rise
to the Contested ITCs were co-ordinated between the
various participants
including [the taxpayer].
the Full Court indicated, there is no necessary inconsistency between a finding
of sophisticated co-ordination and lack of knowledge
of the fraud.
Commissioner came to express the matter in terms that the issue raised is
whether and to what extent [the taxpayer] was an informed
participant in
arrangements that included sale of gold to [the taxpayer] that had been
deliberately de-valued by adulteration of
bullions bars. Such facts, if they
were found, would not supplant the tests to be applied which are addressed
. For the reasons which follow, the Tribunal does not consider that
findings on these matters are determinative of the issue before
the Tribunal.
Was [the taxpayer] an informed participant in arrangements that included
sale of deliberately-defaced bullion to [the taxpayer]?
summary, on the basis of the evidence before it,
the Tribunal is not prepared
to make positive findings that [the taxpayer]
was an informed participant that knew of, or ought to have known of and
turned a blind eye to, the activities of the Division 165
Entities. As indicated, the Commissioner said that for his case to succeed it
was not necessary to make such a knowledge
such an informed participant in the arrangements. As
discussed below, even if such a finding were appropriate, it would not change
the outcome of this matter
(bold emphasis added)
at T[109] the Second Tribunal observed:
Findings of fact are made on evidence led, and that process needs to consider
the evidence led through the lens of what was, or could
be expected to be,
capable of being led. The positive finding sought by [the taxpayer] cannot be
made given the extent of the evidence
it has led.
at T[171] the Second Tribunal noted:
For these reasons, the manner in which the scheme was entered into or carried
out does not support a conclusion that any entity entered
into the scheme or any
part of the scheme with the dominant purpose of [the taxpayer] obtaining the
Contested ITCs.
Even if, contrary to the conclusion above, [the taxpayer] was
an informed participant in the scheme, the manner in which it was carried
would still support a conclusion that the Fraudulent Suppliers had a dominant if
not sole purpose of defrauding the Commonwealth
. It would not support a
conclusion that [the taxpayer], ABC NSW or any other entity had a dominant
purpose of [the taxpayer] obtaining
the Contested ITCs. [The taxpayer] would
still have obtained refining profits only.
(emphasis added)
at T[215] to [219] and under the heading “Knowledge or blind eye”,
the Tribunal stated the views which are reproduced
at [72] above. Of particular
relevance is T[219] which is reproduced again for ease of reference :
The conclusion would not change even if [the taxpayer] was, as the Commissioner
asserts, an informed participant in co-ordinated
arrangements. Little if
anything concerning purpose conclusions changes by assuming [the taxpayer] had
relevant knowledge. In the
Tribunal’s view, it would still not be
reasonable to conclude that the dominant purpose of the Fraudulent Suppliers was
[the taxpayer] to obtain ITCs. Even if there was informed participation and
co-ordination by [the taxpayer], the requisite conclusion
would still be that
the dominant purpose of those suppliers was to receive but not pay amounts
referable to their GST liabilities.
The taxable supplies and connected ITCs were
merely steps in an ultimate plan that would remain the same. [The taxpayer] paid
for dollar for the ITCs it became entitled to. That remains the same. The
dominant purpose of [the taxpayer] remains securing its
refining profit.
Informed coordination could not change the principal effect of the scheme or a
part of the scheme.
E.6.2 The Commissioner’s challenge to the Second
Tribunal’s findings
ninth question described in the supplementary notice of appeal is:
Whether the Second Tribunal erred in finding that it was not reasonable to
conclude that [the taxpayer] had the requisite purpose
under Division 165 of the
GST Act in circumstances where [the taxpayer] failed to establish that it was
not an informed participant
in the arrangements constituting each scheme?
question is supported by grounds 13 and 14, as follows:
or in the alternative, the Second Tribunal erred in holding at [219], despite
its reasons at [96(b)], that Division 165 of
the GST Act would not apply to the
scheme even if [the taxpayer] failed to establish that it was not an informed
participant in the
arrangements constituting the scheme.
Tribunal ought to have held that, because [the taxpayer] failed to establish
that it was not an informed participant in the arrangements
constituting the
scheme (see [96(b)]), it could not be concluded that it did not have the
requisite purpose for the purposes of s
165-5(1)(c)(i) of the GST Act.
E.6.3 Consideration
Commissioner’s first submission was that the Second Tribunal erred in
holding at T[219] that Division 165 of the GST Act
would not apply to the scheme
irrespective of the taxpayer’s failure to establish that it was not an
informed participant in
it because objective evidence which reflects a
participant’s actual or constructive knowledge about the effects and
characteristics
of the wider scheme in which it is a participant could be
evidence relevant to the evaluation of its purpose, citing
Minerva Financial
Group v Commissioner of Taxation
[2022] FCA 1092
(O’Callaghan
J) and the authorities there cited.
in the Commissioner’s submission is the proposition that the taxpayer
could not succeed unless it established that
it was not an informed participant
in the arrangements constituting the schemes. That proposition is unsound, as:
(1) it has no basis
in the GST Act or otherwise; and (2) assuming for present
purposes that the informed participation of a participant in a scheme may
relevant to the tasks mandated by s 165-5(c)(i) and (ii), mere potential
relevance is insufficient.
Commissioner’s second submission was that such error also involved a
reversal of the onus of proof imposed by
Administration Act 1953
(Cth).The Commissioner submitted that the Second
Tribunal erred in focussing its attention on the Commissioner’s inability
persuade it to make a positive finding (T[97] to [102]), when it was not for
the Commissioner to prove the taxpayer’s knowing
participation; it was for
the taxpayer to disprove it, which it could not ([96(b)]).
was no reversal of the onus of proof. The Second Tribunal found, as it was able
to, that the taxpayer discharged its onus of
proof without proving that it was
not an informed participant. Further, the Second Tribunal did not focus its
attention solely on
the Commissioner’s case concerning the knowledge of
the taxpayer. It also considered whether to make the finding sought by
taxpayer that it was not an informed participant in the arrangements and
expressly declined to do so. The Second Tribunal also
considered, as it was
entitled to do, that such a finding, even if made, would not have been a matter
of any moment in the light
of other factual findings that it had made
(T[96(b)]). Such reasoning is orthodox and discloses no error of law.
F. CONCLUSION
appeal should be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and thirty-six (136) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 24 October 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
FEUTRILL J:
INTRODUCTION
A New Tax System (Goods and Services Tax) Act 1999
(Cth) contained
certain general anti-avoidance provisions aimed at negating the fiscal
consequences of artificial or contrived schemes
that reduce the GST tax base.
Division 165 operated if an entity (avoider) got a GST benefit from a scheme
and, taking into account
certain mandatory matters, it was reasonable to
conclude that either: (1) an entity that entered into or carried out the scheme
so with the dominant purpose of that entity or another entity getting a GST
benefit from the scheme; or (2) the principal effect
of the scheme was that the
avoider got the GST benefit from the scheme: s 165-5(1)(c). If Div 165
applied, the applicant (Commissioner)
had power to make a declaration that had
the effect of negating a GST benefit of the avoider: s 165-40. The
Commissioner also had
power to make assessments or amended assessments of the
amount payable by or to the avoider under certain provisions contained in
Taxation Administration Act 1953
Commissioner exercised the declaratory and assessment powers by which refunds in
the total amount of $72,953,611 which the respondent
(taxpayer) had received
were negated. The Commissioner exercised the power on the ground, amongst
others, that the taxpayer had obtained
refunds for input tax credits under a
gold refining scheme entered into or carried out by a number of entities
(referred to as the
Division 165 Supplying Entities) which had supplied scrap
gold to the taxpayer. The taxpayer objected to the assessments under the
provisions of
Taxation Administration Act
. The Commissioner
disallowed the objection and the taxpayer sought review of the objection
decision in the Administrative Appeals
tribunal (First Tribunal) made a decision largely affirming the assessments. The
taxpayer appealed to this Court and that appeal
was allowed and the matter
remitted to the tribunal for determination according to law. The tribunal on
remitter (Second Tribunal)
made a decision to the effect that it was not
reasonable to conclude that an entity had the s 165-
‘dominant purpose’ or the scheme had the s 165-
‘principal effect’. The Commissioner commenced an appeal from that
decision under
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth). The AAT Act has since been repealed and the
Administrative Review
Tribunal Act 2024
(Cth) enacted. The Administrative Appeals Tribunal has
been abolished and replaced by the Administrative Review Tribunal. Under certain
transitional provisions this appeal continues as if it were an appeal under
s 44 of the AAT Act and, if the Second Tribunal decision
is set aside, the
matter may be remitted to the Administrative Review Tribunal.
ultimately pursued, the notice of appeal identifies seven questions of law and
eight grounds in support of asserted errors of law.
The overall question of law
posed in the notice of appeal is whether the Second Tribunal correctly applied
the legal test mandated
in s 165-5(1)(c) of the GST Act and, thereby,
correctly concluded that it was
reasonable to conclude that an entity
had the statutory ‘dominant purpose’ or the scheme had the statutory
effect’ (Question 1). The answer to that question
essentially turns on the answers to each of the other questions posed. The
aspects of the tribunal’s decision challenged and the issues raised in the
appeal may be summarised as follows.
(1) The Commissioner challenges the conclusion, for the purposes of
s 165-5(1)(c)(i), that it was not reasonable to conclude that
the Division
165 Supplying Entities entered into or carried out the scheme or part of the
scheme with the dominant purpose of getting
the taxpayer a GST benefit from the
scheme. There were a number of strands to the Commissioner’s contentions,
but these largely
boil down to two main issues. First, whether in the
application of a facilitative purpose of an ultimate purpose analysis drawn from
Mills v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2012] HCA 51
250 CLR 171
tribunal disregarded the statements of principle applicable to consideration of
composite purposes in
ACN 154 520 199 Pty Ltd (in liq) v Federal Commissioner
of Taxation
[2020] FCAFC 190
282 FCR 455
Commissioner of Taxation v
Complete Success Solutions Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 19
(2023) 116 ATR 9
thereby, misconstrued and misapplied the s 165-5(1)(c)(i) ‘dominant
purpose’ test. Second, whether there was a failure
to consider the
importance of the taxpayer getting input tax credits to the economic feasibility
of the scheme and, thereby, the
tribunal failed to exclude that potential
importance in its consideration of which of the competing purposes was dominant
1 – 4, Grounds 1 – 3, 5).
(2) The Commissioner challenges the conclusion, for the purposes of
s 165-5(1)(c)(ii), that it was not reasonable to conclude that
principal effect of the scheme or part of the scheme was that the taxpayer got
the GST benefit. Here, there are also two issues.
First, whether there was a
misconstruction and misapplication of the s 165-5(1)(c)(ii)
‘principal effect’ test because
the tribunal incorrectly focussed on
the general non-fiscal effects of the change in ownership and form of gold and
the (dishonest)
non-payment of GST liabilities rather than on the fiscal effect
of the particular scheme or part of the scheme. Second, as with dominant
purpose, whether there was a failure to consider the importance of the taxpayer
getting input tax credits to the economic feasibility
of the scheme and,
thereby, the tribunal failed to exclude that potential importance in its
consideration of the effect of the scheme,
in particular, that part of the
scheme in which the taxpayer participated (Question 5, Ground 6).
(3) The Commissioner challenges the manner in which the matter described in
s 165-15(1)(c), the purpose or object of the GST Act
or any provision of
that Act, was taken into account in considering the statutory questions posed in
s 165-5(1)(c). The relevant
issue is whether the purpose or object of Div
165 to deter artificial or contrived schemes was a mandatory matter to be taken
account and that matter was disregarded in considering the statutory
questions (Question 6, Ground 8).
(4) The Commissioner challenges the conclusion, for the purposes of
s 165-5(1)(c)(i), that it was not reasonable to conclude that
the taxpayer
entered into or carried out the scheme or part of the scheme with the dominant
purpose of the taxpayer getting a GST
benefit from the scheme. Here, again there
are two issues. First, whether informed participation of the taxpayer in the
arrangements
constituting the scheme was a ‘circumstance’ to be
taken into account in considering the statutory questions posed in
s 165-5(1)(c)(i). Second, whether it should have been found that the
taxpayer was unable to discharge its onus of proving that it
was not reasonable
to conclude that the taxpayer had the s 165-5(1)(c)(i) dominant purpose
because the taxpayer failed to positively
prove that it was
informed participant (Question 9, Grounds 13 and 14).
have had the advantage of reading the reasons of Goodman J in draft. His Honour
has set out the statutory context, background and
Second Tribunal’s
decision and consideration of the applicable provisions in terms with which I
agree. None of these matters
need be restated except as is necessary to explain
my reasons and, otherwise, I gratefully adopt his Honour’s explanation of
them and the expressions and terms his Honour has described or defined in his
reasons. However, on the principal issues in the appeal,
regrettably and with
due respect to his Honour’s reasons, I have largely reached different
conclusions.
the reasons that follow, I am of the view that the Second Tribunal misconstrued
and misapplied s 165-5(1)(c)(i) in adopting and
applying a facilitative
purpose analysis in its consideration of the ‘dominant purpose’
statutory inquiry mandated in
Div 165. That conclusion renders it unnecessary to
address the other issues raised in the appeal, but as these were fully argued,
have also expressed my views on them. In short, the tribunal misconstrued and
misapplied the s 165-5(c)(ii) ‘principal effect’
failing to focus on the fiscal effect of the scheme. Further, the tribunal
misconstrued and misapplied s 165-5(1)(c) by
disregarding that a purpose or
object of Div 165 is to deter artificial or contrived schemes. Otherwise, I do
not accept that any
of the other matters the Commissioner raised involve errors
of law. The Second Tribunal’s decision should be set aside for
law and the matter remitted to the Administrative Review Tribunal for
determination according to law.
STATUTORY CONTEXT
is convenient to commence with an overview of the general provisions of the GST
Act and the specific provisions of Div 165 of that
GST Act provided that GST is payable on ‘taxable supplies’ and
entitlements to ‘input tax credits’ arise
on ‘creditable
acquisitions’: s 7-1. Amounts of GST and amounts of input tax credits
are set off against each other to
produce a ‘net amount’ for a tax
period: s 7-5. The amount assessed as being the ‘net amount’
for a tax period
is the amount that the entity must pay to the Commonwealth or
the Commonwealth must refund to the entity in respect of the period:
s 7-15. A person must pay GST on any taxable supply made by that person:
s 9-40. A person is entitled to input tax credits on any
acquisition made by that person: s 11-20. The amount of the GST liability
is 10% of the value of the taxable supply or
one eleventh of the consideration
for the taxable supply.
Relevantly,
a taxable supply is made if the supply is for consideration, made in the course
or furtherance of an enterprise the taxpayer
carries on, and the taxpayer is
registered or required to be registered. However, the supply is not a taxable
supply to the extent
that it is ‘GST-free’ or ‘input
taxed’: s 9-5. A ‘creditable acquisition’ is made if
is acquired solely or partly for a creditable purpose, the supply of
the thing is a taxable supply, consideration is provided for
the supply, and the
acquirer is registered or required to be registered: s 11-5. A thing is
acquired for a ‘creditable purpose’
to the extent that it is
acquired in carrying on the acquirer’s enterprise: s 11-15. An
‘enterprise’ is an activity
or series of activities, done in the
form of a business or in the form of an adventure or concern in the nature of
trade: s 9-20(1).
A person is required to be registered under the GST Act
if the person is carrying on an enterprise and the person’s GST turnover
meets the registration turnover threshold: s 23-5.
the GST Act assumes that a GST liability will be included in the consideration
for a taxable supply and where the thing acquired
is used in the course or
furtherance of an enterprise the notional GST liability embedded in the
consideration will be refunded through
an entitlement to an input tax credit.
Through this system of setting off GST liability against input tax credit and
assessment and
payment or refund of the ‘net amount’, the burden of
the tax is borne by the ultimate consumer of goods and services.
are special rules relating to certain supplies that are ‘GST-free’
or ‘input taxed’: Div 38, Div 40.
These rules include certain
supplies of ‘precious metal’. The expression ‘precious
metal’ is defined to mean
gold, silver or platinum in investment form of
at least 99.5%, 99.9 or 99% fineness or any other substance in investment form
particular fineness specified in regulations: s 195-1.
special rules, dealers in precious metal would not be able to ‘pass
on’ a liability incurred to pay GST on an
otherwise taxable supply of a
precious metal because the consideration for the supply of the precious metal
would be fixed by the
international price for that precious metal. To avoid that
outcome, the first supply of precious metals after it is refined is
if the entity that refined the precious metal is a
‘refiner of precious metal’ and the recipient of the supply is a
in precious metal’: s 38-385. Likewise, subsequent
transactions involving precious metal where the consideration is also fixed
internationally are ‘input taxed’: s 40-100. To the extent that
a supply is both ‘GST-free” and ‘input
general, the supply is GST-free and not input taxed for the purposes of the GST
Act: s 9-30(3). See, also, Explanatory
Memorandum to
A New Tax System
(Goods and Services) Tax Bill 1998
(Cth), paras 5.125 – 5.127.
Division 165
any taxation legislation, the GST Act is open to abuse. Therefore, Div 165
contains general anti-avoidance provisions that are
in similar terms and operate
in a similar way to other general anti-avoidance provisions in Commonwealth
taxation legislation.
the relevant period, s 165-5 and s 165-10 of the GST Act
165-5 When does this Division operate?
General rule
(1) This Division operates if:
(a) an entity (the
) gets or got a *GST benefit from a
(c) taking account of the matters described in section 165-15, it is reasonable
to conclude that either:
(i) an entity that (whether alone or with others) entered into or carried out
the scheme, or part of the scheme, did so with the
sole or dominant purpose of
that entity or another entity getting a *GST benefit from the scheme; or
(ii) the principal effect of the scheme, or of part of the scheme, is that the
avoider gets the GST benefit from the scheme directly
or indirectly; ...
165-10 When does an entity get a GST benefit from a scheme?
(1) An entity gets a
GST benefit
from a *scheme if:
(a) an amount that is payable by the entity under this Act apart from this
Division is, or could reasonably be expected to be, smaller
than it would be
apart from the scheme or a part of the scheme; or
(b) an amount that is payable to the entity under this Act apart from this
Division is, or could reasonably be expected to be, larger
than it would be
apart from the scheme or a part of the scheme;
What is a scheme?
(3) An entity can get a *GST benefit from a *scheme even if the entity or
entities that entered into or carried out the scheme, or
a part of the scheme,
could not have engaged economically in any activities:
(a) of the kind to which this Act applies; and
(b) that would produce an effect equivalent (except in terms of this Act) to the
effect of the scheme or part of the scheme;
other than the activities involved in entering into or carrying out the scheme
or part of the scheme.
165-10(2) described the meaning of ‘scheme’ broadly to be any
arrangement, agreement, understanding, promise or
undertaking, or any scheme,
plan, proposal action, course of action, or course of conduct. Section 165-15
described 12 matters that
were to be taken into account in considering an
entity’s purpose in entering into and carrying out the scheme from which
avoider got a GST benefit and the effect of the scheme.
Div 165 operated, the Commissioner had a discretion to negate a GST benefit by
making a declaration about the avoider’s net
amount for a specified tax
period under s 165-40. Schedule 1 of the
Taxation Administration Act
contained provisions by which the Commissioner could make assessments and
amended assessments based on the ‘net amount’
THE SCHEME AND GST BENEFIT
substance, the Second Tribunal made findings of fact from which it was
reasonable to conclude that the Division 165 Supplying Entities
entered into or
carried out the essential elements of the scheme the Commissioner articulated
for most of the relevant period. The
tribunal also accepted that the taxpayer
got a GST benefit from the scheme for most of the relevant period.
essential elements of the scheme were as follows:
(a) The taxpayer supplying a related party (ABC NSW) and an unrelated party
(Ainslie) with gold metal of 99.99% fineness in investment
form for an amount
roughly equivalent to the prevailing spot price for gold. (ABC NSW and Ainslie
are referred to as the Dealers.)
(b) Certain of the Division 165 Supplying Entities (Intermediaries) purchasing
gold metal of 99.99% fineness in investment form from
the Dealers and (or) other
(c) Certain of the Division 165 Supplying Entities scratching, melting or
altering of the gold metal referred to in paragraph (b)
above such that,
while still of 99.99% fineness, the gold was no longer in investment form for
the purposes of the definition of
‘precious metal’ in s 195-1 of the
(d) Certain of the Division 165 Supplying Entities supplying of the gold metal
referred to in paragraph (c) (scrap gold) to the taxpayer
for an amount that was
less than the prevailing spot price for gold, before the addition of GST.
(e) The taxpayer refining the scrap gold referred to in paragraph (d) to produce
‘precious metal’ as defined.
Commissioner also asserted and relied on a scheme described as the
‘narrower scheme’ which consisted of the transactions
and course of
action referred to in paras (b), (c) and (d) of the ‘wider
supply of scrap gold referred to in para (d) was notionally a ‘taxable
supply’ within the meaning of the GST Act.
As a consequence, the Division
165 Supplying Entities incurred a liability to the Commonwealth to pay GST
calculated as one eleventh
of the consideration for the supply. At the same
time, the acquisition of the scrap gold was notionally a ‘creditable
acquisition’
within the meaning of the GST Act. As a consequence, the
taxpayer was entitled to input tax credits calculated as one eleventh of
consideration for the taxable supply.
not part of the scheme (wide or narrow) as articulated, the Division 165
Supplying Entities failed to pay the GST liabilities
incurred on the notional
taxable supplies. The Commissioner made assessments of net amounts and penalties
for most of those entities.
The assessments were not paid and all the Division
165 Supplying Entities went into administration for insolvency. The Second
described this ‘wider design’ (i.e., the whole design
including the step of non-payment of GST liabilities) as dishonest
or fraudulent
and as a ‘missing trader or carousel fraud arrangement’.
taxpayer lodged GST returns with the Commissioner by which it received refunds
for net amounts based on the entitlements to input
tax credits resulting from
the creditable acquisitions of scrap gold. The Commissioner made declarations
under s 165-40 of the GST
Act and assessments and amended assessments by
which refunds of $72,953,611 were disallowed. The Second Tribunal accepted that
of these refunds were GST benefits within the meaning of the GST Act.
the notional effects of the GST Act are ignored, the Division 165 Supplying
Entities made notional gains on the acquisition of
gold in investment form as
the consideration paid was based on the value of gold metal in investment form
and it was supplied to
the taxpayer for consideration that included a 10% markup
on the value of gold metal in scrap gold. The taxpayer made notional losses
because it acquired the scrap gold based on its value plus a 10% markup, refined
it into investment form and then supplied it for
consideration based on the
value of the gold metal in investment form.
the notional effects of the GST Act are taken into account the opposite is the
case. The Division 165 Supplying Entities must make
losses if their GST
liabilities are discharged and the taxpayer may make gains (depending on the
movement in international value
of gold metal) after refining the gold because
the 10% markup included in the consideration paid for the scrap gold would be
to the taxpayer through input tax credits.
is self-evident that no commercially rational refiner of precious metal would
acquire scrap gold at a 10% markup to the value of
the gold metal unless it
believed it would recover the whole consideration as part of its enterprise.
Therefore, the assumption the
taxpayer would be entitled to input tax credits,
objectively, was an inducement for the taxpayer to pay the Division 165
Entities the consideration it paid for the scrap gold.
is equally self-evident that no commercially rational dealer of precious metal
would acquire gold metal in investment form, change
its form into scrap gold and
thereby devalue the gold content and supply it to a refiner of precious metal at
a loss. Therefore,
objectively, the Division 165 Supplying Entities intended to
supply the scrap gold for the value of the gold metal plus a 10% markup,
discharge any GST liability they incurred.
THE SECOND TRIBUNAL DECISION
proceeding before the Second Tribunal was a review of the Commissioner’s
decision not to allow the taxpayer’s objection
s 14ZZ(1)(a)(i)
Taxation Administration Act
. In that proceeding the taxpayer was limited
to the grounds stated in its taxation objection and had the burden of proving
Commissioner’s assessment was excessive or otherwise incorrect
and what the assessment should have been:
The taxpayer’s
grounds of objection included that an entity did not have the
(1)(c)(i) ‘dominant purpose’ or that the scheme did not
have the s 165-
(1)(c)(ii) ‘principal effect’.
Relevantly,
the Second Tribunal was required to decide if, taking into account the matters
described in s 165-
reasonable to conclude that
either: the Division 165 Supplying Entities (or the taxpayer) entered into or
carried out the scheme
or part of the scheme with the sole or dominant purpose
of the taxpayer getting a GST benefit from the scheme; or the principal effect
of the scheme or part of the scheme was that the taxpayer got the GST benefit
from the scheme directly or indirectly.
essence, the objective consequence of the steps described in paras (b) and (c)
of the scheme were as follows.
(1) To change the form of the gold metal from investment form into scrap gold.
That step changed the way a supply of the gold metal
would be treated under the
GST Act and placed the Division 165 Supplying Entities in a position in which
they could obtain consideration
from the taxpayer based on the value of the
scrap gold plus a 10% markup.
(2) To supply scrap gold to the taxpayer. That step involved a notional
‘taxable supply’ of the scrap gold.
(3) The Division 165 Supplying Entities became liable to pay a GST liability of
10% of the value of the scrap gold and the taxpayer
became entitled to an input
tax credit of 10% of the value of the scrap gold.
is self-evident that an intended consequence of that part of the scheme was for
the Division 165 Supplying Entities to secure consideration
for the supply of
scrap gold that included a 10% markup on the value of the gold metal. The GST
Act or fiscal consequence was to
‘create’ a notional ‘taxable
supply’ of gold metal. That, in turn, had the fiscal consequences of the
165 Supplying Entities incurring a GST liability and the taxpayer
becoming entitled to input tax credits. It is also self-evident
that without
creating a notional ‘taxable supply’ the taxpayer would not have
paid consideration that included a 10%
markup on the value of the scrap gold and
the Division 165 Supplying Entities would not have secured that consideration
and the scheme
would have been loss-making. It was within that factual and legal
context that the Second Tribunal was called upon to address the
questions posed in s 165-5(1)(c).
the proceeding before the Second Tribunal the parties conducted the dispute on
the footing that the battleground lay in whether
the requisite dominant purpose
or principal effect ought to be found. The taxpayer contended that the dominant
purpose of the Division
165 Supplying Entities was to obtain and dishonestly
retain the benefit of the GST payable on the prices the taxpayer paid them for
the scrap gold through collecting GST-informed consideration but not paying the
GST liabilities to the Commonwealth. The Commissioner
contended that the
objective purpose of the Division 165 Supplying Entities could not be explained
as evading a GST liability that
would not exist but for the scheme. Rather, the
scheme was directed at the taxpayer obtaining input tax credits without which it
would not have paid GST-informed consideration for the scrap gold.
Second Tribunal identified one of the issues that it had to address to answer
the statutory questions as ‘whether purposes
of a supplier creating a
taxable supply and therefore creating (or creating and not paying) a GST
liability and for the recipient
of the supply of a corresponding [input tax
credit] entitlement are effectively different sides of the one coin, so to
speak, such
that they could not be regarded as a single composite
purpose’: T [158]. The Second Tribunal cited relevant passages from
Full Court ACN
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Ludekens
214 FCR 149
Complete Success Solutions
that set out the
applicable ‘composite purpose’ principles. It also said that the
comments in
‘regarding the standing of facilitative steps
towards an ulterior and ultimate goal inform the characterisation of steps in
linked chain of events’ and cited certain passages from
support of that proposition: T [159]-[163]. After addressing each of the
matters described in s 165-15 the Second Tribunal returned
to the question
of composite purpose and, in effect, concluded on the facts as found that the
composite purpose analysis was inapplicable
to the circumstances of the case
before it: T [208]-[211].
it acknowledged that
Complete Success Solutions
for the proposition that ‘a single purpose may be appropriately found in
some circumstances’, it considered that
the analysis in
facilitative purpose of an ultimate purpose was more apposite to the
circumstances of the case before it. Applying the
analysis to the
facts as found it considered that ‘creating taxable supplies that also
produced GST-informed prices being paid
and [input tax credit] entitlements to
arise, was a necessary preliminary to an ulterior and ultimate goal’ and
concluded that
‘any purpose in obtaining [input tax credits] in the
present circumstances, assuming there was one, was a purpose properly
as central to the design of a scheme directed to achieving an ulterior and
ultimate purpose, and therefore any purpose of
obtaining [input tax credits] was
incidental and not dominant’: T [208]. Ultimately, the tribunal
concluded that the dominant
purpose of the Division 165 Supplying Entities was
to execute ‘their fraud’ by obtaining and retaining GST-informed
consideration:
Second Tribunal’s conclusions relating to principal effect are
interspersed with its consideration of dominant purpose and
the matters
described in s 165-15. The tribunal expressed the view, in substance, that
the principal effect of the scheme was to
change the form of the gold metal,
transfer it to the taxpayer and place the Division 165 Supplying Entities in the
position in which
they could retain the whole consideration and avoid paying GST
liabilities: T [172], [176], [216].
the course of addressing the matters described in s 165-15 the Second
Tribunal dealt with the purpose or object of the GST Act
and expressed the view
that the GST Act had its intended effect on the arrangements that constituted
the scheme and that it was the
non-payment of GST liabilities that departed from
the object of the GST Act: T [178]-[179].
Second Tribunal was not prepared to make a positive finding that the taxpayer
was an informed participant in the arrangements
that constituted the scheme.
But, it was also not prepared to make a positive finding that the taxpayer was
not an informed participant:
T [96]-[109]. The tribunal concluded that even
if the taxpayer was an informed participant it would not have made any
to the conclusions that the tribunal made regarding dominant purpose:
Ultimately,
the Second Tribunal concluded that it would not be reasonable to conclude that
any entity entered into the scheme or part
of the scheme (wider or narrow) with
the sole or dominant purpose of, or the principal effect of the scheme or part
of the scheme
(wide or narrow) was, the taxpayer obtaining input tax credits:
four aspects of the Second Tribunal’s decision that are challenged are set
out and summarised earlier in these reasons.
to the challenge to the conclusion that it was not reasonable to conclude that
the Division 165 Supplying Entities had the s 165-5(1)(c)(i)
purpose, the core of the Commissioner’s contentions in the appeal centres
on the manner in which the Second Tribunal
disregarded the observations about
composite purpose in
Full Court ACN
Complete Success Solutions
and applied a facilitative of ultimate purpose
analysis drawn from
Commissioner contends that the Second Tribunal disregarded
Full Court ACN
Complete Success Solutions
without explanation. And, explanation was
necessary given that the observations in
Full Court ACN
were made on
virtually the same facts and the observations in
Complete Success
were made on facts involving the same core elements. Further, in
disregarding
Full Court ACN
Complete Success Solutions
Second Tribunal gave no consideration as to whether the purpose of obtaining (or
obtaining and not paying) GST and the purpose
of obtaining input tax credits for
the taxpayer were inextricably linked. The tribunal’s finding that the
purpose of obtaining
input tax credits was incidental to the purpose of
non-payment of GST liabilities was made without excluding the possibility it was
important to the Division 165 Supplying Entities that the scheme end with a
GST-free supply by an entity which would be refunded
by input tax credits so
that the scheme as a whole would work by being sufficiently funded.
Commissioner also contends that the Second Tribunal failed to characterise
‘purpose’ in the manner that s 165-5(1)(c)(i)
requires. In
substance, the Commissioner contends that the tribunal focussed on the remote
and fiscally irrelevant (dishonest) purpose
of non-payment of notional GST
liabilities whereas it was required to focus on the fiscal purpose of getting
the taxpayer input tax
credits from the scheme. In so doing, the tribunal failed
to appreciate that the remote and fiscally irrelevant purpose was not
necessarily
inconsistent with a dominant purpose of getting the taxpayer input
tax credits. The tribunal expressed no rationale for concluding
(dishonest) purpose was separate, discrete and dominant over the input tax
credit purpose. The Commissioner contends that
the asserted errors in failing to
consider if the purposes were inextricably linked and failing to distinguish
between the purposes
also affected the tribunal’s consideration of the
matters described in s 165-15(1)(a) and s 165-15(1)(b).
to the challenge to the conclusion that it was not reasonable to conclude that
the effect of the scheme or part of the scheme was
the s 165-5(1)(c)(ii)
‘principal effect’, the Commissioner contends that the Second
Tribunal failed to correctly apply
the statutory test. In this respect, the
Commissioner submits that the tribunal failed to recognise the effect of change
and ownership of the gold metal was not inconsistent with the effect of
creation of a taxable supply and corresponding GST liabilities
and entitlements
to input tax credits. Further, as with dominant purpose, the tribunal did not
undertake an assessment of the importance
of the refunds to the scheme and each
part of the scheme.
to the treatment of the matters described in s 165-15(1)(c), the
Commissioner contends that the object or purpose of Div 165 was
a mandatory
matter to be taken into account in the consideration of the statutory questions
under s 165-5(1)(c). The Commissioner
contends that the Second Tribunal
disregarded that mandatory matter in error of law because it failed to take into
account that a
purpose or object of Div 165 is to deter artificial or contrived
to the last aspect of the Second Tribunal’s decision the Commissioner
challenges, in accordance with
Taxation Administration Act
the taxpayer had the onus of positively proving that it was not reasonable to
conclude that it had the s 165-
(1)(c)(i) ‘dominant purpose’.
The Commissioner contends that the Second Tribunal was wrong to conclude that
the outcome
would not have changed if the taxpayer were an informed participant
and that involves misconstruction of s 165-
(1)(c)(i) and s 165-15 of
the GST Act. Further, the Commissioner contends that because the taxpayer failed
to prove that it was not
an informed participant, the tribunal was bound to
conclude that the taxpayer had failed to prove that it was not reasonable to
that the taxpayer had the s 165-5(1)(c)(i) dominant purpose. That
involves misconstruction and misapplication of s 14ZZK.
QUESTIONS OF LAW
taxpayer contends that the supplementary notice of appeal fails to raise a
question of law. The taxpayer submits that all the
grounds of appeal pressed are
complaints about findings of fact and do not identify any error in the Second
Tribunal’s understanding
of the applicable legal principles or its
application of those principles to the facts as found. Nonetheless, it was
common ground
that if the Second Tribunal were found to have applied the wrong
legal test in answering the statutory questions in s 165-5(1)(c)
amount to an error of law. It may also be accepted that it would be an error of
law if the tribunal disregarded a material
matter that the statute obliges the
tribunal to take into account in the exercise of its review function: e.g.,
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v Peko-Wallsend Ltd
[1986] HCA 40
at 39-40 (Mason J).
is fair to observe that, before the Commissioner abandoned certain of the
questions and grounds of appeal in the notice of appeal,
there was a significant
degree of entanglement in the Commissioner’s notice of appeal and written
submissions between questions
of law and fact finding that tended to obscure the
legal questions raised in the appeal. Nonetheless, it emerged during the course
of the appeal that the principal question of law raised in the appeal is
whether, in applying the facilitative purpose analysis drawn
the Second Tribunal misunderstood and misapplied the s 165-5(1)(c)
‘dominant purpose’ and ‘principal effect’
tests. Many of
the other questions of law and grounds of appeal involve the Second
Tribunal’s application of the facilitative
purpose analysis to the facts
as found which the Commissioner contends are demonstrative of an erroneous
application of the applicable
legal tests.
fairness to both the Commissioner and the taxpayer, where, as here, it is
asserted that a decision-maker has misconstrued the relevant
statute thereby
misconceiving the nature of the function which the decision-maker performed,
drawing the line between error in the
application of the law to the facts as
found and mere error in fact finding can be particularly difficult to discern. A
similar problem
arises in the context of judicial review in discerning
Craig v South Australia
[1995] HCA 58
184 CLR 163
at 178 (Brennan,
Deane, Toohey, Gaudron and McHugh JJ). It requires careful consideration of the
reasons for decision, acknowledging
that they should be read as a whole and
fairly, and may require inference to be drawn from the reasons about the manner
the decision-maker has performed the relevant statutory function: e.g.,
Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs v Wu Shan Liang
[1996] HCA 6
185 CLR 259
at 271-2 (Brennan CJ, Toohey, McHugh and Gummow JJ). For the reasons
given later, in my view, misconstruction of s 165-5(1)(c) is
discernible
from the Second Tribunal’s reasons for decision and, therefore, the appeal
is ‘on a question of law’.
Disregard of mandatory relevant
considerations is also evident.
Goodman J has set out the principles applicable to the identification of errors
of law in fact finding. With the exception
of characterisation of the statutory
question of whether ‘it is reasonable to conclude’ posed in
s 165-5(1)(c) as one
of fact and that the words ‘dominant’ and
‘principal’ where used in that subsection have their normal meaning,
I agree with his Honour’s summary. On the view I take of the questions
raised in the appeal, it is unnecessary to resolve this
point of difference
because the Second Tribunal applied the wrong legal test in reaching its
conclusions on the s 165-5(1)(c) statutory
questions. Nonetheless, it is
necessary to explain the reasons for my not fully embracing his Honour’s
construction of s 165-5(1)(c).
Satisfaction
of the requirements in s 165-5(1)(a) and s 165-5(1)(c) are necessary
preconditions to the application of Div 165 and
to the exercise of the
Commissioner’s powers under that division, including the power to negate a
GST benefit under s 165-40.
These preconditions are appropriately
characterised as ‘jurisdictional facts’: see, e.g.,
[60]. Moreover, there is nothing to suggest that the question of whether
‘it is reasonable to conclude’ in s 165-5(1)(c)
is founded on
the Commissioner’s opinion or state of satisfaction such that the relevant
‘jurisdictional fact’
is the Commissioner’s state of
the expression ‘jurisdictional fact’ is used to describe necessary
preconditions to the jurisdiction or power
of a decision-maker, the applicable
statutory criteria need not only involve facts to answer the description of a
fact. It is frequently the case that ‘jurisdictional
facts’ involve ‘a complex of elements’:
Enfield City
Corporation v Development Assessment Commission
[2000] HCA 5
199 CLR 135
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ). Jurisdictional facts may also be
purely factual in content. But, whatever the content,
‘jurisdictional fact
review proceeds on the basis that it is a jurisdictional error of law for
someone to exercise public power
in the absence of a jurisdictional fact’:
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Applicant
[2003] HCA 30
, [59] (McHugh and Gummow JJ). In
the context of jurisdictional fact review, a court is entitled to determine the
facts for itself
and receive evidence even if that evidence was not before the
original decision-maker, and the court can give such weight to the
decision as to the existence of the jurisdictional fact the court sees fit:
EHF17 v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2019] FCA 1681
272 FCR 409
(Derrington J) and the authorities there cited.
v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2015] FCAFC 92
(at [202]) the Court observed that ‘one of the functions of
s 44 is to ensure that the tribunal stays within its jurisdiction.
appeal that raises jurisdictional error is an appeal on a question of law under
s 44.’. Given that in circumstances of judicial
non-existence of a jurisdictional fact, it may
be that the Court is not deprived
of authority to determine the existence or non-existence of a jurisdictional
fact, as an appeal
on a question of law, for the purposes of s 44 of the
AAT Act: see, e.g.,
Rana v Repatriation Commission
[2011] FCAFC 124
this appeal the Court was not invited to determine for itself on the facts as
found or on the evidence if ‘it was reasonable
to conclude’ that
there was either the s 165-5(1)(c) ‘dominant purpose’ or
‘principal effect’. Therefore,
the question of whether it has
authority to do so in an appeal under s 44 from a decision of the tribunal
under Pt IVC of the
Taxation Administration Act
does not directly arise for
determination. However, I do not the regard the Full Court’s observation
Complete Success Solutions
(at [66]-[67]), citing
Commissioner of
[2003] FCAFC 236
132 FCR 523
[92]-[94]), to the effect that the statutory task under s 165-
‘requires the drawing of conclusions of fact and an ultimate
conclusion about dominant purpose and principal effect, also being
a conclusion
of fact’ as inconsistent with characterisation of the ultimate conclusion
of fact as a ‘jurisdictional fact’.
any event, whatever were the nature of the matters described in s 177D(b)
of the 1936
Income Tax Assessment Act
, the matters described in s 165-15
are not all necessarily pure questions of fact. The purpose or object of the GST
Act or any relevant
provision of that Act and the effect that the GST Act would
have in relation to the scheme apart from Div 165 are both matters that
questions of law: s 165-15(1)(c), s 165(1)(f). Section 165-15(1)(b)
requires consideration of the form and substance of the
scheme including the
legal rights and obligations involved in the scheme. Depending on the
circumstances, the manner in which the
scheme was entered into or carried out,
changes in financial positions, consequences for the avoider or any connected
entity, the
nature of the connection between the avoider and any connected
entity, the circumstances surrounding the scheme and other relevant
circumstances could also involve consideration of legal rights and obligations.
Therefore, the jurisdictional fact described in s
165-5(1)(c) is a complex
of elements rendering the description of the ultimate conclusion the section
calls for a conclusion of ‘fact’
something of a misnomer.
the foregoing reasons, I prefer not to express a definitive view on the extent
to which the statement of the Full Court in
Complete Success Solutions
[66] should be qualified in the manner the Commissioner submits. However, in
whatever manner the statutory question posed in s
165-5(1)(c) is
characterised, the meaning of the provision is a question of law and I do not
consider that the expressions ‘it
is reasonable to conclude’ or
‘dominant purpose’ or ‘principal effect’ are used
according to their
common understanding such that the ‘special
considerations’ referred to in
Vetter v Lake Macquarie City Council
[2001] HCA 12
202 CLR 439
apply. That is, I do not accept that both the meaning
of these expressions and the application of them are questions of fact:
at [24]-[27] (Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Callinan JJ) and the
authorities there cited.
explained shortly, the ordinary meaning of ‘dominant purpose’ and
‘principal effect’ is affected by the
statutory context and object
and purpose of the GST Act and Div 165. Although ‘dominant’ and
‘principal’
are used according to the ordinary meaning of those
words, they are not separate or individual ‘facts’ as components
the statutory inquiry. The words operate to qualify ‘purpose’ and
‘effect’ each of which are not used
according to the ordinary
meaning of the words but have particular meanings of statutory significance for
the statutory questions
posed in s 165-5(1)(c).
DIVISION 165 ANALYSIS
Context, purpose or object
the analysis of the meaning of a provision in a statute or legislation starts
and ends with the text, the text must be considered
in context and having regard
to the legislative purpose:
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated
Media Holdings Ltd
[2012] HCA 55
250 CLR 503
(French CJ, Hayne,
Crennan, Bell and Gageler JJ). Where different interpretations are open, the
interpretation that would best achieve
the purpose or object of the Act is to be
preferred to each other interpretation:
Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth). To that end, material not forming part of the
Act that is capable of assisting in the ascertainment of the meaning of the
provision to be considered may be taken into account, either to confirm the
ordinary meaning or determine the meaning in cases where
meaning is ambiguous,
obscure, absurd or unreasonable: s 15AB. Nonetheless, the ‘modern
approach’ to statutory interpretation
insists that context, including
purpose or object, be considered in the first instance:
CIC Insurance Ltd v
Bankstown Football Club Ltd
[1997] HCA 2
187 CLR 384
at 408 (Brennan CJ,
Dawson, Toohey and Gummow JJ).
general provisions and operation of the GST Act provide context to the
application and operation of Div 165. The relevant provisions
and operation are
summarised earlier in these reasons and are set out and explained more
extensively in the reasons of Goodman J.
Nonetheless, it is useful to make three
further observations about the general provisions that provide additional
context in which
to construe the provisions of Div 165.
a person registered or required to be registered must give the Commissioner a
GST return for each tax period: s 31-5. The GST
return is required to be
given in the approved form identifying the entity’s net amount (amount of
GST liabilities less amount
of input tax credits) and must be given at a
particular time after the end of each period: s 31-8, 31-10, 31-15 and
s 17-5 of the
GST Act. Lodgement of a GST return results in an assessment
of the net amount for a tax period: s 155-5 and s 155-15 of Sch 1 of
Taxation Administration Act
. The liability of an entity to pay the net amount
falls due and payable on specific prescribed dates dependent upon which
tax period applies: s 33-
and s 33-5 of the GST Act. Conversely, the
entitlement to receive a refund for the net amount arises following the
lodgement of the
GST return: s 35-5 and s 35-10 of the GST Act. In general, an
input tax credit cannot be claimed in a GST return for a tax period
taxpayer holds a tax invoice for the creditable acquisition at the time the GST
return is given to the Commissioner: s
in point of detail, a supplier neither ‘charges’ nor
‘collects’ GST on a taxable supply and an acquirer
does not pay GST
on a creditable acquisition. As supplier, a taxpayer receives consideration for
a taxable supply and, as acquirer,
a taxpayer pays consideration for a
creditable acquisition. A liability to pay GST or an entitlement to receive an
input tax credit
depends upon the individual circumstances of the relevant
taxpayer. However, insofar as an entitlement to receive an input tax credit
concerned, there is interdependence between the circumstances of the supplier
and the circumstances of the acquirer. To be entitled
to receive an input tax
credit the supply must meet the requirements of a taxable supply and, therefore,
be a supply by which the
supplier is liable to pay GST. Further, to attribute an
input tax credit to a tax period the acquirer must have received a tax invoice
from the supplier.
the context of the issues raised in this appeal, these observations have
particular significance because there is a direct relationship
between the
creation of a taxable supply and incurring a GST liability on the one hand and
creation of a taxable supply and entitlement
to input tax credit on the other.
In general, a taxpayer cannot ‘claim’ an input tax credit without
receiving a tax invoice
from the supplier. Therefore, a ‘claim’ for
an input tax credit is not merely based on an assumption that there was a
taxable supply it is founded, in effect, on a ‘representation’ by an
entity registered for GST that it was a taxable
supply and, in effect, a
liability to pay GST was incurred by the supplier. Thus, there is a direct legal
nexus between the existence
of a GST liability and an entitlement to set-off
input tax credits in the calculation of the net amount.
another relevant feature of the general provisions of the GST Act is that a
taxable supply is made in the course or furtherance
of an enterprise the
supplier carries on. Relevantly, an ‘enterprise’ is defined to mean
an activity, or series of activities
done in the form of a business or adventure
or concern in the nature of trade: s 9-20 of the GST Act. In general, a business
or adventure
or concern in the nature of trade is carried on with a view to
profit or gain: see, e.g.,
Professional Admin Service Centres Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Taxation
[2013] FCA 1123
(Edmonds J);
Commissioner of Taxation v Myer Emporium Ltd
[1987] HCA 18
163 CLR 199
209-210 (Mason ACJ, Wilson, Brennan, Deane and Dawson JJ). For example, in the
case of an individual, an ‘enterprise’
does not include an activity
or series of activities done without a reasonable expectation of profit or gain:
s 9-20(2)(c). Put another
way, relevantly and in general, the purpose or
object of the GST Act is not to make GST payable on supplies made in the course
furtherance of a hobby or a non-genuine business, adventure or concern in the
nature of trade. That is not to say that a supply of
a thing that is unlawful
cannot be a taxable supply for the purposes of the GST Act: s 9-10(3).
Unlawful supplies may well be made
in the course or furtherance of an
‘enterprise’ involving a genuine, albeit illegal, business or trade.
However, activities
that are loss-making and are structured in such a manner
that there is no reasonable expectation that the activities will ever produce
profits or gains may not meet the description of an ‘enterprise’ for
the purposes of the GST Act.
Anti-avoidance provisions
165 is, of course, as much a part of the GST Act, under which assessments of
liability to pay a net amount or entitlement
to refund of a net amount arises,
as any other provision of that Act and is to be construed according to it terms:
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Spotless
Services Ltd
186 CLR 404
purpose or object of Div 165 is to deter schemes that are intended to give or
have the effect of giving an entity (avoider) GST
benefits by taking advantage
of the GST Act in circumstances other than in those consistent with the purpose
or object of the GST
Act. The provisions of Div 165 are in similar terms to
other general anti-avoidance provisions in taxation legislation. Insofar as
GST Act is concerned, Div 165 is a key component in maintaining the integrity of
the GST base: Explanatory Memorandum, para 6.307.
Genuine supplies and
acquisitions are not the target of Div 165: Explanatory Memorandum, para
headings to the Chapters, Parts, Divisions and Subdivisions and explanatory
sections of the GST Act all form part of that Act:
s 182-1 of the GST Act.
An explanatory section may be considered, amongst other things, in the
interpretation of an operative provision
to determine the purpose or object
underlying that provision: s 182-10(2).
heading to Div 165 is ‘Anti-avoidance’. Section 165-1 (the
explanatory section for Div 165) provides, relevantly,
that the object of
the Division is to deter schemes to give entities benefits by increasing refunds
and that the Division is ‘aimed
at artificial or contrived schemes’.
Broadly, the object of Div 165 is to deter artificial or contrived schemes that
in a reduction of the GST tax base.
to certain observations that the Second Tribunal made regarding the operation of
Div 165 and its approach to the purpose and object
of the GST Act in its
consideration of the matter described in s 165-15(1)(c) it is useful to
emphasise that Div 165 operates according
to its terms and it matters not that
an avoider is unaware of the scheme or part of the scheme in which the avoider
is a participant.
It also does not matter that where the GST benefit involves
input tax credits another entity has incurred a corresponding GST liability
vice versa. In any circumstance in which there is a GST benefit there will be
‘another side to the coin’.
the heading ‘Collection failures’ the Second Tribunal observed that
the Commissioner was seeking to uphold assessments
disallowing input tax credits
of nearly $73 million in circumstances in which the Division 165 Supplying
Entities, and not the taxpayer,
had (dishonestly) profited, the taxpayer was
unrelated to those entities. The Commissioner had not alleged that the taxpayer
participated
in the dishonesty. The taxpayer’s profits on the relevant
transactions were less than $12 million. Disallowing the input tax
credits would
not reverse the ‘huge financial gain’ of the Division 165 Supplying
Entities but would drastically effect
the taxpayer which did not enjoy the
benefit of the dishonest profits. Further, the Commissioner would not be seeking
to disallow
the input tax credits if the unpaid GST had been recovered from the
Division 165 Supplying Entities: T [212]-[213]. The Tribunal
There is nothing in the text of Division 165, or extraneous materials, or in the
jurisprudence relating to Division 165 or Part
IVA of the 1936 Assessment Act
upon which it was plainly modelled, to indicate Division 165 was intended to be
invoked, where it
would not otherwise be applied, as an alternative to recovery
of liabilities owed by other entities.
observations are, of course, not part of the Tribunal’s task in
determining whether Division 165 applies which must be
approached according to
the terms in which the Division is cast. And they have not been treated as if
they are. However, these observations
suggest careful and close scrutiny of the
statutory considerations relevant to whether Division 165 applies is required.
especially so in a case where the result of applying Division 165
strikes the Tribunal as both surprising, in terms of visiting extraordinarily
severe consequences on the applicant, who did not participate in the fraud,
rather than the Fraudulent Suppliers who were the perpetrators
that benefited
directly from their fraud, and out of all proportion to any benefit that, on any
view, could have been enjoyed by
the applicant from participation in the scheme.
apparent concern expressed about the ‘extraordinarily severe
consequences’ visited upon an innocent participant in
a (dishonest) scheme
is not a reason for considering that Div 165 was not intended to operate in
those circumstances. Division 165
operates based upon the objective dominant
purpose of an entity that entered into or carried out the scheme. As already
the requirements of s 165-5(1) are preconditions to the exercise
of the Commissioner’s power to negate a GST benefit under
If the preconditions exist the Commissioner may, but need not, exercise the
power. If the Commissioner negates a GST benefit,
the Commissioner also has
power to negate or reduce any GST disadvantage that an entity obtained from a
scheme: s 165-45. A GST disadvantage
includes GST liabilities that were
larger than they would have been apart from the scheme. Therefore, where an
entity obtains a GST
benefit that is negated, it is contemplated and within the
power of the Commissioner to also negate the corresponding GST liability
supplier. Put another way, there is a mechanism by which the Commissioner is
able to avoid the Commonwealth receiving GST
from one entity with respect to a
taxable supply and negating the corresponding input tax credit of another entity
in circumstances
in which that outcome would not be consistent with the purpose
or object of the GST Act. Thus, an inability to recover corresponding
liabilities is not a reason for considering that Div 165 is not intended to
apply in such circumstances. Moreover, if and to
the extent that the avoider is
truly innocent (and is able to demonstrate that to be the case) the Commissioner
may, in the exercise
of his discretion, choose not to exercise the power under
Dominant purpose
purpose is a consequence intended by a person to result from some action. A
person will often intend that a single action have multiple
consequences. Thus,
it is the relationship between multiple intended consequences that the word
‘dominant’ in s 165-5(1)(c)(i)
is directed:
[63] (Gageler J). ‘In its ordinary meaning, dominant indicates that
purpose [intended consequence] which was the ruling,
prevailing, or most
influential purpose.’:
Spotless Services
at 416. The relevant
purpose is that of an entity (whether alone or with others) that ‘entered
into or carried out the scheme,
or part of the scheme’. It is not
necessary that the entity in question gets a GST benefit from the scheme to meet
the requirement
in s 165-5(1)(c)(i).
there are multiple intended consequences arising from a scheme or part of a
scheme, s 165-5(1) presents the question of whether,
taking into account
the matters described in s 165-15, posited as objective facts, it is
reasonable to conclude (or a reasonable
person would conclude) that an entity
that entered into or carried out the scheme or part of the scheme did so for the
dominant purpose
of that entity or another entity getting a GST benefit:
Spotless Services
at 424 (Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron, Gummow and
Kirby JJ). The twelve matters described in s 165-15 may be taken into
in forming ‘a global assessment of purpose’ or effect:
Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated Press Holdings Ltd
[2001] HCA 32
207 CLR 235
are the purposes of a person, whether that person be a natural person, an
artificial person (such a corporation) or some
form of construct (such as a
reasonable person). The purpose is ‘subjective’ in the sense that it
belongs to the subject
whether that purpose be the actual purpose of a person
or, like s 165-5(1)(c)(i), a constructive objective purpose in the sense of
an object that an act or circumstance is ‘apt to achieve’. In the
context of a statutory inquiry about fiscal consequences
of action, it is
necessary to distinguish between purpose, motive and means. A person’s
purpose is usually the ultimate end,
object or goal that the person seeks to
achieve. A person’s motive is the reason that the person seeks to achieve
that purpose
or end. A person’s means is the way in which the purpose is
to be achieved. A person’s means to achieving their ultimate
object could
also be characterised as a purpose, but it is only an intermediate or proximate
end. It may also be possible to characterise
a person’s motive for certain
action, such as to make a profit or gain or increase wealth, as a purpose, but
that purpose or
motive may be too remote from the fiscal consequences of the
action to be relevant for the statutory inquiry. Therefore, for the
purposes of
a statutory inquiry, it is necessary to characterise the purpose or end of some
action at the proper level of generality,
as distinct from any motive for that
purpose or the intended means of achieving that purpose:
Automotive Invest
Pty Ltd v Federal of Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] HCA 36
(Edelman, Steward and Gleeson JJ).
appropriate description or characterisation of the end sought to be accomplished
(purpose), as distinct from the reason for seeking
that end (motive), may depend
on the legislative or other context in which the task is undertaken. Thus,
‘in describing, for
the application of a law relating to tax avoidance,
the purpose of an individual, or of an arrangement, it will be necessary to look
at what is sought to be achieved that is of fiscal consequence, not at a more
remote, but fiscally irrelevant, object, such as increasing
a taxpayer's
disposable income’:
News Ltd v South Sydney District Rugby League
Football Club Ltd
[2003] HCA 45
215 CLR 563
(Gleeson CJ), cited
with evident approval in
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Sharpcan Pty
[2019] HCA 36
269 CLR 370
Automotive Invest
[112]. Likewise, in the application of a tax avoidance provision like
s 165-5(1)(c), the statutory inquiry into purpose is not
concerned with
subjective actual motive or subjective
purpose and is to be
undertaken objectively taking into account the matters described in
Consolidated Press Holdings
Commissioner of Taxation v Hart
[2004] HCA 26
217 CLR 216
necessity to address the question of purpose or effect at the correct level of
generality and by reference to the fiscal consequence
sought to be achieved is
also of relevance to consideration of the ruling, prevailing or most influential
purpose. An entity may
enter into or carry out a scheme or part of a scheme with
the dominant purpose of getting an avoider a GST benefit where that dominant
purpose is also consistent with a more remote and fiscally irrelevant pursuit of
commercial gain in the course of or furtherance
of an enterprise:
Consolidated Press Holdings
Principal effect
effect is also a consequence or result produced by some agency or cause, but it
differs from a purpose in that it need not have
been an intended consequence or
even a consequence that was foreseen. As with purpose, a single action can also
have multiple consequences
whether or not intended by any person. In the case of
effect, it is the relationship between multiple consequences or results of
action to which the word ‘principal’ is directed. While
‘dominant purpose’ is focussed on the entity that
entered into or
carried out the scheme, the focus of ‘principal effect’ is on the
fiscal consequences for the avoider,
which may be, but is not necessarily, the
entity that entered into or carried out the scheme. In its ordinary meaning
‘principal’
indicates first or highest in rank or importance. The
ordinary meaning of that expression is consistent with the description ‘a
principal effect is an important effect, as opposed to merely an incidental
effect’ in the Explanatory Memorandum, para 6.345.
As with purpose, a
principal effect of getting an avoider a GST benefit may also be consistent with
a more remote effect of commercial
gain of the entity that entered into or
carried out the scheme or part of the scheme or with the effect of commercial
gain for the
avoider. Therefore, as with purpose, the focus of the statutory
inquiry under s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) centres on the fiscal consequences
from the scheme or part of the scheme and not remote and fiscally irrelevant
effects or preliminary and fiscally irrelevant
is also important to appreciate the differences in the manner in which the
‘dominant purpose’ and ‘principal
effect’ tests are
expressed. In the case of dominant purpose, it is a necessary precondition that
the avoider gets or got
GST benefit from
scheme and it must be
reasonable to be concluded that it was
consequence that
gets or got
GST benefit from
scheme: s 165-5(1)(a), s 165-5(1)(c)(i). In the case of
principal effect, it is a necessary precondition that the avoider gets or
GST benefit from
scheme and it must be reasonable to conclude
that it was the principal
consequence that the
GST benefit from
scheme. That is, the principal effect
test is concerned with actual consequences of activities not with the intended
consequences
of the activities. The focus is quite different. Dominant purpose
focusses on objective intended outcomes whereas principal effect
focusses on
objective actual outcomes irrespective of objective intent.
Full Court ACN, Complete Success Solutions and
the course of the reasoning in the appeal from the First Tribunal decision in
Full Court ACN
, amongst other things, the Full Court (Perram, Moshinsky
and Thawley JJ) was called upon to consider an argument that the taxpayer
advanced in that appeal that was similar to the argument which the Second
Tribunal ultimately accepted on remitter. The taxpayer
that the scheme was explicable only by the desire of the rogues to
pocket the cash from the GST and the First Tribunal had erroneously
benefit out of its mind. Further, that the Tribunal had asked itself the wrong
question; namely, what made the scheme work,
rather than what the scheme was
working to achieve. Apart from certain grounds dealt with earlier in their
reasons by which they
concluded the First Tribunal had failed to accord the
taxpayer procedural fairness, the Full Court considered that the taxpayer had
not established that the First Tribunal had adopted the wrong approach or made
an error of law in its consideration of dominant purpose
and principal effect
for the purposes of s 165-5. In this respect the Full Court said:
as ACN 154 submits that the dominant purpose of the scheme was for the Division
165 Supplying Entities to obtain the GST (which
they would fail to remit to the
Commissioner), rather than for ACN 154 to obtain input tax credits, this
submission seems to go to
the merits of the Tribunal’s conclusion.
any event, we consider that it was open to the Tribunal to view the obtaining
(by ACN 154) of the input tax credits and the obtaining
(by the supplying
entities) of the GST as comprising one purpose, in circumstances where the two
were inextricably linked: cf
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Ludekens
(2013) 214 FCR 149
ACN 154’s submission has echoes of the position rejected by the High Court
. In that case, as Brennan CJ, Dawson, Toohey, Gaudron, Gummow
and Kirby JJ noted at 414, the majority of the Full Federal Court held
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
(Cth) (on which Div 165 of
the GST Act is modelled, albeit there are some differences) did not apply to the
scheme. The majority
in the Full Federal Court decided that the “dominant
purpose” of the taxpayers was to obtain the maximum return on the
invested after the payment of all applicable costs, including tax, and not to
obtain a “tax benefit”. After setting
out passages from the judgment
of Cooper J (who formed part of the majority in the Full Federal Court),
including a passage referring
to a “rational commercial decision”,
the plurality in the High Court stated (at 415):
The references in this passage
on the one hand to a “rational commercial decision” and on the other
to the obtaining of
a tax benefit as “the dominant purpose of the
taxpayers in making the investment” suggest the acceptance of a false
... A person may enter into or carry out a scheme, within the meaning
of Pt IVA, for the dominant purpose of enabling the relevant
taxpayer to obtain
a tax benefit where that dominant purpose is consistent with the pursuit of
commercial gain in the course of carrying
on a business.
the facts are very different, this passage nevertheless tends to indicate the
flaw in ACN 154’s submission.
The fact that the Division 165 Supplying
Entities were pursuing their own (dishonest) gain is not necessarily
inconsistent with a
conclusion that it would be reasonable to conclude that an
entity that entered into or carried out the scheme did so with the dominant
purpose of ACN 154 obtaining the input tax credits
(Emphasis added.)
Full Court’s reference to (dishonest) gain as not necessarily inconsistent
with a dominant purpose of the taxpayer obtaining
input tax credits, in the
context of the reasoning of the High Court in
Spotless Services
to the proposition that a (dishonest) non-fiscal purpose of gain or profit and
the fiscal purpose of getting the taxpayer
input tax credits are not
incompatible, competing or contesting purposes. It is logically flawed to treat
them as so; that would
be a false dichotomy. An entity can have a purpose of
(dishonest) gain
have a dominant purpose of getting an avoider a GST
benefit from the scheme. An entity can have a purpose of (dishonest gain)
have some other dominant non-fiscal purpose sought to be achieved
from the scheme. For example, obtaining GST-informed consideration
in exchange
for a thing (here, scrap gold) may be the dominant non-fiscal purpose of a
transaction as would normally be the case
for a genuine sale and purchase of a
thing to which the GST Act applies. These observations are another way of saying
that the statutory
question posed in s 165-5(1)(c)(i) is focussed on the
purpose of utilising the scheme or part of the scheme as the means chosen to
achieve a fiscally irrelevant and remote end such as profit, gain or increasing
to which the Full Court refers illustrates that there can be a dominant
non-fiscal purpose of a scheme that is inextricably linked
to a fiscal (tax
benefit) purpose such that the purposes are a single composite dominant purpose.
Thus, the purpose of obtaining
GST-informed consideration (a non-fiscal purpose
of the scheme) may be inextricably linked to the purpose of getting the taxpayer
input tax credits (a fiscal purpose of the scheme). Each purpose (whether or not
inextricably linked) is a means of achieving the
more remote non-fiscal
commercial objective of gain or profit. Therefore, identification of a remote
non-fiscal objective will not
supply the answer to the purpose of the scheme as
the means of achieving that ultimate end.
was concerned with general anti-avoidance provisions of taxation legislation
relating to promotion of tax exploitation schemes. The
applicable provision
provided that a scheme was a tax exploitation scheme if it were reasonable to
conclude that an entity that entered
into or carried out the scheme did so with
the sole or dominant purpose of that entity or another entity getting a benefit
scheme and it was not reasonably arguable that the scheme benefit was
available at law. A scheme benefit was described as arising
where a tax related
liability was or could reasonably be expected to be less than it would be or its
tax-related credit was or could
reasonably be expected to be more than it would
be apart from the scheme.
Ludekens was a director of Lotus Capital Group Pty Ltd which held an Australian
Financial Services Licence. Mr Van de Steeg and
Mr Ezzy carried on a foreign
exchange trading business through Meloka Pty Ltd. As part of a plan to obtain
finance for Meloka’s
business, Mr Van de Steeg and Mr Ezzy acquired, with
Dr Ludekens and others, 3,250 fully-financed woodlots in the 2006 Gunns Woodlot
project to the value of $22,165,000. To fund the acquisition a loan of
$22,203,813.75 was necessary. As part of that plan, the acquirers
forward all commissions, GST and tax refunds from the sale of Gunn trees to
Meloka. These amounts were intended to partly
fund and repay the loan to acquire
the woodlots. The remaining acquisition cost and loan and interest were to be
funded by on-selling
woodlots to (secondary) investors. The secondary investors
would fund the purchase price from a loan and obtain tax refunds on the
acquisition of the woodlots. The tax refund would be used to repay the loan and
interest. Regarding the dominant purpose of the plan
(or scheme) the Court
assessing the purpose and evaluating its importance, and whether it is dominant,
one must appreciate that
it is the scheme in question to which the enquiry is
directed, not a general state of affairs other than the scheme. Persons engaged
in trade and commerce do so for personal gain
. The purpose of all commercial
arrangements is, in a broad sense, the making of profit: cf, by way of example,
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Hart
[2004] HCA 26
(2004) 217 CLR 216
the authorities cited and
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Consolidated
Press Holdings Ltd
[2001] HCA 32
(2001) 207 CLR 235
. Here the respondents
undoubtedly wished to make profits from the purchase of woodlots and from
running a foreign exchange business.
They chose the Plan to effect that.
Integral to the Plan was that the entities acquiring woodlots on 30 June 2007
(see [69] above)
would obtain scheme benefits from the GST refunds from the
purchase of the woodlots and that the Secondary Investors would obtain
benefits from tax deductions and tax refunds from their participation. Those are
not two purposes: they comprise one purpose
— that scheme benefit in terms
of lowered tax-related liabilities and increased amounts that the Commissioner
must pay or credit
(s 284-50(1)(a) and (b)) would flow to them and others. Those
two streams of funding, together with the commission from Gunns, were
to prop up the foreign exchange business: see [41], [44]-[45] and [58] above.
Plan required all three streams of funds — the Gunns commission, the GST
refunds and the Secondary Investors’ tax
The commission could
have been obtained without the need for the scheme. However, the scheme was
quite elaborate in nature. The getting
of the GST refunds and tax refunds
— in addition to the commission — was vital in order to reduce the
level of indebtedness
to Gunns and enable the respondents to retain a
significant investment in the 2006 Gunns Woodlot Project thereby, it was hoped,
secure commercial gains from participation in the Project and from support of
the foreign exchange business.
The Plan was centrally driven by the level of
the scheme benefits obtained, paid and on-lent to Meloka. The dominant purpose
get the scheme benefits, and each of them. The additional purposes of
profit making and the getting of commission do not affect that
conclusion. Those
are not competing purposes. There is but one purpose properly answering the
description of s 290-65(1)(a)(i). The
respondents entered into and carried out
the Plan with the dominant purpose of getting the scheme benefits (and each of
them and others from the Plan.
examples perhaps illuminate the matter. First, if a promoter wanted to fund his
or her private business by getting 99 streams
of funds from 99 people by way of
receipt of a percentage of the scheme benefits from the scheme inuring to each,
as well as by raising
subscribed capital or loan funds, would it be logical or
conformable with the policy of the statute to say that the purpose of receipt
the tax benefits was not dominant because the capital or loan funds were a
material and not
source of funds for the business? No: because
the dominant purpose is to obtain the scheme benefits to add to the other source
funds in order to make money from the business.
if one takes a financial scheme and posits that a promoter marketed to members
of the public a “wealth maximising
scheme” of the kind in Hart, he
or she would do so, no doubt, to make profit, perhaps from commissions paid by
the financial
institutions for the introductions of borrowers and also from sums
of money from the introduced borrowers being commensurate with
a proportion of
their tax benefits. The profit of the promoter comes from the scheme overall.
The purpose was to make money in one
sense; but the dominant purpose in entering
the scheme was to obtain for the prospective borrowers scheme benefits by way of
(Emphasis added.)
Full Court ACN
Complete Success Solutions
, a differently
constituted Full Court (Moshinsky, Thawley and Hespe JJ) heard an appeal from
the tribunal in a proceeding in which
the Commissioner had negated refunds under
Div 165 another refiner of precious metals had derived from a gold-refining
scheme that
had substantially the same features as the scheme in this case. One
of the questions of law the Commissioner raised in that appeal
was whether there
is a necessary dichotomy between the purpose and (or) effect of an entity
getting a GST benefit from the scheme,
and the purpose and (or) effect of
another entity avoiding the payment of GST as part of the scheme. As to that
question, consistently
Full Court ACN
, the Full Court said:
would be an error to assume that, because Manila Exchange wanted to obtain (and
not remit) the GST embedded in its supplies of
scrap gold, it was not possible
that its purpose, ascertained in accordance with Div 165, was to ensure that CSS
could obtain input
tax credits on a GST‐free sale.
As the Full Court
(Perram, Moshinsky and Thawley JJ) stated in
at 514 [226], the
purpose of obtaining (and not remitting) GST “is not necessarily
inconsistent with” a conclusion that
the dominant purpose was obtaining
the relevant input tax credits. Indeed, it would be open to conclude that the
purpose of obtaining
(and not remitting) GST and the purpose of obtaining input
tax credits for CSS were one purpose if the facts showed them to be inextricably
at 513 [224]. Such a conclusion might be open, for
example, if it were concluded that it was important to Manila Exchange that the
scheme end with a GST-free supply by an entity which would be refunded input tax
credits, so that the scheme as a whole would work
by being sufficiently funded.
It is not clear that the Tribunal reached its factual conclusion about Manila
Exchange’s dominant
purpose by excluding the possibilities just mentioned.
(Emphasis added.)
s 177EA of the 1936
Income Tax Assessment Act
consideration.
Section 177EA(3)
provided that the section applied if, amongst
other things:
(a) there is a scheme for a disposition of membership interests, or an interest
in membership interests, in a corporate tax entity;
(e) having regard to the relevant circumstances of the scheme, it would be
concluded that the person, or one of the persons, who
entered into or carried
out the scheme or any part of the scheme did so for a purpose (whether or not
the dominant purpose but not
including an incidental purpose) of enabling the
relevant taxpayer to obtain an imputation benefit.
that case, a bank raised Tier 1 capital by issuing stapled securities comprising
a preference share issued from Australia and an
unsecured subordinated note
issued from New Zealand referred to as PERLS V securities. The securities
provided for distributions
that would be fully franked. Due to the structure of
the securities the capital raised generated income that was not taxable in
but the distributions were deductible in New Zealand. Taxpayers who
held PERLS V securities received imputation benefits from the
fully franked
distributions. There was no contest that the dominant purpose of the bank was to
raise Tier 1 capital:
at [50]. Thus, the relevant question was
whether the scheme was entered into and carried out for
enabling the relevant taxpayers to obtain imputation benefits which was more
than an incidental purpose. Two other features
of the PERLS V scheme were
important. First, in whatever form of Tier 1 capital was issued, it would
necessarily be treated as capital
and not as debt. As a consequence, for tax
purposes it was, in substance, whatever its form, equity and all distributions
either dividends or non-share dividends. Second, flowing from certain
rules in the 1997
Income Tax Assessment Act
, any distribution on the securities
the bank issued was effectively required to be franked at the same rate as other
distributions
of the bank. As the bank had fully franked other dividends that
meant that the PERLS V securities were effectively required to be
majority of a Full Court of the Federal Court had concluded that enabling the
taxpayers to obtain imputation benefits was a purpose
of the bank and that was
not an incidental purpose. In the High Court the relevant taxpayer contended
that the Full Court was in
error by adopting an incorrect understanding of
‘incidental purpose’. He argued that a purpose answers that
description
if it is in furtherance of, or consequential upon, another purpose.
The bank had the over-riding purpose of raising Tier 1 capital
and the pursuit
of that purpose inevitably required that the bank issue equity interests on
which it would pay frankable distributions.
The bank had a purpose of franking
distributions on the particular equity interest it chose to issue (including the
PERLS V securities)
but that purpose was in furtherance of, or consequential
upon, pursuit of its over-riding purpose of raising Tier 1 capital:
at [55]. Justice Gageler (French CJ, Hayne, Kiefel and Bell JJ agreeing)
concluded that the jurisdictional fact in
s 177EA(3)(e)
did not exist. His
Honour said it would be concluded from the perspective of a reasonable person
that the bank entered into and carried
out the arrangements for the issues of
PERLS V securities for a purpose of enabling taxpayers who became holders of
PERLS V securities
to obtain franking credits. But, it would also be concluded
that the purpose was incidental to the bank’s purpose of raising
central component of the reasoning in
concerned the meaning of
s 177EA(3)(e)
and what was meant by an ‘incidental purpose’ in
that provision. Justice Gageler gave the text of that provision a purposive
construction taking into account that
of the 1936
Assessment Act
was to be read in the context of that Act and the 1997
Assessment Act
as a whole. Further, an available construction that advanced the
objects of the Part was to be preferred to one that does not. His
Honour said
that a ‘purposive construction of the text of
s 177EA(3)(e)
particularly important given the place of
s 177EA(3)(e)
structure of
’. His Honour observed that the requirements
ss 177EA(3)(a)
-(d) would be present in circumstances that reflected
‘no more than the normal operation of
of the ITAA 1997’.
Consequently, if
was to be targeted to its purpose of
‘preventing abuse of that system, then it was through the operation of
s 177EA(3)(e)
at [58]-[61]. Having identified the
context, purpose and object of the provision, Gageler J then turned to the
relevant questions
of construction and said:
questions of the construction of
s 177EA(3)(e)
, pivotal to the application of
, are twofold: what amounts to “a purpose ... of enabling”; and
when is such a purpose “an incidental purpose”?
reference to “purpose” in each of those phrases is to that of a
person who may, but need not, be the issuer. A purpose
is a consequence intended
by a person to result from some action. Here it is a consequence intended by the
person in entering into
or carrying out a scheme for the disposition of relevant
interests. A person will often intend that a single action have multiple
consequences. It is to the relationship between multiple intended consequences
that the parenthesised words of
s 177EA(3)(e)
are directed.
is, in the Explanatory Memorandum for
as originally inserted into the
ITAA 1936 in 1998, already quoted, a very clear statement that “a purpose
is an incidental
purpose when it occurs fortuitously or in subordinate
conjunction with another purpose, or merely follows another purpose as its
natural incident”. The statement, repeated in the Supplementary
Explanatory Memorandum, employed the word “or”
disjunctively because
a purpose may be in subordinate conjunction with another purpose or may do no
more than follow another purpose
as the natural incident of that other purpose
without necessarily being fortuitous. The statement accords with standard
definitions
of the word “incidental” to be found in mainstream
dictionaries and with a natural reading of the statutory text, “an
incidental purpose”, in the context of
s 177EA(3)(e).
The adoption of
the meaning conveyed by the statement as the proper construction of the
statutory text produces the result that a
purpose of a person, in entering into
or carrying out the scheme for the disposition of equity interests, of enabling
a holder to
obtain a franking credit is “an incidental purpose”
outside the scope of
s 177EA(3)(e)
if that purpose does no more than further
some other purpose or follow from some other purpose. That result confines the
application
in a manner that is consistent with its object. The
meaning ought, for those reasons, to be adopted.
I disagree with Jessup J in relation to the construction of
s 177EA(3)(e)
two respects. First, a purpose can be incidental even where it is central to the
design of a scheme if that design is directed
to the achievement of another
purpose. Indeed, the centrality of a purpose to the design of a scheme directed
to the achievement
of another purpose may be the very thing that gives it a
quality of subsidiarity and therefore incidentality. That is not impermissibly
to confine the scope of
s 177EA(3)(e)
to a dominant purpose: the categories of
“dominant” and “incidental” are not exhaustive. The
parenthesised
s 177EA(3)(e)
make clear that a dominant purpose of
enabling a holder to obtain a franking credit is sufficient but not necessary
for the requisite
purpose which does no more than further or follow from some dominant
incidental. Secondly, counterfactual analysis is not antithetical to the
statutory inquiry mandated by
s 177EA(3)(e).
Purpose is a matter for inference
and incidentality is a matter of degree. Consideration of possible alternatives
may well assist
the drawing of a conclusion in a particular case that a purpose
of enabling a holder to obtain a franking credit does or does not
exist and, if
such a purpose exists, that the purpose is or is not incidental to some other
that construction of
s 177EA(3)(e)
, there is in the case of a capital raising
where the issuer intends to frank distributions on the equity interests disposed
“purpose ... of enabling” the holders of those equity interests
to obtain franking credits. Any such capital raising
is therefore potentially
within the scope of
s 177EA(3)(e).
If, however, the intended franking of
distributions serves no purpose other than to facilitate the capital raising
then the purpose
is an incidental purpose:
s 177EA(3)(e)
is not engaged and
does not apply. That is to be contrasted with franking credit trading and
franking credit streaming where it is the issue of equity
interests that is
incidental to the provision of the franking credits.
No doubt, there are
other scenarios within the “catch-all” operation of
the circumstances are more nuanced. The present case does not involve one of
(Emphasis added.)
observations of Gageler J were made in explication of the meaning of
‘incidental purpose’ in a particular statutory
provision that had a
particular statutory purpose. And, importantly, within a statutory framework in
which any capital raising where
the issuer intended to frank distributions on
equity interests would have potentially been within the scope of
s 177EA(3)(e).
The provision also operated with respect to a particular
kind of scheme ‘for disposition of membership interests, or an interest
membership interests, in a corporate tax entity’. In that context, the
meaning of ‘incidental purpose’ served
an important and central
function in distinguishing between ordinary capital raising involving franking
distributions which were
intended to give rise to imputation credits and schemes
where the raising of capital is, in effect, incidental to imputation benefits
such as franking credit trading and streaming. The focus of the statutory
inquiry was on the non-fiscal purpose of raising capital
through the means of
the scheme and the fiscal purpose of enabling a taxpayer to obtain an imputation
benefit. That was the sense
in which the fiscal purpose facilitated the
non-fiscal purpose. It was not a comparison between a fiscal purpose and a more
non-fiscal purpose such as commercial gain for the bank.
the purpose and features of
s 177EA(3)(e)
have no analogue in Div 165 of
the GST Act. It would be an error to import and apply the concept and meaning of
‘incidental
purpose’ in s 177EA(3)(e) of the 1936
Assessment Act
into s 165-5(1)(c) of the GST Act. It would also be an error
to consider that the meaning given to ‘incidental purpose’
has a wider application than the specific statutory context in
which that expression was used in s 177EA(3)(e). Likewise, it would
error to treat s 165-5(1)(c) as if the statutory inquiry required
consideration of whether a purpose of getting a GST benefit
from a scheme was
‘not incidental’; the statutory inquiry requires consideration of
‘dominant purpose’ within
the meaning of that expression in Div
is of little, if any, use in the construction of Div 165, it is
illustrative of the manner in which consideration of alternative
possibilities
of fiscal relevance may be of assistance in the drawing of a conclusion that a
purpose of enabling a taxpayer to obtain
a tax benefit does or does not exist
and the relative importance of that purpose. In
it was not in
contest that the dominant purpose of the bank entering into and carrying out the
scheme was to raise Tier 1 capital.
Therefore, the relevant question was whether
enabling taxpayers to obtain imputation credits was
non-dominant
purpose that was not incidental. The bank needed to raise Tier 1 capital and all
means available to raise Tier 1 capital
(the alternative possibilities) would
have involved the bank franking distributions to the same extent as the scheme
in question
with corresponding imputation benefits for the relevant taxpayer. In
those circumstances, while it would be concluded from the perspective
reasonable person that the bank entered into and carried out the arrangement for
the issue of the relevant securities for the
purpose of enabling taxpayers who
became holders of the securities to obtain franking credits, it would also be
concluded that purpose
was incidental to the bank’s purpose of raising
Tier 1 capital:
at [75]-[77].
way of analogy with Div 165, if all alternative possibilities would result in an
entity receiving the same or substantially the
same ‘net amount’
refund it might be concluded that there is no GST benefit from the scheme or, if
so, that it was an
incidental and non-dominant purpose of the scheme. However,
to reach such a conclusion would require evidence from which a conclusion
be made about the form or substance of any alternative possible activities and
what GST benefits could reasonably be expected
to flow from any such alternative
possibilities. The facts of
and the facts of this case bear no
resemblance. Therefore, not only is
of no real assistance in
determining the meaning of ‘dominant purpose’ in s 165-5(1)(c),
to the extent it could be of
any assistance by way of analogy, it is
distinguishable on the facts.
of the foregoing should be taken to mean that, in any given case, it would be an
error to reach the conclusion, taking into account
the matters described in
s 165-15, that it is
reasonable to conclude that an entity had a
s 165-5(1)(c)(i) ‘dominant purpose’ because a purpose of the
avoider getting
a GST benefit from the scheme was ‘incidental’,
within the ordinary meaning of that word, to some other non-fiscal purpose.
is, it may be reasonable to conclude that a purpose is not dominant because it
is incidental.
The applicable statutory tests
follows that the statutory inquiries under s 165-5(1)(c) required the
Second Tribunal to consider if it was
reasonable conclude
(a) getting the taxpayer
GST benefit was the dominant purpose of the
Division 165 Supplying Entities or the taxpayer entering into or carrying out
scheme or part of the scheme (wide or narrow) the
Commissioner articulated as the means by which the Division 165 Supplying
chose to make (dishonest) gain or profit; and
(b) if getting the taxpayer
GST benefit was the principal effect of
utilising the
scheme or part of the scheme as the means of the
Division 165 Supplying Entities making (dishonest) gain or profit.
CONSIDERATION
Was the facilitative purpose analysis an application of the
wrong statutory test?
already mentioned, questions 1 – 4 and grounds 1 – 3 and 5 of the
supplementary notice of appeal, in substance, boil
down to an assertion that the
Second Tribunal applied the wrong statutory test because it applied a
facilitative purpose analysis
in its consideration of
dominant purpose.
Second Tribunal reasoning on dominant purpose
Second Tribunal set out the relevant parts of Div 165 and principles applicable
to consideration of dominant purpose: T [143]-[163].
The tribunal then
considered each of the matters described in s 165-15: T [164]-[206].
After addressing the matters described in
s 165-15 the tribunal then made a
number of further observations regarding purpose: T [208]-[219].
is evident from the manner in which the Second Tribunal addressed the
s 165-15 matters and purpose that the Second Tribunal reached
conclusion that the dominant purpose of the Division 165 Supplying Entities was
to obtain and dishonestly retain GST-informed
consideration for the scrap gold
the taxpayer acquired from them. The tribunal then addressed the question of
single composite purpose
or non-dominant incidental purpose facilitating a
dominant purpose by asking itself if the purpose of creating a taxable supply
part of the dominant (dishonest) purpose as a single composite purpose or
whether creation of a taxable supply was a separate non-dominant
purpose that
facilitated the dominant (dishonest) purpose.
Second Tribunal correctly identified the legal principle that Div 165 may
operate even if the ultimate objective of the transaction
is not a tax objective
or the transaction producing the GST benefit also delivers a desired non-tax
outcome and referred to
Spotless Services
However, in its application of that principle it drew a distinction between an
honest non-tax outcome and a dishonest
non-tax outcome and evidently considered
the principle to be of diminished significance in circumstances in which the
desired non-tax
outcome is a dishonest end.
the context of considering the manner in which the scheme was entered into or
carried out, the Second Tribunal observed:
a case where the relevant competition or comparison is between pursuit of
commercial ends and pursuit of a GST benefit, the existence
of steps that are
uncommercial or extraordinary in the manner or execution of the scheme might
suggest pursuit of the GST benefit
is dominant. However, where the relevant
comparison is between pursuit of a dishonest end and pursuit of a GST benefit,
extraordinary,
or irrational or uncommercial steps might be expected in the
sequence of events. In that setting such steps might more appropriately
indicate, as part of the analysis of the manner of execution of a scheme, that
that other goal was either the sole or dominant purpose
of a participant in the
Second Tribunal analysed the uncommercial and extraordinary step in the scheme
involving the adulteration and deliberate devaluation
of the bullion and
observed that the transactions downstream of devaluation were not remarkable as
a bargain struck between the Div
165 Supplying Entities and the taxpayer for
scrap gold and the taxpayer only generated refining profit on those
transactions: T [166]-[168].
The Second Tribunal then said:
pricing issue is, of course, linked to the adulteration of bullion which is
certainly out of the usual. However, in the Tribunal’s
view that part of
the scheme is explicable by the Fraudulent Suppliers’ purpose of securing
a GST-informed amount of money
and non-payment of GST. It does not suggest a
separate dominant purpose of the applicant obtaining ITCs.
the context of considering the form and substance of the scheme the Second
Tribunal said:
legal form of the transactions was not consistent with the economic and
commercial substance. What was precious metal in investment
form was not altered
so much in terms of chemical composition but its appearance so that it no longer
conformed to the “in
investment form” standard. It was an appearance
alteration that facilitated a different attribute in the marketplace that
a different trading price structure which in turn facilitated a
receipt of money that the Fraudulent Suppliers would keep. Where
purpose is to effectuate a fraud, it can be expected that trickery or facades
may be involved and that form and substance
might differ.
Second Tribunal continued with the theme that a pursuit of a dishonest end was
separate and distinct from pursuit of a GST benefit
in its consideration of the
purpose or object of the GST Act (T [178]-[179]), the timing of the scheme
and period over which it was
entered into or carried out (T [184]), the
effect of the GST Act apart from the scheme (T [192]), change in the
financial position
of connected entities (T [199]) and circumstances
surrounding the scheme and other relevant circumstances (T [205]-[206]).
The tribunal
then addressed single composite purpose and non-dominant incidental
purposes facilitating a dominant purpose as follows:
passages from
Complete Success Solutions
above indicate that a single purpose may appropriately be found in some
circumstances. They did not go on and consider
whether those purposes were
facilitative of an ultimate purpose in the sense contemplated by Gageler J in
Mills also noted above.
analysis is apposite in the present
circumstances for two reasons: first, creating taxable supplies that also
produced GST-informed
prices being paid and ITC entitlements to arise, was a
necessary preliminary to an ulterior and ultimate goal as contemplated by
Honour’s analysis, and second because His Honour suggests that the text of
the Explanatory Memorandum under discussion
confirmed the ordinary meaning of
language and natural reading of statutory text. Thus, the hierarchy of
incidental and dominant
purposes to which His Honour refers can and should have
wider application. This analysis informs how facilitative steps in a wider
design ought to be characterised. Viewed through this lens, any purpose of
obtaining ITCs in the present circumstances, assuming
there was one, was a
purpose properly regarded as central to the design of a scheme directed to
achieving an ulterior and ultimate
purpose, and therefore any purpose of
obtaining ITCs was incidental and not dominant.
the present case, what was essential for the scheme to operate was the creation
of a product that the marketplace traded at a GST-informed
price, and the
Fraudulent Suppliers receiving that price and not paying the GST to the
Commissioner, or more fundamentally, for the
Fraudulent Suppliers not to pay
their GST liability having received a market driven price that assumed they
would. As already noted,
without that feature there would not have been ongoing
sales by the suppliers, as they would have traded at a loss. The availability
the ITCs was an ordinary incident of a purchase of a taxable commodity on
commercial terms by a GST-registered entity in the course
of its enterprise.
those circumstances, the non-payment of amounts referrable to GST stands aside
from the creation of the GST liability and the entitlement
to corresponding
ITCs. Even if the transactions were conducted in a co-ordinated way with the
knowledge of the applicant (which the
Tribunal has not found) it would remain
the case that the non-payment of GST is the central feature upon which the
viability of the
suppliers’ unlawful endeavours rested. The
applicant’s entitlement to ITCs was not dependent on that action, only
the acquisition of gold in a taxable supply for which it paid a full
commercial price for what it acquired.
short, even if it would be correct to view the making of taxable supplies and
obtaining of ITCs as a single purpose, that single
purpose was a step in a wider
process. The Tribunal sees the Fraudulent Suppliers’ non-payment of GST as
a separate and ulterior
and ultimate purpose to any purpose of making taxable
supplies and the applicant obtaining ITCs.
Were Full Court ACN, Ludekens and Complete Success Solutions
disregarded without explanation?
agree for the reasons given by Goodman J and the reasons that follow that the
Commissioner’s contentions that the Second Tribunal
erred by disregarding
Full Court ACN
Complete Success Solutions
and failed to
consider whether purposes were inextricably linked should not be accepted.
Second Tribunal’s analysis of composite purpose versus incidental purpose
starts with a recognition that
, cited with approval in
Complete Success Solutions
stand for the proposition
that ‘a single purpose may be appropriately found in some
circumstances’ (T [208]). After citing
Full Court ACN
, it had earlier said that in appropriate circumstances the
creation of a taxable supply, a GST liability and corresponding entitlement
input tax credit could be regarded as a single purpose, but that would not
exclude a purpose of non-payment of the GST liability
and retaining the whole
consideration being the dominant purpose. It had also cited
Complete Success
and noted that the Full Court contemplates the possibility of
obtaining and not remitting amounts referrable to GST liability and
input tax credits as a single purpose, but the Full Court had not mandated that
there was such a purpose (T [159]-[162]).
None of that explanation of
Full Court ACN
Complete Success Solutions
indicative of any misunderstanding of the correct legal principles. The
tribunal’s observation that neither
Success Solutions
considered whether the purposes were facilitative of an
ultimate purpose in the sense contemplated by Gageler J in the passages from
set out earlier in the reasons is also accurate (T [208],
[163]). The tribunal then applied a facilitative purpose of an ultimate
analysis and reached the conclusion that any purpose of obtaining input tax
credits was incidental and not dominant.
a fair reading of the Second Tribunal’s reasons, it considered that the
purpose of creating a taxable supply was a necessary
preliminary to an ulterior
and ultimate (dominant) goal of (dishonest) non-payment of notional GST
liabilities. Consequently, the
tribunal considered that the purpose of creating
a taxable supply was incidental to the dishonest purpose and was not dominant.
that reasoning, it was not necessary for the tribunal to consider if the
purpose of creating the taxable supply with resulting GST
liability and input
tax credit entitlements and obtaining GST-informed consideration were part of a
single composite dominant purpose
because the tribunal had found that the
purpose of creation of the taxable supply was incidental and not dominant. The
sides of the one coin’ question the tribunal had
identified earlier in its reasons did not need to be answered because, on
tribunal’s facilitative purpose reasoning, the purpose of obtaining and
not remitting GST and the purpose of obtaining
input tax credits were not
inextricably linked.
I do not accept the Commissioner’s submission to the effect that the
tribunal disregarded the relevant observations
Full Court ACN
Complete Success Solutions
without proper or adequate
explanation or failed to consider if the applicable purposes were inextricably
linked. The real question
is whether adopting and applying the
facilitative purpose analysis was an error of law that resulted in the tribunal
disregarding the principles expressed in
Full Court ACN
Complete Success Solutions
and avoiding a fulsome consideration of
the inextricably linked issue for erroneous reasons. In this regard, I
respectfully take
a different view to that of Goodman J.
Was a facilitative purpose analysis apposite and
applicable?
my view, the analysis in
is inapposite and inapplicable to the
statutory inquiry required under s 165-5(1)(c). The Second Tribunal’s
adoption and application
of that analysis involved an error of law and
misconstruction and misapplication of the statutory dominant purpose test. In
its application
of the analysis in
the tribunal also fell into
error in failing to focus on the
scheme (wide or narrow) as
the means utilised by the Division 165 Supplying Entities to achieve the more
remote and fiscally irrelevant
(dishonest) end. Instead of asking the statutory
question s 165-5(1)(c)(i) posed, the tribunal asked itself if the scheme
was facilitative
of a wider and fiscally irrelevant (dishonest) end. Further,
in so doing the tribunal treated the statutory question as if the (dishonest)
end and fiscal purpose were competing or contesting objectives when they are not
inconsistent or mutually exclusive.
already mentioned, the meaning given to ‘incidental purpose’ in
is confined to its particular statutory context, purpose and
object. Contrary to the Second Tribunal’s reasons, the ‘hierarchy
incidental and dominant purposes’ to which reference is made in
does not have wider application than the construction of
s 177EA of the 1936
Income Tax Assessment Act
. The particular construction
that was declared and applied in
was that ‘a
purpose of a person, in entering into or carrying out the scheme for the
disposition of equity interests, of enabling
the holder to obtain a franking
credit is “an incidental purpose” outside the scope of
s 177EA(3)(e)
if that purpose does no more than further some other purpose
or follow from some other purpose’. That notion of ‘incidental
purpose’ has no bearing on the statutory meaning of ‘dominant
purpose’ in s 165-5(1)(c)(i) of the GST Act.
contrary to the Second Tribunal’s reasons, that construction of
s 177EA(3)(e) does not inform ‘how facilitative
steps in a wider
design ought to be characterised’ for the purposes of Div 165 of the GST
Act. A scheme or part of a scheme
will inevitably be facilitative of some wider
objective of an entity that enters into or carries out the scheme. The statutory
posed in s 165-5(1)(c)(i) is not directed to the purpose of a
wider design or whether the scheme or part of the scheme facilitates
design, it is directed to the dominant purpose of the scheme or part of the
scheme even though that scheme may form part of
a wider design.
Second Tribunal identified the ‘ulterior and ultimate purpose’ as
(dishonestly) not paying the GST liability: T [211].
That identification was
founded, in part, on the conclusion that non-payment of GST [was] the central
feature upon which the viability
of the suppliers’ unlawful endeavour
rested’: T [210]. That was little more than a conclusion that a
purpose of the Div
165 Supplying Entities was (dishonest) gain or profit through
supplies of scrap gold for GST informed consideration. Non-payment
liability was said to ‘stand aside from the creation of the GST liability
and the entitlement to corresponding [input
tax credits]’: T [210]. The
Tribunal said that the ‘analysis informs how facilitative steps in a
wider design
ought to have been characterised’ (emphasis added): T
[208]. The Tribunal also said that even if the making of taxable supplies
obtaining of input tax credits were a single purpose ‘that single purpose
was a step in a
wider process
’ (emphasis added): T [211].
it was permissible for the Second Tribunal to consider the wider design or
process in order to understand and explain the scheme
and the 12 matters
described in s 165-15, the statutory inquiry was confined to the dominant
purpose of an entity that entered into
or carried out the
scheme or part of the scheme the Commissioner articulated. It will inevitably be
possible to characterise part of an articulated
scheme as a step that furthers,
follows, or facilitates the scheme as a whole. It will also inevitably be
possible to characterise
a narrowly articulated scheme as steps that further,
follow or facilitate a wider overall transaction. Characterising part of a
from which an entity gets a GST benefit as a necessarily preliminary to
an ulterior or ultimate goal or facilitative step in a wider
inconsistent with the construction of s 165-5(1)(c)(i)
earlier in these reasons. It is also inconsistent with and undermines the object
of Div 165.
Second Tribunal’s reasoning has echoes of an argument the High Court
rejected in
Consolidated Press Holdings
as to the artificiality of the
Commissioner selecting part of the overall transaction as the scheme. In so
doing, the Court said:
The fact that the overall transaction was aimed at a profit making does not make
it artificial and inappropriate to observe that
part of the structure of the
transaction is to be explained by reference to a s 177D purpose. Nor is
there any inconsistency involved,
as was submitted, in looking to the wider
transaction in order to understand and explain the scheme, and the eight matters
point may be illustrated by adapting the example of an athlete competing at the
Olympics given in
Automotive Invest
by which the difference between
ultimate purpose, means and motive were explained. There, a majority of the High
Court said ‘an
athlete might engage in a sporting activity for the purpose
or end of competing at the Olympics. The motive for that end might be
fulfillment, profit, or glory. And the means to achieve that end might be many
hours of training’:
Automotive Invest
at [111]. But, accepting all
those elements of that example will not answer the question of whether
particular medication taken by
the athlete during training (means) was taken for
the dominant purpose of enhancing performance at the Olympics (ends). The
question for that inquiry would be: what was the dominant purpose of
the athlete in taking the medication even though taking the
medication formed
part of the means (training) to a more remote end (competing at the Olympics)?
That question cannot be answered
by asking if taking the medication was the
means of achieving (furthered, followed or facilitated) a wider and more remote
end (competing
at the Olympics). That question would be meaningless because it
is self-evident that that means facilitated that end. In the case
s 165-5(1)(c)(i), the statutory question concerns the dominant purpose of
the means (scheme or part of the scheme) utilised to
achieve (facilitate) the
end (gain or profit). Therefore, asking the question of whether the scheme or
part of the scheme facilitates
a wider design of gain or profit (whether honest
or dishonest) is meaningless in the context of the statutory object of Div
Second Tribunal’s reasoning regarding s 165-15 and its further
observations on purpose or effect are also indicative of
error in that they
suggest that the Second Tribunal was of the view in the first instance that,
typically, the nature of the statutory
inquiry under s 165-5(1)(c)(i)
involves a comparison between a commercial end (honest gain or profit), on the
one hand, and a tax
benefit end (obtaining a GST benefit), on the other. For the
reasons already given, the focus of the inquiry is on the fiscal purpose
scheme not any comparison between that purpose and a more remote and fiscally
irrelevant purpose like gain or profit. Thus,
the tribunal’s reasoning in
this regard is suggestive of acceptance of a false dichotomy of the kind
Spotless Services
(at 415). Likewise, the statutory inquiry
does not require a comparison between obtaining a fiscally irrelevant dishonest
profit and obtaining a GST benefit.
a distinction between honest and dishonest ends is also suggestive of a false
dichotomy of a different kind. Division 165
is aimed at artificial or contrived
schemes whether they be in the pursuit of honest commercial ends or dishonest
ends. A scheme
comprised of extraordinary, irrational or uncommercial steps is
just as much artificial or contrived because it is entered into or
carried out
for dishonest gain or profit as is a scheme with such features entered into or
carried out for legitimate commercial
gain or profit. A particular course of
action may be both ‘tax driven’ and bear the character of a
dishonest design.
The presence of the latter characteristic does not determine
the answer to the question, within the meaning of s 165-5(1)(c)(i),
an entity entered into or carried out a scheme for the dominant purpose of
getting another entity a GST benefit:
Spotless Services
follows that, irrespective of the inapplicability of the
in the context of the purpose and object of Div 165, identifying (dishonest)
gain or profit as the ultimate goal or end
is indicative of a failure to focus
on the statutory questions posed in s 165-5(1)(c) and the object sought to
be achieved from the
particular scheme that is of fiscal consequence. Here, the
tribunal failed to focus on that object and, instead, focussed almost
on the more remote and fiscally irrelevant object of (dishonest) gain or profit.
The tribunal’s misconstruction and
misapplication of the statutory inquiry
is, perhaps, best illustrated in its ultimate conclusions about dominant purpose
a search for an alternative purpose is not the Division 165 test, the existence
of such a purpose throws light on whether the
requisite GST benefit purpose
conclusion should be reached. When looking at a scheme, or a part thereof, if
there is an alternative
dominant purpose of any participant, or an alternative
principal effect, then it is unlikely that the dominant purpose test will
satisfied in respect of that participant or that the principal effect test will
be satisfied. If that alternative dominant purpose
of a participant in, or
alternative principal effect of, a scheme or a part thereof was that the
Fraudulent Suppliers benefit from
their fraud, or to place an inflated,
GST-informed, price or amount of money into the hands of the Fraudulent
Suppliers so as to
set up the possibility of the fraud being executed
profitably, it is unlikely that it would be reasonable to conclude that that
participant
had the requisite dominant purpose or that the scheme had the
requisite principal effect.
summary, in the Tribunal’s view, the proper conclusion is that the
dominant purpose of the Fraudulent Suppliers was to execute
their fraud by first
obtaining and then retaining the GST-informed prices they charged the applicant.
Their participation in the
transactions made no sense unless they committed that
passages confirm that the singular focus of the Second Tribunal was upon the
dishonest motive it attributed to the Division
165 Supplying Entities for
entering into or carrying out the wider design or process it had earlier
identified and not the purpose
of the scheme or part of the scheme (wide or
narrow) as articulated (T [208], [211], [215]). Specifically, it is evident
tribunal focussed on whether ‘fraud’ was the dominant
for the Division 165 Supplying Entities entering into or carrying
out the wider design or process. Whereas, the correct statutory
inquiry was
whether the object of getting the taxpayer input tax credits from the scheme or
part of the scheme (wide or narrow) was
the ruling, prevailing, or most
influential intended consequence of the Division 165 Supplying Entities entering
into or carrying
scheme or part of that scheme as the
means by which they chose to achieve the ultimate (dishonest)
analysis in
also does not require that ‘a necessary
preliminary to an ulterior and ultimate goal’ must be characterised as an
purpose or that the ultimate goal must be characterised as dominant
for at least three reasons. First, as Gageler J observed ‘it
follow that a purpose which does no more than further or follow from some
dominant purpose is incidental’:
at [66]. Therefore, a
necessary preliminary need not be incidental. Second, the analysis of one
purpose furthering or following another
is described in
circumstances in which one purpose was already designated or identified as the
dominant purpose. The concept of a necessary preliminary
to an accepted dominant
purpose is not necessarily a useful tool for identifying at the outset which of
the competing purposes is
dominant. Further, and in any event, merely because
one purpose furthers or follows another purpose does not require that the
furthered or followed is dominant. Third, and relatedly, the Second
Tribunal’s reasoning is founded on an implicit but unstated
that ‘ulterior and ultimate purpose’ is a synonym for dominant
purpose. This is indicative of circular reasoning.
Second Tribunal’s explanation of its reasons for concluding that any
purpose of obtaining input tax credits was incidental
started by identifying the
creation of a product that the marketplace traded at a GST-informed price and
the Division 165 Supplying
Entities receiving that price and not paying the GST
liability as ‘essential for the scheme to operate’. In that context,
the tribunal observed that ‘availability of the [input tax credits] was an
ordinary incident of a purchase of a taxable commodity
on commercial terms by a
GST-registered entity in the course of its enterprise’: T [209]. In
substance, that is no more than
an observation that an ordinary incident of the
operation of the GST Act, in circumstances in which the Division 165 Supplying
adulterated the gold in investment form and sold scrap gold to the
taxpayer, was that the sale of the scrap gold was a ‘taxable
supply’. The tribunal then identified non-payment of amounts referrable to
GST embedded in the GST-informed consideration as
separate from the creation of
the taxable supply. The tribunal identified that step as the ‘central
feature upon which the
viability of the [Division 165 Supplying Entities’]
unlawful endeavour rested’. The tribunal considered that the taxable
supply and entitlement to input tax credits was not dependent on the non-payment
of the GST liability: T [210]. The tribunal then
observed that the creation of
taxable supplies was a step in a wider process and the non-payment of GST
liabilities was a separate
and ulterior and ultimate purpose to the creation of
taxable supplies: T [211]. That analysis also illustrates that the tribunal
failed to ask itself the statutory question posed in s 165-5(1)(c)(i);
namely, what was the dominant purpose of performing the step
that created the
taxable supply as the means by which it achieved the (dishonest) ends it had
identified in the wider process.
Second Tribunal’s observation that any purpose of obtaining input tax
credits ‘was properly regarded as central to
the design of a scheme
directed to achieving an ulterior and ultimate purpose’ draws on the first
of two reasons that Gageler
for disagreeing with the
construction Jessup J had given to s 177EA(3) of the 1936
Assessment Act
at [66]. The second reason Gageler J gave for his
disagreement was that ‘counterfactual analysis is not antithetical to the
statutory inquiry’ and that consideration of possible alternatives may
well assist the drawing of a conclusion in a particular
case that a particular
purpose does or does not exist and that it is incidental to some other purpose.
As already mentioned, the
existence of possible alternatives all of which had
the consequence of imputation benefits was central to the conclusion in
that enabling the taxpayer to obtain imputation benefits was an
incidental purpose in that case. In the Second Tribunal’s analysis
application of
it ignored and overlooked that important and, on the
, decisive consideration that assists to draw conclusions
Second Tribunal made no findings identifying any alternative possibilities that
could have resulted in the taxpayer getting the
same or substantially the same
refunds from input tax credits as those the scheme or part of the scheme
delivered to the taxpayer.
Moreover, it is implicit in the Second
Tribunal’s acceptance that the taxpayer obtained GST benefits from the
scheme or part
of the scheme that it found, contrary to the findings in
, that there were no alternative possibilities to the scheme.
Therefore, there was no foundation for the tribunal to reach the conclusion
(equivalent to the conclusion in
means of issuing
Tier 1 capital would result in the same tax benefit) to the effect that
consequence of the taxpayer getting GST benefits from the scheme was
merely the natural incident to
consequence of supplying and acquiring
scrap gold for GST informed consideration.
applying the natural and ordinary meaning of ‘incidental purpose’
described in
to the facts as the Second Tribunal found them, the
creation of a taxable supply could not possibly be described as
‘fortuitous’.
The creation of a taxable supply was manifestly not a
consequence that happened by chance. Further, to describe the creation of a
taxable supply as a consequence that was a ‘subordinate conjunction’
to the purpose of non-payment of GST liabilities
or obtaining and retaining
GST-informed consideration is also inapposite because without a notional taxable
supply the Division 165
Supplying Entities would not have received GST informed
consideration. The purpose of creating a notional taxable supply could not
described as a minor or insubstantial purpose that happened in mere conjunction
with the purpose of obtaining GST-informed consideration.
It is also not
possible to characterise the creation of a taxable supply as the natural
incident of obtaining and retaining GST-informed
consideration. If anything,
obtaining GST-informed consideration is the natural incident of the creation of
a notional taxable supply.
Therefore, the tribunal cannot be taken to have
applied the ordinary meaning of ‘incidental’ as a means of
its conclusion that a purpose of obtaining input tax credits for the
taxpayer was incidental to a dominant purpose of obtaining GST-informed
consideration. Rather, the tribunal asked itself the question of whether a
purpose of obtaining the taxpayer input tax credits from
the scheme was
incidental to a dominant purpose of (dishonestly) not paying GST liability and
in so doing applied the meaning of
‘incidental purpose’ in
s 177EA(3)(e) of the 1936
Income Tax Assessment Act
Conclusion on application of statutory dominant purpose
follows that, contrary to the Second Tribunal’s reasoning, the analysis
is inapposite and does not inform the statutory inquiry
required under s 165-5(1)(c)(i). The Second Tribunal’s application
that analysis in its consideration of dominant purpose was an error of law.
regard to the conclusion I have reached on questions 1 – 4 and grounds 1
– 3, it is not necessary to address the
other questions, grounds and
issues raised in the supplementary notice of appeal. However, as these matters
were fully argued, I
will explain my reasons for accepting there were two
further errors and rejecting the other asserted errors.
Was the importance of the taxpayer getting input tax credits
considered?
Second Tribunal clearly considered the economic feasibility of the scheme and
considered, accepted or rejected aspects of the
Commissioner’s relevant
arguments about the relative importance of input tax credits to the scheme. The
Second Tribunal acknowledged
and accepted that the taxpayer was induced to pay
GST-informed consideration for scrap gold (T [215]). The Second Tribunal
that the taxpayer had only made additional refining profits (T [168],
[171], [194]). It rejected the Commissioner’s contention
that the taxpayer
had profited from the refund of GST and without that refund the transactions
made no sense (T [194]-[195]). It
was not satisfied on the evidence that
ABC NSW enjoyed an enhanced turnover (T [200]). It had regard to the
‘round robin’
nature of the movement of gold metal and noted the
scheme was structured to be ‘self-contained and possibly self-perpetuating
(T [184]). In substance, the Second Tribunal found that the economic
feasibility of the scheme depended upon the Division 165 Supplying
Entities’ (dishonest) non-payment of the notional GST liabilities they
incurred because the transactions involved losses if
the GST Act consequences
for the Division 165 Supplying Entities were taken into account (T [198], [210],
[215], [218]). The Second
Tribunal found, in effect, that the input tax credit
in itself achieved no benefit for the taxpayer or the Division 165 Supplying
Entities (T [218]).
general, there is no error of law in failing to make a finding of fact: see,
Azzopardi v Tasman UEB Industries Ltd
(1985) 4 NSWLR 139
(Glass JA). An assertion that the tribunal failed to make a finding of fact is
tantamount to an assertion that it made
a ‘wrong’ finding which is
no error of law:
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(Brennan J). Otherwise, the Commissioner made no assertion that the Second
Tribunal made an error of law for failing to identify,
understand and evaluate a
substantial and clearly articulated argument of the Commissioner such as might
support an error of law
in the performance of the tribunal’s review
Dranichnikov v Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and
Indigenous Affairs
[2003] HCA 26
197 ALR 389
(Gummow and
Callinan JJ), [95] (Hayne J);
Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v SZMTA
[2019] HCA 3
264 CLR 421
(Bell, Gageler and
Keane JJ), at [105] (Nettle and Gordon JJ).
any event, I am not persuaded that the asserted failure to expressly consider
and make findings on the importance of the input
tax credits to the economic
feasibility of the scheme was in and of itself an error. If anything, the
absence of full or complete
consideration of the importance of input tax credits
is an illustration or indication of the Second Tribunal’s erroneous
to dominant purpose rather than a standalone error. The absence of
direct consideration of the potential importance of input tax
credits to the
economic feasibility of the scheme is best explained by the tribunal not having
to fully engage with the inextricably
linked issue. If the tribunal had not
erroneously applied a facilitative purpose analysis and, thereby, sidestepped
direct consideration
of composite purpose at the level of taxable supply, it
would have been required to directly confront the importance of creation
notional taxable supplies, entitlements to input tax credits and inducement to
the taxpayer paying GST-informed consideration
for the scrap gold. That forensic
enquiry was avoided because the tribunal concluded that creation of taxable
supplies was an incidental
purpose to (dishonest) gain or profit.
Was there error in the application of the
s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) principal effect test?
Second Tribunal addressed aspects of ‘principal effect’ in the
course of dealing with each of the matters described
in s 165-15. When
addressing the s 165-15 matters the Second Tribunal identified what it
described as the ‘principal effect’
of the manner in which the
scheme was entered into and carried out and the form and substance of the scheme
in the following way.
the Tribunal does not identify any aspect of the manner in which the scheme was
entered into or carried out that supports
a conclusion that the principal effect
of the scheme or any part of the scheme was the applicant obtaining ITCs. The
principal effects
of the scheme as a whole were the change of ownership of very
high values of gold and after that the fraud on the Commissioner. The
effect of the adulteration aspect of the manner of execution was to transform
the character of the relevant gold and to
devalue it.
system of levying GST on dealings in gold substances is very much form driven.
Metal in substance, i.e. chemically and atomically,
identical, may be treated
differently depending on its presentation or its form. Producing something that
is in form different to
its substance and transacting in it, as has happened
here, transformed the character and transferred the ownership of the highly
valuable commodity. This was the principal effect to be recognised.
Second Tribunal said that the other s 165-15 matters also did not suggest
or support a conclusion that the principal effect of
the scheme or part of the
scheme was for the applicant to obtain input tax credits: T [181], [187],
[192], [196], [202], [204]. Later,
in the course of addressing its ultimate
conclusions on dominant purpose, the tribunal said that if an alternative
principal effect
of the scheme or part of the scheme was that the Division 165
Supplying Entities benefit from their fraud, or to place an inflated,
GST-informed, price or amount of money into their hands so as to set up the
possibility of the fraud being executed profitably, it
was unlikely that it
would be reasonable to conclude that the scheme had the requisite principal
effect: T [216]. Ultimately, the
Second Tribunal concluded, for the reasons
given in the sections dealing with principal effect, that it would not be
reasonable to
conclude that the scheme or part of the scheme had the
s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) principal effect: T [226].
Commissioner contends that the Second Tribunal applied the wrong
s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) ‘principal effect’ test for two
First, it failed to recognise the benign and mechanical non-fiscal effects of
the scheme were not inconsistent with a principal
effect of getting the taxpayer
input tax credits. Second, it did not undertake an assessment of the importance
of the creation of
refund entitlements to the scheme and each part of the
scheme. I accept the first contention, but not the second.
the passages dealing with the s 165-15 matters in which the Second Tribunal
identifies what it considers to be the ‘principal
effects’ of the
scheme (T [172], [176]) there is no explanation of the reason(s) for
considering those effects to be of the
highest rank or importance except for the
association between changing the form of the gold metal and transferring it to
the taxpayer
in exchange for GST-informed consideration so as to place the
Division 165 Supplying Entities in a position to (dishonestly) not
pay notional
GST liabilities. Therefore, as with dominant purpose, the focus of the tribunal
is on the ‘effect’ of the
wider design or process and the
consequence of (dishonest) gain or profit which the tribunal considered to be
the principal effect
of that wider process. As with dominant purpose,
identifying an effect of the wider design or process as (dishonest) gain or
does not answer the question posed in s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) because that
effect is not inconsistent or incompatible with a ‘principal
of the scheme or part of the scheme (wide or narrow) of getting the taxpayer
input tax credits.
effect of changing the form of the gold metal and transferring ownership of the
gold metal to the taxpayer
the effect of creating a taxable supply
with corresponding GST liabilities and entitlements to input tax credits were
both effects
of the scheme or part of the scheme that placed the Division 165
Suppling Entities in a position to (dishonestly) retain the GST-informed
consideration. Thus, the question posed for the purposes of
s 165-5(1)(c)(ii) was whether the principal effect of the
scheme or part of the scheme (wide or narrow) by which the Division 165
Supplying Entities were placed in that position was the exchange
of gold metal
(as would be the case in an ordinary legitimate transaction) or getting the
taxpayer input tax credits. It is evident
from the tribunal’s reasons that
it did not ask itself that question but rather asked if the principal effect of
process was to place the Division 165 Supplying Entities in a position
to (dishonestly) gain or profit. Thereby, the tribunal applied
statutory test.
for the reasons already given with respect to consideration of the dominant
purpose, mere failure to consider and make
express findings about the importance
of input tax credits is not directly indicative of an error of law but more
illustrative of
the primary error and incorrect focus of the statutory inquiry.
Was there an erroneous failure to take into account the purpose
or object of Div 165?
Second Tribunal’s reasons suggest that it considered that the GST Act
operated largely as intended with respect to the activities
of the scheme (wide
or narrow): e.g., T [166], [177], [190]. In that context, when addressing
s 165-15(1)(c) of the GST Act the Tribunal
artificial creation of a GST liability, and corresponding ITC entitlement, by
defacing bullion may be seen as not an object of
the GST Act. However, a
liability arising on a taxable supply is an intended outcome under GST law
regardless of the circumstances
giving rise to the liability. Even illegal
supplies may be taxable supplies [s 9-10(3)]. Once the gold was no longer
precious metal
its subsequent supply being taxable was unremarkable and an
intended outcome under the GST Act.
purpose or object of the GST Act includes, fundamentally, to create a liability
for GST on taxable supplies. That is what occurred
here. It is the failure to
pay the GST that departs from the object of the GST Act, not the allowance of
ITCs on business-to-business
acquisitions which is the standard and intended
object of value-added taxation.
substance, the Commissioner contends that these passages reveal that the Second
Tribunal failed to take into account the purpose
or object of Div 165; namely,
to deter schemes to give entities benefits by reducing GST, increasing refunds
or altering the timing
of payment of GST or refunds. Specifically, its focus on
non-payment of GST liabilities as the element of the wider design that departed
from the object of the GST Act indicates that it failed to fully and completely
take into account the steps in the narrow scheme
that included the adulteration
of bullion and deliberate devaluation of the gold metal that resulted in an
artificial creation of
taxable supplies and that Div 165 is aimed at such
artificial or contrived schemes. I largely accept these submissions.
the facts as found, the activities of the Division 165 Supplying Entities could
only be said to have been carried on with a view
to profit or gain if the GST
liabilities arising from notional taxable supplies of scrap gold are ignored. As
taxable supplies, the
activities were loss-making and there was manifestly no
expectation that they would ever produce a profit or gain when the notional
liabilities are taken into account. Therefore, taking into account the notional
effect of the GST Act on the supplies of scrap
gold tends to undermine any
assumption that the Division 165 Supplying Entities made the supplies in the
course of or furtherance
enterprise. The uncommercial nature
of the activities calls into question the extent to which there were any
taxable supplies that would support
entitlements
to input tax credits. At the heart of the scheme was the ‘creation’
of taxable supplies, but these were
not genuine transactions undertaken as part
of a genuine enterprise because gold in investment form was deliberately
devalued, sold
at a loss based on the ‘value’ of the gold metal
content of the refining materials, and the ‘profitability’
transactions depended upon non-payment of the notional GST component of the
consideration. As the Full Court observed in
Complete Success Solutions
‘it is not consistent with the object or policy of the [GST] Act for GST
to become embedded in supply of goods that has been
deliberately
Complete Success Solutions
at [103]. To the extent that
there were taxable supplies within the meaning of the GST Act, these were
clearly artificial or contrived
resulting in artificial or contrived GST
liabilities and corresponding artificial or contrived input tax credits. The
Commissioner
aptly characterised the effect of the scheme as creating an
artificial market for gold.
the Second Tribunal acknowledged that the artificial creation of taxable
supplies may not be regarded as an object of the GST
Act, it evidently
considered that, irrespective of the circumstances in which these taxable
supplies came into existence, it was
consistent with the object of the GST Act
to impose GST liabilities on those taxable supplies. But, that is to ignore that
or object of Div 165 is to deter artificial or contrived schemes
from which an avoider gets a GST benefit. Moreover, the example
of the GST Act
imposing a GST liability on illegal transactions is not to the point. An illegal
transaction may be genuine in the
sense that it is neither artificial or
contrived and is made in the course or furtherance of a genuine enterprise. It
is consistent
with the purpose or object of the GST Act that illegal
transactions in the course or furtherance of a genuine enterprise attract
liability and result in increased taxation revenue. The same cannot be said of
artificial or contrived transactions not made
in the course or furtherance of a
genuine enterprise which operate to decrease taxation revenue. Transactions of
that character are
a target of Div 165. Thus, the tribunal’s reasons
indicate that it failed to take into account that a purpose or object of
is to deter artificial or contrived schemes of which the scheme (wide or narrow)
as articulated by the Commissioner was an
Was the taxpayer’s failure to disprove informed
participation correctly taken into account?
already mentioned, one of the issues raised before the Second Tribunal concerned
the extent to which the taxpayer was an informed
participant in the scheme (wide
or narrow). The Commissioner contended that the transactions in which the
taxpayer participated were
co-ordinated and cohesive and the result of
sophisticated planning and interaction between the participants including the
He contended that the tribunal should conclude that the taxpayer knew
of, or at least, turned a blind eye to the activities of the
Division 165
Supplying Entities including the adulteration of bullion before on-supply to the
taxpayer. In the appeal the Commissioner
submits that such a finding, if made,
would be objective evidence that could inform the evaluation of the
taxpayer’s purpose
of entering into or carrying out the scheme or part of
the scheme:
Minerva Financial Group v Commissioner of Taxation
and the authorities there cited. The tribunal was not prepared to
make a positive finding that the applicant was an informed participant
of, or ought to have known of and turned a blind eye to the activities of the
Division 165 Supplying Entities. But, the
tribunal was also not prepared to make
a positive finding that the taxpayer was not such an informed participant in the
arrangements
constituting the scheme (T [96]).
reasons for the Second Tribunal’s refusal to make positive findings
included the absence of evidence from a director of
the taxpayer and ABC NSW, Ms
Simpson. It was to be expected that she could have given evidence about the
nature of any participation
of the taxpayer in co-ordination of the activities
of the Division 165 Supplying Entities: T [104]. The Tribunal remarked that it
was ‘curious that [the taxpayer] did not call Ms Simpson’: T [105].
However, the Second Tribunal did not draw any adverse
inferences against the
taxpayer specifically relating to informed participation on the ground of an
unexplained failure to call a
witness in its camp: e.g.,
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
101 CLR 298.
Second Tribunal returned to the topic of the taxpayer’s informed
participation in the last part of its reasons in which
it addressed dominant
purpose (T [215]). After reaching its ultimate conclusions on the dominant
purpose of the Division 165 Supplying
Entities and that it was not reasonable to
conclude that any entity had the s 165-5(1)(c)(i) dominant purpose to which
is made in para [113], to the tribunal said:
conclusion would not change even if the applicant was, as the Commissioner
asserts, an informed participant in co-ordinated arrangements.
anything concerning purpose conclusions changes by assuming the applicant had
relevant knowledge. In the Tribunal’s
view, it would still not be
reasonable to conclude that the dominant purpose of the Fraudulent Suppliers was
for the applicant to
obtain ITCs. Even if there was informed participation and
co-ordination by the applicant, the requisite conclusion would still be
dominant purpose of those suppliers was to receive but not pay amounts referable
to their GST liabilities. The taxable supplies
and connected ITCs were merely
steps in an ultimate plan that would remain the same. The applicant paid dollar
for dollar for the
ITCs it became entitled to. That remains the same. The
dominant purpose of the applicant remains securing its refining profit. Informed
coordination could not change the principal effect of the scheme or a part of
the scheme.
Commissioner characterises the effect of that paragraph as a conclusion that Div
165 would not apply to the scheme irrespective
of the taxpayer’s failure
to establish that it was not an informed participant in the arrangements
constituting the scheme.
Minerva Financial Group
Commissioner submits that conclusion is wrong because objective evidence which
reflects a participant's actual or constructive
knowledge about the effects and
characteristics of the wider scheme in which it is a participant could be
evidence relevant to the
evaluation of its purpose.
do not accept the Commissioner’s characterisation of the Second
Tribunal’s reasons. The tribunal gave reasons for its
view that its
conclusion would not change, assuming the taxpayer was an informed participant,
none of which is that informed participation
would not be a relevant
circumstance to be taken into account. In any event, the tribunal did not make a
finding that the taxpayer
was an informed participant and, therefore, even if
the tribunal had made the error asserted, it could not have had any effect on
the outcome.
the Commissioner contends that the Second Tribunal ought to have concluded that
because the taxpayer failed to establish that
it was not an informed
participant, the tribunal could not be satisfied that it was not reasonable to
conclude that the taxpayer
had the s 165-5(1)(c)(i) purpose. The
Commissioner submits that the tribunal, in effect, reversed the onus of proof
Taxation Administration Act
. The tribunal was
wrong to focus its attention on the Commissioner’s inability to persuade
the tribunal to make a positive
finding (T [97]-[102]) because the onus was
on the taxpayer to prove it was not an informed participant not on the
Commissioner to
prove that it was an informed participant. For the reasons that
follow, I do not accept that the tribunal’s approach to the
informed participation reveal that it misconstrued or misapplied
resulting in a reversal of the onus.
effect of s 14ZZK of the Tax Administration Act is that the
Commissioner’s assessment is taken to be correct until falsified:
Binetter v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2016] FCAFC 163
249 FCR 534
(Perram and Davies JJ). Consequently, the taxpayer was taken to
have entered into or carried out the scheme or part of the scheme
s 165-5(1)(c)(i) ‘dominant purpose’ unless the Second Tribunal
made a positive finding that it would
be reasonable to reach that
conclusion. That required the tribunal to undertake the statutory inquiry in
s 165-5(1)(c)(i) taking
into account the matters described in
s 165-15. However, the absence of proof of a fact of potential relevance to
that inquiry did
not deprive the tribunal of the ability to reach the ultimate
conclusion based on such other facts as were proved.
Nonetheless,
a consequence of the Second Tribunal concluding that it was not prepared to
positively find that the taxpayer was not
an informed participant was that it
was required to approach the statutory inquiry under s 165-5(1)(c)(i) and
take into account the
matters described in s 165-15 from the perspective
that the evaluation of the facts could not be undertaken on the footing that the
taxpayer was
an informed participant. That might have been another
‘relevant circumstance’ to be taken into account in accordance
s 165-15(1)(l).
the tribunal was not prepared to draw any adverse inferences, that does not mean
that an unexplained failure to call a witness
in the taxpayer’s camp was
not relevant to the evaluation of whether it was reasonable to conclude that the
taxpayer participated
in the scheme or part of the scheme with the
s 165-5(1)(c)(i) ‘dominant purpose’. Division 165 sits within a
statutory taxation framework that is largely based on
‘self-assessment’ and places the onus on taxpayers to comply with
revenue laws. It is inherent within that framework that there is an information
asymmetry between Commissioner and taxpayers concerning
the information upon
which taxation assessments are formally made. Therefore, the Commissioner has
power ‘where it is reasonable
to conclude’ certain matters to negate
the foundation for GST benefits. The process of assessment, amendment of
assessment,
objection to assessment, and appeal in the
Taxation Administration
places the onus on the taxpayer, who should be in possession of all
necessary information required to do so, to prove that the assessment
incorrect and to prove the correct amount of the assessment. In that context, an
unexplained failure of a taxpayer to provide
evidence from a witness in its camp
who it is reasonable to expect could give evidence going to the factual
substratum of the extent
of the taxpayer’s knowledge of the elements of a
scheme and informed participation in the scheme may be a
‘circumstance’
that is ‘relevant’ for the purposes of
(1)(c)(i) and s 165-
Commissioner does not contend that the Second Tribunal was in error for
disregarding that the taxpayer had not positively proved
that it was not an
informed participant as a ‘relevant circumstance’ and matter the
tribunal was obliged to take into
account by operation of s 165-
(1)(l). Otherwise, it is not a case where it could be said
that, taking into account that the taxpayer had not proved that it was
informed participant, only one outcome was possible; such that it could
confidently be concluded on the facts as found that
the taxpayer had failed to
discharge its overall burden of proof under
Administration Act
DISPOSITION
the reasons given, I would allow the appeal and set aside the Second
Tribunal’s decision. The matter should be remitted
to the Administrative
Review Tribunal for determination according to law. The taxpayer should pay the
Commissioner’s costs
I certify that the preceding one hundred and forty-five (145) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 24 October 2025
RTF format (1.21 MB)
Signed PDF/A format