Wu v Chu [2025] FCAFC 155 (10 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2025] FCAFC 155
Appeal from:
Chu v Lin, in the matter of Gold Stone Capital Pty Ltd (Trial
[2024] FCA 766
Chu v Lin, in the matter of Gold Stone Capital
Pty Ltd (No 4)
[2024] FCA 980
File number(s):
NSD 1233 of 2024
Judgment of:
O'CALLAGHAN, O'BRYAN AND VANDONGEN
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– application by successful
appellant for costs of the appeal to be paid on an indemnity basis pursuant to
r 25.14(3) of the
Federal Court Rules 2011
– whether r 25.14 of the FCR applies to offers made in appeals –
whether the presumptive position in r 25.14(3) should
be departed from
– indemnity costs order made
Legislation:
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Federal Court Rules 2011
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure Rules) 2025
Cases cited:
Australian Skills Quality Authority v Western
Institute of Technology Pty Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 183
Bradken Ltd v Norcast S.ár.L
[2013] FCAFC 123
(2013) 219 FCR 101
Caporaso Pty Ltd v Mercato Centrale Australia Pty Ltd (Costs)
CGU Insurance Limited v Corrections Corporation of Australia Staff
Superannuation Pty Ltd
[2008] FCAFC 173
Chu v Lin, in the matter of Gold Stone Capital Pty Ltd (No 4)
CSR Ltd v Eddy
[2005] HCA 64
(2005) 226 CLR 1
Futuretronics.com.au Pty Ltd v Graphix Labels Pty Ltd
[2009] FCAFC
IFTC Broking Services v Cmr of Taxation
[2010] FCAFC 31
JMC Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation (Costs)
[2023] FCAFC 95
Kooee Communications Pty Ltd v Primus Telecommunications (No 2)
[2011] FCAFC 1141
Lenijamar Pty Ltd v AGC (Advances) Limited
[1990] FCA 520
(1990) 27 FCR 388
[2025] FCAFC 130
Calderbank v Calderbank
Lodestar Anstalt v Campari America LLC (No 2)
[2016] FCAFC 118
Telstra Corporation Ltd v Minister for Broadband, Communications and the
Digital Economy
(2008) 166 FCR 64
The Agency Group Australia Ltd v H.A.S. Real Estate Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2024] FCAFC 44
Thomas v Commissioner of Taxation (No 2)
[2017] FCAFC
Thomson Australia Holdings Pty Ltd v Trade Practices Commission
(1981) 148 CLR 150
Appeal Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
Commercial Contracts, Banking, Finance and Insurance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission:
Date of hearing:
Determined on the papers
Counsel for the Appellant:
Mr Vahan Bedrossian SC
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Kydon Segal Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondents:
Daniel Meyerowitz-Katz
Solicitor for the Respondents:
McCabes Lawyers
NSD 1233 of 2024
Second Respondent
O'CALLAGHAN, O'BRYAN AND VANDONGEN JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
to rr 25.14 and 40.02 of the
Federal Court Rules 2011
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth), order 5 of the orders of
the Court made on 12 September 2025 be replaced by the following
5. In lieu thereof, the respondents pay:
(a) the appellant’s costs of the proceeding below;
(b) the appellant’s costs of the appeal for the period prior to 13
September 2024 on a party and party basis; and
(c) the appellant’s costs of the appeal on and from 13 September 2024 on
an indemnity basis.
respondents pay the appellant’s costs of the interlocutory application
dated 15 September 2025.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
reasons concern the appropriate order to be made with respect to the costs of
Xiao Wu’s appeal following the Full Court’s
judgment in
[2025] FCAFC 130
appeal reasons
). The appeal reasons concerned
three appeals arising from the primary judgment, one of which was brought by Mr
Wu, who contended
that the primary judge erred in exercising his discretion to
award him only 20% of his costs. In the appeal reasons, we granted Mr
to appeal, allowed the appeal, and ordered that the respondents pay Mr
Wu’s costs of the proceeding below and of the
judgment was delivered on the appeal on 12 September 2025, Mr Wu sought leave to
apply under r 40.02 of the
Federal Court Rules 2011
for an order that the costs of the appeal be awarded in his favour other than as
between party and party. An order to that effect
was made on that day.
15 September 2025, Mr Wu filed an application seeking that the Full
Court’s costs order be varied such that Mr Wu’s
costs of the appeal
prior to 13 September 2024 be paid on a party and party basis and his costs on
and from that date be paid on
an indemnity basis.
support of the application, Mr Wu relied on an affidavit of Susan Joy Owen, a
paralegal employed by Kydon Segal Lawyers, affirmed
on 15 September 2025.
Exhibited to Ms Owen’s affidavit was an email dated 10 September 2024 from
the legal representative for
Mr Wu to the legal representatives for the
respondents, which attached an offer of compromise purportedly made in
accordance with
r 25.01 of the FCR. The terms of the offer were to the effect
that Mr Wu would compromise his appeal on the basis that the parties
seek the following orders from the Full Court by consent:
(a) leave to appeal be granted and the appeal allowed;
(b) the primary judge’s orders with respect to the costs of the trial be
set aside and replaced by an order that the respondents
pay 80% of Mr Wu’s
costs of the trial; and
(c) there be no order as to the costs of the appeal (with the intent that each
party pay their own costs of the appeal).
offer was stated to be open for acceptance for 21 days after service of the
offer. It is relevant to note that the offer was made
only 5 days after Mr Wu
had filed his application for leave to appeal.
email to which the offer of compromise was attached also stated that, in the
event that the offer was held not to be valid or
effective as an offer of
compromise under r 25.01 of the FCR, Mr Wu relied upon it as a Calderbank offer
in accordance with the principles
Calderbank v Calderbank
[1975] 3 All ER 333
support of his application, Mr Wu filed written submissions on 23 September
2025. The respondents filed written submissions in
response on 29 September
2025. Mr Wu filed written submissions in reply on 30 September 2025.
is not in dispute between the parties that Mr Wu obtained judgment on the appeal
in terms more favourable than the terms of the
offer. However, the parties are
in dispute as to whether
of the FCR applies to appeals, and therefore
whether Mr Wu’s offer of compromise can be considered as an offer under r
which would attract the application of r 25.14(3).
Rule 25.14(3)
following terms:
25.14 Costs where offer not accepted
(3) If an offer is made by an applicant and not accepted by a respondent, and
the applicant obtains a judgment that is more favourable
than the terms of the
offer, the applicant is entitled to an order that the respondent pay the
applicant's costs:
(a) before 11.00 am on the second business day after the offer was served
– on a party and party basis; and
(b) after the time mentioned in paragraph (a) – on an indemnity basis.
r 25.14(3) states that an applicant is “entitled” to an order for
indemnity costs if an offer is made by an applicant
and not accepted by a
respondent and the applicant obtains a judgment that is more favourable than the
terms of the offer, the Full
Court has determined that the rule establishes a
rebuttable presumption in favour of indemnity costs in recognition of the fact
r 1.35 provides that the Court may make an order inconsistent with the
Kooee Communications Pty Ltd v Primus Telecommunications (No
[2011] FCAFC 1141
, approved in
Lodestar Anstalt v Campari
America LLC (No 2)
[2016] FCAFC 118
) at [23] and
Caporaso Pty Ltd v Mercato Centrale Australia Pty Ltd (Costs)
) at [21]. The mere fact that the respondent
acted reasonably in refusing the offer is not necessarily sufficient to rebut
the presumption:
in respect of the former O 23 r 11(6), see
Futuretronics.com.au Pty Ltd v Graphix Labels Pty Ltd
[2009] FCAFC 40
Futuretronics
) at [11] and
IFTC Broking Services v Cmr of
[2010] FCAFC 31
) at [9]; and in
respect of r 25.14, see
JMC Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Taxation (Costs)
[2023] FCAFC 95
parties agree that if
of the FCR does not apply to appeals, the offer can
be taken to be a Calderbank offer. As explained by the Full Court in
Insurance Limited v Corrections Corporation of Australia Staff Superannuation
[2008] FCAFC 173
, there is no presumptive entitlement to an
indemnity costs order if an offer is made by a party and not accepted and the
party obtains
a judgment that is more favourable than the terms of the offer.
Rather, it will be necessary for the party seeking indemnity costs
demonstrate that the other party’s refusal of the offer was unreasonable,
having regard to the circumstances at the time
of the offer.
foregoing principles concerning
of the FCR and Calderbank offers are not
the subject of any material dispute between the parties. The questions that
arise on Mr
Wu’s application are:
of the FCR apply to the appellate jurisdiction of the Court;
(b) if it does, should an order for indemnity costs be made in favour of Mr
(c) if it does not, should an order for indemnity
costs be made in favour of Mr Wu in the exercise of the Court’s discretion
with respect to costs, having regard to the
principles.
the reasons that follow, we have concluded that:
(a) for more than 15 years,
of the FCR, and the predecessor rules, have
been applied to the appellate jurisdiction of the Court and that practice should
(b) an order for indemnity costs be made in favour of Mr Wu pursuant to r
25.14(3); and
(c) it is unnecessary to consider the application of the
principles.
apply to the appellate jurisdiction of the
submitted by the respondents, there are several factors that support a
conclusion that
is not intended to apply to proceedings in the appellate
at [23]. The most significant factors are the following.
appears in Chapter 2 of the FCR which relates to proceedings in the
original jurisdiction of the Court. Matters of practice and procedure
appellate jurisdiction of the Court are addressed in Chapter 4 of the FCR.
and as a corollary of the first point, procedural matters that are addressed in
Chapter 2 of the FCR, and which have analogous
application in the appellate
FCR. Examples include:
(a) parties and interveners, governed by
in the case of proceedings in the
original jurisdiction and Div 36.3 in the case of proceedings in the appellate
(b) security for costs, governed by
in the case of the proceedings in the
original jurisdiction and r 36.09 in the case of proceedings in the appellate
(c) the withdrawal, discontinuance or summary dismissal of a proceeding,
governed by
in the case of proceedings in the original jurisdiction
and Div 35.3 and Div 36.6 in the case of proceedings in the appellate
there are textual indications that
is directed to proceedings in the
original jurisdiction of the Court. The rules within
refer to applicants,
not appellants.
, which concerns the orders the Court can make if an
accepted offer is not complied with, do not expressly include an order in
of an appeal and include orders that could only be relevant to the
Court’s original jurisdiction, including orders striking
respondent’s defence or that a cross-claim, not the subject of the offer,
the circumstances of an appeal differ from the circumstances of a proceeding at
first instance, but
of the FCR makes no special provision for appeals. The
most obvious difference is that, at the time of appeal, one of the parties
the benefit of a judgment of the Court. An offer to compromise an appeal which
is made by an appellant is received by a respondent
who has the benefit of the
primary judgment. Any assessment of the reasonableness of a refusal of the offer
must be made in light
of that circumstance. A further difference concerns the
exercise of the power of the Court to make orders finalising a proceeding
consent of the parties (to give effect to an agreed compromise of a proceeding)
in the Court’s original jurisdiction and
in its appellate jurisdiction.
The Court frequently makes consent orders in its original jurisdiction under r
39.11 of the FCR (provided
the orders are within power and conform to legal
Thomson Australia Holdings Pty Ltd v Trade Practices
(1981) 148 CLR 150
at 164). The Court is also empowered by
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) to make an
order by consent disposing of an appeal to the Court. However, in
Corporation Ltd v Minister for Broadband, Communications and the Digital
(2008) 166 FCR 64, the Full Court observed (at [47]-[51]) that
consent orders in the Court’s appellate jurisdiction must be
within power
and appropriate and that, if the order is to allow the appeal, the Court must be
satisfied that there is appellable
error. The decision of the Full Court in
Bradken Ltd v Norcast S.ár.L
[2013] FCAFC 123
(2013) 219 FCR 101
[35] is to the same effect.
way of comparison, we note that the
Supreme Court (General Civil Procedure
Rules) 2025
(Vic) contain separate rules governing offers of compromise in
the original and appellate jurisdiction of the Victorian Supreme Court
26.08 in respect of proceedings in the Supreme Court and r 26.12 for proceedings
in the Court of Appeal. Rule 26.08 is materially
the same as former O 23 r
11(6). In contrast, r 26.12 confers a broader discretion on the Court of Appeal
to take an offer of compromise
into account when making a determination about
the costs of the appeal and the basis on which those costs are payable. Rule
provides as follows:
Where on an appeal—
(a) a party has made an offer in writing to the other party (whether or not
expressed to be without prejudice) to compromise the
appeal on the terms
specified in the offer;
(b) the offer was open to be accepted for a reasonable time, but was not
accepted; and
(c) the party making the offer obtains an order on the appeal no less
favourable to that party than the terms of the offer—
the Court of Appeal shall take those matters, and also the stage of the appeal
at which the offer was made, into account in determining
what order for costs to
make in respect of the appeal or in respect of the appeal and the proceeding
more generally.
submitted by Mr Wu, however, in several cases the Full Court has proceeded upon
the assumption that r 25.14 and its predecessor,
O 23 r 11, apply to proceedings
in the appellate jurisdiction of the Court. In respect of O 23 r 11, the cases
Futuretronics
at [8]-[9] (Tamberlin, Finn and Sundberg JJ) and
at [6] (Stone, Edmonds and Jagot JJ). In respect of r 25.14, the
cases include
at [21] (Allsop CJ, Greenwood, Besanko, Nicholas
and Katzmann JJ);
Thomas v Commissioner of Taxation (No 2)
) (Dowsett, Perram and Pagone JJ) and
at [23] (Katzmann, Wheelahan and Hespe JJ). We note for
completeness that Mr Wu also placed reliance on
The Agency Group Australia
Ltd v H.A.S. Real Estate Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2024] FCAFC 44.
Indemnity costs
were not ordered in that case, and it is difficult to discern from the reasons
of the Full Court whether the application
was made under r 25.14(2) or under
principles (or both). Mr Wu also referred to
Skills Quality Authority v Western Institute of Technology Pty Ltd
, but that case was an appeal from a decision of the Administrative
Appeals Tribunal which engages the original jurisdiction of the
(notwithstanding the Court was required to be constituted by three judges).
the Full Court discussed the considerations that support a
conclusion that Pt 25 is not intended to apply to proceedings in the appellate
determine the issue. The Full Court observed (at
The parties proceeded on the basis that that r 25.14 applies to the costs of
both the trial and the appeal. Yet r 25.14 appears in
Chapter 2 of the Rules,
which pertains to proceedings in the original jurisdiction of the Court. It
speaks of applicants and respondents,
not parties. In contrast, the
Civil Procedure Rules 2005
(NSW) and the
Supreme Court (General Civil
Procedure Rules) 2015
(Vic) both expressly provide for offers of compromise
on appeal. In New South Wales, see rr 51.47 and 51.48. In Victoria, see r 26.12.
Both the New South Wales and the Victorian rules provide for costs consequences
that accommodate the different nature of appeals
from proceedings in original
Federal Court Rules
make no special
provision for appeals. The term “appellant” is defined in the
Dictionary as “a person who has filed
a notice of appeal, under Chapter 4
of these Rules”. The combination of the location of the indemnity costs
within Chapter 2, the reference to “applicant”
rather than “appellant” in
, and the omission from
any reference to the particular costs consequences that may arise on an appeal,
suggests that
applies to proceedings in the original jurisdiction and
not appeals. On the other hand, we note that “applicant” is broadly
defined in the Dictionary in Schedule 1 to mean “a party, other than a
cross-claimant, claiming relief”, and “respondent”
to mean both a party, other than a cross-respondent, against whom relief is
claimed, and a party to an appeal brought
by an appellant. These textual
indications may overcome the suggestion arising from the contextual indications.
Other cases have
proceeded on the basis that
applies to appeals,
apparently without argument on the point: see, for example,
The Agency Group
Australia Ltd v H.A.S. Real Estate Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2024] FCAFC 44 (Yates
Markovic and Kennett JJ). In the absence of argument on the question in the
present case, we will address the submissions that were
put, which also
proceeded on the basis that r 25.14 applies to both the trial and the appeal and
that, if it does not, the offers
should be treated as Calderbank offers. As it
happens, nothing turns on the point.
can be accepted, as submitted by the respondents, that each of the Full Court
cases referred to above assumed the applicability
of r 25.14 to proceedings in
the Court’s appellate jurisdiction without argument. In those
circumstances, the cases do not
constitute binding authority for a conclusion
that the rule is applicable to appeals:
CSR Ltd v Eddy
[2005] HCA 64
(2005) 226 CLR 1
(Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Heydon JJ).
the following reasons, we have reached the conclusion that the practice of the
Full Court, which is to interpret r 25.14 of the
FCR as applicable to
proceedings in the appellate jurisdiction of the Court, should be
the practice of the Full Court has been in place for at least 15 years. No
apparent inconvenience has arisen from the practice.
Further, having regard to
the longstanding practice, no litigant can be surprised by the application of
the rule to appeals.
the practice was applied to the predecessor to r 25.14, O 23 r 11. There is no
indication that the new rules, introduced in
2011, were intended to change the
practice. As stated in the Explanatory Statement (p 5) which accompanied the
introduction of the
FCR in 2011, the new rules were not intended to
substantially alter existing practice and procedure but rather explain it in a
that can be more easily followed and applied. In relation to the specific
, the Explanatory Statement went on to say (at p 17):
adopts, simplifies and streamlines the process and procedures which
operated under the former Rules. It does not substantially alter
practice but provides better guidance to parties on some aspects (for example
the content of an offer) and more flexibility
on aspects to do with the
structure of offers (for example in relation to interest).
costs which can be recovered on an offer being accepted (if that offer is not
inclusive of costs) to up to and including
14 days after the offer was made
regardless of when the offer may be accepted.
the language of
can be readily adapted and applied in the context of
appeals. Most of the rules within
make no reference to the type of
proceeding in which an offer of compromise is made and merely refer to an offer
made by a “party”.
The word “party” is defined in the
Dictionary in Schedule 1 to the FC Rules as “a party to a
proceeding”.
The word “proceeding” is defined by reference to
the definition in
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
which definition includes an appeal proceeding. Whilst r 25.14 refers to an
applicant and not an appellant, that is not a
material reason not to apply the
rule in the context of appeals. The expression “respondent” in r
25.14 is defined in
the Dictionary as including “a party to an appeal
brought by an appellant”.
and most importantly, the manner in which r 25.14 has been interpreted and
applied by the Full Court enables the rule to be
applied so as to take account
of the different circumstances of an appellate proceeding. The Full Court has
determined that rule
25.14(3) establishes a rebuttable presumption in favour of
indemnity costs. The Court may depart from the presumptive position for
at [9]. In our view, it is appropriate for the Court to
have regard to the specific circumstances of the appeal in determining whether
there is a proper reason to depart from the presumptive position. Different
considerations apply to an offer made by an appellant
(who, by definition,
failed at trial) in comparison to an offer made by a respondent (who, by
definition, succeeded at trial). In
the case of an offer made by an appellant
that has been refused by a respondent, the circumstances that ought to be
considered by
the Court, in deciding whether to depart from the presumptive
position, include:
(a) the fact that, at the time of receiving the offer, the respondent had the
benefit of the primary judgment, which affects the
assessment of the
reasonableness of the refusal of the offer; and
(b) the terms of the offer, including whether the offer would require the Full
Court to make orders by consent allowing the appeal
without a hearing to
demonstrate error in the primary judgment, which the Full Court may refuse.
in considering the prior judgments of the Full Court which have applied r 25.14
(or its predecessor) in the appellate jurisdiction
of the Court, it is important
to recognise that most of the cases (
Futuretronics,
IFTC, Thomas
) concerned an offer made by a respondent to the appeal (who,
by definition, succeeded at trial). Only one of the cases,
concerned an offer made by an appellant (who, by definition, failed at
Should an indemnity costs order be made?
noted earlier, Mr Wu obtained judgment on the appeal in terms more favourable
than the terms of the offer of compromise. Rule 25.14(3)
therefore gives Mr Wu a
presumptive entitlement to indemnity costs from the second business day after
the offer was served. It is
for the respondents to satisfy the Court that the
presumptive position stated in r 25.14(3) should be departed from:
Futuretronics
respondents submitted that the following considerations justify a departure from
the presumptive position stated in r 25.14(3).
starting point is that the respondents had received a judgment in their favour
(that they pay only 20% of Mr Wu’s costs).
That judgment was given on 23
August 2024:
Chu v Lin, in the matter of Gold Stone Capital Pty Ltd (No
[2024] FCA 980.
Mr Wu filed his application for leave to appeal on 5
September 2024, with the application accepted by the Court the following day
6 September 2024. The application for leave to appeal was accompanied by a draft
notice of appeal and a supporting affidavit.
However, apart from the draft
notice of appeal, there was no other explanation or elaboration of Mr Wu’s
proposed grounds of
appeal. Mr Wu served the offer of compromise a few days
later, on 10 September 2024. The offer remained open for acceptance for 21
Mr Wu did not file his submissions on the appeal until 14 February 2025, well
after the expiry of the offer.
respondents submitted that, on the application for leave to appeal, Mr Wu faced
the “formidable task” of persuading
an appellate court to disturb a
discretionary costs decision:
at [14]. As such, it was incumbent on
Mr Wu to provide compelling reasons to persuade the respondents to accept his
respondents submitted that, during the period of the offer, they were not aware
of the nature or strength of Mr Wu’s proposed
appeal. The offer was not
accompanied by any explanation of Mr Wu’s case. Nor had that case been
notified in any other manner.
The respondents argued that the principal ground
on which Mr Wu succeeded on appeal was that, not only had Mr Wu enjoyed overall
success at trial, but he had also been successful in relation to many
allegations which had been pleaded. The respondents submitted
that the draft
grounds of appeal and the content of the supporting affidavit obscured rather
than elucidated the true nature of Mr
Wu’s appeal. The respondents further
submitted that they could not have ascertained Mr Wu’s case on appeal from
the proceeding
below. The respondents argued that the principal point on which
Mr Wu had succeeded had received minimal ventilation in the Court
respondents also sought to place reliance on the fact that the claim against Mr
Wu was a relatively minor part of a large and
complex multi-party proceeding,
and Mr Wu’s application was one of four appeals the respondents were
facing, meaning that he
could not reasonably have expected his application to
have the respondents’ full attention.
our view, the question whether the presumptive position stated in r 25.14(3)
should be departed from is finely balanced.
the one hand, the presumptive position in r 25.14(3) fulfills an important
purpose to encourage parties to compromise the litigation
and to require them to
give serious thought to the risk involved in not accepting an offer when
“litigation is inescapably
at [20]. The offer made by Mr Wu represented a real compromise
of the appeal, discounting his costs by 20% and foregoing the costs
the other hand, there is force in several submissions advanced by the
respondents. The respondents had the benefit of the costs
judgment below and the
appellants faced the burden of persuading the Full Court to disturb an order
made in the exercise of discretion
on a matter of practice and procedure:
Lenijamar Pty Ltd v AGC (Advances) Limited
[1990] FCA 520
(1990) 27 FCR 388
at 393. The
offer was made at an early stage of the appeal, before the respondent had the
benefit of the appellant’s written
submissions or any other elaboration of
the appellant’s case.
factor that weighs most heavily in the respondents’ favour is that, at the
time of receiving the offer, they had the benefit
of a judgment of the Court.
Further, as the judgment concerned the award of costs, Mr Wu faced a
considerable hurdle in persuading
the Full Court that the judgment should be
overturned. In those circumstances, the respondents’ decision not to
offer can be characterised as reasonable. However, in our assessment,
that conclusion is not a sufficient reason to depart from the
presumptive
position. Ultimately, we consider that the respondents’ submissions with
respect to their inability to assess Mr
Wu’s offer at the time it was made
were overstated. Before the primary judge, the respondents had argued that there
be no order as to costs in their proceeding against Mr Wu because his
success was “on technical grounds” and “on
no merits of their
own”. Conversely, Mr Wu had argued that he was the successful party (the
claims against him had been dismissed)
and numerous other claims made against
him failed on their merits. The primary judge accepted the respondents’
argument, which
we have concluded involved an erroneous exercise of discretion.
Mr Wu’s arguments on appeal were identified with sufficient
clarity in the
draft notice of appeal, including:
(a) by ground 1, that the primary judge arrived at a determination that was
unreasonable and plainly unjust;
(b) by ground 2(a), that the primary judge erred in making the finding that Mr
Wu was only successful on a limitation question; and
(c) by ground 3, that the primary judge erred by failing to take account of
relevant considerations, including that Mr Wu had been
entirely successful in
the proceeding and the respondents had failed on a number of claims for reasons
apart from the limitation
all of the relevant facts, we are not persuaded to depart from the presumptive
position stated in r 25.14(3).
is one further consideration that was not addressed by the parties, which
concerns the form of the offer made by Mr Wu. The
offer required the respondents
to agree to orders to be sought from the Full Court by consent, one of which was
that the appeal be
allowed. As noted earlier, on the current state of the
authorities, a Full Court would be unlikely to agree to an order allowing
appeal unless persuaded that the primary judgement involved material error.
Thus, the form of the offer may have created an impediment
to the resolution of
the appeal pursuant to the terms of the offer. On this application, the
respondents did not submit that their
refusal to accept Mr Wu’s offer was
justified because of the form of the offer. It is therefore unnecessary for us
into account the form of the offer made by Mr Wu. Nevertheless, when
framing offers of compromise in the appellate jurisdiction of
the Court, parties
should appreciate that the Full Court would not ordinarily make an order
allowing the appeal by consent. If the
terms of the compromise require the
orders of the primary judge to be varied or set aside, r 39.05(f) empowers the
Court to vary
or set aside an order after it has been entered if the party in
whose favour it was made consents. It follows that, as part of a
compromise, the
parties to an appeal can consent to an order being made by the Full Court which
varies or sets aside the orders of
the primary judge without the Full Court
being required to allow the appeal.
conclusion, r 25.14(3) is applicable to Mr Wu’s offer and Mr Wu is
entitled to receive his costs on an indemnity basis from
the second business day
after his offer was served on the respondents. Having reached those conclusions,
it is unnecessary to consider
Calderbank principles.
his application, Mr Wu sought indemnity costs for the period from 13 September
2024. An order to that effect will be made. Mr Wu
should also receive his costs
of the application.
I certify that the preceding forty-one (41)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
O'Callaghan, O'Bryan and
Dated: 10 November 2025
RTF format (467 KB)
Signed PDF/A format