Dianne Gurnsey v Bairnsdale Regional Health Service - re Termination of employment - jurisdiction [2009] AIRC 954; (17 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Termination of employment
Dianne Gurnsey
Bairnsdale Regional Health Service
(U2009/557)
COMMISSIONER GAY
MELBOURNE, 17 DECEMBER 2009
Termination of employment - jurisdiction.
Ms Dianne Gurnsey, the applicant in this matter, was employed at the Bairnsdale Regional Health Service (the respondent) from 2 February
2009 until 20 May 2009 when her employment was terminated, on her account, due to a lack of candour and lack of judgement. In the
respondent’s Notice of Appearance of 22 June 2009 the response given as to the reasons for the termination of Ms Gurnsey’s
employment was, “The applicant’s employment was terminated for serious misconduct”. For present purposes it is
unnecessary to delve into the detail of the basis upon which the respondent came to its decision to terminate the employment in question.
The matter was set down for conciliation in Morwell on 28 July 2009 (following the cancellation of a conference scheduled to be conducted
by a Deputy Registrar). Upon receipt of a Motion to Dismiss from the respondent’s solicitors on 23 June 2009 the conciliation
was also cancelled as the respondent objected to conciliation prior to the Motion’s determination.
The basis of the Motion to Dismiss was that because at the time of termination Ms Gurnsey had not completed the qualifying period
of employment within the meaning of
Workplace Relations Act
(the Act) she was therefore excluded by virtue of
Section 643(6)
is in the following terms:
“(6) An application under subsection (1) must not be made on the ground referred to in paragraph (1)(a), or on grounds that
include that ground, unless the employee concerned had completed the qualifying period of employment with the employer at the earlier
of the following times:
(a) the time when the employer gave the employee the notice of termination;
(b) the time when the employer terminated the employee’s employment”
The Form R29 upon which Motions to Dismiss are made provides space for the respondent, objector to the Commission’s jurisdiction,
to set out in summary form the facts in support of the ground or grounds relied upon. The respondent’s solicitors took advantage
of this opportunity and it is convenient to record the position said to obtain as to Ms Gurnsey. The application, lodged on 5 June
2009, relied on the
s.643(1)(a)
ground, that the termination of her employment was harsh, unjust or unreasonable.
Section 643(6)
provides that an application cannot be made under
section 643(1)
on the ground that the termination was harsh, unjust or unreasonable unless the employee concerned had completed the qualifying period
of employment with the employer at the time when the employer gave the employee the notice of termination or when the employer terminated
the employee’s employment, whichever occurs earlier.
Section 643(7)
defines the qualifying period of employment to be 6 months, or a shorter or longer period if agreed in writing prior to the commencement
of employment. The qualifying period was not extended or shortened by agreement between the applicant and the employer in this instance.
As a result, the qualifying period of employment was 6 months.
The applicant commenced employment with the employer on 2 February 2009. Her employment was terminated by the employer effective on
20 May 2005. Therefore, she had not completed the requisite qualifying period of employment at the time her employment was terminated.”
Upon return from a period of leave I requested my Associate to write to the parties on 24 August 2009. The correspondence said, in
part, “To assist the Commission in considering the ‘Notice of Motion’ and whether it is necessary to conduct a
hearing, the applicant’s agent or solicitor is asked to initially respond to the ‘Notice of Motion’ in writing,
with a copy to the respondent, as to the facts of the completion of the qualifying period, any other material relevant to the jurisdictional
objection and including whether it is necessary to conduct a hearing.” There was no reply to this correspondence.
On 28 September 2009 my Associate communicated with Mr Ellingham, agent for Ms Gurnsey, by email indicating that if no response was
received to the 24 August letter, the file would be closed.
On 5 October 2009, a submission was filed in the Commission replacing an earlier, imperfect version which had been lodged on 2 October.
The later submission contained an argument relying on the fact that at the time of the applicant’s termination one of the Act’s
principal objectives was to assist in giving effect to Australia’s international obligations in relation to labour standards.
It was contended that because Article 2(B) of the Termination of Employment Convention provided for exclusion from protections for
an employee serving a period of probation
a qualifying period determined in advance, it was not open to Australia to erect an exclusion based on both a period of probation
and a qualifying period of employment.
The thrust of the argument is found in the following passage of Mr Ellingham’s submission:
“We submit that the
Workplace Relations Amendment (Work Choices) Act 2005
by creating a distinction between the probation and qualifying period has changed the sense of the Convention from “or”
to “and” and as such does not comply with the Convention nor does it meet one of the principal objectives of the Act
section 3(n)
to give effect to Australia’s international obligations in relation to labour standards. On this basis the applicant should
be given access to the provisions of the unfair termination procedure.”
In due course the respondent’s solicitors declined to make a submission in reply, preferring to rely on the points set out in
the ‘Notice of Motion’.
In my view the artful argument propounded for Ms Gurnsey cannot, unfortunately for her, prevail. In a general sense one must, in my
view, take the legislation to be effective, so that its terms are to be applied subject only to the normal considerations as to construction.
Questions of legitimacy, constitutionality and the consonance of terms of the Act with Australia’s international treaties and
the consequence of some deficit of comity said to arise therefrom are not, in my view, to be answered by me - other than by the provision
of this decision.
It is true that the more than dozen principal objects of the WorkChoices Act 2005 did not, other than at s.3(n) referring to Australia’s
international obligations, specify
employment protection
or some similar term for the matter of a remedy for those who had had their employment terminated. The Objects of Division 4 of the
Act, set out at subdivision A – Termination of Employment, say nothing about the exclusions found within that Subdivision,
principally at s.638. At s.638 a range of exclusions appeared including at s.638(1)(c) that dealing with probation periods. The fact
of a qualifying period necessary for an application to be made, was separately detailed, at Subdivision B of the Act, at s.643(6).
As Ms Gurnsey had been advised by her manager that she had satisfactorily completed her probationary period it will be seen that the
further period required to be served, namely six months, disqualifies an application such as Ms Gurnsey’s, notwithstanding
the completion by her of the separate probationary period. That is the qualifying period’s purpose – otherwise the Parliament
at the time, would have provided that on those occasions where a probationary period existed and had been satisfactorily completed,
the qualifying period was deemed to have been served or was to no effect. As is clear from the location in the Act of the qualifying
period (s.643(6) and the probationary period (s.638(1), they are different provisions with independent operation. It can be readily
envisaged that s.643(6) would regularly operate to limit access to the jurisdiction for any successful probationer who had not also
completed six months service. In my view the Explanatory Memorandum to the WorkChoices Bill reflects the Parliament’s intention
when it provided, at page 319 of the Workplace Relations Amendment (WorkChoices) Bill 2005 Explanatory Memorandum:
period under paragraph 170CE(5B)(a) stipulates the length of an employee’s employment with an employer before being able to
lodge an unfair dismissal application. Probation is different as it refers to a period set by the employer to assess suitability
for employment.”
As there is no doubt in my mind that the scheme of the Act is for s.638 and s.643 to operate severally, Ms Gurnsey’s application,
relying as it does only on the s.643(1)(a) ground, is not within jurisdiction and cannot continue to be considered. I am unable to
agree with the submission of the applicant’s agent that paramount weight can be given to Article 2(b) of the Convention over
the specific provision of an Act of the Australian Parliament. As I have found the application to be beyond jurisdiction the ‘Notice
of Motion’ must be accepted and the application dismissed. An order to that effect will issue [
BY THE COMMISSION:
COMMISSIONER
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code A, PR991681>
No downloadable files available