Salway & Hackley & Anor [2013] FMCAfam 328 (10 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SALWAY & HACKLEY
[2013] FMCAfam 328
FAMILY LAW – Parenting dispute –
earlier orders made to transition child from primary care of grandmother to
mother having to leave Australia – child not transitioning
to mother – child still primarily attached to grandmother
child’s primary attachment at risk – orders made for child to live
with grandmother.
Family Law Act 1975
Aldridge v Keaton
[2009] FamCAFC 229
Mulvany v Lane
[2009] FamCAFC 76
(2009) FLC 93-404
Goode v Goode
First Respondent:
Second Respondent:
File Number:
MLC 5136 of 2012
Judgment of:
Burchardt FM
Hearing dates:
8 & 9 October 2012 and 21, 22 & 28 March 2013
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Women’s Legal Service Victoria
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Solicitors for the First Respondent:
Fiona R. McGregor
Counsel for the Second Respondent:
Solicitors for the Second Respondent:
Lampe Family Lawyers
Counsel for the Independent Children’s Lawyer:
Solicitors for the Independent Children’s Lawyer:
Septimus Jones & Lee
THE COURT ORDERS:
(1) That subject to Order 19 all previous Orders be
discharged.
(2) That the paternal grandmother have sole parental responsibility for the
child, [X] born [in] 2010.
(3) That the child live with the paternal grandmother.
(4) That the child spend time with the mother as follows:
(a) Until the
mother leaves Australia on or before 30 April 2013:
(i) From 10.00
am Tuesday until 10.00 am Friday each week; and
otherwise by agreement with the paternal grandmother.
(b) Whilst the
mother is living in Bali:
(i) In Bali by
agreement with the paternal grandmother;
Australia by agreement with the paternal grandmother for at least five hours
every second day for the duration of the mother’s
visit to Australia, or
as otherwise agreed.
event the mother returns to Australia to live:
agreement with the paternal grandmother and the mother have liberty to
(5) Notwithstanding Order 4(a) upon the mother’s departure date being
confirmed by supplying the paternal grandmother with
a copy of the
mother’s flight itinerary the paternal grandmother and the mother shall
ensure that the child is in the mother’s
care for a 48 hour period
immediately preceding her departure from Australia but not including the day of
her departure.
(6) That the child spend time with the father by agreement with the paternal
grandmother, with such time to be supervised by the
paternal grandmother.
(7) That the paternal grandmother and the father encourage and foster the
child’s relationship with the mother.
(8) That the paternal grandmother will encourage and facilitate the child having
Skype contact with the mother on at least three
occasions per week.
(9) That the paternal grandmother inform the mother as soon as practicable if
the child suffers any serious illness or injury whilst
in her care and provide
the mother with details of same, together with the contact details of any of the
child’s treating medical
professionals and provide authority for those
professionals to speak with the mother about the child.
(10) That the paternal grandmother will advise the mother if she intends to
change address and will provide her updated address details
forthwith, together
with any change in contact telephone numbers or email addresses.
(11) That the mother keep the paternal grandmother informed of her address and
(12) That the paternal grandmother keep the mother informed about the welfare
and education of the child on a regular basis.
(13) Once the child is of school age, the paternal grandmother provide to the
mother on a regular basis copies of all school reports,
any other reports on
school progress in relation to the child and school photos of the child as soon
as practicable after they are
(14) That the mother be at liberty to forward from time-to-time photographs of
herself to the child and the paternal grandmother
ensure that those photos are
displayed in the child’s bedroom.
(15) That the paternal grandmother forward to the mother on a monthly basis by
email or Facebook recent photographs of the child.
(16) That the mother be at liberty to send the child cards, letters and gifts
and the paternal grandmother ensure that the child
receives same.
(17) That the paternal grandmother do all such acts and things as to facilitate
the child’s involvement with the Balinese community
and join a Balinese
community such as Mahindra Balia (Balinese Community of Victoria) and to arrange
for the child to attend a Balinese
language school once he is of school age.
(18) That at the next changeover the mother provide the paternal grandmother
with the child’s passport and citizenship papers
and the paternal
grandmother provide the mother with the child’s jewellery (being 2 rings,
a necklace and bangles).
(19) That the Watch List Order made 14 June 2012 be discharged on the day after
the mother’s departure from Australia in April
2013 and the paternal
grandmother’s solicitor serve a sealed copy of this Order and the
mother’s flight itinerary on
the Australian Federal Police.
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the
Salway & Hackley & Anor
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
MLC 5136 of 2012
First Respondent
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introductory
this matter, I gave Judgment on 13 November 2012. These Reasons for Judgment
should be read in conjunction with those then published,
although I will
recapitulate some of the more important matters in a moment.
the matter broadly, what emerged from the former hearing was that there was an
Order made that the applicant mother have sole
parental responsibility for the
child, [X], born [in] 2010, and that he live with the mother for an introductory
period, and then
from Tuesday to Saturday each week. The child was to live with
Ms Hackley, the paternal grandmother, at all other times, and to
spend time with
his father, the son of Ms Hackley, supervised by Ms Hackley from time-to-time.
background to that decision can be gleaned from my earlier Reasons for Judgment,
but in essence the matter was attended by a measure
of urgency because at the
date of Judgment it was anticipated that the mother might have to return to Bali
because of visa difficulties
in December 2012. As was then foreshadowed, the
mother’s visa has been extended, in effect, to 30 April 2013.
things have now transpired, the critical question in this case is whether [X]
should be returned with his mother to Bali before
the end of April or whether he
should stay in Australia. If he does return to Bali in this way he will largely
be excised from not
only his paternal grandmother, Ms Hackley, but also from his
father and the father’s family. Conversely, if he remains in
Australia he
will be largely excised from his mother and her family. It is immediately
apparent that this is, to use an adjective
I used in the earlier decision, a
heart-wrenching set of circumstances.
A brief overview of the earlier decision
following matters are particularly relevant in my earlier decision:
section 11F
counsellor who provided a report on 29 June 2012 was clear that
there was greater warmth between [X] and his grandmother and that
absent when [X] was with his mother and indeed with his father (paragraph
mother confirmed that [X]’s primary attachment was with his grandmother
(paragraph 53);
interviews in late August 2012, Ms B prepared a report dated 3 September 2012 in
which she recorded:
was observed to enjoy a closely attached relationship with his paternal
grandmother, Ms Hackley and a familiar relationship with
his father (paragraph
relationship with his mother was far less developed (paragraph 68);
set out at paragraphs 45 to 51 a number of reservations about the state of the
evidence in the parties’ proposals, concluding
at paragraph 51:
any clear recommendations about future living arrangements can be made, the
outcome of the mother’s residence
application will need to be
clarified.”
confirmed that if the mother stayed in Australia then there should be over time
(at least six months) a process whereby [X] would
be returned to his
mother’s primary care (paragraph 71);
Independent Children’s Lawyer, not without misgivings, adopted the
position that [X] should be in the primary care of his
mother (paragraph
found that the reason that the mother gave up [X] to the grandmother, at the age
of only two months, was:
is impossible to avoid the conclusion that the mother’s love for the child
was simply not great enough to countervail
her desire to improve her visa
prospects.”
(paragraph 100);
found that [X]’s primary attachment was to his grandmother, that he had a
secure and satisfactory relationship with his father,
and a developing
relationship with his mother and excellent relations with the father’s
extended family (paragraph 106);
found that it appeared to be common cause that [X] ought to be transitioned from
the primary care of his grandmother to his mother
(paragraph 158);
found that it was in [X]’s best interests to remain with his primary carer
and that if this was his grandmother in December
2012, it was not in [X]’s
best interests to be removed from the grandmother and taken to Bali (paragraph
further found that if the mother’s visa extension was granted and
transition was effected so that he was in the primary care
of his mother and had
a secure attachment with her, then despite all difficulties he should go with
her to Bali (paragraph 164);
found that if the mother had to return to Bali before she became [X]’s
primary carer, it was in [X]’s best interests
to remain with his primary
carer, his grandmother, in Australia (paragraph 167).
application for leave to appeal that decision was made, and although the parties
had liberty to apply, no interim applications
were made by any parties arising
out of the operation of those Orders.
foreshadowed, a follow-up family report was prepared by Ms B when the matter
returned to Court for final hearing.
the interim, as is apparent from the above, the mother’s visa had been
extended. From exhibited material before the Court,
it is clear that she has to
depart Australia to arrive in Bali no later than 30 April 2013.
The march of events since last year
the time available before the mother’s anticipated departure (although
aspects of her visa future remain unclear, it is
at least clear that she has to
be out of Australia by the end of April), this matter is attended with
considerable urgency, as has
indeed been the case throughout, notwithstanding
that it commenced in the Court in May of last year.
do not propose to traverse the affidavit material filed by the parties in
laborious detail, but to concentrate upon those aspects
that are of most
significance, although I have of course had regard to all the materials filed
and all the evidence given before
mother has filed two further affidavits and an affidavit of support from Ms M.
mother’s first affidavit deposed to the developing relationship between
herself and [X] and also deposed to difficulties
with changeover. At paragraphs
10 and 11 of the affidavit filed on 8 March 2013, she
“10. However, the changeovers have been quite
difficult for me. I pick up [X] at 10am at [omitted] Station every Tuesday.
[Ms Hackley] sometimes follows me when I picked up [X].
11. [Ms Hackley] collects [X] from me at Mr H’s house at 10am every
Saturday. She comes in to the house, and often stays for
over an hour before
she leaves with [X].”
mother went on to depose that [X] is often returned to her care with cuts,
bruises, and insect bites and the like. She further
deposed at paragraph 13:
“I want now to have the full time care of [X]. I am his
mother, and I believe he should be living with me full time, and not
grandmother.”
mother deposed to the developing relationship she has with Mr H, the time she
has spent with Ms M and her visa status. She further
deposed that if she returns
to Bali, she will live in [K] and will have a measure of family support. She
proposed to rent a one-room
bedroom unit in [K] for her and her child and that
she would expect financial support from Mr H.
affidavit deposed that the mother would support Ms Hackley spending time with
[X] in Bali.
affidavit of Ms M, sworn 19 March 2013, is essentially supportive of the mother.
She was not required for cross-examination.
It is not necessary to go into the
detail of the affidavit because it generally supports the mother’s
proposition that [X]’s
relationship with his mother was improving. She
confirmed that there were difficulties at changeover on two occasions when Ms
was returning [X] to his mother and that:
Hackley] became very clingy to [X] and did not encourage him to go with Ms
Salway. [Ms Hackley] sometimes stays longer
than necessary and prolongs the
importantly, bearing in mind that the affidavit was sworn in March when the new
arrangements for extended time came into place
some months beforehand, Ms M
deposed at paragraph 14:
“[X] seems to be becoming better
adjusted to change-over’s as they become routine and is happy to be back
with his mother.”
mother’s second affidavit was essentially written to respond to the family
report of Ms B. I will return to these matters
when I deal with the oral
affidavit of the father, sworn 20 March 2013, says little save that he is now
back in the [T] Rehabilitation facility.
affidavit of the Ms Hackley, sworn 19 March 2013, deposed at paragraph
“Since the increase in time with Ms Salway, [X]’s
behaviour has changed and progressively become worse.”
She deposed at paragraph 7 that:
“He has become more clingy and on occasions has taken to hitting me
and throwing things. He has recently started to spit and
bite which is out of
character. He refuses to go to bed on his own, even though he has slept on his
own since he was four months
Hackley deposed that [X] constantly watches where she was and refused to let her
leave a room without him and throws tantrums.
She deposed that it takes a long
time to settle [X] upon return from his mother. Ms Hackley deposed in detail to
the unfortunate
changes that have occurred in [X]’s behaviour since time
with his mother has increased (and time with his grandmother decreased).
Hackley responded to the criticisms put by the mother of her at changeover and
said that she had significant difficulties with
trying to make [X] go to his
mother. It is fair to characterise the affidavit as containing an element of
recrimination for the
mother’s behaviour at changeover and more generally,
something that is reciprocated in the mother’s affidavit material.
The Mother’s evidence given before the Court
mother was called first. In evidence-in-chief, she responded to the
grandmother’s affidavit. It is not necessary to traverse
this material in
any detail as it really involved responding in considerable detail to minor
criticisms made of her by Ms Hackley,
such as the failure to use a dummy,
something apparently regarded as culturally inappropriate in Bali.
is sufficient to say that the mother confirmed her general position which is
that any difficulties at changeover arise out of a
measure of hostility on the
part of Ms Hackley, together with misunderstandings arising from the different
perceptions of the parties.
It is clear from the mother’s own words that
she struggles to cope with her emotions about Ms Hackley. She retains an
ambivalence
arising out of her perception that Ms Hackley stole her child, the
form of words she used on more than one occasion.
the mother’s hostility to Ms Hackley is evident in the fact that she said,
on I think three occasions, and always
unresponsively to the question asked,
that Ms Hackley is getting money from the government and spending it on going on
cross-examination, the mother confirmed that she does not want, really, to be
friendly with Ms Hackley. She said that she feels
Ms Hackley had lied
to her in the past and that she did not like her. She does not like Ms Hackley
using any terms of affection to
her. She confirmed that [X] does have a cry on
occasions at changeover, but settles down quickly when it is over.
should be noted that the mother gave a number of very long answers to what were
really short questions not requiring extensive
reply. I should record that her
hostility to Ms Hackley was all too obvious.
emerged that the mother has established a Facebook account in the name of Ms S
with a fictitious identity suggesting that she was
a student at the [omitted]
Secondary College. When asked why this was the case, her initial response was
to say that this was a
private matter which the Court should not hear about. In
the ultimate, the best that can be said of this slightly troubling episode
that the mother appears to suggest that she set it up to ensure that the father
could not access it. This was apparently because
the father had accessed her
Facebook account in her own name.
do not propose to make overmuch of this matter which in the ultimate is a
sideshow, but it is concerning that the mother should
need to move to such
elaborate deceit. If she wished to set up a Facebook account to which the
father did not have access, she did
not have to go to such lengths. I say this
even though it may be that it was Mr H who came up with at least some of the
suggestions
as to the fictions on the Facebook page.
should also say, although once again it is not a matter in the ultimate of great
moment, that the mother’s answer that she
did not want friends to find her
on Facebook and that this was why the Ms S account was created had all the
appearance of being made
up on the run.
mother was cross-examined about non-attendance at [X]’s birthday party and
other family events. I accept that this would
be at least as likely to arise out
of the difficult interpersonal dynamic with
Ms Hackley and the father as for
any other reason. I note, however, that the mother confirmed in terms under
cross-examination by
Ms Boymal words to the effect that she liked Ms
Hackley in the beginning but now knows that she is dishonest.
is sufficient to say that on her own evidence the mother is bitterly resentful
of Ms Hackley for, as she sees it, stealing her
child from her, lying to her
benefits to her own benefit
rather than applying them to [X].
mother confirmed what is otherwise patent, namely that she has to return to Bali
by the end of April and does not know how long
she will be there. Although she
still plans to marry Mr H, she does not propose to do so quickly and wishes to
take her time.
mother confirmed a matter recorded in Ms B’s report at paragraph 10 that
she did say “I’m your mother”
to [X] on 8 March 2013.
“She’s not your mother ... she stole you.” She also
complained that Ms B had spent far
more time with Ms Hackley than with her on
that occasion.
also confirmed that although she was happy for Ms Hackley to come and see [X] in
Bali, she alone would determine the amount of
time spent. She confirmed what is
also otherwise patent, namely that she does not have the money to contribute to
Ms Hackley’s
costs of flying to Bali, and that it is her dream to live in
mother further confirmed that it was in [X]’s best interests to be with
his mother. This was the only reason she put that
she should have the primary
care of him.
Cross-examination
by the counsel for the father in my view added little. The mother said that it
was important [X] has a relationship
with his father. She also went on to
accuse him of lying in his previous affidavit because he is now in
rehabilitation, and it is
fair to say that her evidence was replete with
criticism of the father for the failure to obtain her a spouse visa in the first
Cross-examination
by the Independent Children’s Lawyer gave interesting details as to
[X]’s routine when with his mother,
but otherwise, in my view, added
nothing of any moment.
is one final aspect of the evidence concerning the mother I should deal with.
Exhibit B1 is a series of extracts from the mother’s
Facebook page under
the name Ms H. On 14 January 2013, she entered a Facebook remark:
“I love this life, my boyfriend works all day and I get to
go shopping all day with his money.”
have said in my earlier Reasons for Judgment that it is perhaps understandable
that a woman as young as the mother may at times
find the business of being a
mother somewhat difficult. At one level of analysis, this message is an
extremely cynical expression
of satisfaction by a highly successful gold digger.
In the ultimate, however, at most this is a remark expressing the cynical
exploitation
of her relationship with Mr H. It does not directly touch upon her
relationship with her son.
The evidence of the paternal grandmother, Ms Hackley
evidence can be dealt with somewhat more briefly. The evidence confirmed what is
patent already, namely that the relations between
Ms Hackley and the mother
have got no better at all since they were last before the Court. It is not
necessary to record the various
mutual accusations about bruises and so on on
the mother’s part, and failure to use a dummy, and a poor response to
being hugged
and the like on the part of the grandmother. The fact is they do
not like each other and their perceptions of events at changeover
and the like
are entirely influenced by their own perceptions.
should record that it is quite clear that this holiday which has occasioned the
mother so much concern was a cruise proposed out
of the blue by Ms
Hackley’s other daughter, [name omitted], in January 2013 in the context
of a likely outcome perceived at
that time that [X] would be leaving Australia
with his mother. I accept that it has now been cancelled.
further accept the failure of the grandmother to do anything about the distress
ostensibly felt by [X] at changeover and throughout
the intervening period has
arisen out of a combination of unexceptionable factors. The mother was not
legally represented until
very recently, is not of particularly advantaged
educational background, and knew the matter would be coming back to Court in any
event. I draw no adverse inferences out of the failure of Ms Hackley to bring
the matter back to Court earlier. I note that the
mother also says there were
problems throughout the intervening period and she, being legally represented
throughout, likewise did
not return to Court prior to trial.
note that in response to questions from counsel for the father,
confirmed that there are photographs of the mother in her lounge and hall
entrance and one in [X]’s room on his wall.
I accept that the grandmother
brings these to [X]’s attention and tells him that they are photographs of
his mother. She will
also continue Skype and Facebook if [X] stays here and his
mother returns to Bali.
extensive cross-examination by counsel for the mother, the pattern of the
evidence that I have described in the immediately
preceding paragraphs remained
undisturbed.
The updated report of Ms B
B’s report clearly speaks for itself. I note, inter alia, the following
observations. At paragraph 7, Ms B wrote:
outset it was apparent that the mother was angry and frustrated by the
assessment procedure. She was antagonistic
towards Ms Hackley and abrupt and
dismissive throughout the interview process. In contrast Ms Hackley presented
as consistently
child focussed and respectful towards the mother and at
interview.”
paragraph 8, Ms B recorded:
“Initially the mother arrived
alone with [X]. She said her partner Mr H (sic) was working and unable to
attend. A subsequent
attempt to contact Mr H (sic) by telephone was
unsuccessful. [X] seemed happy and content in her company and the mother seemed
and at ease with [X]. However, she seemed intent on sharing her
negative appraisal of Ms Hackley rather than relaxing and settling
[X] into the
environment of the waiting room.”
B went on to describe [X]’s elevation of mood when Ms Hackley arrived and
his reference to her as “mummy”, something
corrected by saying, “I’m Nanna”.
paragraphs 10 and 11, Ms B recorded:
“10. Given the
tensions, Ms Hackley was immediately invited into the interview room while [X]
remained with his mother. The
mother seemed frustrated as she held tightly to
the child. Unfortunately [X] became increasingly distressed and began crying
loudly for Ms Hackley referring to her interchangeably as
“mummy...(and)...nanna”. [X]’s cries became louder and
became distraught. The mother was unable to soothe [X]. She held him tightly
on her hip and told him in a firm and unfriendly
way, “she’s not
your mother...she stole you.” [X] wriggled and squirmed and tried to
disengage from the mother’s
embrace still screaming out “mummy (or)
11. The mother held onto [X] and took him outside briefly. She soon
returned with [X] still screaming and crying. [X] continued
to cry and yell in
a loud manner for his paternal grandmother. He did not impress as having the
capacity to self soothe or respond
to his mother’s attempts to calm him
down. Nor did the mother appear to sufficiently advance parenting and nurturing
to soothe and calm [X] or assist him to settle.”
was returned to the room with Ms B and his grandmother and he immediately ceased
“13. ... [X] calmed instantly and he became
chatty and engaged verbally with his grandmother. [X] presented as calm
in Ms Hackley’s presence.”
to have Ms Hackley leave the room led to [X] becoming extremely upset and it is
sufficient to record Ms B’s observation
at paragraph 17:
“[X]’s close attachment relationship with Ms Hackley
was apparent. He continued to show difficulties and quickly became
if he was separated from her. The mother did not seem to accept or respect
[X]’s need to be in proximity of Ms
Hackley at the
assessment.”
B took the parties outside for a walk to see if [X] could be calmed and settled
and to play with them in an open environment. Ms
B recorded at paragraph 19
“... The mother again became hostile and unfriendly.
She grabbed [X], who immediately commenced screaming and crying and trying
disengage from her embrace.”
paragraph 20 of the updated report, it is apparent that [X] continued to cry and
scream and yell in the mother’s arms and
that the mother repeatedly
informed him in a hostile manner, “she’s not your mummy...she stole
you.” The mother
refused to cooperate and collaborate in this aspect of
the assessment and walked at a fast pace some distance ahead of Ms B and Ms
the ultimate, [X] was returned to Ms Hackley and settled gradually.
alone with Ms B, the mother relevantly confirmed that it was her view that [X]
was well settled in her care and that she would
be returning to Bali with [X]
immediately following the next Court hearing. She was confident of the Court
transitioning [X] to
her full-time care on a permanent basis.
mother confirmed her dislike of Ms Hackley and was highly critical of her for
what she perceived as her reluctance to provide
the mother with financial
assistance. It should be noted that this aspect of her criticism was repeated
in the evidence about the
CentreCare payments set in Court.
B reported at paragraph 27:
“In summary, the mother was
confident that [X] should or would live with her in the upcoming months and they
would return to
live in Bali indefinitely. She was unsupportive of fostering an
ongoing relationship with Ms Hackley.”
Hackley confirmed that the transitional arrangements had been difficult for [X].
She confirmed that she was respectful of the likelihood
that [X] would live
primarily with his mother at some future stage and was supportive of this, but
was worried about when this should
occur. She confirmed that [X] has not
managed the change of residence well (paragraph 29 of the report).
paragraph 32, Ms B recorded:
“In summary, ideally Ms
Hackley wanted to slow the pace of the transition of [X] to the mother’s
care. She was supportive
of a more permanent transition in the future when [X]
was better able to manage extended time away from her and remain with his
is sufficient for these purposes to record the following aspects of
B’s evaluation from paragraph 36 onwards:
mother and Ms Hackley present as a loving parent and caregiver to [X]. They are
both eager to be involved in the child’s
future care and upbringing. It
remains apparent that [X] enjoys a more closely attached relationship with Ms
Hackley than with the
mother. [X]’s relationship with his mother will
take time to develop and extend.
37. Despite the good intentions of all, it is apparent that [X] has not
managed the transition from Ms Hackley’s care to the
mother’s care.
His presentation about being reunited with
Ms Hackley and distressed
behaviour after being separated from her showed evidence of developing anxiety
and insecurity in his relationship
formations. In addition, the level of
mistrust and hostility in the mother’s and paternal grandmother’s
relationship
has seemingly disrupted the organisation of [X]’s experience
of the security and availability of his secure relationship figure,
Ms Hackley. If [X] is to develop optimally and in a normative manner
he needs predictability in his life and access to his secure
based attachment
figure, Ms Hackley.
38. If the current arrangement continues or progresses, unfortunately it
would not bode well for [X]. The child is assessed as too
developmentally immature to be separated from the paternal grandmother for
extended periods of time at present. [X] needs
to return to the predominant
care of Ms Hackley as soon as practicable. Ideally [X] would spend regular time
with his mother while
their relationship develops and extends prior to
considering a further transition to the mother’s care. In the current
circumstances,
given the mother’s unknown visa situation it remains
unclear how this can be achieved. When [X] ages and matures somewhat,
three or four years of age, then he may have developed the cognitive skills and
abilities to better tolerate separation from
Ms Hackley and more time with the
39. While living with Ms Hackley in the absence of the mother, it may be
beneficial for [X] to trial a facilitated separation from
her with the
assistance of the former familiar day care service
that [X] previously
B went on to recommend that [X] return to live with the paternal grandmother
wherever the mother lives, noted that time between
[X] and his mother was
supported and encouraged and made a series of recommendations for time to be
spent if the mother remained
in Australia. Such time did not include overnight
time in the immediate future.
is obvious, Ms B pointed out that if the mother returns to Bali then alternative
arrangements would need to be made.
Cross-examination of Ms B
cross-examination by counsel for the Independent Children’s Lawyer, Ms B
expanded upon her evidence about the risks to
[X]. Her evidence was that a
child’s brain forms between the ages from birth to three. In order to
develop properly, the brain
needs a calm environment, and a secure attachment
provides the background for that to occur. Where there is not a secure
environment
and the child is distressed, the brain releases cortisol which
prevents learning. An insecure attachment may occur because the child
know who the primary carer is or where care is not consistent. The child may
become chaotic. A secure attachment is a good
indicator of an adjusted
adulthood, and an insecure attachment is likely to lead to difficult behaviour
from early life onwards.
This includes social problems at school and problems of
regulating emotions. These problems escalate throughout adolescence and
A secure attachment is essential.
B confirmed that [X] is more attached to his grandmother than to his mother, and
that when she first saw him [X] was clearly attached
to his grandmother. She
said that when she saw him for the follow-up report, she put in place an
attachment assessment. [X]’s
distress, according to Ms B, shows a real
risk of an insecure attachment if he is not returned to the grandmother. This
was something
she had observed during the day they were together.
problem Ms B identified was the level of distress experienced by [X] when he was
removed from his grandmother. This was at risk
of affecting his brain
development. His stress was a level of 10 out of 10.
B said that [X]’s relationship with his mother was not irreparable in the
longer term, provided he was able to develop normally
and retains a memory of
her. The priority for [X] was to consolidate his attachment to his grandmother.
B was concerned that if [X] lived in Bali, his functioning, both short term and
long term, would be at risk. This was so even
though he would be upset at first
but might then settle down. The issue for Ms B was the likely detriment to
[X]’s brain functioning
if this occurred. [X] needs to be returned to his
grandmother now.
was no prospect of contemplating a change to the full-time care of his mother
until he was at least three to four years old,
and even this would depend on how
the matter was handled. Ms B described [X]’s level of distress as
extraordinary. Two visits
per year from the grandmother to Bali would just not
be enough to retain his relationship with his grandmother.
cross-examination by counsel for Ms Hackley, Ms B confirmed that [X]’s
secure attachment is to his grandmother. Even
if he were to acclimatise to
Bali, there would be still be the brain developmental problems to which she had
referred. Ms B said
that the mother was unpredictable and it was impossible to
assess her genuineness.
further confirmed that any return to day-care would need to be painstakingly
cross-examination by counsel for the father, Ms B confirmed that she did not see
the father on this occasion and had nothing
to add to her earlier report.
for the mother sought to traverse, in if I may say so a very skilful way, the
particular events of the day of the interview
Ms B. It was a very
difficult and hot day.
B confirmed that the mother brought the child and there were no problems. It
was put to Ms B that it was scarcely surprising that
[X] was very pleased to see
his grandmother after spending a number of days away from her, and it was
further put that [X] was likely
to have been in a difficult mood both because of
the hot weather and because he had missed his afternoon nap.
B, nonetheless, confirmed the course of events as she had described them. She
confirmed that the mother had been angry and frustrated
from the start. She said
that she was fine when Ms B first came in, but became upset when Ms B spoke to
her as she could not understand
why a further interview was necessary. Ms
B’s understanding was that the mother thought that [X] was transferring to
was frustrated by the necessity for a further interview.
B confirmed that she observed [X] with the grandmother for possibly one hour and
that [X] calmed down after about 15 minutes.
She then asked the grandmother to
leave, this being part of the attachment assessment to which she had referred.
Even when the grandmother
was asked to go to the opposite side of the room, [X]
was distressed.
was clear that [X] would not separate from Ms Hackley, Ms B suggested the
parties go for a walk to see how [X] went between the
two adults. She did not
see a naughty child, but a distressed child, (this remark was made in response
to a question that [X] was
simply having a tantrum).
B confirmed her description of the walk outside and the difficulties occasioned
by the mother walking off quickly and [X] screaming
for his grandmother.
response to the suggestion that the removal of day-care and the removal of the
father to [T] (this having taken place in January
following 10 days or so of
rehabilitation also away from the family home) might have unsettled [X], Ms B
replied that it was not
the time with the mother that was the problem, but the
time away from the grandmother. The grandmother had been the reliable person
before the change took place.
is sufficient to say that Ms B stood by her report and her earlier remarks.
Despite the skill of cross-examination, she was not
moved, in my view, one inch
from the conclusions she had earlier set out.
The issues in the case
is clear that the mother will be returning to Bali by the end of April. It is
not known when she will be able to return or indeed
if she will ever be able to
do so. Counsel for the mother asserted that the mother cannot hope to return to
Australia for at least
six months no matter what occurs. Counsel for the
grandmother and the father say the matter is more opaque.
I did canvass with the parties the prospect that I might do my own research into
this aspect of the matter, and no counsel appeared
vigorously to object, I have
decided not to do so. Notwithstanding that I sit in the migration list, my
conclusions would not follow
a process of open discussion and challenge in
Court, and I therefore will do no more for these purposes than conclude, as
is obvious and all parties agree, that the mother will unquestionably
leave for Bali before the end of April 2013. She will certainly
be away from
Australia for some period of time and it must be assumed that this will be at
least a matter of some months. Whether
or not she is able to return to
Australia will depend, inter alia, upon the progress of her relationship with Mr
H, which she says
herself she is not in rush to conclude and certainly not
merely to obtain a visa.
must also be accepted that she may never be able to return to Australia as a
permanent resident.
difficulties the mother has had in getting to Australia to see [X] and indeed to
conduct this litigation are such that I conclude
that the better view is she
will never be able to afford to come to Australia unless she is sponsored by
some third party. Such sponsorship
is purely conjectural at this stage.
however, and this is equally clear, Ms Hackley is not rich. She lives on a
carer’s pension in difficult circumstances,
looking after her own father
as well as her son and, dependent upon the outcome of this case, her grandson.
At best, she will be
able to afford to go to Bali once per year, and I note that
Ms B says that this will not be enough to sustain the relationship with
central question in this case is a brutal one that can be put shortly. Should
[X] be returned as Ms B recommends to the primary
care of his grandmother
forthwith and remain with her when his mother goes overseas to Bali, or should
he go to Bali with her and
his relationship with everybody else await the march
The submissions of the parties
Independent Children’s Lawyer addressed first. Counsel correctly
identified the problem as being the mother’s return
to Bali. It was
submitted that this produces a different position to that which obtained at the
last hearing when the report of Ms
B led to the changes then made.
emphasised that the test involves, in the ultimate, the ascertaining of
[X]’s best interests. It was submitted that
[X] has been in the primary
care of his grandmother for some time and that while it is no-ones fault the
fact is that he has not
transitioned to his mother.
was submitted that both parties have complied with the Court’s Orders in a
fashion which, taken overall, could be described
as reasonably civilised.
pointed to the fact that [X] has a secure attachment to his grandmother and an
insecure attachment with his mother. It is
noted that Ms B recommends a return
to the grandmother.
Submissions
made traverse the obvious difficulties experienced by [X] between the last
hearing and now and it was submitted that [X]
should return to his primary care
of Ms Hackley.
Orders designed to assist [X] to appreciate his Balinese culture were also
for Ms Hackley concentrated submissions on the law. It is not necessary to deal
in any detail with the comprehensive and
counsel put forward as counsel for the mother accepted that it was an accurate
recitation of the
traversed the statutory pathway in detail but it is not, in my view, necessary
to record those submissions at any length.
It is sufficient to say that counsel
submitted that a proper consideration of the relevant matters in
Family Law Act 1975
(“the Act”) led to the
conclusion that it was appropriate that [X] be returned to the primary care of
his grandmother
as recommended by Ms B.
for the father supported the Orders sought by the paternal grandmother.
Essentially, she adopted submissions made by counsel
for the paternal
grandmother.
for the mother referred to
Aldridge v Keaton
[2009] FamCAFC 229
(2009) FLC 93-421
and [74]. She submitted that unless there was harm proven while in the care of
his parents’ then the paternal grandparent
simply did not
be considered.
the pressure of time involved in preparing this Judgment, it is not possible for
me to deal at any length with the extensive
case law in this area. In my view,
it is sufficient to note that
provides that “a court must regard
the best interests of the child as the paramount consideration”.
note further that the Full Court in
Aldridge v Keaton
approved the
remarks and observations of Finn J in
Mulvany v Lane
[2009] FamCAFC 76
(2009) FLC 93-404
Aldridge v Keaton
at [65]). That means that in a case such as this
the Court can only reach its determination in parenting proceedings on an
application
s.60CC(2)(b)
and of the additional matters in
they expressly apply to a person other than a parent.
as I must the force of that qualification, I note that the Full Court at
Aldridge v Keaton
at [75] said:
there can be no doubt that the amending Act has placed greater emphasis on the
role of both parents in the upbringing
of their children, all applications for
parenting orders remain to be determined with the particular child’s best
as the paramount but not sole determinant.”
is clear in my view that in the circumstances of this case, the paternal
grandmother cannot be excluded in some artificial way
from the proceeding. In
view of the facts that obtain, the submission made by counsel for the mother
goes further than in my view
the legislation can take it.
the avoidance of doubt, I point out that to send [X] to Bali and/or to remove
him from the care of his primary carer, his grandmother,
would be to inflict
harm upon the child in any event and I further note that the
considerations that apply to persons other than the parents (particularly
s.60CC(3)(b)
,(d),(f),(g) and (m)) will clearly apply.
for the mother also suggested that the difficulties that were manifested by [X]
at the assessment with Ms B had arisen out
of combination of unfortunate
circumstances. Everybody agrees it was a very hot day and it would appear that
[X] may not have had
his normal afternoon nap. Criticism was advanced of the
way in which Ms B dealt with the matter and it was submitted that Ms B should
have had properly assessed the child with the mother first and not moved
immediately to the grandmother. It was submitted that this
was not a proper
test of attachment. Ms B had in fact set up a contest of affection between the
grandmother and the mother which
in the circumstances the grandmother was always
going to win.
should make it clear that I do not accept that submission. Ms B sought to
interview the paternal grandmother, a decision in my view
wholly unremarkable
and clearly not infused with any animus or bias. Ms B’s report accepts
that the mother loves the child
and it is not in my view, despite the various
criticisms she made, unduly critical of the mother.
have already dealt in a general way with these events and it is not necessary
otherwise to repeat the arguments.
further submitted that it was Ms B’s evidence that the child would
acclimatize to Bali and would settle. This submission,
in my view, rather
misses the point. Ms B accepted that [X] would settle but was adamant that a
failure to return [X] to the primary
carer, his grandmother, would be very
damaging to him.
concentrated further on the evidence of Ms M but while I accept that Ms M said
that everything is going well, Ms M was not
at the assessment with Ms B. There
is no tension between Ms M’s evidence and that of Ms B in my view.
further submitted that the mother’s anger at Ms Hackley was entirely
understandable. I accept that given her state of
mind it is inevitable that the
mother is resentful of and angry with Ms Hackley. However, the submission
seeking as it were to apportion
Ms Hackley rather misses the point.
I have already determined in my earlier Judgment that Ms Hackley took [X] to
Australia with full
agreement of the mother. While the mother has now
reconstructed matters in her own mind the fact is that she has no proper basis
upon which to be angry as she is. It should be made clear, however, that while I
make this finding the outcome of this case owes
nothing to an apportionment of
blame for this state of affairs. The reality is that the only importance of the
poor and interpersonal
dynamic between the mother and grandmother is that it is
likely to impact on the extent to which the mother would foment a relationship
with [X]’s maternal family.
The statutory pathway
set out the relevant extracts of
Goode v Goode
[2006] FamCA 1346
of my previous Reasons for Decision. It is not necessary to repeat them in
these circumstances. The first matter that arises is
the question of parental
responsibility.
is plain that whoever has primary care of [X] should have sole parental
responsibility. There is no other practical potential
outcome in the
circumstances of this case.
Equal time and substantial and significant time
has parental responsibility, the law requires that the Court give consideration
to the child spending equal time or alternatively
substantial and significant
time with the other parent within the meaning of those phrases as defined in the
Family Law Act
. It is sufficient for these purposes to say that in the
circumstances with which we are confronted, neither equal time or substantial
and significant time should be ordered. They are utterly impracticable in any
The order in [X]’s best interests
is not necessary to re-traverse the matters set out in paragraphs 125 to 156 of
the earlier Judgment. They traverse the statutory
background and the
section 60CC(3)
matters in some detail.
picture has significantly altered however since I then dealt with the matter.
Relevantly, Ms B’s report suggests that [X]’s
secure and primary
attachment to his grandmother is at risk. If this risk is as it were fulfilled,
then Ms B’s evidence is
that [X] will suffer very significant and serious
harm which needs to be addressed forthwith.
have perhaps not said so in terms to this point, although it may be implicit. Ms
B was an extremely impressive witness who, as I
have said, was not moved one
inch in cross-examination. Although some of the assumptions underpinning her
conclusions (the weather,
[X] missing his nap and so on) were put in issue,
these did not alter her judgment one iota. Given the nature of the matters Ms B
was asserting, this is scarcely surprising. Indeed, Ms B’s distillation of
the relevant research, plainly given within her
area of expertise and given with
considerable and believable confidence, was not itself challenged.
accept Ms B’s report and her evidence generally.
regret to say that once that conclusion is reached, the disposition of the
matter is all too straightforward. As Ms B has said,
despite the best efforts of
all, [X] simply has not transitioned into his mother’s care as Ms B had
recommended and as all
parties had hoped would be the case. To the contrary, his
circumstances have deteriorated to a point where not only has he not fully
transitioned into his mother’s care, but his relationship with his primary
attachment, his grandmother, is at risk with all
the attendant and established
difficulties.
these most regrettable circumstances, it is quite clear that it is in
[X]’s best interests that he is returned forthwith
to his grandmother and
that I make the Orders proposed by Ms Hackley, based on the recommendations of
Ms B. It is imminently appropriate
that the child be returned to his
grandmother forthwith.
should be noted that it necessarily follows from the immediate return of [X] to
his grandmother that he simply cannot depart with
the mother at the end of April
2013. In making this finding, I am keenly conscious of the very great distress
it will cause her
and the potential difficulties it may give rise to for [X],
both immediately, bearing in mind his developing but unfortunately not
grounded relationship with his mother, and in the future.
Nonetheless,
the force of Ms B’s recommendations is irresistible. It is clear that [X]
cannot be transitioned to his mother
now. It is not in his best interests for
this to be the case. Quite the contrary, it will be damaging for him, both
immediately
and for his future development for the reasons given by Ms B.
it may be possible to contemplate transitioning [X] to the full-time care of his
mother in the future, for example when he
turns four or thereabouts, will have
to await the march of events. Much will depend upon the way in which
[X]’s future development
is handled and how successfully he moves forward.
Much would also depend in the future upon the attitude of his mother.
have described this decision as heart-wrenching on more than one occasion. I did
so in my first Judgment and have repeated that
phrase in this one. It remains
so. There is no way round it. [X] must be largely sundered from one of his
parents and in the event
that he returns to Bali must be sundered from his
primary attachment to his grandmother. It is clear that removal from his
attachment is not in his best interests and it is really for this reason
that the case that he remains in Australia with her is so
overwhelming.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
nineteen (119) paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Burchardt FM.
Date: 10 April 2013
RTF format (280 KB)
Signed PDF/A format