1312553 [2015] RRTA 293 (20 May 2015)
[2015] RRTA 293
(20 May 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
Afghanistan
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Melissa McAdam
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the
direction that the applicant satisfies s.36(2)(a) of the Migration Act.
Statement made on 20 May 2015 at 3:41pm
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration to refuse to grant the applicant
a Protection visa under
Migration Act 1958
applicant who claims to be a citizen of Afghanistan, applied for the visa [in]
December 2012 and the delegate refused to grant
the visa [in] August 2013.
applicant was represented in relation to the review by his registered migration
RELEVANT LAW
criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An applicant for the visa must
meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That is,
the applicant is either a person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the ‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other
‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same
family unit as such a person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same
Refugee criterion
36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant
for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the Minister is
satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status
of Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to
the Status of Refugees (together, the Refugees Convention, or the Convention).
is a party to the Refugees Convention and generally speaking, has protection
obligations in respect of people who are refugees
as defined in Article 1 of the
Convention. Article 1A(2) relevantly defines a refugee as any person
owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group
or political opinion, is
outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is
unwilling to avail himself
of the protection of that country; or who, not having
a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence,
unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to
91R and 91S of the Act qualify some aspects of Article 1A(2) for the purposes of
the application of the Act and the Regulations
to a particular person.
are four key elements to the Convention definition. First, an applicant must be
outside his or her country.
an applicant must fear persecution. Under s.91R(1) of the Act persecution must
involve ‘serious harm’ to the applicant
(s.91R(1)(b)), and
systematic and discriminatory conduct (s.91R(1)(c)). Examples of ‘serious
harm’ are set out in s.91R(2)
of the Act. The High Court has explained
that persecution may be directed against a person as an individual or as a
member of a group.
The persecution must have an official quality, in the sense
that it is official, or officially tolerated or uncontrollable by the
authorities of the country of nationality. However, the threat of harm need not
be the product of government policy; it may be enough
that the government has
failed or is unable to protect the applicant from persecution.
persecution implies an element of motivation on the part of those who persecute
for the infliction of harm. People are persecuted
for something perceived about
them or attributed to them by their persecutors.
the persecution which the applicant fears must be for one or more of the reasons
enumerated in the Convention definition -
race, religion, nationality,
membership of a particular social group or political opinion. The phrase
‘for reasons of’
serves to identify the motivation for the
infliction of the persecution. The persecution feared need not be
attributable to a Convention reason. However, persecution for multiple
motivations will not satisfy the relevant test unless a Convention
reasons constitute at least the essential and significant motivation for the
persecution feared: s.91R(1)(a) of the Act.
an applicant’s fear of persecution for a Convention reason must be a
‘well-founded’ fear. This adds an objective
requirement to the
requirement that an applicant must in fact hold such a fear. A person has a
‘well-founded fear’ of
persecution under the Convention if they have
genuine fear founded upon a ‘real chance’ of being persecuted for a
stipulated reason. A ‘real chance’ is one that is not
remote or insubstantial or a far-fetched possibility. A person
well-founded fear of persecution even though the possibility of the persecution
occurring is well below 50 per cent.
addition, an applicant must be unable, or unwilling because of his or her fear,
to avail himself or herself of the protection of
his or her country or countries
of nationality or, if stateless, unable, or unwilling because of his or her
fear, to return to his
or her country of former habitual residence. The
expression ‘the protection of that country’ in the second limb of
1A(2) is concerned with external or diplomatic protection extended to
citizens abroad. Internal protection is nevertheless relevant
to the first limb
of the definition, in particular to whether a fear is well-founded and whether
the conduct giving rise to the fear
is persecution.
an applicant is a person in respect of whom Australia has protection obligations
is to be assessed upon the facts as they
exist when the decision is made and
requires a consideration of the matter in relation to the reasonably foreseeable
Complementary protection criterion
a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a), he or she may
nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant of
a protection visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
being removed from Australia to a receiving country, there is a real
risk that he or she will suffer significant harm: s.36(2)(aa)
complementary protection criterion’).
‘Significant
harm’ for these purposes is exhaustively defined in s.36(2A): s.5(1). A
person will suffer significant harm
if he or she will be arbitrarily deprived of
their life; or the death penalty will be carried out on the person; or the
person will
be subjected to torture; or to cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment; or to degrading treatment or punishment. ‘Cruel or
treatment or punishment’, ‘degrading treatment or punishment’,
and ‘torture’, are further defined
in s.5(1) of the Act.
are certain circumstances in which there is taken not to be a real risk that an
applicant will suffer significant harm in a
country. These arise where it would
be reasonable for the applicant to relocate to an area of the country where
there would not be
a real risk that the applicant will suffer significant harm;
where the applicant could obtain, from an authority of the country,
such that there would not be a real risk that the applicant will suffer
significant harm; or where the real risk is one
faced by the population of the
country generally and is not faced by the applicant personally: s.36(2B) of the
Section 499 Ministerial Direction
accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the Act, the
Tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines
prepared by the
Department of Immigration –PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Complementary
Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee
and humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines
– and any country information assessment prepared by the Department of
Foreign Affairs
and Trade expressly for protection status determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
SUMMARY OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
Protection visa application
following is a summary of the claims and information provided by the applicant
in his Protection visa application:
applicant was born on [date] in [a] Village, [District 1], Daikundi Province,
Afghanistan. The applicant submitted his Refugee
ID card issued in Iran and his
marriage certificate.
applicant is an ethnic Hazara and of Shia Islam religion.
had [number] years of [schooling] in Afghanistan.
fighting in Afghanistan. He lived in Iran illegally
and did occasional labouring
work and loading for under minimum pay.
married his wife in October 1990 in [Iran]. They have [children].
1993 the Iranian government allowed Afghan refugees to obtain temporary
residence documents to remain in Iran. The applicant obtained
a permit for
himself and his wife. It did not entitle him to work legally.
show his identification. He did not have it with him
and was arrested. He was
detained for four days then deported over the border to Herat in
Afghanistan.
applicant stayed in Herat from about two weeks then re-entered Iran
to show his identification. He was detained and
deported over the border to
Herat again. After three weeks he again re-entered Iran illegally.
in Iran remained difficult and he often faced discrimination and abuse.
Iranian authorities. He decided not to try to return
to Iran again because life
was so difficult there. He was too fearful to stay in Afghanistan because he is
Shia Hazara and he feared
being killed by the Taleban. He travelled to Quetta in
Pakistan. The situation for Shia Hazaras was dangerous there so he arranged
journey via [various countries] to Australia.
arrived in Australia in June 2012.
applicant’s wife and [children] are still residing in Iran. His mother
[and siblings], are in Daikundy, Afghanistan. His
Departmental Interview, [in] August 2013
following is a summary of the claims and information provided by the applicant
in his Departmental Interview:
applicant left Afghanistan because he was in fear of the Pashtuns coming. The
rest of his family remained in Afghanistan. His
father has passed away. The
applicant never returned to his village after going to Iran.
of the applicant’s family were involved in any militias. The
applicant’s [siblings] are living in Daikundy. The
applicant’s
father had a farm in Daikundy.
closest Pashtun [village] is a day’s walk from his home village in
Daikundy. During the time of the Taleban the applicant’s
Daikundy had problems like being beaten and going to prison. Since the fall of
the Taleban the applicant’s family
in Daikundy have problems if they have
to travel to Kabul. Sometimes the roads are blocked or there is
applicant had a valid Refugee White Card in Iran but decided not to return in
2012 because it was so hard there and he had been
deported three times. The
applicant did not visit his family on the third time he was deported to
Afghanistan because he was too
afraid to travel in that direction. When he was
deported in 2012 he travelled from Herat to Kandahar by bus, and then by car to
location] on the border with Pakistan.
[District 1] is secure but outside is not secure. If the applicant goes outside
[District 1] he will be killed.
Delegate found the applicant to be a generally credible witness. He found that
although the Taleban is active and control many
parts in Afghanistan, Hazaras
and Shias are not systematically targeted or persecuted throughout Afghanistan.
He considered the
risk of serious harm to the applicant in Daikundi to be
Information to the Tribunal
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 19 May 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments. The Tribunal hearing was conducted with
the assistance of an
interpreter in the Hazaragi and English languages.
following is a summary of the information provided by the applicant at the
applicant confirmed that the information in his Protection visa application was
all correct and that there was nothing he wished
to change or add.
applicant’s mother [and siblings] are still living in Daikundy in
Afghanistan. The applicant’s wife and children are
applicant left Afghanistan so that he would not have to join the groups fighting
the Russian occupation.
applicant married in Iran. None of his family or relatives in Afghanistan
attended his wedding because it was too dangerous for
them to travel in
Afghanistan to Iran because of the war. They have never visited him in Iran
because of the dangers from the Taleban,
travelling that route. Incidents happen
from time to time. The applicant’s family have problems if they go outside
their village
area. Hazara people travel but they know they are taking a chance
of being attacked, killed or robbed.
Hazaras have trouble from the Taleban and from another group, DAESH.
applicant did not try to return to [District 1] when he was deported from Iran
because he was fearful of the dangers in going
there. His father was ill and the
applicant wanted to visit him before he died but he was not able to. The
applicant’s father
died two weeks later.
applicant’s accent has changed from his years in Iran. He has developed an
Iranian accent. When he speaks the Taleban will
know he is from Iran.
returns to Afghanistan he will be in more danger because people will know he
went to a western country. The Taleban are able
to get information about
applicant fears a man in [District 1] called [Mr A]. [Mr A] is a powerful person
who wanted the applicant to return to Afghanistan
from Iran to fight with his
group. This was when the applicant was about [age] years old. The applicant
didn’t return and
[Mr A] said he will kill the applicant if he returns to
Afghanistan. He has never mentioned this before because he didn’t think
applicant cannot live in Kabul because there are incidents against Shias and
Hazaras there. He will not be able to find a house
or a job because of his age
and because he does not know anyone there and does not know the city. The
applicant has never been to
Kabul. He does not know anyone in Kabul. He has no
family or relatives in Kabul.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
applicant submitted his identity documents which show he was an Afghan refugee
living in Iran. On the basis of these document
and the applicant’s oral
evidence the Tribunal is satisfied the applicant is a citizen of Afghanistan.
The Tribunal assesses
the applicant’s claims against Afghanistan as his
country of nationality and receiving country.
Tribunal accepts on the evidence before it that the applicant was deported from
Iran three times. The Tribunal is satisfied the
applicant does not have a
current right to enter and reside in Iran.
Credibility
applicant gave clear and credible evidence he is a Shia Hazara originating from
[District 1] in Daikundi province, Afghanistan.
He also gave clear, detailed and
credible evidence that he went to Iran in about 1987 and lived there until late
2012. The Tribunal
accepts these aspects of his claim and profile.
applicant claimed to fear harm in Afghanistan from the Taleban and the Islamic
State (DAESH) as a Shia Hazara. This claim does
not raise additional credibility
issues regarding any assertions of personal facts by the applicant. In assessing
the claim, the
well-foundedness of the applicant’s fear will be
applicant also claimed to fear an influential man in his village who wants to
kill him for not returning to Afghanistan to fight
with the man’s
Fear of Local Man, [Mr A]
Tribunal found the applicant’s claim that a local man [Mr A] wanted to
kill him, both implausible and vague. The claim was
only raised late in his
hearing with the Tribunal. The Tribunal considers the late inclusion of this
claim substantially undermines
its credibility. When asked why he had not
mentioned the matter previously the applicant’s only response was he
thought it important. When the Tribunal then asked him if the
matter was important he indicated it was. He did not resolve the contradiction
in these two responses and the Tribunal does not accept his explanation as a
the applicant was unable to provide a rational basis for the claimed enmity by
the man [Mr A]. At the time he claimed [Mr
A] demanded his return he had been in
Iran for several years. As put to the applicant given he was in Iran and working
to help support
his family in Afghanistan like many other young Hazaras at the
time, he was not a suitable person to target for recruitment. It
was further put
to the applicant that he had brothers of a similar age still in Afghanistan who
[Mr A] could recruit. His response
was vague, stating that they had each done
their turn, without further explanation. He also offered no details as to why
[Mr A] would
now take such an extreme reaction as to kill the applicant over
this matter when it happened in the early 1990s and the applicant’s
actions could not be considered unreasonable at the time.
Tribunal does not accept that a man in [District 1], [Mr A], wants to kill the
applicant because he did not return to Afghanistan
to join in the fighting. The
Tribunal does not find this claim credible.
Fear of Harm in Afghanistan
Hazaras in Afghanistan
assessed that Hazaras “are not currently at any
greater risk of violence than other ethnic groups in Afghanistan” but
[t]he security situation in Afghanistan remains fluid and varies from district
to district within individual provinces”,
noting that “any
categorical assessment on the security in a particular area could be rendered
inaccurate.”
a somewhat analogous assessment the Department’s 2015 COIS Paper on
Afghanistan states (with the internal reference footnoted
Although the Taliban leadership and the group as a whole has
not been anti-Shia or anti-Hazara, the sporadic killings of Hazaras in
regions since 2001 seems to indicate that a small number of Taliban commanders
in various parts of Afghanistan do hold either
anti-Shia or anti-Hazara views.
The Taliban is made up of individuals with a wide range of motivations –
some join for religious,
political or ideological reasons, others join for
financial reasons, others to solve local problems or pursue personal causes,
as revenge, and yet others are criminals who use the cover of the movement
to prey on the
population.
Biljert states: ‘The variety within the Taliban movement also illustrates
that the movement has a spectrum of enemies,
and that not all Taliban fighters
will attack the whole
Road Travel
2014 Report contains the following in relation to road security in
Afghanistan:
Insecurity compounds the poor condition of
Afghanistan’s limited road network, particularly those roads that pass
through areas
contested by insurgents. Taliban and criminal elements target the
national highway and secondary roads, setting up arbitrary armed
checkpoints.
Official ANP and ANA checkpoints designed to secure the road are sometimes
operated by poorly-trained officers known
to use violence to extort bribes. More
broadly, criminals and insurgents on roads target all ethnic groups, sometimes
including kidnapping
for ransom. It is often difficult to separate criminality
(such as extortion) from insurgent activity.
Individuals working for, supporting or associated with the Government and the
international community are at high risk of violence
perpetrated by insurgents
on roads in Afghanistan. Carrying documentation that would indicate employment
or another connection with
the Government is dangerous. Because Hazaras are
perceived to be affiliated with either the Government or international
those Hazaras travelling these routes who work for the Government or
international community frequently take precautions to ensure
that, if they are
stopped, they could not be identified as such.
Hazara MPs and several credible civil society contacts have told DFAT that
‘dozens’ of Hazaras were killed on roads to
and from Hazarajat in
2013. However, DFAT has no reliable evidence to indicate that insurgents
disproportionately target Hazaras
on roads in Afghanistan. Hazaras are often the
main travellers on roads to Hazarajat, so higher numbers of victims could also
the higher volume of traffic.
Department’s
Paper summarises the differing views regarding
the safety of road travel for Hazaras:
There are conflicting views
among external sources consulted on whether Hazara travellers travelling to
Ghazni City or Kabul are being
targeted because of their ethnicity. Advice by
DFAT, Qayoom Suroush,of Afghanistan Analysts Network and the Afghanistan
Development
Association indicates that there is no evidence of ethnic targeting
on roads in Ghazni. In contrast, Thomas Ruttig, Professor Alessandro
Professor William Maley and a Ghazni based NGO, the Ghazni Rural Support
Program, maintain that travel for Hazaras is dangerous
on roads passing through
Pashtun districts.
also provides a list of reported attacks on Hazaras in
Afghanistan. The following is the excerpt from the list of attacks occurring
2014 and 2015, the majority of which occurred on the roads:
A bus was stopped travelling between Ghazni and Jaghouri. Ten
Hazaras were abducted. After some hours nine were released with one
to be held at the time of writing. Unconfirmed reports believe the remaining
captive worked for the government.
Masked men stopped two vehicles traveling on the
highway near Zabul and identified and abducted 30 Hazaras. The Hazaras were
to be Afghan refugees returning from Iran. Different reports identified
the abductors as possibly foreign and either members of the
Taliban or ISIS. As
of the time of publication, the men had not been found, although one Hazara
escaped on 25 February.
Eight or nine Hazaras were killed in Gilan district in
Ghazni when their van was exploded by a remote controlled bomb. The Hazaras
travelling from Kabul to Jaghori district. The pro-Hazara source
Kabul Press
claimed that ‘These victims were civilians who were going from Kabul
to Jaghori, did not work for any government offices and
did not have any
connection with any of Afghanistan’s political parties’, though
other sources do not give such details
Australian-Afghan Sayed Habib Musawi, a Hazara from
Jaghori district in Ghazni, was reportedly killed by the Taliban while
from Kabul to his home district of Jaghori. He was reportedly killed
as he was an Australian, but the fact that he was also a Hazara
may have been
c.16 September 2014
Zainullah Naseri, a Hazara from Jaghori district
in Ghazni, was reportedly abducted and tortured by the Taliban for two days in
province after being deported from Australia. He escaped to Jaghori then
returned to Kabul. DFAT was unable to confirm the report.
Suspected Taliban fighters halted two minibuses in
Lal-o-Sar Jangal district in the western province of Ghor, identified 14 Shia
passengers, including three women and a child, bound their hands, then
shot them dead by the side of the road.
The Taliban killed (Hazara sources say
‘beheaded’) between 14 and 17 people, usually described as policemen
or ex-policemen,
in Gizab district of Uruzgan Province. This incident was little
reported and reports do not give much detail. According to Hazara
sources, the
victims were Hazaras, mostly students and workers, though other sources do not
mention their ethnicity. Other information
tends to support the assertion that
the victims were Hazaras: Hazaras comprised a disproportionately large part of
the police force
in Uruzgan and particularly in Gizab, according to a 2010 NGO
report on Uruzgan, and one of the reports mentions that one of the
victims was
the nephew of Governor Amanollah Timuri who is elsewhere reported to be a
have been further reports of attacks on Hazaras on the roads in Afghanistan
since COIS published its paper. According to media
reports six Hazaras were
abducted by armed masked men on the Herat-Farah highway in Farah province on 16
March 2015.
Hazaras were reportedly abducted in Ghazni as they were travelling out of their
Tribunal notes that security concerns in Afghanistan, particularly for Hazaras,
have increased in recent months with the addition
of a growing
(IS or DAESH) presence in the country. The Afghan President recently
acknowledged that the Islamic State is gaining influence in
Afghanistan
Associated Press
has reported on not only the emergence of an IS presence
in Afghanistan but also of the “Taliban spreading their own influence
areas where they have not had a significant presence in the
of the reported recent attacks on Hazaras have been attributed to IS fighters -
foreign fighters and/or defectors from the Taleban.
For example a March
article states:
The mass kidnapping of members of Afghanistan's Hazara
minority has raised concerns that Islamic State militants are entering a new,
active, phase in the country. Details about the mass abduction, which took
place in Zabul Province on February 23, remain murky,
with claims that it was
carried out by Islamic State militants countered by denials that the group is
present in the southeastern
... Provincial government official Abdul Khaliq Ayubi blamed the abduction on
IS, which has a strong anti-Shi'ite agenda. He said
the gunmen all wore black
clothing and black masks. Eyewitnesses who spoke to ToloNews said the gunmen
spoke in a foreign language.
Other Afghan officials have
expressed skepticism about the involvement of IS in the abduction,
however. Islam Gul Sayal, the spokesman
for Zabul’s governor, told
RFE/RL’s Radio Free Afghanistan that he believes the Taliban was behind
the abduction. "These
gunmen were antigovernment forces," he said. "It’s
possible that they were [Pakistani] Taliban. But the Islamic State group
not have a presence here. They are simply Taliban who have changed their
flags." Nevertheless, the incident has fueled suspicions
that IS militants
are moving beyond the recruitment phase in
Afghanistan....
are speaking of ‘competition’ between IS and the Taleban resulting
in increasing brutality and sectarianism.
Khaama Press
reported in February 2015 that:
... Being attracted by even [more]
radical group, the Taliban are continuously losing their men to ISIL. In
contrast, the ISIL is
rapidly maximizing its man power, ammunitions and
financial resources. For example, since the announcement of the Khorosaan
covering modern day Pakistan, Afghanistan, India, Bangladesh, and part
of neighboring central Asian countries, in January 2015, the
ISIL had not only
convinced commanders of Pakistani Taliban to declare their allegiance to
Al-Baghdadi, the Group had also nominated
the Pakistani Taliban commander Hafez
Saeed Khan as the emir of the Khorosaan. Other well-known Taliban figures who
had recently
joint ISIL are Shahidullah Shahid, Sa’aad al Emarati, Sheikh
Muhsin, Dolat Khan, Khalid Mansoor, Abdul Rauf Khadim and dozens/hundreds
others. ...
... The ISIL soon began to expand their influences towards southern province
of Afghanistan, mainly towards major provinces of Loya
Paktia, Ghazni and
Helmand. In the late September 2014, just few weeks after the release of
ISIL’s first propaganda message
in Peshawar, the group killed about 100
people in Ajristan district of Ghazni province; among them 12 persons were women
and children
who were brutally beheaded. The Taliban spokesperson Zabihullah
Mujahid rejected claims for such mass killing; however, local inhabitants
witnessing the scene considered Taliban militants, who were carrying the black
flag of ISIL with them, responsible for such murders.
According to local Afghan
news, Wahdat news, the Taliban militants carrying ISIL’s flag not only
killed dozens of people in
Ajristan, they had also blocked communication roads
to other districts of Ghazni province including Jaghori, Qarabagh and
... When the ISIL men riding on horse with black ISIL’s flags on hand
maneuvered in front of the cameras got attentions of Afghan
local TVs and
newspapers, the group was already involved in hanging Taliban’s militants
in Nuristan and recruiting men in east,
south and Northern provinces of
Afghanistan. Around the country, the ISIL commanders recruited men from eastern
provinces of Badakhshan,
Nuristan and Nangarhar; South and Eastern provinces of
Paktia, Logar, Ghazni, Helmand and Zabul; and Northern provinces of Jawzjan,
Kunduz and Parwan. By expanding their presence in almost all major provinces of
Afghanistan, today the ISIL is ... considered a powerful
rival against the
Taliban.... According to local Afghan Medias, like Abdul Rauf Khadim, dozens and
hundreds other Taliban fighters
are joining ISIL to make new align with a group
that is notoriously growing in the country and
to a recent
New York Times
article there is speculation the Taleban is
becoming increasingly brutal to Hazaras to try to combat the growing popularity
and the defection of its fighters to
Tribunal notes the opinion of DFAT in its March 2014 reports that Hazaras are
not deliberately targeted or at greater risk than
any other group in
Afghanistan. However the Tribunal considers the situation in Afghanistan has
changed significantly since the publication
of that report. The Tribunal
considers that recent information of the increase in targeting of Hazaras on the
roads gives rise to
a substantial ground for the applicant’s fear of
serious harm on return to Afghanistan.
Tribunal notes that to return to or around his home area in [District 1] the
applicant will necessarily have to travel along roads
where Hazaras have been
singled out and abducted or killed. The Tribunal also observes that even if the
applicant can safely make
it back to his home there would still be a need for
him to travel outside of [District 1] to work or find work and for health,
and civic administrative purposes.
Tribunal considers that there are additional aspects to the applicant’s
profile, namely his years in both Iran and Australia,
which increase the risk to
him as a Shia Hazara travelling on the roads. The applicant described how he has
developed an Iranian
accent from his years in Iran.
Tribunal notes further that the applicant has lived in Australia for almost
three years now. The Tribunal notes the reports cited
above that Hazaras from
Australia were targeted in Afghanistan in the past twelve months.
Tribunal considers these aspects of the applicant’s profile increase the
risk the Taleban will target him if he travels
on the roads into or out of or
around, [District 1]. The Tribunal notes the available country information of
the network of informers,
including amongst the Hazara population
provide information about the identity of travellers to the Taleban.
Tribunal considers that reports of the growing Islamic State presence in
Afghanistan further adds to the current risk of harm
to the applicant in
Afghanistan as a Shia Hazara, from Iran and Australia. The Tribunal notes
available information of the sectarian
nature of the IS and its targeting of
religious groups or individuals they consider deviate from their own
interpretation of Islam.
The Tribunal also notes available information that
Iranian forces are fighting in support of the Syrian and Iraqi regimes,
against IS forces. This information refers to the Iranian state using
Afghan Shia Hazaras living in Iran to fight with their forces
for the regime in
applicant’s circumstances, as a Shia who also lived in Iran, the Tribunal
acknowledges that the enmity and suspicion
of IS fighters towards him could be
heightened.
view of the available evidence and the applicant’s particular
circumstances the Tribunal is satisfied there is a real chance
of him being
abducted and killed by either Taleban or IS forces in Afghanistan. The Tribunal
is satisfied this amounts to serious
harm involving systematic and
discriminatory conduct and therefore amounts to persecution under the Act. The
Tribunal is satisfied
that the essential and significant reason for the harm the
applicant fears is a combination of the applicant’s religion and
Shia Hazara and imputed political opinion of being aligned with the west and/or
pro-Iran because of his ethnicity and provenance.
has noted that the ability of the Afghan security forces to maintain effective
state protection outside of the major cities is
a source of concern in the
post-2014 environment. DFAT gave the following outline of state protection for
Hazaras in Afghanistan
in its March 2014 thematic report:
ongoing insurgency, particularly in the south and east of Afghanistan means that
the Government struggles to exercise effective
control over parts of the
country. As a result, the Government lacks the ability to adequately address
human rights issues, protect
vulnerable groups and prosecute human rights
violators in those areas.
Despite these challenges, DFAT assesses that the Government maintains
effective control over major urban areas—particularly
provincial capitals including Herat, Mazar-e-Sharif and Kandahar and the
majority of district centres.
Many Afghans, including Hazaras, have expressed their concern about security
in Afghanistan post-2014. In the absence of effective
state protection outside
of major urban areas, DFAT assesses that many local communities, including
Hazaras, maintain their own militias
to protect themselves from criminals and
insurgents.
cited above have commented on the deteriorating security situation in
Afghanistan. DFAT has also referred to the ongoing dangers
in road travel and
the lack of security on the highways in Afghanistan.
view of these reports and the number of attacks that continue to occur the
Tribunal is not satisfied there is protection available
to the applicant while
travelling on the roads into or out of [District
Tribunal considers that the threat of serious harm to the applicant is while
travelling on the roads into, out of, and around
[District 1]. The Tribunal
therefore needs to assess whether or not the applicant could live safely
elsewhere in Afghanistan. Given
the spread of the Taleban presence and the lack
of security on the roads throughout much of Afghanistan the Tribunal is
its assessment on Kabul, the capital and place of likely initial
return for the applicant.
is reportedly a very large community of Hazaras living in
While Kabul
is said to be somewhat insecure there are very few reported incidents of Hazaras
being specifically targeted there.
on the economic situation for Hazaras in Kabul are mixed. The Department’s
a useful presentation of a range of views and analyses. Most commentators appear
to agree that the overall socio-economic
situation for Hazaras in Afghanistan
has improved significantly. They also remark on Hazaras’ initiatives to
embrace and create
work and business opportunities, including in Kabul. However
it is also stated that individual Hazaras’ experiences differ
that not all Hazaras have benefited from the increased economic opportunities;
or patronage/connections, is still a critical element in a
person’s survival; and that the Hazaras are still described as amongst
poorest communities in Afghanistan, with an ‘underclass’ of Hazaras
present in Kabul.
applicant has given evidence which is accepted that he has no relatives or
connections in Kabul and has never been there. He has
had only [a few years] of
education. He did not do paid work when he lived in Afghanistan. He worked as a
[occupation] for his family
on their farm. In Iran he did [various] work.
Tribunal’s considers that the applicant’s lack of connections in
Kabul, his lack of familiarity with Kabul, his lack
of education, his limited
employable skills and experience, the differences he has developed living in
Iran and Australia, and his
long absence from Afghanistan are likely to prove at
least initially prohibitive in any search for employment in the reportedly
over-saturated
job market in Kabul where unemployment is high. Further, Kabul is
reportedly a very expensive city to live in, outside of the slum
areas and presents substantial obstacles to new arrivals.
such circumstances the Tribunal considers that the applicant will likely find no
employment or reasonable level of accommodation
in Kabul, at least in the short
term. Without income he would have great difficulty subsisting.
Tribunal also notes reports of continuing insecurity and violence in
Tribunal considers that the applicant’s lack of connections and
familiarity with the city are likely to add to his vulnerability
environment.
regard to all the particular circumstances and in view of the available general
information before it, the Tribunal is not
satisfied it is reasonable, in a
practicable sense, for the applicant to relocate to Kabul to avoid the harm he
fears. The Tribunal
finds that the applicant does not have a reasonable
relocation option in Afghanistan.
Refugee Criteria
the reasons given above the Tribunal is satisfied the applicant has a
well-founded fear of persecution for a Convention reason
in Afghanistan. The
Tribunal is satisfied the applicant does not have a right to enter and reside in
any other country therefore
he is not excluded from Australia’s protection
by s.36(3) of the Act.
CONCLUDING PARAGRAPHS
Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant is a person in respect of whom
Australia has protection obligations under the Refugees
Convention. Therefore
the applicant satisfies the criterion set out in
s.36(2)(a).
Tribunal remits the matter for reconsideration with the direction that the
applicant satisfies
Migration Act
Melissa McAdam
DFAT Thematic Report: Hazaras in Afghanistan and Pakistan
, 26 March,
Bijlert, M 2009, ‘Unruly Commanders and Violent Power Struggles: Taliban
Networks in Uruzgan’ in A Giustozzi (ed),
Decoding the New Taliban:
Insights form the Afghan Field
, Colombia University Press, NY,
, COIS, 2015, “Afghanistan: Hazaras Issues Paper”,
March, p. 49.
DFAT Thematic Report: Hazaras in Afghanistan and Pakistan
COIS, 2015, “Afghanistan: Hazaras Issues Paper”, March, pp. 46
, COIS, 2015, “Afghanistan: Hazaras Issues Paper”,
March, pp. 54-57.
(Afghanistan), 2015, “Another 6 Hazara Passengers
Abducted”, March 18.
The Express
(Pakistan), 2015, “Five abducted Hazaras beheaded in
Afghanistan: officials”, 17 April,
http://tribune.com.pk/story/871896/five-abducted-hazaras-beheaded-in-afghanistan-officials/
Khaama Press
(Afghanistan ), 2015, “ISIS promotes training camp
in Logar province in Afghanistan’, 29 April.
Associated Press 2015, “Taliban
Announce Their Spring Offensive In Afghanistan”, 22 April
http://www.sfgate.com/news/world/article/Taliban-announce-their-spring-offensive-in-6215508.php
2015, “Mass Abduction Of Hazaras In Afghanistan Raises Fears Of Islamic
Khaama Press
, 2015, “Clash between radicals: ISIL vs Taliban in
Afghanistan”, 26 February. See also
“Taliban, ISIS announce war against each other in Afghanistan”, 20
New York Times
, 2015, “Taliban Are Said to Target Hazaras to Try to
Match ISIS’ Brutality, 22 April.
See for example reports such as Nazari
Foundation, 2010, “Security Update”, 10 January
HTTP://NAZARIFOUNDATION.COM/JUMA-POST/
; and Abdul Karim Hekmat, “Unsafe Haven: Hazaras in Afghanistan and
Pakistan”, Cosmopolitan Civil Societies Research
Centre, UTS, Sydney,
October 2011, p.19
The Washington Institute
, 2014, “Iran's Afghan Shiite
Fighters in Syria”, 3 June – this article also refers to a claim
that a pictured Afghan
fighter in Syria is an “Afghan Shiite refugee who
had been granted asylum in Australia” ; and
“Afghan migrants offered $500 by Iran to fight for Syrian regime”, 4
DFAT Thematic Report: Hazaras in Afghanistan and Pakistan
DFAT Country
Report, 2014, Afghanistan,
26 March, page
Department of Immigration and Border Protection
, COIS, 2015,
“Afghanistan: Hazaras Issues Paper”, March, passport 10 – 13.
example the
Danish Immigration Service
’s ‘Fact Finding
Mission to Kabul, Afghanistan, 25 February to 4 March 2012’, published
May 2012, and Michael O’Hanlon,
‘How Not to Squander Hard-Won Gains
in Afghanistan’,
Wall Street Journal
, 5 February 2015.
RTF format (217 KB)
Signed PDF/A format