Betts v Chief of Army [2018] ADFDAT 2 (10 July 2018)
DEFENCE FORCE DISCIPLINE APPEAL TRIBUNAL
Betts v Chief of Army
[2018] ADFDAT
Appeal from:
Defence Force Magistrate
File number:
DFDAT 2 of 2017
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), BRERETON AND GARDE (MEMBERS) JJ
Date of Decision:
Catchwords:
DEFENCE AND WAR
– appeal from a
decision of a Defence Force Magistrate (“DFM”) – where the
appellant was found guilty of
four counts of obtaining a financial advantage
contrary to
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) and s
135.2(1) of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) by way of an overpayment of rental
allowance, knowing or believing that he was not eligible to receive that
advantage –
where the appellant failed to advise Defence Housing Australia
in accordance with cl 1.5.2(4) of the
Defence Determination 2005/15
that he was subletting his residence to his friend – whether the DFM
erred in ruling that cl 1.5.2(4) imposed a legal duty on
the appellant such that
failure to perform that duty constituted conduct by omission for the purposes of
ss 4.3 and 135.2(1) of the
Criminal Code
(Cth) – whether the DFM
erred in refusing the appellant’s application to amend the charge sheet to
avoid a multiplicity
of charges – whether the DFM erred in finding that
the appellant was subletting his residence and that he was therefore required
report that circumstance – whether the DFM erred by amending the charge
sheet so that it read “subletting” rather
than “sharing”
– whether a reasonable doubt existed as to the appellant’s knowledge
or belief that he was
not eligible to receive the relevant amount of rental
STATUTORY INTERPRETATION
– meaning of
“subletting” in Ch 7 of
Defence Determination 2005/15
Legislation:
Crimes Legislation Amendment (Slavery,
Slavery-like Conditions and People Trafficking) Act 2013
(Cth) Sch 1 item
Criminal Code
(Cth) ss 4.1, 4.2, 4.2(1), 4.2(4), 4.3, 4.3(b), 5.3,
135.2(1), 135.2(1A)
Defence Act 1903
Defence Force Discipline Act 1982
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
Defence Determination 2005/15
cls 1.5.1-1.5.4, 1.5.6, 1.5.2(4),
1.5.2(5), 7.1.2, 7.1.3(1), 7.6.2, 7.6.3, 7.6.19, 7.6.21, 7.6.21(3)
Defence Determination 2005/52
Defence Determination 2016/19 (Conditions of Service)
Cases cited:
Baker v Chief of Army
[2017] ADFDAT
Beckwith v The Queen
[1976] HCA 55
(1976) 135 CLR 569
Cann’s Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1946] HCA 5
(1946) 71 CLR 210
Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) (Cth) v Poniatowska
[2011] HCA 43
Herbert v Chief of Air Force
[2018] ADFDAT 1
Junghenn v Wood
(1958) SR(NSW) 327
King Gee Clothing Co Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1945] HCA 23
(1945) 71 CLR
Low v Chief of Navy
[2011] ADFDAT 3
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
MFA v The Queen
(2002) 213 CLR 606
[2002] HCA 53
Mickelberg v The Queen
[1989] HCA 35
(1989) 167 CLR 259
[2014] ACTSC 287
[1994] QCA 547
(1994) 75 A Crim R 456
(2011) 243 CLR 400
[2011] HCA 13
Yewsang v Chief of Army
[2013] ADFDAT 1
Date of hearing:
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Appellant:
CK McConaghy with RJ De Vietri
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Crown Capital Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
D McLure SC with J Woodward
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Office of the Director of Military Prosecutions
DFDAT 2 of 2017
TRAVIS WILLIAM BETTS
CHIEF OF ARMY
TRACEY (PRESIDENT), BRERETON AND GARDE (MEMBERS) JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
WHERE MADE:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
be granted to the appellant to appeal to the Tribunal on the grounds referred to
and (d) of the
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act 1955
(Cth) insofar as those grounds do not involve questions of law.
appeal be dismissed.
REASONS FOR
THE TRIBUNAL:
appellant appeals from a decision of a Defence Force Magistrate (“the
DFM”), made on 22 March 2017, finding him guilty
of four counts of
obtaining a financial advantage contrary to
Defence Force
Discipline Act 1982
(Cth) (“the DFDA”) and s 135.2(1) of
the Schedule to the
Criminal Code Act 1995
(Cth) (“the Criminal
Code”) by reason of his failure to advise Defence Housing Australia
(“DHA”) in writing,
in accordance with cl 1.5.2(4) of
Determination 2005/15
(“the Determination”), that he was
subletting part of his residence in Paddington, in the State of Queensland
premises”) to Mr Chris Williams, who was not his
dependant, and, as a result, received overpayments of rental allowance
of $27,439.56 in the period between 26 October 2011 and
6 January 2015, knowing or believing that he was not eligible to receive
that financial advantage.
first charge relates to the period between 26 October 2011 and 11 April 2012;
the second to the period between 12 April 2012 and
22 April 2013; the third to
the period between 23 April 2013 and 27 March 2014; and the fourth to the
period between 28 March 2014
and 6 January 2015. Separate charges relating
to different periods were preferred because, at the start of each of the second,
and fourth periods, the appellant had submitted an online RA review in
which he represented that there had been no change to his
status as the sole
occupier of the premises (namely, as someone who was
“not sharing”).
circumstances which gave rise to the charges were the subject of substantial
agreement. An agreed statement of facts was tendered
at trial, which read:
all material times, 8226471 LTCOL Travis William Betts was, and knew he was, a
Defence member within the meaning of
Defence Force
Discipline Act 1982
Rent allowance
7 December 2010, LTCOL Betts moved into [the premises]. This residence was a
three bedroom townhouse. He applied for and was
granted Rent Allowance (RA) at
the Member With Dependent (MWD) rate.
5 January 2011, LTCOL Betts commenced receipt of the first fortnightly RA
payment in the amount of $711.93.
26 October 2011 and 6 January 2015, LTCOL Betts received into his personal bank
account a total of $27,810.00 in payments
from Mr Williams as
October to 12 September 2012 – 46 weekly payments of $150.00, totalling
September 2012 to 6 January 2015, 123 weekly payments of $170.00 from Mr
Williams, totalling $20,910.00.
Betts’ personal bank account is
Defence Bank – Travis Betts BSB
[redacted] Account Number [redacted]
. All payments were received into this
account under the description “DIRECT CREDIT – CHRISTOPHER WILL
RA paid by the Commonwealth to LTCOL
6 January 2011 and 6 January 2015, LTCOL Betts received a total of $55,770.94 in
RA at the MWD rate in the following amounts:
January 2011 to 11 May 2011 – $711.93 per fortnight;
May 2011 to 28 March 2012 – $664.38 per fortnight;
March 2012 to 13 March 2013 – $682.15 per
March 2013 to 12 March 2014 – $664.99 per fortnight; and
March 2014 to 6 January 2015 – $667.89 per fortnight.
appellant’s defences included that he did not know that he was not
entitled to receive the full amount of RA over the period
during which Mr
Williams was making payments to him, and that the payments received into his
personal bank account were not contributions
towards the rent of the
RELEVANT LEGISLATION
provisions of the Criminal Code, the
Defence Act 1903
(Cth) (“the
Defence Act
”) and the Determination are relevant to the issues raised on
this appeal.
Criminal Code
charges of obtaining a financial advantage, of which the appellant was found
guilty, were preferred under s 135 of the Criminal
135.2(1) and (1A) of the Criminal Code provided, at the relevant times:
(1) A person is guilty of an offence
(a) the person engages in conduct; and
(aa) as a result of that conduct, the person obtains a financial advantage for
himself or herself from another person; and
(ab) the person knows or believes that he or she is not eligible to receive that
financial advantage; and
(b) the other person is a Commonwealth entity.
(1A) Absolute liability applies to the paragraph (1)(b) element of the offence.
4.1 of the Criminal Code provides:
(1) A physical element of an offence may be:
(a) conduct; or
(b) a result of conduct; or
(c) a circumstance in which conduct, or a result of conduct, occurs.
(2) In this Code:
means an act,
on omission to perform an act or a state of affairs.
engage in conduct
(a) do an act; or
(b) omit to perform an act.
Voluntariness
is dealt with in s 4.2, which relevantly provides that conduct can only be a
physical element of an offence if it is
voluntary (s 4.2(1)) and that an
omission to perform an act is only voluntary if the act omitted is one which the
person is capable
of performing (s 4.2(4)).
to perform an act are the subject of s 4.3 of the Criminal Code:
An omission to perform an act can only be a physical
element if:
(a) the law creating the offence makes it so; or
(b) the law creating the offence impliedly provides that the offence is
committed by an omission to perform an act that there is
a duty to perform by a
law of the Commonwealth, a State or a Territory, or at common law.
scope of s 4.3(b) was expanded in 2013 to make it clear that a duty to perform
an act, arising under a law of a State or Territory
or under the common law, and
not only under a law of the Commonwealth, is sufficient to constitute the basis
of the commission of
an offence by omission under s 4.3: see
Legislation Amendment (Slavery, Slavery-like Conditions and People Trafficking)
(Cth) Sch 1 item 1. This renders it unnecessary to consider any
further the observations of French CJ, Gummow, Kiefel and Bell JJ
of Public Prosecutions (DPP) (Cth) v Poniatowska
[2011] HCA 43
(2011) 244 CLR 408
[2011] HCA 43
to the effect that the reference to “an act that by
law there is a duty to perform” in the previous form of s 4.3(b)
confined to a duty imposed by a law of the Commonwealth. In any event, as we
conclude below, the relevant duty in this case
was imposed by the Determination,
which is a law of the Commonwealth.
5.3 defines “knowledge” for the purposes of the Criminal Code:
A person has knowledge of a circumstance or a result if
he or she is aware that it exists or will exist in the ordinary course of
Defence Act
, Div 1 of the
Defence Act
is concerned with determinations made by the
Minister in relation to remuneration, allowances and other benefits to be paid
Force members and their families. At the relevant time, when the
Determination was made in 2005,
(1) The Minister may, by instrument in writing, make
determinations, not inconsistent with this Act, the
Naval Defence Act
Air Force Act 1923
, providing for and in relation to:
(a) the remuneration of members or cadets;
(b) the payment of allowances or other pecuniary benefits (except allowances or
benefits by way of remuneration) to or for members
or cadets, including the
payment of additional compensation to members of the Reserves to whom
compensation is payable under the
Safety, Rehabilitation and Compensation
(Defence-related Claims) Act 1988
(c) the payment of allowances or other pecuniary benefits to or in respect of
members of the families of members or cadets; and
(d) leave of absence and long service leave of members; and
(e) the provision of other benefits to or in respect of members or cadets, or to
or in respect of members of the families of members
or cadets; and
(f) the payment of allowances and expenses to or in respect of, and the
provision of travelling facilities for, applicants for appointment
or engagement
as members in respect of attendance at an enlistment centre of the Defence Force
or attendance for interview or examination;
(g) deductions from the remuneration of a member or cadet from allowances or
other pecuniary benefits referred to in paragraphs (b)
and (c); and
(ga) payments, by way of compensation, incentives or other benefits,
(i) members of the Reserves;
(ii) their dependants; or
(iii) their employers, business or professional partners or other associates;
(iv) other persons;
in relation to the availability of the members for defence service, or for
losses incurred or inconvenience suffered because of the
members' absence on
defence service (including losses incurred or inconvenience suffered because of
the operation of the
Defence Reserve Service (Protection) Act 2001
(h) the meanings to be attributed to words
and expressions used in existing determinations and future determinations made
section, and the circumstances in which those meanings are to apply.
(1A) A determination made under this section may make provision for or in
relation to a matter by applying, adopting or incorporating,
with or without
modification:
(a) the provisions of any Act or of any
regulations made under an Act or of any determination made under this section,
section 58H
of this Act or
Public Service Act 1999
in force at a particular time or as in force from time to time; or
(b) any matter contained in any other instrument or writing as in force or
existing at the time when the first-mentioned determination
takes effect.
(1B) A determination under this section may provide that, where an amount has
been paid (whether before or after the commencement
of this subsection) to a
member or to a member of the family of a member under the regulations or under a
determination made under
this section or under Division 2, the member of the
family of the member is required to pay to the Commonwealth an amount, not
the first-mentioned amount, upon the occurrence of an event specified
in the determination, and may provide for the manner of recovery
(2) Subsection (1) does not authorize the making of a
determination providing for or in relation to the payment to or in respect of
member, or to or in respect of a member of the family of a member, of a benefit
of the nature of a pension.
(3) A determination shall not be made
providing for or in relation to the forfeiture or assignment of the whole or
(a) the remuneration of a member or cadet; or
(b) allowances or other pecuniary benefits referred to in paragraph (1)(b) or
(9) In this section, a reference to this Act does not include a reference to the
regulations.
Regulations
permitted the Minister to delegate the power to make determinations.
Section 58E of the Defence Act provided, at the
time that the
Determinations was made, as follows:
The regulations may make provision for and in relation
to the delegation by the Minister of his or her power to make determinations
with respect to such of the matters with respect to which determinations may be
made as are specified in the regulations.
2005 the delegation of the Minister’s power to make determinations was
provided for in reg 72A of the
Defence Force Discipline Regulations
The Determination
Determination is dated 20 May 2005 and was made by a delegate of the Minister.
It was reproduced and published in the Defence
Force’s Pay and Conditions
Manual (“PACMAN”) and was the principal determination governing
conditions of service
within Australia and overseas at the relevant times. It
dealt with a wide range of conditions of service, and had comprehensive
definitions and provisions. It is no longer in force and has been replaced by
Defence Determination 2016/19 (Conditions of Service)
1, Part 5 of the Determination dealt with the rights and obligations of members.
Clauses 1.5.1-1.5.4 and 1.5.6 (as in force
at the relevant time)
A member must meet certain obligations when
they have an entitlement. This Part sets out those
obligations.
Change in member’s
circumstances
are responsible for keeping themselves informed about their entitlements.
clause applies if a member or their dependants meet both these
conditions.
have qualified for an entitlement.
is a change in the circumstances by which they qualified.
member must tell their Commanding Officer about the change as soon as
practicable.
This requirement
member must also inform the approving authority for any housing assistance that
the member is in receipt of about the change as
soon as practicable.
member must fill in and provide the relevant form at Annex 1.5.A of their
Commanding Officer as soon as practicable after any of
these events.
Overpayment
clause applies if a person has been paid more than the amount they are entitled
person must repay to the Commonwealth the difference between their entitlement
and the amount they were paid.
A member is
paid vehicle allowance in advance of travel. They do not travel, or they travel
less than they expected to. They must
repay all or part of the allowance,
whichever applies.
Where tax has been deducted from an amount overpaid and the
amount was paid in a previous financial
Recovery by the
Commonwealth
clause applies if a member must repay an overpayment of salary or allowances to
the Commonwealth.
Commonwealth may recover the overpaid amount from the salary and allowances that
the member has been – or may be –
paid. The Commonwealth still has
the right to recover the overpaid amount by other means.
Member to provide evidence of payment
clause applies to a member who is entitled to be reimbursed a payment they
member must provide either of the following as evidence that they made the
a. Written evidence, including any original
b. A statutory declaration if written evidence is not
member must provide the items when they lodge their claim for reimbursement or
as soon as practical after that time.
note that subclauses 1.5.2(4) and (5) were added by
Defence Determination
, which was made on 30 November 2005 and which commenced operation on
1 December 2005.
7.6.19 of the Determination provided for the calculation of a member’s
entitlement to RA and the variation of the member’s
RA entitlement in the
event that a rental property was sublet. “Rent”, for the purposes
of the clause, was taken to
be the lower of the amount of weekly rent paid by
the member or the approved rent ceiling for the property. The rate of RA was to
be worked out using this formula. There followed a series of tables which were
designed to show how the formula was to be applied.
The second “[e]xample
table” dealt with RA for a member without dependants or a member with
dependents (separated).
It provided for the calculation of RA in circumstances
in which the member was “sharing” with one other person.
7.6.21 dealt with the calculation of RA in the event that a member with
dependents sublet part of a home in respect of which
the member was receiving
7.6.21(3) imposed an obligation on a member, who was receiving RA, to inform the
Housing Management Centre Manager in writing
if another person would be living
in the member’s home for longer than four weeks. The clause provided for
the Chief of Defence
Force (“the CDF”) to consider all the
circumstances in which the person was living in the home, and to decide if the
member was “sub-letting” the home.
cl 7.6.3 “sub-lease rent” was defined to mean “the amount of
income [a] member gets as rent for any part of the
rental property that is
sub-let”. An example was given in these terms: “Money made by
sub-letting a downstairs flat
or a spare bedroom to a boarder.”
THE GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant advanced nine grounds of appeal:
Ground 1: the
DFM erred in ruling that subclause 1.5.2(4) of the Determination imposed a
“legal duty” on the appellant
and that failure to perform the duty
was capable of being understood as “conduct” by omission for the
purposes of ss
4.3 and 135.2(1) of the Criminal Code and that such conduct
was capable of giving rise to criminal sanction.
Ground 2: the
DFM erred in refusing the appellant’s application to amend the charge
sheet so as to avoid a multiplicity of
Ground 3: the
DFM erred by finding that the appellant was subletting his residence to Mr
Williams at relevant times.
Ground 4: the
DFM erred in finding that the appellant was required to advise DHA of a change
of circumstance relating to Mr Williams.
Ground 5: the
DFM erred by admitting into evidence a financial statement that was said to have
been improperly disclosed to investigators.
This ground was abandoned during
oral argument.
Ground 6: the
DFM erred by amending the particulars on the charge sheet after the close of the
evidence, by removing the references
to “sharing” and substituting
“subletting”.
Ground 7: the
evidence did not support a finding that the appellant was subletting the
premises at the relevant times.
Ground 8: a
reasonable doubt existed as to the appellant’s knowledge or belief that he
was not eligible to receive the relevant
amount of RA.
Ground 9: the
convictions were unsafe or unsatisfactory.
1 to 4 were founded on
Defence Force Discipline Appeals Act
(Cth) (“the DFDA Act”), which states that the Tribunal
shall allow an appeal where, as a result of a wrong decision
on a question of
law, or of mixed law and fact, the conviction was wrong in law and that a
substantial miscarriage of justice has
occurred. Ground 6 was founded on
s 23(1)(c), which refers to circumstances where there was a material
irregularity in the course
of proceedings before the DFM and a substantial
miscarriage of justice has occurred. Grounds 7 and 8 were founded on s
which refers to circumstance in which, having regard to the evidence,
the conviction cannot be supported. Ground 9 was founded on
s 23(1)(d),
which provides that, in all the circumstances of the case, the conviction is
unsafe or unsatisfactory.
appellant conceded that the Determination was a “law of the
Commonwealth”. That concession was properly made, as
was confirmed in
Herbert v Chief of Air Force
[2018] ADFDAT 1
(Tracey (President),
Hiley and Garde (Members) JJ), which case was argued and decided after judgment
in the present appeal was reserved.
appellant also did not dispute the lawful authority of the Minister’s
delegate to make the determination.
appellant’s principal contention under this ground was that a failure to
comply with the requirement contained in cl 1.5.2(4)
of the Determination, that
a member advise the DHA of any change to qualifying circumstances, could not
give rise to a criminal offence.
This was because the powers conferred on the
Minister by s 58B of the Defence Act did not extend “to the making of
appellant argued that: the Determination was an instrument which had been
designed for administrative purposes and did not impose
legal duties on Defence
members of a kind that could create criminal liability; the Determination could
be made by a public servant
who was the delegate of the Minister; and it could
not have been Parliament’s intention, when enacting s 58B of the Defence
Act, that the execution of an instrument by a public servant could create
positive obligations on Defence members which, if not satisfied,
could make the
members liable for criminal sanctions.
the alternative, it was argued that cl 1.5.2 of the Determination was void for
uncertainty, vagueness or a lack of ascertainability.
The appellant submitted
that the terms “entitlement”, “inform”, “the
approving authority”, “the
change” and “as soon as
practicable” found in cl 1.5.2(4) were not defined and were
imprecise. Finally, it was
submitted that cl 1.5.2 did not contain any
enforcement mechanism (except receivers) and contained no hint of any of the
penal consequences
for non-compliance.
arguments were advanced following the closure of the prosecution case at trial,
as part of a “no case” submission
by the appellant.
DFM held that cl 1.5.2(4) created a legal duty for the purposes of
s 4.3 of the Criminal Code. He reasoned:
The purpose of clause 1.5.2 can be regularly deduced
from the note to subclause (3), while that note strictly attaches to subclause
(3) it is evident the note more generally describes the purpose of the
notification requirements imposed by clause 1.5.2, which,
in the words of the
note, is to help the Commonwealth prevent overpayments being made.
When read in context and as a whole it is apparent that clause 1.5.2(4) requires
a member to inform the approving authority for any
housing assistance if there
is a change in the circumstances by which they qualified for an entitlement.
This obligation is in addition
to the obligation to notify the member’s
CO. Relevantly to this matter, the approving authority for housing assistance
Looking at subclause (4), not in isolation, but in the context of both clause
1.5.2 and the rest of the determination, and considering
the apparent policy
purpose behind clause 1.5.2, it is my view that the obligation imposed by
subclause (4) is to notify DHA of a
change of circumstances that is relevant to
DHA’s decision making authority.
distinguished between the creation of the duty under cl 1.5.2(4) and the
criminal offence of failing to comply with the duty, which
was created
separately by the Criminal Code.
, the Tribunal held that cl 1.5.2(4) created a duty to notify
a change of circumstances and that a breach of that duty could give
criminal offence pursuant to ss 4.3 and 135.2 of the Criminal Code: see at
[48]-[49], [50] and [53]. For the reasons
given there we consider that the DFM,
in the present matter, was correct to hold that cl 1.5.2 gave rise to a
legal duty which constituted
a “law of the Commonwealth” for the
purposes of s 4.3 of the Criminal Code. We would add that the opening
s 58B(1), in providing that the Minister may make determinations
providing for
and in relation to
the subsequently listed matters, makes
clear that the delegated legislative power extends beyond making provision for
allowances etc, to making provisions reasonably related thereto. A
provision which imposes an obligation to notify a change in a
circumstances relevant to eligibility for an allowance is plainly a provision
“in relation to” the payment
of the allowance.
DFM also rejected the submissions relating to uncertainty. He ruled
With respect to the word “entitlement”, I am
not satisfied that a member seeing the word “entitlement” in
1.5.2 would be unaware as to what that relates to. The Macquarie definition in
the dictionary of “entitlement”
That to which one is entitled as part of
a contract, will, employment arrangement, et
I am satisfied that when clause 1.5.2 is read as a whole
in the context of the rest of the determination, a member would understand
mean that where they are in receipt of an allowance, a pecuniary benefit or some
other benefit due to their particular circumstances,
that they would be under an
obligation to notify if those circumstances which qualified them for that
entitlement changed.
With respect to inform, the fact that the manner in which a member is to inform
is not specified seems to me to be in the member’s
favour, rather than a
vagueness. It would allow a member to inform, relevantly, DHA orally, including
both in person, over the phone,
in writing by means of a signed hard copy, by
email or by any other effective means.
With respect to the approving authority, the fact that the approving authority
is not defined within the clause within the determination
is no different from
the fact that who a particular member’s commanding officer is is [sic]
also not defined. It would be
case or factor specific. The approving authority
would be the person who approved the member’s housing assistance.
The member would be aware of this from the correspondence they received advising
them that their housing assistance had been approved.
If, per chance, the
member was notified of the approval of their housing assistance by someone other
than the actual authority who
granted the approval, and that notification did
not identify the actual approving authority, and so perhaps left the member with
the impression that the notifier was the approver, then clause 1.5.2(4) could be
construed in favour of the member, if the member
informed the person who
informed them of the approval.
With respect to the change... the change will relate to the changing
circumstances by which the member qualified for the entitlement.
By its very
nature, that will be fact and case specific. I do not see any merit in that
part of the objection.
In summary, “practicable” is not defined in the determination. It
has its natural and ordinary meaning of capable of
being put into practice, done
or effected, especially with the available means or with reason or prudence;
feasible. The ordinary
meaning of the word “practicable” includes
at least some element of reasonableness. The phrase “as soon as
practicable”
should be read as “as soon as reasonably
practicable”
“As soon as practicable” requires references to be made to the
circumstances pertaining to the person and to the person’s
capacity to
comply with the obligation, as well as by reference to the obligation itself. A
relevant circumstance is the ability
of the [appellant]to give the notice
required by the provision. This includes whether the [appellant]has all of the
information
that was required to be included in such a notice.
I am satisfied that the inclusion of the words “as soon as
practicable” assists a person who is under an obligation to
give a notice,
rather than making the obligation vague or uncertain.
With respect to consequences of non-compliance, for the reasons given when
finding the clause 1.5.2 does impose a legal duty, I am
not persuaded that the
fact the clause 1.5.2 does not of itself indicate consequences of
non-compliance, makes that clause void of
not capable of imposing a legal
Substantially
the same arguments were advanced before the Tribunal.
can be no doubt that subordinate legislation may be held void for uncertainty:
King Gee Clothing Co Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1945] HCA 23
(1945) 71 CLR 184
Cann’s Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1946] HCA 5
(1946) 71 CLR 210.
If a failure
to comply with subordinate legislation is a basis for a criminal charge any
ambiguity or doubt in relation to that
subordinate legislation must be resolved
in favour of the defendant: see
Beckwith v The Queen
[1976] HCA 55
(1976) 135 CLR 569
at 576 (Gibbs J) and 585 (Murphy J).
we do not accept that any or all of the elements of cl 1.5.2, about which the
appellant complains, are void for uncertainty.
They are expressed with
sufficient clarity to enable a service member to understand that, if he or she
is in receipt of a benefit
such as RA and the circumstances which are relevant
to entitlement to that benefit materially change, the relevant authority must
advised of that change as soon as reasonably practicable.
consider that the DFM was correct to reject the challenge to the validity of
cl 1.5.2(4) for the reasons which he gave.
1 must be rejected.
charge sheet contained four charges. The first charge of obtaining a financial
advantage was laid under s 135.2(1) of the Criminal
Code. The second,
third and fourth charges each alleged obtaining financial advantage by deception
contrary to s 134.2(1) of the
Criminal Code. There were alternative charges,
preferred under s 135.2(1), which were laid as alternatives to each of the
third and fourth charges.
appellant pleaded not guilty to all charges.
has already been noted, each of the four sets of charges related to a different
time period. Separate charges were preferred in
relation to the later periods
because, at the commencement of those periods, the appellant had submitted an
online RA review in which
he advised that there had been no change to his status
as the sole occupier of the premises.
the close of the prosecution case, the appellant made successful “no
case” submissions in relation to Charges 2, 3
and 4, which were thereupon
dismissed. He then applied to the DFM to amend the charge sheet. His proposal
was that Charge 1 be
amended to cover the whole of the period between
26 October 2011 and 6 January 2015. He contended that the overpayment
figure should
be amended to record the aggregate overpayment figure for the
whole period. It was submitted that the alternative to the second
charge should
be expressed as an alternative to the first charge, as should be the
alternatives to both the third and fourth charges.
DFM refused this application. He did not consider that the alternative charges
could become alternatives to an amended first
charge, that the charge sheet was
“overloaded”, or that the charge sheet was unfair or prejudicial to
the conduct of
the defence.
Ground 2, the appellant submitted that, because each of the four remaining
charges were based on the same omission: a single
charge should have been
preferred; the refusal to make the amendment exposed him to “double
punishment”; and the alternative
charges were unduly oppressive as, had
the amendment been made, he would have only confronted the possibility of one
set of penalties
upon conviction.
do not consider that the DFM erred in refusing the appellant’s amendment
application. The three alternative charges were
alternatives to charges which
had been dismissed. They were not alternatives to the first charge. The
appellant had pleaded to
each of them when arraigned.
amendment proposed was, in those circumstances, impractical. The proper
application of sentencing principles (a matter with which
the Tribunal is not
concerned) would have ensured that there was no “double punishment”
in the event that (as ultimately
occurred) the appellant was convicted on each
of the remaining charges. There was no error in law committed by the DFM, and no
miscarriage
of justice.
ground must fail.
is convenient next to deal with Ground 6.
the conclusion of the prosecution case, on the application of the prosecutor,
the DFM amended the charge sheet to replace the word
“sharing” in
the first charge with “subletting part of his residence”. Other
minor consequential amendments
were also made. In its amended form, the first
charge read:
Engaging in conduct outside the Jervis Bay Territory
that is a Territory offence, being the offence of obtaining financial
Being a defence member at Brisbane, in the State of Queensland, between
26 October 2011 and 11 April 2012 engaged in conduct by failing
the approving authority for housing assistance, namely Defence Housing Australia
(DHA), in writing that his circumstances
had changed in accordance with
Defence Determination 15/2005
Chapter 1, part 5, clause 1.5.2, namely
that he was
subletting part of
his residence
at ... Paddington in the State of Queensland
Mr Chris Williams,
who was not his dependant
, and as a result of
that conduct obtained a financial advantage from the Commonwealth being Rent
Allowance in the amount of $3600.00,
knowing or believing he was not eligible to
receive that financial advantage.
(Emphasis in the original.)
Similar amendments were made to the alternatives to the second, third and fourth
DFM directed himself in accordance with the decision of Refshauge J in
[2014] ACTSC 287
, [13] and [16]. He was satisfied that the
amendments proposed would not lead to any injustice to the appellant or, at the
injustice that could not otherwise be remedied. He was also satisfied
that the amendments would not lead to a miscarriage of justice.
allowing the amendment, the DFM informed the appellant’s counsel that,
should he wish to recall any of the prosecution witnesses
for cross-examination
as a result of the amendment, he would consider such an application. No such
application was made.
Ground 6, the appellant complained that the DFM erred in acceding to the
prosecution’s application to substitute “subletting”
“sharing” in the charges. This was said to have constituted a
material irregularity, and one which gave rise to
a substantial miscarriage of
justice, because the amendment was made late in the trial after the evidence was
completed, such that
it gave rise to an injustice which the appellant could not
possibly remedy. It was contended that the effect of the amendment was
the focus of the charge away from the appellant’s state of mind,
concerning his relationship with Mr Williams, to
whether the appellant was, as a
matter of law, subletting, within the meaning of the Determination.
respondent submitted that there was no substantive difference between
“subletting” and “sharing” and that,
if anything, the
prosecution case was being narrowed, because the concept of
“sharing” was wider than that of “subletting”.
view there is force in that submission, but the more important point is that the
amendment did not alter the real issue in
the trial, which was whether or not
the appellant knew that he was not eligible to receive the amount of RA which he
was receiving,
in circumstances where he was also receiving regular weekly
payments from Mr Williams who was residing in the premises. There is
to think that the evidence would have been any different had the charge
originally alleged subletting rather than sharing.
It is most significant that,
although the DFM expressly offered the appellant the opportunity to apply to
have witnesses recalled
if the amendment prejudiced his position, no such
application was made.
our view, no relevant prejudice was occasioned to the appellant by the
amendment, and it occasioned no substantial miscarriage
of justice.
GROUNDS 3 AND 4
3 and 4, which flow from the amendment of the charges to refer to
“subletting”, are next conveniently considered
together. The
appellant contends that the DFM erred by finding that he had
“sublet” the premises to Mr Williams (Ground
3) and that, in the
absence of any subletting, there was no requirement to advise the approving
authority of a change in circumstances
(Ground 4). These are mixed grounds of
law (as to the content, for relevant purposes, of the term “sublet”
or “sublease”)
and of fact (as to whether the evidence supported a
conclusion that there was a sublease). Insofar as they raise questions as to
whether the evidence sufficiently established a sublease, they overlap with
aspects of Ground 7, 8 and 9.
Williams gave evidence at the trial as to how he came to live, from time to
time, at the premises. In 2010, he had been living
in Wodonga in rental
accommodation. Towards the end of that year the appellant, who was resident in
Brisbane, telephoned him, said
that he was separating from his wife, and invited
Mr Williams to come to Brisbane. Mr Williams responded positively, because at
that time he had no job opportunities in Wodonga. Once the appellant found a
property in which to live (the premises), Mr Williams
made arrangements to move
his “gear” from Wodonga to the premises. This “gear”
included two queen size beds,
whitegoods (including a fridge, washer, dryer and
microwave), a six-seater couch, some “bed set” drawers and
clothing. Mr Williams subsequently began to live in the premises.
his arrival, Mr Williams set about applying for jobs. He was successful in
obtaining employment as a catering attendant for
Queensland Rail, commencing on
or about 7 August 2011. When he commenced employment he completed a form
requiring his personal details.
These included his residential address, which
he nominated as being at the premises. He also gave the same address to Telstra
to the Queensland licensing authority for drivers.
Williams agreed that, on 26 October 2011, he commenced paying rent to the
appellant at the rate of $150 per week. Between then
and 12 September 2012, 46
weekly payments of that amount had been made. Between 13 September 2012 and 6
January 2015, he had made
123 weekly payments to the appellant at the rate
of $170 per week. His evidence was that he considered it in his best interests
to start paying the appellant rent. The $150 figure was nominated by the
appellant. Mr Williams was not paying rent for any other
premises at the
relevant times. The change from $150 per week to $170 per week in 2012
coincided with an increase in the rent payable
by the appellant.
the course of his evidence, Mr Williams displayed some uncertainty about his
legal status as an occupant of the premises and whether
the payments which he
made should be characterised as “rent”. He had not entered into any
formal sublease with the appellant.
He denied that he was a co-tenant, but
said, “I pretty much had all my gear there but I was moving around from
either Kingston
or going down to the Gold Coast to see my friends and then
coming up to Brisbane.” He did not consider himself to be the owner
the room he occupied and said that he would not have minded if anybody else had
used that room in his absence.
on both sides explored the question of the amount of time Mr Williams spent at
the premises. Mr Williams said that, on average,
his Queensland Rail duties
meant that he was away four days a week. On the other days he either lived at
the premises or with a
friend who lived in Kingston. He also spent some time
with his mother on the Gold Coast.
Gregory Prossor and Ms Keri Welsh, friends of the appellant, were called as
defence witnesses. Both had visited the premises from
time to time.
Prosser visited the premises on about 15 occasions over a two to three year
period and went inside about 10 to 12 times. He had
seen Mr Williams at the
premises on about three occasions.
Welsh visited the premises approximately six to eight times in about 2014. She
had only gone inside on a couple of occasions.
On one occasion the appellant
had not been at home but he had told her that another male, whose name she could
not recall, would
be there and let her in. This occurred. She had also seen
the same other male at the premises on a later occasion.
DFM concluded that the appellant had sublet the premises to Mr Williams
during the relevant period. Having considered the evidence
of Mr Williams, Mr
Prosser and Ms Welsh, the DFM declared himself satisfied that
Mr Williams was living with the appellant during
the relevant period and
that the weekly payments were for rent. This was the only rational hypothesis.
“Subletting” is not defined in the
determination. As such, it bears its ordinary meaning. The Macquarie
Dictionary defines
“subletting” as, not so
To sublet is to let to another person, the
party letting being already a lessee. A sublease is a lease granted by someone
already a lessee of the property.
Butterworth’s Australian Legal Dictionary defines
a sublease as being:
A sublease may be in respect of whole or
part only of the premises and must terminate before the termination of the head
also must not conflict with the terms of the head lease. Finally,
there is no direct contractual relationship between the head lessor
Hornsby’s [sic] Laws of Australia more pithily
describes it as:
A sublease is a lease by a tenant for a term
that is less than the tenant has.
The DFM said that, in order for him to determine whether there was a sublease,
he needed to consider where Mr Williams resided at
the relevant times. This was
because of defence submissions that Mr Williams, by reason of his employment and
social commitments,
spent so little time at the premises that he could not be
regarded as residing there.
DFM rejected these submissions:
I am satisfied that the preponderance of the prosecution
evidence is that Chris Williams was living with the [appellant]. He was
regularly over a period of three years. There was a particular unchanging room
that he used. He kept his clothes there.
Any absences can be explained by
either the nature of his work. An analogy could be made with a fly in/fly out
worker or as a single
man his pursuit of a golfing interest with a friend who
lived far enough away to warrant staying at that friend’s house.
Mr Williams had mail addressed to the rental allowance property, he used that
address in his CV, he had that address on his Queensland
licence, he paid money
associated, at the least, with him staying there. There is no evidence that he
had mail addressed elsewhere,
paid rent elsewhere or used another address on
other official records.
There is no contemporaneous material that is actually inconsistent, with the
exception of some opinions formed by a few of the defence
witnesses which were
based on infrequent visits and contact, and for which there was little
foundation adduced to support those opinions,
as opposed to their actual
observations of seeing Mr Williams there, including his use of one of the
bedrooms and the fact that he
would let another visitor in while the [appellant]
wasn’t home. It is particularly notable that Mr Williams was regularly
present when those witnesses visited.
The absence of personal items, the keeping of a few clothes in a golf bag at
another friend’s house which is conveniently located
to a golf course, is
not something that I think rises to the level of an inconsistency with were him
residing at the rental allowance
DFM also concluded that the money paid by Mr Williams to the appellant was
sublease rent:
There is no evidence of an existing holiday debt.
Suggesting it was for furniture storage, which was not accepted by Mr Williams,
is fanciful. The furniture was not stored, it was being used to the advantage
of the [appellant]. No other rational hypothesis
is reasonably available. I am
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that all of the money was for rent.
I am satisfied beyond reasonable doubt that there was, via an oral agreement and
a pattern of conduct over an extended period, a
sublease in place. I am
satisfied there is no other reasonable description for the arrangement. The
fact that Mr Williams was either
acquiescing in, or willing to allow other
people to use the bedroom that he otherwise occupied, I do not consider to be
inconsistent
with that finding.
appellant submitted that the payment, by Mr Williams, of the regular weekly sums
whilst he was staying at the premises did not
equate to a subletting of all or
part of the premises in the absence of any right of exclusive possession being
conferred on Mr Williams.
He argued that lodgers and boarders also make payment
for use of a room and household facilities. He denied that Mr Williams was
subtenant. He further argued that, in considering where Mr Williams
resided, the DFM fell into error because what was in issue
was not where
Mr Williams lived but what rights of occupancy had been conferred on him by
the appellant. It was submitted that the
DFM had not considered whether Mr
Williams should be characterised as a guest, lodger, boarder or tenant.
assistance, which was dealt with in Chapter 7 of the Determination, was intended
to help members “handle the hardships
caused by the need to move location
regularly or at short notice”: cl 7.1.2. There were various forms of
housing assistance,
including rental allowance, which was available to a member
who lived in a rented home. The purpose of rental allowance was to
with the rent”: see cls 7.1.3(1) and 7.6.2.
4 of Chapter 7 of the Determination was entitled, “How rent allowance is
worked out.” It is plain that, if a
member was receiving RA and sublet
part of the premises to another person, that subletting had implications for the
rate at which
RA was to be paid. In particular, it is also plain that money,
received by way of sublease rent, was to be taken into account and
reduce the RA
payable to the member. The terms “rent” and
“sub-letting” were not defined in the Determination
and must be
construed in the context in which they appeared. In its ordinary and natural
meaning, “rent” refers to a
periodic payment paid by a tenant of
premises to the landlord in consideration of the tenant’s right
exclusively to occupy
the premises: see
Junghenn v Wood
SR(NSW) 327
at 330 (Owen J). However, in cl 7.6.3, the term
“sublease rent” was defined as the “amount of income the
receives in rent for any part of the rental property that is
it is true that it is a definitive feature of a lease or sublease that it
confers on the tenant or subtenant a right of exclusive
occupation of the
premises, it does not follow that, in the context of the Determination,
“sub-letting” had a corresponding
meaning. In our view, it had a
much wider meaning. The term “sub-lease” in the definition of
“sub-lease rent”
was expanded by the example of
“sub-letting” a spare bedroom to a boarder. Liability for a
reduction in RA because part
of the home was “sublet” would, in the
circumstances contemplated by cl 7.6.21(3), depend upon a determination by
CDF, who was given an overriding discretion to decide whether or not a
member was subletting, having regard to all the circumstances
in which a person
was living in the residence. These provisions indicate that the delegate who
made the Determination did not intend
that the term “sub-lease” bear
its strict conventional sense. In our view, “sub-letting”, for
the purposes
of the Determination, was used in a broad sense which extended to
arrangements such as lodging and boarding, under which the head
lessee received
revenue from a person for the use of all or part of the rental property. No
concept of exclusivity of possession
was involved, as the example of
“subletting” a spare bedroom to a boarder makes clear.
these reasons, we do not consider that the DFM erred in holding that the
appellant had sublet part of the premises to Mr Williams.
This finding was open
on the evidence. Mr Williams resided at the premises as his employment
permitted. He provided bedding, furniture
and whitegoods for his own use, and
for common use at the premises. He kept his clothing and other personal
belongings at the premises
over a protracted period. He enjoyed access to the
premises and to his bedroom at will over the period during which he was making
these payments. His “official” address was at the premises. He
made regular weekly payments to the appellant, and (most
strikingly) the amount
of those payments was increased when the rent payable by the appellant was
increased. Mr Williams was a boarder
occupying a bedroom consistently with the
example found in the definition of “sub-lease rent” in the table in
The DFM was correct when he decided that the appellant had
sublet the premises to Mr Williams, in the sense in which that term is
in the Determination.
GROUNDS 7 TO 9
turn, then, to the submissions that the conviction cannot be supported having
regard to the evidence and that, in all the circumstances
of the case, the
conviction is unsafe or unsatisfactory. While these are separate grounds, under
ss 23(1)(a) and 23(1)(d) respectively
of the DFDA Act, they are the same in
legal substance: the phrases “cannot be supported, having regard to the
and “unsafe and unsatisfactory” are different ways
of stating the same legal concept:
M v The Queen
[1994] HCA 63
(1994) 181 CLR 487
492 (Mason CJ, Deane, Dawson and Toohey JJ);
MFA v The Queen
at 623-624;
[2002] HCA 53
(McHugh, Gummow and
Yewsang v Chief of Army
[2013] ADFDAT 1
(President), White JA (Deputy President) and Logan J (Member)).
scope of these grounds is now well-established and was explained by this
Tribunal in
at [56]-[59], with reference to
M v The Queen
MFA v The Queen
SKA v The Queen
(2011) 243 CLR
[2011] HCA 13.
The central principles are:
question for the Tribunal is whether it considers that, upon the whole of the
evidence, it was open to the DFM to be satisfied
beyond reasonable doubt that
the appellant was guilty: see
Secondly, to
address that question, the Tribunal must make an independent assessment of the
sufficiency and quality of the evidence:
at 406 [14]
(French CJ, Gummow and Kiefel JJ);
at [57]-[59].
Thirdly, the
conviction must be set aside if the Tribunal decides that the DFM should have
had a reasonable doubt about the appellant’s
guilt, even if there is
sufficient evidence in law to support it:
at 493-495;
Low v Chief
[2011] ADFDAT 3
[74] (Tracey J (President), White JA (Deputy
President) and Mildren J (Member)).
Fourthly, a
doubt experienced by the Tribunal will be a doubt which the DFM ought also to
have experienced, except where the DFM’s
advantage in seeing and hearing
the evidence is capable of resolving a doubt experienced by the Tribunal:
v The Queen
these grounds, which were argued together, the appellant essentially submitted
that the conviction was unsafe and unsatisfactory
because of an insufficiency of
evidence to support the findings that the appellant was subletting to Mr
Williams and that, at the
relevant times, he knew that he was not eligible to
receive RA at the rate at which it was being paid. Before us, the issue was
whether it was open, on the whole of the evidence, to find beyond reasonable
doubt, as the DFM did,
, that the appellant had sublet his premises
to Mr Williams and,
that he knew that, thereafter,
he was not eligible to receive RA at the rate at which it was being paid.
The prosecution had the
burden of proving both allegations beyond
reasonable doubt. To do so, any rational hypothesis consistent with innocence
grounds are factual, and require leave: see DFDA Act s 20(1). We consider that
the appellant’s case in relation to these
grounds is sufficiently arguable
to warrant leave, which we accordingly grant.
to the first aspect, we have referred above, under Grounds 3 and 4, to the
evidence relevant to the question of subletting, and
to our conclusion that, on
that evidence, it was not only open but also correct for the DFM to conclude
that the appellant had sublet
his premises, within the meaning of the
Determination, to Mr Williams. It is unnecessary to repeat that analysis here;
for the reasons
given above, the conclusion that the appellant had sublet the
premises to Mr Williams was not unsupportable, having regard to the
evidence, nor unsafe or unsatisfactory.
to the second aspect, the prosecution case at trial was that the appellant was
aware that he was not entitled or eligible to receive
rental allowance at the
rate at which he in fact received it. The appellant did not give evidence at
trial. That, of course, did
not affect the circumstance that the prosecution
had to establish, beyond reasonable doubt, that the appellant had
intentionally
engaged in the relevant conduct by failing to notify DHA as
soon as practicable after Mr Williams had commenced residing at the
and started to make regular weekly payments, and that he knew or
believed that he was not eligible to receive the financial advantage
obtained as a result of that omission. In that respect, the DFM directed
[I]n a conduct or omission case, the test that I will
[be] applying is has the prosecution established beyond reasonable doubt that
the only rational inference is the [appellant] must have known or believed that
by failing to report his change of circumstances,
he would obtain, in the
ordinary course of events, a benefit that he was not eligible to
No issue was, or could be, taken with that direction.
most important evidence on the question of the appellant’s state of mind
was his record of interview, which was conducted
on 17 June 2015 in
course of the interview, the allegation was put to the appellant that, while he
was living at the premises, he had Mr Williams
with him as a co-tenant. The
investigator described Mr Williams as “a financial member of the
household”. When invited
to respond to the allegation, the appellant
declined, saying that he would have to look at it. Later, the appellant said
nights was about the longest period that Mr Williams stayed at the
property at any one time over the four year period.
appellant gave a variety of inconsistent explanations as to why the periodical
payments were made to him by Mr Williams. When
asked whether, at any time
during that period, Mr Williams had given him any money for staying at the
premises, the appellant responded
that Mr Williams had not given him money to
stay there, but that Mr Williams had “given me money”. That money
to have been paid by Mr Williams in repayment of a debt of about two
and a half thousand dollars which had been incurred by Mr Williams
when he and
the appellant had been backpacking in Europe some decade earlier.
a later point in the interview, the appellant suggested that the payments may
have been made because he had told Mr Williams that
he (Mr Williams) should pay
for storing his furniture in the premises. The appellant did not explain how
this was consistent with
his earlier answers.
confronted with the regular payments, the appellant denied that they were made
for rent. He advanced other suggestions, such
as that Mr Williams “used
to eat my food and things like that”, that he had been “consuming my
utilities and things
like that, me storing ... his furniture”, and paying
back the debt.
asked to explain why the amount of the regular payment rose from $150 to $170 in
September 2012, when the appellant’s rent
rose, his explanation
We talked about him using utilities, using food and I
said, you know, “I – you know, it’s not – it’s
– it’s not fair that if you – if you do eat stuff out of the
fridge and things like that, that – you
know, that I’m continually
paying for that, like – you know, it’s only, you know, maybe a
couple of eggs or something
like that, or – or you might share our –
our bloody stir fry with us one night or something like that, but it’s
– it’s not – it’s not fair that you do that and not, you
know - - -”
That answer was no explanation at all of why an increase from $150 to $170
coincided with an increase in the appellant’s rent.
The appellant
asserted that the fact that Mr Wilson paid about half of the
appellant’s total rent was a coincidence.
appellant was unable to explain at all how it was that the payments commenced
when Mr Williams commenced his stay at the premises
and ceased when he
appellant denied that he deliberately failed to advise DHA that he was receiving
the regular weekly payments. At one point during
the interview he
I’m not saying it is something I should have
declared. I’m saying, if that is something that I should have declared,
it escapes me. It escapes me because it didn’t happen right now, it
happened over a long period of time. I think –
I think you already
established, “You’ve got a lot on your plate and now you’re
going off and buying another thing,”
et cetera. Maybe I have not –
I should have done something but I did not genuinely try to – to –
– to get a gain for – which I wasn’t entitled
to. I – I was being forthright and open, as much as I was
thinking that I
was supposed to be, with answering the DHA things.
an adjournment, the appellant said that he wished to make a statement. He said
that he had been “broadsided” by
questions put to him by the
investigators earlier and wished to clarify his position. He then provided a
further explanation, in
the course of which he said:
At no time did I look to defraud the government or
defraud DHA or gain something from – from DHA in regards to accommodations
That friend [Mr Williams] was in the habit of dropping by my house, which I
considered my house. The purpose of that dwelling as
to – for me and my
daughter to reside in. What I used that dwelling for, from that point on, I
didn’t consider, unless
I had, you know, a change in – in – in
my categorisation of member with dependants or that the system had decided that
it would be – that there was a married quarter now available that I could
move into, and then they would cease RA. I was not
– I was not aware of
that friend’s day-to-day business. I was not aware that he had made my
address as the address for
his licence in November ’14, when he regained a
– he renewed his licence. I was unaware that he even owned a car. I
know that he does own a car now because he’s talked about driving around
to do what he – his work that he’s
doing up in Cairns at the
And so he [Mr Williams] derived a benefit from being able to crash at a
friend’s place, which I did not think was untoward
... but I was supplying a lot of the – well, you know, if he [Mr Williams]
was staying for dinner, I’d – I’d
provide a steak and I would
buy a carton of beer and he would consume those things, and I felt – and
this is what I mean by
abuse – I felt it a bit – or I felt it unfair
that I was constantly providing my home, you know, entertainment, food
and, you know, we’re not sort of – we’re talking about sort of
more-expensive sort of things on a shopping
list and – and conversation
progressed that he would pay me money. I did not think of that money as
I felt that I was paying the rent.
My understanding was that I was receiving rental assistance for a member with
dependants. I was the member, my dependant was [the
appellant’s daughter
who lived with him for half the year under shared-parenting arrangements] and
that’s what I was
receiving that money for.
I was under the impression that he [Mr Williams] was residing with a friend of
his who was also in Queensland Rail, out of Logan.
I had visited their
residence in Kingston.
this statement was made, the questioning resumed. The appellant then
... I’m saying I do not believe that I had
received a financial gain. If I believed I had a financial gain or had received
some other form of benefit, I would have declared it, if I believe that is the
I did not know that I had done anything wrong. I did not suspect that I had
done anything wrong, nor was I trying to hide anything,
and, in fact, I have
practised being open and honest in regards to my housing situation as I thought
I was to be. So, at no time
did I think I had got – at no time did I
deliberately try to get a financial gain or any other gain and at no time did I
I had a financial gain and then decide not to declare it. Does that
make sense?”
I did not believe that I was being paid money for
DFM analysed the record of interview and concluded that the appellant’s
explanation of his financial arrangements with Mr
Williams was unbelievable.
The DFM referred to the guarded answer to the question about whether Mr Williams
had given him money.
The DFM found the subsequent references to payments to
cover furniture storage and the repayment of a decade old debt to be
implausible.
He found that the weekly amounts exceeded that which would
reasonably be attributable to the cost of food and utilities, and did
that none of the amount could be attributed to rent:
There is no evidence of an existing holiday debt.
Suggesting it was for furniture storage, which was not accepted by Mr Williams,
is fanciful. The furniture was not stored, it was being used to the advantage
of the [appellant]. No other rational hypothesis
is reasonably available. I am
satisfied beyond a reasonable doubt that all of the money was for
conclusions were unsurprising on the evidence, and were open to the DFM. The
DFM was also entitled to think that it was implausible
that the increase in the
weekly payment from $150 to $170 at the same time as the appellant’s rent
increased was merely a coincidence.
DFM rejected the appellant’s assertion, in his record of interview, that
he did not know or believe that his circumstances
were such as to disentitle him
to receive the rate of RA which was being paid to him at the relevant time for
each of the charges.
While accepting that the prosecution case was
circumstantial, the DFM found that the evidence supported an inference that the
knew or believed at relevant times that the receipt of payments from
Mr Williams affected his entitlement to receive a full RA payment.
addition to the inconsistent and implausible explanations that he had offered,
the DFM also had regard to the regularity of the
rental payments, the increase
of those payments which coincided with the increase in the rent being paid by
the appellant, the length
of the appellant’s service and his prior receipt
of RA, the appellant’s familiarity with the need to comply with rules
as those contained in the Determination, the appellant’s standard of
education, and his senior rank.
DFM declared himself satisfied that the appellant knew that he was under an
obligation to report a change of circumstances, and
that he knew that his
circumstances had changed. This led to a strong inference that the appellant
knew or believed that the change
in circumstances would result in him no longer
being eligible for the full rate of RA. The DFM continued:
But a strong inference alone is not enough. It must be
the only rational inference consistent with guilt. I have carefully reviewed
the evidence and considered the submissions of counsel.
It is improbable that a member with his years in the army, his rank, experience
and intelligence would believe that despite being
in receipt of RA as a member
with dependants, that the [appellant] might have thought or believed that he
could be in receipt of
a fixed weekly payment for Mr Williams for over three
years that was clearly in respect of Mr Williams staying at the RA property
that would not be a circumstance that would affect not his entitlement to rental
allowance but the rate of that rental allowance.
For completeness, I note that Mr Williams was not a dependant, nor did the
[appellant] think he was. I am satisfied beyond reasonable
doubt that from 26
October 2011, the [appellant] knew or believed that he was not entitled to
receive rental allowance at the rate
at which he was receiving it, i.e. he knew
or believed he was receiving a financial advantage to which he was not
considered the whole of the evidence, we are satisfied that it was open to the
DFM to be satisfied, beyond reasonable doubt,
that the appellant knew or
believed that he was not entitled to receive rental allowance at the rate at
which he was receiving it,
and thus that he was receiving a financial advantage
to which he was not entitled. In the context of the regularity of the rental
payments, their increase at a time which coincided with the increase in the
appellant’s rent, the appellant’s prior receipt
of RA, his standard
of education, seniority and familiarity with the need to comply with rules such
as those contained in the Determination
and, most significantly, the
inconsistent and implausible explanations offered during his record of
interview, there was no reasonable
hypothesis consistent with innocence.
was not submitted that the DFM had erred in finding that the other elements of
the offences, the subject of each of the four charges,
were established beyond
reasonable doubt.
Accordingly,
these grounds must be rejected.
FRESH EVIDENCE
the outset of the hearing of the appeal, counsel for the appellant sought the
leave of the Tribunal to adduce and rely on, by way
of fresh evidence, an
undated one page statement signed by Mr Williams.
statement, entitled “TO WHOM IT MAY CONCERN”, read:
I, Chris Williams, hereby make this statement in
relation to Travis Betts, and my stay with him at Unit 1/25 Ferhnerg Road,
Paddington.
As Travis prepared most of the meals, we discussed victualling and decided he
would purchase all foodstuffs and beverages.
In return, I offered to pay him a sum of money allotted to his bank account on a
regular basis.
I spent about three (3) days a week in his unit.
I did not pay Travis for rent. To suggest that I did is untrue and
a nonsense.
an affidavit affirmed on 31 August 2017 Ms Deanna Roberts confirmed that she had
witnessed the statement in mid to late June 2015
at the request of Mr
father of the appellant, Major James Betts (retd), deposed, in his affidavit
affirmed on 1 September 2017, that he had visited
Mr Williams in June
2015 “and spoke to him about the matter involving his [Mr Williams’]
stay with the appellant”
at the premises. Mr Williams had agreed to sign
a statement, the original of which he subsequently gave to the appellant’s
father. Mr Betts had not advised the appellant of the existence of the
statement until after the trial because he had assumed (for
no stated reason)
that Mr Williams would give a copy of the statement directly to the appellant or
the appellant’s legal counsel
at trial. He deposed that he had given the
original statement to the appellant’s solicitor in mid-August 2017.
an affidavit, affirmed on 1 September 2017, the appellant deposed that he was
unaware of the existence of the letter prior to mid-August
2017, at which time
his father informed him of its existence.
heard argument, the Tribunal informed the parties that it would rule on the
application after it had had the benefit of argument
in relation to the other
grounds of appeal.
application was made pursuant to s 23(2) of the DFDA Act, which
(2) Subject to subsection (5), where in an appeal
it appears to the Tribunal that there is evidence
(a) was not reasonably available during the
proceedings before the court martial or the Defence Force magistrate;
(b) is likely to be credible; and
(c) would have been admissible in the proceedings before the court martial or
the Defence Force magistrate;
it shall receive and consider that evidence and, if it appears to the Tribunal
that the conviction or the prescribed acquittal cannot
be supported having
regard to that evidence, it shall allow the appeal and quash the conviction or
the prescribed acquittal.
for the appellant referred to the evidence given by Mr Williams at trial about
paying rent to the appellant and contended
that, had the statement been
available to him at trial, he would have been able to confront Mr Williams with
it and tender it as
a prior inconsistent statement.
do not consider that the conditions for the receipt of the statement, prescribed
by s 23(2) of the DFDA Act, have been satisfied.
statement was created in mid-2015, well before the charges were laid. The
statement was solicited by the appellant’s father.
His purpose in
obtaining the statement is not disclosed but, assuming that it was intended to
assist his son, his failure to produce
the original, which he was holding, at or
before the trial, is inexplicable. No foundation has been provided for the
alleged assumption
that Mr Williams would have provided a copy to the appellant.
We are not persuaded that the statement was not reasonably available
at the time
of the DFM hearing. To the contrary, there was no reason why it could not have
been provided to the appellant or his
legal representatives long before the
hearing by the DFM. Although he may not personally have been aware of it, it
was in the possession
of the appellant’s camp.
statement acknowledges that Mr Williams did offer to pay the appellant a sum of
money allotted to his bank account on a regular
basis, as the evidence shows he
did. It also verifies that Mr Williams spent about three days a week at the
statement, “I did not pay Travis for rent”, attributed to
Mr Williams, lacks clarity and is uncertain in meaning.
It may well have
been inadmissible and, at best, would have been of little value and provided
little assistance to the DFM in determining
the facts surrounding
Mr Williams’ occupancy of the premises or the character of that
occupancy. The legal nature of the payment
was a matter for the DFM to determine
on an objective assessment of the facts. Mr Williams’s characterisation
of the payments
which he made could not have been determinative of that question
and would have carried little if any weight.
trial, Mr Williams was cross-examined about an oral statement which he had
earlier made, to similar effect to the letter. In that
way, the substance of
what was in the statement made by Mr Williams, on which the appellant now seeks
to rely, was available and
was deployed before the DFM.
these circumstances we do not consider that, in any event, there existed a
significant possibility that the DFM, acting reasonably,
would have acquitted
the appellant had the statement been before him: cf
Mickelberg v The
[1989] HCA 35
(1989) 167 CLR 259
at 273 (Mason CJ), 275 (Brennan J), 301-302
(Toohey and Gaudron JJ). See also
[1994] QCA 547
(1994) 75 A Crim R 456
458 (Fitzgerald P);
Baker v Chief of Army
[2017] ADFDAT 3
(President), Brereton and Hiley (Members) JJ). We do not consider that, even if
the statement were to be received in evidence
and considered, the convictions of
the appellant could not be supported having regard to that evidence.
these reasons, we have determined not to accede to the appellant’s
application to adduce fresh evidence.
the grounds of appeal therefore fail, and the appeal must be
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
eleven (111) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment
the Honourable Justices Tracey (President), Brereton and Garde
Dated: 10 July 2018
RTF format (554 KB)
Signed PDF/A format