Commissioner of Taxation v PepsiCo Inc; Commissioner of Taxation v Stokely-Van Camp Inc; Commissioner of Taxation v PepsiCo Inc; Commissioner of Taxation v PepsiCo Inc; Commissioner of Taxation v Stokely-Van Camp Inc; Commissioner of Taxation v Stokely-Van Camp Inc [2025] HCA 30 (13 August 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
EDELMAN, STEWARD, GLEESON, JAGOT AND BEECH‑JONES JJ
Matter No M98/2024
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION APPELLANT
PEPSICO, INC. RESPONDENT
Matter No M99/2024
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION APPELLANT
STOKELY-VAN CAMP, INC. RESPONDENT
Matter No M100/2024
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION APPELLANT
PEPSICO, INC. RESPONDENT
Matter No M101/2024
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION APPELLANT
PEPSICO, INC. RESPONDENT
Matter No M102/2024
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION APPELLANT
STOKELY-VAN CAMP, INC. RESPONDENT
Matter No M103/2024
COMMISSIONER OF TAXATION APPELLANT
STOKELY-VAN CAMP, INC. RESPONDENT
Commissioner of Taxation v PepsiCo Inc
Commissioner of Taxation v Stokely-Van Camp Inc
Commissioner of Taxation v PepsiCo Inc
Commissioner of Taxation v PepsiCo Inc
Commissioner of Taxation v Stokely-Van Camp Inc
Commissioner of Taxation v Stokely-Van Camp
[2025] HCA 30
Date of Hearing: 2 & 3 April 2025
Date of Judgment: 13 August 2025
M98/2024, M99/2024,
M100/2024, M101/2024, M102/2024 & M103/2024
Matter No M98/2024
Appeal dismissed with costs.
Matter No M99/2024
Appeal dismissed with costs.
Matter No M100/2024
Appeal dismissed with costs.
Matter No M101/2024
Appeal dismissed with costs.
Matter No M102/2024
Appeal dismissed with costs.
Matter No M103/2024
Appeal dismissed with costs.
On appeal from the Federal Court of Australia
Representation
K J Deards SC with T L Phillips and R J May for the appellant (instructed by
MinterEllison)
E F Wheelahan KC with C M Pierce SC and A M Haskett for the respondents
(instructed by PricewaterhouseCoopers)
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
Commissioner of Taxation v PepsiCo Inc
Commissioner of Taxation v Stokely-Van Camp Inc
Commissioner of Taxation v PepsiCo Inc
Commissioner of Taxation v PepsiCo Inc
Commissioner of Taxation v Stokely-Van Camp Inc
Commissioner of Taxation v Stokely-Van Camp Inc
Income tax (Cth) – Notice of assessment – Royalty withholding tax
– Diverted profits tax – Where non-resident
companies entered into
agreements with Australian company to bottle, sell and distribute beverages
– Where agreements licensed
intellectual property to Australian company
– Where agreements did not provide for payment of royalty for use of
intellectual
property – Where no payment made by Australian taxpayer to
non-resident companies – Where payment made to Australian
subsidiary of
non-resident companies for beverage concentrate – Whether payments to
subsidiary included royalty for use of
intellectual property owned by
non-resident companies within meaning of s 6 of
Income Tax Assessment
(Cth) ("ITAA 1936") – Whether payments paid or credited to or
derived by non-resident companies within meaning of
– Whether non-resident companies liable to pay diverted
profits tax under
Words and phrases – "alternative postulate", "antecedent monetary
obligation", "basis or condition", "consideration", "consideration
"derived by", "diverted profits tax", "DPT", "DPT tax benefit", "exchange of
promises", "income derived", "paid or credited",
"payment by direction",
"postulate", "principal purpose", "reasonable alternative", "reasonable
expectation", "royalties", "royalty",
"royalty withholding tax", "scheme",
"single, integrated and indivisible transaction", "substance of the scheme",
"tax benefit",
"tax benefit in connection with the scheme".
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
Taxation Administration Act 1953
GAGELER CJ, JAGOT AND BEECH-JONES JJ.
companies resident in the United States ("the US") within the PepsiCo group of
companies ("the PepsiCo Group") – PepsiCo,
Inc ("PepsiCo") owning the
global brands "Pepsi" and "Mountain Dew" and Stokely-Van Camp, Inc ("SVC")
owning the global brand "Gatorade"
– each entered into contracts with a
local manufacturer of soft drinks: Schweppes Australia Pty Ltd ("SAPL"), a
company resident
in Australia. The contracts provided for the US companies to
sell or cause another member of the PepsiCo Group to sell to SAPL the
concentrate needed to make the branded drinks. They also provided for the US
companies to grant exclusive licences to SAPL to exploit
the trade marks and
other intellectual property rights sufficiently to enable SAPL to be the
exclusive manufacturer, bottler, packager,
seller and distributor of those
branded drinks in Australia.
contracts obliged SAPL to buy at least a specified minimum amount of the
concentrate from the US companies or another nominated
PepsiCo Group member at
an agreed price. SAPL was to follow the US companies' directions in producing
the branded drinks, maintain
sufficient production capacity to sell and
distribute sufficient quantities of the branded drinks throughout Australia,
ensure appropriate
standards for production of the branded drinks, sell the
branded drinks at prevailing competitive market prices, use its reasonable
endeavours to maximise the sale of the branded drinks throughout Australia, and
enter into advertising and marketing and performance
agreements with the US
companies under which the parties would promote the marketing and maximisation
of sales of the branded drinks
in Australia.
to the contracts, each US company nominated another PepsiCo Group member to be
the seller of concentrate. SAPL paid the
nominated PepsiCo Group member the
agreed price for the sale of concentrate.
paying the agreed price for the sale of concentrate, did SAPL pay a "royalty" as
Income Tax Assessment Act 1936
(Cth) ("the
to mean "any amount
paid or credited, however described or computed ... to the extent to which it is
paid or credited, as the case
may be, as consideration for", relevantly, "the
use of, or the right to use, any ... trade mark, or other like property or
in respect of the branded drinks? This is question one. If so, did the US
companies derive income from the payment of the royalty
s 128B(2B)(a)
and (b)(ii) of the ITAA so that, by
of that Act, those companies
are liable to pay income tax (specifically, royalty withholding tax) on that
derived income? This is
question two. If the US companies are not so liable
of the ITAA, are they instead liable to pay diverted
profits tax ("DPT") under
of that Act by reason of having
entered into a scheme for a principal purpose of obtaining a tax benefit (in not
being liable to
pay royalty withholding tax) and reducing their liabilities to
tax under a foreign law in connection with the scheme? This is question
Commissioner of Taxation issued royalty withholding tax notices and DPT
assessments to the US companies for the income years
ending 30 June 2018 and 30
June 2019 on the basis that each of these questions should be answered in the
affirmative, albeit that
question three must be in the alternative to questions
one and two (as if royalty withholding tax is payable DPT is not payable).
US companies, in response, filed applications of two kinds. The first kind
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth), by which the
Federal Court of Australia is vested with jurisdiction in any matter arising
under laws of the Commonwealth Parliament.
The US companies sought declarations
to the effect that they are not liable to pay royalty withholding tax. The
second kind invoked
Taxation Administration Act 1953
(Cth) ("the TAA"), by which a person may appeal against the Commissioner's
taxation objection decision disallowing or only partly
allowing a taxation
primary judge in the Federal Court of Australia (Moshinsky J) answered
questions one and two in the affirmative and said that,
had he not done so, he
would have answered question three in the
affirmative.
On appeal a
majority of the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia (Perram and
Jackman JJ) held that the primary judge had
erred and answered each of the
questions in the negative.
Colvin J, in dissent, answered question one in the
affirmative
and question two
in the negative,
in the conclusion that the US companies were not liable to pay royalty
withholding tax.
Colvin J answered question three in the affirmative, reflecting his
conclusion that the US companies were liable to pay
reasons to be explained, we consider the answers given by Colvin J to have
been correct. We would therefore allow the Commissioner's
further appeals by
special leave to this Court.
The agreements in more
general structure of the contracts between the US companies, PepsiCo and SVC,
and the local manufacturer, SAPL, has been described.
To the extent more detail
is required, it can be confined to the following essential matters.
principal components of the contractual arrangements are contained in a
so-called "Exclusive Bottling Appointment" or "Exclusive
Bottling Agreement"
("EBA") executed in 2009. The EBAs replaced earlier agreements made from 2000
and 2001 onwards.
parties to the PepsiCo EBA were PepsiCo, a company within the PepsiCo Group
resident in Bermuda (and owner of some of the relevant
intellectual property
rights) referred to as CMCI, and SAPL. The parties to the SVC EBA were SVC and
SAPL. The EBAs were mostly in
terms sufficiently similar to involve no material
legal distinction.
the EBAs PepsiCo and SVC appointed SAPL exclusively to bottle, sell and
distribute the branded drinks under their trade marks
PepsiCo and SVC
each agreed to "sell or cause to be sold" by it, or by a company in the PepsiCo
Group nominated by it, to SAPL the
units of concentrate required for SAPL to
manufacture the branded drinks at an agreed price per unit subject to
indexation.
PepsiCo and CMCI
and SVC warranted that they owned the trade marks and that SAPL's use of the
trade marks according to the EBA would
not infringe the rights of any other
each EBA SAPL agreed to comply with all manufacturing and quality control
requirements of PepsiCo or SVC as
SAPL agreed, in
effect, to maintain in Australia sufficient and adequate bottling plants to
bottle, sell and distribute sufficient
of the branded drinks in
such plants to
be maintained at a required
SAPL agreed to
use its reasonable endeavours to maximise the sale of the branded drinks
throughout Australia, including through competitive
pricing for the sale of the
branded drinks.
is common ground that the PepsiCo EBA contained an implicit licence from PepsiCo
and CMCI to SAPL to exploit the intellectual
property rights necessary to enable
SAPL to perform its obligations and exercise its rights under the PepsiCo EBA.
The SVC EBA contained
an express licence to the same effect in respect of that
The exclusive
licences gave SAPL no rights of ownership in the intellectual property or the
goodwill accruing in those rights after
the commencement of the EBAs. Rather,
the licences granted rights of exploitation of the intellectual property in
Australia to SAPL
exclusive of third
the PepsiCo EBA, PepsiCo and SAPL agreed to enter into co-operative advertising
and marketing agreements and a performance
co-operative advertising and marketing agreements were entered into by SAPL and
a PepsiCo Group company annually. They contained
agreements about financial
contributions to marketing, as well as marketing and advertising targets for
sales of the branded drinks
in Australia. The performance agreement, entered
into in 2009, was between another company within the PepsiCo Group registered in
Ireland and SAPL. Amongst other things, the performance agreement provided for
minimum annual sales volumes, sales targets, distribution
targets and
distribution investments.
the SVC EBA, SVC and SAPL agreed provisions relating to co-operative marketing
under a "Marketing
The SVC EBA
also provided that SAPL would use its reasonable endeavours to achieve minimum
specified annual sales
respect of payments for units of concentrate to be sold to SAPL, the PepsiCo EBA
provided that:
"All Units shall be delivered to [SAPL's] plant, with freight, insurance and
handling charges to be prepaid by [PepsiCo or its related
company supplying
concentrate] and charged to [SAPL]. [SAPL] shall be responsible for paying
customs duty and GST. [SAPL] will at
its own cost and expense, and without any
cost or expense to [PepsiCo or its related company supplying concentrate],
obtain all import
licenses and permits in relation to the Units. ... Title to
all Units shipped by [PepsiCo or its related company supplying concentrate]
[SAPL] shall remain in [PepsiCo or its related company supplying concentrate]
until the Units are paid by [SAPL] according to
the provisions hereof. Payment
in full for each order of Units shall be made by [SAPL] within 7 days of
PepsiCo EBA provided that, in addition to all other rights and remedies of a
party under the EBA, "in the event that the other
party at any time has failed
to make timely payment under [the EBA] or any related agreement, such party
shall be liable for the
payment of interest for any such amounts outstanding
calculated at [a specified
respect of payments for units of concentrate to be sold to SAPL, the SVC EBA
provided that:
"If the [concentrate] is supplied by a [SVC related company] the terms of [this
EBA], to the extent that they are relevant, apply
to transactions between [SAPL]
and the [SVC related company] as if they were direct parties to [this EBA]."
SVC EBA also provided
"(f) [SAPL] must pay [the agreed prices] for the [concentrate] supplied by [SVC
or its related company] within 28 days after the
invoice, which shall be issued
on the date of delivery of the [concentrate]. Unless the parties agree
otherwise, payment shall be
made by telegraphic transfer to such bank account in
the U.S.A. as may be specified by [SVC or its related company] at any time.
(g) Any failure by [SAPL] to make any payment required under [this EBA] when due
shall be a breach of [this EBA] and without limiting
[SVC's] other remedies:
(i) [SVC] may at its option require immediate payment to [SVC or its related
company] of all [SAPL's] liabilities and other indebtedness
outstanding to [SVC
or its related company] regardless of previously agreed-upon terms of
(ii) [SAPL] shall owe and pay to [SVC or its related company] as the case may
be interest on such overdue payment at [a specified
SVC EBA additionally provided
"Property and risk in the [concentrate] will pass to [SAPL] on completion of
delivery to [SAPL] which shall occur upon [SAPL] or
its agent or nominee taking
custody of the goods at [SVC's] Warehouse."
Related transactions and other agreements
execution of the EBA PepsiCo notified SAPL that the seller of the units of
concentrate would be PepsiCo Beverage Singapore
Pty Ltd ("PBS"), which, despite
its name, was a company in the PepsiCo Group registered in Australia. SVC
likewise notified SAPL
that the seller of the concentrate would be PBS. PBS also
notified SAPL of PBS's bank account details, referring to each EBA as relevant.
It is common ground that between 1 July 2017 and 30 June 2019, SAPL made
payments to PBS for the supply to SAPL of concentrate in
accordance with both
the EBAs and SAPL's purchase orders to PBS. That one or more than one act (in
this case, ordering the concentrate
from PBS and paying for it) may have several
legal effects between different parties (that is, as between SAPL and PepsiCo or
under the EBAs and as between SAPL and PBS under the purchase orders) is
commonplace.
1 January 2018 a Singapore company, Concentrate Manufacturing (Singapore) Pte
Ltd ("CMSPL") (a member of the PepsiCo Group), and
PBS entered into a
concentrate distribution agreement in respect of concentrate ("CDA"). The CDA
replaced an earlier CDA effective
from 22 December 2015. The CDA defined
"Concentrate" as the concentrated essence and other components used in making
the branded
drinks for sale in
PBS agreed to
distribute Concentrate to "Bottlers" and "Approved Resellers" (in effect,
companies authorised by PepsiCo or an affiliate
of PepsiCo to produce the
branded drinks in the Territory, which includes
) in such annual
volumes as PBS and CMSPL
CMSPL agreed to
use its best efforts to make Concentrate available at such volume per year as
PBS and CMSPL agreed given PBS's volume
PBS agreed to
"purchase Concentrate from CMSPL at the price equal to PBS's sales prices less a
distribution discount" (referred to
as the distribution price) and the
distribution discount was to constitute the "sole monetary consideration to PBS
for distributing
Concentrate".
distribution price was to be an amount that would be provided by a seller to an
unrelated purchaser under similar
circumstances.
the Concentrate was to pass from CMSPL to PBS at the point of manufacturing of
the Concentrate at CMSPL's manufacturing
facilities in
the proceedings under
Judiciary Act
, PepsiCo and
SVC were the moving parties and therefore bore the onus of proof. In each
proceeding under
of the TAA, s 14ZZO(b)(i) of the TAA imposed
on the appellant (PepsiCo or SVC) the burden of proving, relevantly, that the
was excessive or otherwise incorrect.
Primary judge's
key findings
primary judge made several undisputed factual findings.
the relevant income years ended 30 June 2018 and 30 June 2019 CMSPL supplied
concentrate to PBS under the CDA. SAPL placed orders
with PBS for the purchase
of concentrate. PBS supplied the concentrate to SAPL in accordance with SAPL's
purchase orders and invoiced
SAPL for the concentrate that had been supplied.
SAPL paid PBS into the nominated PBS bank account for the concentrate in
with those invoices. PBS transferred almost all the money received
from SAPL to CMSPL, retaining only a small margin (which may be
inferred to be
the amount of the distribution discount under the CDA). PBS recorded the income
from the sale of concentrate to SAPL
in its Australian income tax returns and
financial statements for the income years ended 31 December 2017,
31 December 2018 and 31
and its predecessor company, the Pepsi-Cola Company, have used a franchise model
involving the sale of concentrate for their
branded drinks to third parties to
manufacture, bottle and sell since inception in the early 1900s. This model
expanded in use from
the United States to other
The franchise
model meant that the PepsiCo Group "gain[ed] access to the bottler's investment
in bottling and distribution equipment
and its capabilities, including its
distribution network, sales force, leadership, relationships with the trade
(such as supermarket
executives) and local regulatory
authorities".
franchise model "there [was] considerable scope for variation in the terms of
exclusive bottling agreements entered into
by the PepsiCo
PepsiCo Group considered that "[t]he long-term success of our Franchise model
comes from building strong
franchise model the sale of concentrate was always accompanied by a licence of
the intellectual property rights as such
rights were necessary to enable the EBA
to operate. PepsiCo would never sell its concentrate for its branded drinks
without also
licensing the brand under which the finished beverage was to be
sold – the concentrate and the brands "always [went]
Some aspects
of the franchise model were therefore considered within the PepsiCo Group to be
non-negotiable, such as exclusive purchase
of the concentrate from the PepsiCo
Group, quality control and PepsiCo Group control over the marketing of its
brands. Other terms,
including the price for sale of the concentrate, were
negotiable.
The PepsiCo
Group franchise team tried to simplify the franchise model and "what they
call[ed] levers that markets can execute to
build the brands" in the various
markets, developed and
"considerable scope to negotiate the way in which the pricing term is expressed
and ... such terms sometimes have a degree
of complexity to
one: did SAPL pay a royalty?
The question in context
one is linked to question two. Whether SAPL paid a "royalty" (question one) is
relevant to determining if PepsiCo and SVC
are liable to pay withholding tax
(question two).
s 6(1) of the ITAA, a "royalty" includes "any amount paid or credited,
however described or computed, ... to the extent to which
it is paid or
credited, as the case may be, as consideration for", relevantly, "the use of, or
the right to use, any copyright, patent,
design or model, plan, secret formula
or process, trade mark, or other like property or right".
reasoning of the Courts below
primary judge characterised the payments made by SAPL for the concentrate as
payments SAPL made "pursuant to" the PepsiCo EBA
and the SVC EBA respectively,
which were, "
to some extent
, consideration for the use of" the
intellectual property rights the subject of licence to SAPL by those
Full Court majority considered that the "ordinary reading of a provision that
says that an item is to be sold for a price is
that the price is the
consideration for the
In contrast,
where "the transfer involved is not one connected to a sale of identified
property ... one may look at the broader context
in determining the
consideration for the
Their Honours
considered that the decision in
Archibald Howie Pty Ltd v Commissioner of
Stamp Duties (NSW)
compared to the decision in
Davis Investments Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Stamp
Duties (NSW)
supported this distinction. Their Honours synthesised these decisions with the
subsequent decisions in
Chief Commissioner of State Revenue (NSW) v Dick
Smith Electronics Holdings Pty
Commissioner of State Revenue (Vic) v Lend Lease Development Pty
on the basis
that, as the latter two decisions did not overrule
, their Honours
were bound to "apply Dixon CJ's statement in
consideration for the transfer of property effected under an agreement for its
sale is the price the parties have agreed
to the Full Court
"The price paid for concentrate was not part of what moved the right of [SAPL]
to use the trade marks and other intellectual property.
The right to use trade
marks and other intellectual property was not the central property disposition
or transaction which they contemplated.
Rather, the central bargain under the
EBAs was the establishment of an exclusive arrangement to distribute
PepsiCo/SVC's beverages
in Australia. What the purchaser in
ultimately wished to acquire were the shares in the company. What Lend Lease
ultimately wished to acquire (and then sell) was the
land at Docklands. In this
case, what [SAPL] ultimately wanted to acquire was not the right to use trade
mark and other intellectual
property rights but rather the right to distribute
famous beverages in Australia. Of course, the right to use trade marks and
intellectual
property was a necessary element in the transaction. But what the
parties were centrally seeking to achieve was not a contract for
the licensing
of trade marks and intellectual property. It was a distribution arrangement of
which the licensing of intellectual
property was merely a part."
in contrast, considered that to determine the monetary consideration for a
transaction or dealing recorded by agreement
based upon its proper construction:
"(1) it is first necessary to discern from the whole of the terms of the
agreement the nature
of the transaction or dealing that is provided for by the
agreement; and (2) the monetary consideration is that which is actuating
moving the whole of that dealing or
transaction".
approach, Colvin J concluded that "regard to the whole of the terms of the EBAs"
revealed that, upon the proper construction
of the EBAs, the prices to be paid
were not simply consideration for the concentrate, but were "also consideration
moving in favour
of PepsiCo for the right to use the valuable brands that are
conferred by the terms of the EBAs", from which it followed that "the
provided for by the EBAs as the prices for units of concentrate were partly
amounts in consideration for the use of the trade
marks which [SAPL] was
licensed to use".
J's analysis of this issue should be accepted. As will be explained, the Full
Court majority's correct acceptance that the
intellectual property licences
granted by the EBAs were a "necessary element" of the agreements to distribute
the "famous beverages"
means that SAPL's promise to pay for what was said in the
EBAs to be the concentrate must to some extent be part of what moved PepsiCo
SVC to grant SAPL the intellectual property licences equally necessary for SAPL
to make and sell the branded drinks.
Consideration
Full Court's synthesis of
Archibald Howie
decisions as inconsistent. We disagree.
Archibald Howie
, Dixon J said that while in the law of simple
contracts "consideration" may be merely a consequence of offer and acceptance,
then relevant provision of the stamp duties legislation "'consideration'
should receive the wider meaning or operation that belongs
to it in conveyancing
rather than the more precise meaning of the law of simple contracts", so that
under the relevant provision,
"the consideration is rather the money or value
passing which moves the conveyance or
, Dixon CJ said that he did not "recede at all from" what he
had said in
Archibald Howie
. His Honour explained that in
the transaction was in pursuit of a company resolution and order for
reduction of capital which were the "method of effectuating
the rights of
shareholders", the shares to be distributed
at the book value.
The consideration in that case, however, was "the full value of the assets", not
the book value (which was lower
than the shares' true value), "because no more
was done [to effect the transfer of the shares
] than to satisfy
the absolute right of the shareholders arising from the resolution and order".
, however, the agreement for the transfers to the shareholder of
shares, whilst forming part of a wider plan for the re-allocation
of interests,
"was thrown by the parties into the form of a sale at a
In that context,
"No doubt, when a transfer or other assurance of property is expressed to be
made for a nominal consideration, for many purposes
it is open to prove a
further consideration not being inconsistent with the nominal consideration
expressed therein. And this may
be so although there is no mention of the real
consideration. ...
But here, for their own purposes the parties have given the transaction the
form of a sale at a price. ... [W]ithin the meaning
of the words in
Stamp Duties Act 1920-1949
(NSW)] would the
consideration moving the transfers – the consideration 'upon' which the
transfers are made – be anything
but the price the parties chose to adopt?
After all we are dealing with a transfer on sale. To go beyond the price may be
realism to formal expression, but it means going to the circumstances
warranting the parties in fixing the price they chose and that
necessarily the same thing as consideration. ... It is a transaction of purchase
and sale. ... But considered as a transfer
on sale it is a transfer for a price.
The price is fixed by the parties for the sale, that is for the transfer. It is
not supplied
by the surrounding or accompanying circumstances, however essential
the elements discoverable therein may be to the legal and economic
efficacy of
the transaction as a whole. In the end it is for that reason that the
consideration must be confined to the price for
the purpose of ascertaining the
stamp duty."
CJ's observation that "[t]o go beyond the price may be to prefer realism" is to
be understood in a context where the only relevant
contractual stipulation was
the sale of shares for an agreed price. There was no other obligation assumed or
right forgone by the
purchaser or the seller under the agreement in
which could be said to have moved the transfer of the shares or the payment of
the price. This reasoning does not suggest that his
Honour intended to
distinguish between contracts for sale of one item of property and other
contracts so that, in the former, the
consideration is necessarily the price
specified by the parties but, in the latter, the consideration may not be
confined to the
price specified by the parties.
does the reasoning in
support that
distinction. In
, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ emphasised that
"consideration", in the stamp duty context, could not be confined to
consideration sufficient
to support a contract, as dutiable transactions
extended beyond transactions effected by contract. That is why, in context,
"consideration"
had to mean the "money or value passing which moves the
conveyance or transfer".
On that basis, the consideration that moved the transfer of shares to the
purchaser in
was not only the stipulated sale price but rather
that price plus an amount that the purchaser had agreed to pay to fund a
that the company to be sold was obliged to pay to the vendors before
completion.
, French CJ, Hayne, Kiefel, Bell and Keane JJ applied the
same approach. In that case the transaction, comprising a suite of agreements
effect both the sale and development of the subject land, was "single,
integrated and indivisible" so that the consideration was
the total of the full
amounts the purchaser was obliged to pay and paid under the suite of agreements,
not the price stipulated in
the contracts for sale of the
difference between the outcomes in
and the other cases did not
depend on a distinction between a contract for the sale of one item at a
specified price and other contracts.
Even in the case of a contract for the sale
of one item at a specified price, Dixon CJ accepted that the consideration
might include
some other amount not inconsistent with the price. That latter
qualification establishes that his Honour accepted that a specified
price under
a simple contract for sale might not be the total consideration even if there is
no suggestion that the contract price
involved a sham. The difference in the
outcomes between
and the other cases involves only the objective
characterisation of each transaction. The principle remains the same in all
– if the transaction is characterised as the sale of property, the
price of the sale is the consideration, but, if the transaction
is characterised
as the sale of property and other elements, the consideration is that which
moved the sale of the property and those
other elements. Importantly, the
outcome in each case results from the objective characterisation of the
transaction and not any
inquiry into the parties' subjective perceptions of the
value to them of parts of the transaction.
this, it is not the case that the question whether there has been any amount
paid or credited in consideration for the use
of intellectual property rights is
to be answered by reference to "the central property disposition or
transaction", the "central
bargain", or "what the parties were centrally seeking
to achieve" in the transaction. It goes without saying that a transaction may
involve more than one central item of property or central bargain and may have
more than one central object. Further, even if a transaction
involves only one
central item of property, one central bargain, and one central object,
subsidiary or ancillary items of property,
bargains and objects, if they exist,
remain relevant to the question whether there has been any amount paid or
credited in consideration
for the use of intellectual property rights.
Archibald Howie
the applicable statutory definition
referred to "consideration in money or money's
the applicable statutory definition referred to
"the amount of a monetary consideration or the value of a non-monetary
consideration".
relevant consideration in the definition of "royalty" in the present case is
"any amount paid or credited, however described
or computed". For present
purposes, there is no material distinction between these provisions. An amount
may be "computed" by any
method of calculation including by the ascribing of
objective market value to any description. This means that there is no relevant
distinction between the concepts of "money's worth", "the value of a
non-monetary consideration", or an "amount paid or credited,
however described
or computed".
follows that an amount may be consideration for the use of intellectual property
so as to meet the definition of "royalty" without
the amount itself being
labelled as a "royalty", and indeed without an "amount" being specified at all,
provided an amount can be
"computed" to be an amount in money. Nor need the
amount be paid or payable. It suffices if the amount is credited in any way. The
words "paid or credited", "however described or computed", and "to the extent to
which it is paid or credited" in the definition
of "royalty" ensure that the
definition of "royalty" can extend to: (1) amounts in fact transferred and
amounts not in fact transferred
but credited in any way; (2) such amounts
not described as relating to any of the matters specified in the definition;
(3) a formula
or description from which such an amount can be "computed";
and (4) any part of any such amount, all irrespective of the labels or
descriptions used by the parties.
need for an "amount" in money (in the sense described) to be paid or credited in
the definition of "royalty" is exposed by the
extrinsic material amending that
definition. Before 1 May 1980, the definition referred to a "payment, whether
periodical or not,
and however described or computed, to the extent to which it
is paid as consideration for" the specified items. The
Income Tax Assessment
Amendment Act 1980
(Cth), amongst other things, amended the definition to
its current form.
Second Reading Speech
Explanatory Memorandum explained that the amendment was required "to remedy two
deficiencies exposed by a Victorian Supreme Court
decision in the case of
Aktiebolaget Volvo v Federal Commissioner of
" which had
held that the definition did not include an amount credited but not in fact
Commissioner contended that part of the payment of money said to be payable
under the EBAs for the concentrate was in fact a
payment of an amount in
consideration for the use of the intellectual property rights. The Full Court
majority considered that the
Commissioner's submission – that if the price
said in the EBAs to be payment for the concentrate did not include a component
for the licences of the intellectual property rights, PepsiCo and SVC would be
giving away those highly valuable rights for nothing,
which was unlikely in the
extreme – overlooked the full nature of the bargain of the parties. In
that bargain there were numerous
cross-promises involving intertwined costs and
benefits to both parties, one part of which was specified in the EBAs to be the
of the concentrate at the agreed prices, another part of which was the
licences, and other parts of which enabled PepsiCo and SVC
(respectively) and
SAPL, to their mutual benefit, to maximise the sales of the branded drinks and,
thereby, the sales of the concentrate
necessary to make those branded drinks.
The Full Court majority said, therefore, that the "Commissioner's submission
proceeds on
the overly simplistic assumption that the grant of the licence right
to [SAPL] was only of benefit to [SAPL]. In fact, it was also
a benefit to
PepsiCo/SVC."
Full Court majority considered that a "complete view" of the intellectual
property licences granted under the EBAs involved:
"(a) the benefits
obtained by [SAPL] in being permitted to use the goodwill attaching to the trade
marks; (b) the restrictions both
as to product and marketing imposed on
[SAPL] in its utilisation of that goodwill; (c) the burdens placed upon
[SAPL] in complying
with testing and inspection regimes; and (d) the
benefits obtained by PepsiCo/SVC in having [SAPL] sustain and promote their
in Australia".
much may be accepted. What remains, however, is the critical point that the
components comprising this "complete view" of the
EBAs, as the Full Court
majority recognised, are interlocking and indivisible. It is within this overall
context that the question
– is the payment said in the EBAs to be payable
for the concentrate to any extent a payment of an amount for the right to use
the intellectual property – is to be answered.
correctly rejected the Commissioner's submission that, unless the price said to
be payable for the concentrate in the EBAs
included consideration for the right
to use the intellectual property, PepsiCo and SVC were giving those valuable
rights to SAPL
for nothing, the Full Court majority implicitly found such
consideration to be in the value of SAPL's other promises to PepsiCo and
under the EBAs. The problem with this reasoning is that the Full Court majority
having also correctly recognised the EBAs to
each constitute a "single,
integrated and indivisible" transaction of which the intellectual property
licences form a necessary
it follows that to
characterise the price payable as consideration only for the sale of concentrate
purportedly subdivides the indivisible.
sale of concentrate contemplated by the EBAs in the future is no different from
the many other promises made between the parties
to the EBAs which involved
future performance. That PepsiCo and SVC reserved the right either to sell the
concentrate or to cause
the concentrate to be sold by a member of the PepsiCo
Group does not make that part of the overall transaction separate from the
balance. Without that promise, the EBAs would be pointless. Equally, the EBAs
would be pointless without the intellectual property
licences and other
interlocking promises.
proper construction (and consequent characterisation) of a commercial agreement,
in accordance with orthodox
principles,
enable a court to subdivide that which is objectively characterised as a single,
integrated and indivisible transaction.
, in such cases
there is no rational objective criterion upon which such a subdivision of
promises may be based.
Accordingly, in this case, that which was paid for the use of or the right to
use intellectual property (that is, a "royalty") must
be determined as a matter
of objective characterisation on the basis of the mutuality of the exchange of
promises which comprise
the entire transaction. The consideration is not to be
determined by attributing intentions to each party to the transaction and
less by attributing to one party an intention relating to some aspects of the
transaction (for example, SAPL intending to pay
for the concentrate alone) and
to another some other intention (for example, PepsiCo and SVC granting to SAPL
the intellectual property
licences in exchange for SAPL paying both for what is
said to be the concentrate and for intellectual property in the licences).
EBAs each provided for an exchange of promises to effect the sale by PepsiCo or
SVC or another PepsiCo Group member of the concentrate
needed to make and the
intellectual property rights needed to sell the branded drinks. As such, the
future sales of that concentrate
at the agreed rates (including the agreed
minimum sales targets per year, which would drive the purchase of units of
concentrate)
were as much an indivisible part of the transactions as the grant
of the necessary intellectual property licences enabling SAPL to
obligations in respect of those branded drinks under the EBAs, including the
obligation and right to sell those drinks
to retailers and consumers. What
cannot be done is to separate the part from the whole or to attribute to each
party intentions based
on the perceived value to them of any individual promise.
Once it is accepted that within the contractual scheme SAPL's payment for
concentrate in part moved the grant of the intellectual property licences, the
answer that the payment included a royalty component
is unavoidable.
Full Court majority, having rightly found the transaction to involve an
integrated and interlocking series of exchanges of promises
and grants of
rights, were wrong then to engage in a process of subdivision in which the
payment (said to be for concentrate) attached
to the concentrate and the other
exchanges of value attached to other aspects of the agreement. That approach
necessarily diverts
the court from asking what objectively and as between the
parties moved the grants of the intellectual property licences. The answer
cannot be one thing for PepsiCo and SVC and another thing for SAPL, as that
which moved the grants of the intellectual property licences
is both necessarily
objectively mutual and part of the indivisible whole. The answer is that the
promise to pay imposed on SAPL under
the EBAs for the concentrate to some extent
moved the grants of the intellectual property licences, the relevant promises
part of a single and indivisible whole. Accordingly, the payment for the
concentrate is to some extent a payment for the grants of
the intellectual
property licences.
approach of the Full Court majority, as Colvin J
recognised,
that "where an amount is required to be paid under an agreement, the parties to
that agreement may have no concern to
identify precisely the consideration for
which the amount is payable" so that "it is quite likely that amounts that are
be paid may not be separated into components that correspond to
different aspects of the consideration for which the amount is paid
there would be no commercial need to do so". The corollary, as Colvin J
also explained, is that where parties to an agreement
have attached a label to a
payment it may be no more than "a convenient rateable measure of the commercial
value of the whole of
the consideration moving under the agreement" so that the
"use of that unit does not mean that the consideration is paid for that
and nothing else".
the price said to be allocated to the item to be sold (in this case, the
concentrate) is not or is not proved to be artificially
inflated is not to the
point. Indeed, any focus on the question whether the price paid for the
concentrate was "disproportionately
would involve a
fruitless attempt to ascertain "the circumstances warranting the parties in
fixing the price they chose and that
is not necessarily the same thing as
consideration", the very approach disclaimed by Dixon CJ in
also explains why it is not to the point that it cannot be said that the EBAs
involved a "sham" or that the transactions between
SAPL and PBS did so. Nor did
the Commissioner's approach involve artificially treating the whole of the price
said to be for the
concentrate as consideration for the grant of the
intellectual property licences. Rather, the Commissioner's case was that the
said to be for the concentrate under the EBAs were
consideration for the intellectual property licences. That is simply
to recognise the "single, integrated and indivisible" nature
transaction.
a consequence of a purported division of a single, integrated and indivisible
transaction would be to make it practically
impossible to identify any royalty
for the grant of rights to use intellectual property in the transaction unless
the parties had
expressly labelled some part of a payment or credit as
consideration for the grant. If, however, the label the parties attach to
sale of concentrate is accepted at face value, that would have the effect of
immunising the payment from being in part consideration
for the use of the
intellectual property. Such an approach is contrary to the language of the
definition of "royalty", which involves
any amount paid or credited, however
described or computed.
Commissioner therefore is correct to have submitted that the "majority's finding
... that the EBAs ultimately secured the right
to distribute the famous
beverages of which the use of intellectual property was a necessary element
a conclusion that part of the payments made by SAPL was for the
use of PepsiCo/SVC's intellectual property" (emphasis added). That
requirement
flows from the proper characterisation of the transaction as single, integrated
and indivisible.
answers of PepsiCo and SVC to these matters, that "a tax Act must take the
result of the taxpayer's activities as it finds them"
and the "relevant
transactions were sales of goods for a price", expose the flaw in their case. In
objectively construing and characterising
an agreement, the court is not bound
to accept any label the parties attach to any aspect of their dealings. Nor are
the EBAs properly
characterised as a sale of goods for a price. While, as
PepsiCo and SVC said, a "process of characterisation of a payment must commence
with a correct identification of the legal rights and obligations attending the
transaction giving rise to the payment", part of
that process of
characterisation involves identifying if the transaction is single, integrated
and indivisible or not, having regard
to its text, structure and purpose. If it
is, it cannot thereafter be divided into its component parts for the purpose of
identifying
any royalty component.
these reasons, question one is to be answered in the
affirmative.
Question two: did PepsiCo and SVC derive
The question in context
two is whether PepsiCo and SVC derived income from the payment of a royalty as
referred to in s 128B(2B) of the ITAA, thereby
making PepsiCo and SVC
liable to pay income tax (specifically, royalty withholding tax) under
s 128B(5A) of that Act, which states
"A person who derives income to which this section applies that consists of a
royalty is liable to pay income tax upon that income
at the rate declared by the
Parliament in respect of income to which this subsection applies."
Relevantly,
s 128B "applies" to income "derived" by a non-resident, in this case
PepsiCo and SVC, during the 1993-1994 income year
that "consists of
a royalty" which is "paid to" the non-resident by a person to whom the section
applies, namely a resident, in this
reasoning of the Courts below
primary judge concluded that, being the parties to the EBAs, each of PepsiCo and
SVC were entitled to receive the payments from
SAPL under those agreements. As
the primary judge put it, "[t]his follows as a matter of contract from the fact
that PepsiCo and
SVC were the parties to the EBAs and SAPL's payment obligations
under the EBAs were owed to them. This remained the case even though
PepsiCo and
SVC nominated PBS as the seller of the concentrate. PBS was not, and did not
become, a party to the
The primary judge
therefore characterised the nomination of PBS as the seller of the concentrate
under the respective EBAs as a "direction
to SAPL to pay PBS rather than PepsiCo
or SVC (as applicable)", so that the payments by SAPL to PBS were income derived
PepsiCo and
Full Court majority and Colvin J disagreed. The majority considered that,
as "there can be no payment by direction unless there
is an antecedent monetary
obligation owed" by the payer to the creditor, it could not be that the
nomination of PBS as the seller
by each of PepsiCo and SVC constituted a
direction to satisfy the debt owed to them by payment to PBS. Rather, the
nomination of
PBS as the seller by each of PepsiCo and SVC involved PBS having
the status of seller under the EBAs by reason of which SAPL would
be obliged to
pay PBS the agreed price for the concentrate and essential base ingredients as
applicable.
Consideration
derived" by a taxpayer or putative taxpayer is understood to involve "gains"
that have "come home" to the taxpayer in "a
realized or immediately realizable
The required
"gains" are not net gains as "the topic under discussion is assessable income,
that is to say gross
Further, the
gains must be received beneficially and therefore "may properly be counted as
gains completely made, so that there is
neither legal nor business unsoundness
in regarding them without qualification as income
Commissioner having disavowed any relationship of agency between each of PepsiCo
and SVC (as relevant) and PBS or notion of PBS
having received money by way of
payment from SAPL on trust for each of PepsiCo and SVC (as relevant), the Full
Court's analysis of
the legal status of those payments is persuasive. The EBAs
enabled PepsiCo and SVC (as relevant) to constitute themselves or (in
another member of the PepsiCo Group as the seller of the concentrate. PepsiCo
and SVC each having nominated PBS as the seller,
each was bound to "cause to be
sold" by PBS to SAPL the concentrate. Being obliged to cause to be sold to SAPL
the concentrate is
not the same as selling to SAPL the concentrate. It is clear
from the EBAs that if PepsiCo and SVC nominate a seller other than themselves
is that entity which is the seller. That SAPL promised PepsiCo and SVC, amongst
other things, to buy from the seller the concentrate
at the agreed prices, and
that PepsiCo and SVC (not
could enforce this
promise, does not convert the promise into one by which SAPL was bound to make
payment to anyone other than PBS
as the nominated seller.
subsequent transactions accord with this characterisation of the EBAs. After
PepsiCo and SVC nominated PBS to be the seller PBS,
by agreement, placed itself
in a position whereby it could sell the concentrate at the price agreed in the
EBAs to SAPL. SAPL placed
orders for the concentrate and essential base
ingredients with PBS. PBS supplied the concentrate to SAPL at the price agreed
the EBAs. PBS held title to and risk in the concentrate until SAPL paid
for it under the PepsiCo EBA. PBS held title to and risk
in the concentrate
until SAPL or its agent or nominee took custody of the concentrate at PBS's
warehouse under the SVC EBA. Neither
PepsiCo nor SVC held title to the
concentrate at any time. PBS invoiced SAPL for the quantity of concentrate
supplied to SAPL and
SAPL paid to PBS amounts so invoiced.
supports giving these facts a legal character contrary to their appearance.
these reasons, the better characterisation of the facts is that neither PepsiCo
nor SVC derived income from the payment of a
royalty as referred to in
s 128B(2B) of the ITAA. Question two is to be answered in the
Question three: liability to pay diverted profits
The question in context
three is in the alternative to questions one and two. Question three concerns
the application of the statutory provisions
relating to DPT located in the
"anti-avoidance" provisions of
of the ITAA.
"Schemes to reduce income tax", applies to a "scheme" in relation to a "tax
benefit" (a "DPT tax benefit") in a year of
if provisions in
respect of a principal purpose component are also satisfied. If the tax benefit
and principal purpose requirements
are both satisfied, the taxpayer is obliged
to pay, for the relevant year of income, tax at a particular rate on the "DPT
base amount
for that DPT tax
Tax benefit
PepsiCo and SVC had been liable to pay royalty withholding tax under
s 128B(5A) of the ITAA they could not also have obtained
"a tax benefit in
connection with a scheme"
as described in s 177C(1)(bc) of the ITAA, to the effect that "a reference
in this Part [Pt IVA] to the obtaining by a taxpayer of
a tax benefit in
connection with a scheme shall be read as a reference to: ... the taxpayer not
being liable to pay withholding tax
on an amount where the taxpayer either would
have, or might reasonably be expected to have, been liable to pay withholding
the amount if the scheme had not been entered into or carried out". It
would then have followed that there was no "scheme" to which
apply to give rise to a liability of PepsiCo and SVC to pay DPT for any "DPT tax
benefit" as provided for in s 177P(1) of the
PepsiCo and SVC are not liable to pay royalty withholding tax under
s 128B(5A) of the ITAA they may be liable to pay DPT under
that Act. According to s 177H(1) of the ITAA the primary objects of the DPT
are "(a) to ensure that the Australian tax payable by
significant global entities properly reflects the economic substance of the
activities that those entities carry on in Australia; and (b) to prevent
those entities from reducing the amount of Australian tax
they pay by diverting
profits offshore through contrived arrangements between related parties".
to pay DPT under
depends on the operation of a series of interlinked
provisions. As noted, by s 177C(1)(bc) a reference in
obtaining by a taxpayer of a tax benefit in connection with a scheme" is to be
read as "the taxpayer not being liable to
pay withholding tax on an amount where
the taxpayer either would have, or might reasonably be expected to have, been
liable to pay
withholding tax on the amount if the scheme had not been entered
into or carried out". By s 177C(1)(g), for the purposes of
amount of the tax benefit shall be taken to be "in a case to which paragraph
(bc) applies – the amount referred to in
that paragraph".
s 177CB(1)(e), to determine if a taxpayer "either would have, or might
reasonably be expected to have, been liable to pay withholding
provisions of s 177CB are to be applied. By s 177CB(2) a "decision
that a tax effect would have occurred if the scheme had
not been entered into or
carried out must be based on a postulate that comprises only the events or
circumstances that actually happened
or existed (other than those that form part
of the scheme)". By s 177CB(3) a "decision that a tax effect might
reasonably be expected
to have occurred if the scheme had not been entered into
or carried out must be based on a postulate that is a reasonable alternative
entering into or carrying out the scheme". By s 177CB(4), in "determining
for the purposes of subsection (3) whether a postulate
is such a reasonable
alternative" it is necessary to: (a) "have particular regard to" (i) the
substance of the scheme; and (ii) any
result or consequence for the
taxpayer that is or would be achieved by the scheme (other than a result in
relation to the operation
of the ITAA); and (b) "disregard any result in
relation to the operation of [the ITAA] that would be achieved by the postulate
any person (whether or not a party to the scheme)".
noted, the taxpayer bears the onus of proving the assessments are excessive
under s 14ZZO(b)(i) of the TAA. As a result, PepsiCo
and SVC accepted that
to determine if a taxpayer might reasonably be expected to have been liable to
pay withholding tax the taxpayer
must prove both that "the Commissioner's
postulates are not reasonable ... [and] ... that there is no other reasonable
postulate".
Commissioner did not accept that description of the operation of the onus but,
as will be explained, it is unnecessary to resolve
that aspect of the dispute.
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Tax Laws Amendment (Countering Tax Avoidance
and Multinational Profit Shifting) Bill 2013
(Cth), which relevantly
inserted s 177CB(3) and (4), said
"The amendment [the introduction of s 177CB(3) and (4)] makes it clear
that when postulating what might reasonably be expected to
have occurred in the
absence of a scheme, it is not enough to simply assume the non-existence of the
scheme – the postulate
must represent a reasonable alternative to the
scheme, in the sense that it could reasonably take the place of the scheme.
Such a postulate will necessarily require speculation about the state of
affairs that would have existed if the scheme had not been
entered into or
carried out. This may include speculation about the way in which connected
transactions would have been modified
if they had had to accommodate the absence
of the scheme."
approach reflects the approach in
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Peabody
that a "reasonable expectation requires more
than a possibility. It involves a prediction as to events which would have taken
if the relevant scheme had not been entered into or carried out and the
prediction must be sufficiently reliable for it to be regarded
reasonable".
s 177CB(4)(a)(i) and (ii) (have particular regard to the substance of the
scheme and any result or consequence for the
taxpayer that is or would be
achieved by the scheme), the Explanatory Memorandum said that the reference to
the substance of the
scheme in s 177CB(4)(a)(i) "requires a consideration
of its commercial and economic substance as distinct from its legal form or
shape" and that for a postulate to constitute a reasonable alternative it
"should correspond to the substance of the
Further, "[i]t
would be expected that a postulate that is a reasonable alternative to the
entering into and carrying out of a scheme
would achieve for the taxpayer
non-tax results and consequences that are comparable to those achieved by the
also imposes a requirement of principal purpose (meaning
principal purpose, which need not be the sole or dominant
The "inquiry
required by
is an objective, not subjective,
As noted, by
applies to a "scheme, in relation to a tax benefit
DPT tax benefit
) if" certain specified conditions are
satisfied. The conditions in dispute are those in s 177J(1)(a) and (b), it
being common ground
that the specified conditions are otherwise satisfied.
Section 177J(1)(a) and (b) provide:
"This Part also applies to a scheme, in relation to a tax benefit (the
tax benefit
(a) a taxpayer (a
relevant taxpayer
) has obtained, or would but
for section 177F obtain, the DPT tax benefit in connection with the scheme, in a
year of income; and
(b) it would be concluded (having regard to the matters in subsection (2)) that
the person, or one of the persons, who entered into
or carried out the scheme or
any part of the scheme did so for a principal purpose of, or for more than one
principal purpose that
includes a purpose of:
(i) enabling the relevant taxpayer to obtain a tax benefit, or both to obtain
a tax benefit and to reduce one or more of the relevant
taxpayer's liabilities
to tax under a foreign law, in connection with the scheme; or
(ii) enabling the relevant taxpayer and another taxpayer (or other taxpayers)
each to obtain a tax benefit, or both to obtain a
tax benefit and to reduce one
or more of their liabilities to tax under a foreign law, in connection with the
whether or not that person who entered into or carried out the scheme or any
part of the scheme is the relevant taxpayer or is the
other taxpayer or one of
the other taxpayers; and
Section 177F(1),
referred to in s 177J(1)(a), provides that, where
applies to a
scheme in connection with which a tax benefit has been obtained, or would but
for s 177F be obtained, the Commissioner,
relevantly, may "(a) in the
case of a tax benefit that is referable to an amount not being included in the
assessable income of the
taxpayer of a year of income – determine that the
whole or a part of that amount shall be included in the assessable income
taxpayer of that year of income".
"[S]ubsection
(2)", referred to in s 177J(1)(b), is s 177J(2). Section 177J(2)
provides that:
"For the purposes of paragraph (1)(b), have regard to the following matters:
(a) the matters in subsection 177D(2);
(b) without limiting subsection 177D(2), the extent to which non-tax financial
benefits that are quantifiable have resulted, will
result, or may reasonably be
expected to result, from the scheme;
(c) the result, in relation to the operation of any foreign law relating to
taxation, that (but for this Part) would be achieved
by the scheme;
(d) the amount of the tax benefit mentioned in paragraph (1)(b)."
177D(2), referred to in s 177J(2)(a), specifies the following
"(a) the manner in which the scheme was entered into or carried out;
(b) the form and substance of the scheme;
(c) the time at which the scheme was entered into and the length of the period
during which the scheme was carried out;
(d) the result in relation to the operation of this Act that, but for this Part,
would be achieved by the scheme;
(e) any change in the financial position of the relevant taxpayer that has
resulted, will result, or may reasonably be expected
to result, from the
(f) any change in the financial position of any person who has, or has had, any
connection (whether of a business, family or other
nature) with the relevant
taxpayer, being a change that has resulted, will result or may reasonably be
expected to result, from the
(g) any other consequence for the relevant taxpayer, or for any person referred
to in paragraph (f), of the scheme having been entered
into or carried out;
(h) the nature of any connection (whether of a business, family or other
nature) between the relevant taxpayer and any person referred
to in paragraph
applies to a scheme because of s 177J then
(a) s 177P applies to the relevant taxpayer; and (b) the
Commissioner cannot make a determination
under, relevantly, s 177F(1). By
s 177P(1), however, the relevant taxpayer is liable to pay tax at the rate
declared by the Parliament
on the DPT tax benefit as specified. Further, as the
Full Court majority explained, the applicable DPT provisions are concerned with
"the amount upon which the taxpayer might reasonably be supposed to have been
liable to pay royalty withholding tax but for the scheme",
so that the "amount
referred to in s 177C(1)(bc) and brought to tax under ss 177P(1) and
(2)(a) is therefore the amount of the royalty
which did not come into existence
because of the scheme. It is not the amount of royalty withholding tax that
would have been due
as the onus is on the taxpayer to prove that the assessments are excessive,
PepsiCo and SVC must prove the lack of the requisite
principal purpose specified
in s 177J(1)(b).
The "schemes" and the Commissioner's
alternative postulates
"scheme" in each case is the entry into the EBA, which, in this aspect of the
case, is to be understood as an agreement under
which each of PepsiCo and SVC
granted to SAPL an exclusive licence to use intellectual property rights of
substantial value without
requiring payment of a royalty for the licence. The
Commissioner proposed that PepsiCo and SVC each obtained a tax benefit in
with a scheme by the EBAs in that they were thereby not liable to pay
royalty withholding tax on an amount each might reasonably
be expected to have
been liable to pay on the amount if the respective schemes had not been entered
into or carried out (s 177C(1)(bc)).
s 177CB(3) the Commissioner proposed two postulates as reasonable
alternatives to the entering into or carrying out of these
schemes to support
the Commissioner's contention that a tax effect might reasonably be expected to
have occurred if the schemes had
not been entered into or carried out. These
postulates (shorn of the irrelevant "would have" component to which
s 177CB(2), not s
177CB(3), would apply) are: (a) the relevant
EBA might reasonably be expected to have expressed the payments to be made by
be for all of the property provided by (and promises made by) the
PepsiCo Group entities (rather than for concentrate only); or (b)
relevant EBA might reasonably be expected to have expressly provided for the
payments to be made by SAPL to include a royalty
for the use of, or the right to
use, the relevant trade marks and other intellectual property (whether or not
the amount of the royalty
specified).
Explanatory Memorandum to the
Treasury Laws Amendment (Combating
Multinational Tax Avoidance) Bill 2017
(Cth), which inserted s 177J(1),
said in respect of the requisite principal purpose
"The 'principal purpose or more than one principal purpose' threshold is lower
than the 'sole or dominant purpose threshold', which
is used in subsection
177D(1) of the ITAA 1936. Consistent with the multinational anti-avoidance law,
the relevant principal purpose
need not be the sole or dominant purpose of a
person or persons who entered into or carried out the scheme, but must be one of
main purposes, having regard to all the facts and circumstances.
This recognises that a scheme or part of a scheme may be entered into or
carried out for a number of purposes, some or all of which
are principal
purposes. The scheme will be caught under section 177J of the ITAA 1936 as long
as one of those principal purposes
satisfies the tax benefit requirements of the
principal purpose test."
The reasoning in the Courts below
as required, s 177CB(4) of the ITAA, the primary judge accepted the
Commissioner's first postulate (each EBA might reasonably
be expected to have
expressed the payments to be made by SAPL to be for all of the property provided
by (and promises made by) the
PepsiCo Group entities (rather than for
concentrate only)) to be a reasonable alternative to entering into or carrying
out the schemes.
The primary judge therefore concluded that "each of PepsiCo and
SVC obtained a tax benefit in connection with the relevant scheme"
as set out in
s 177J(1)(a) of the
primary judge said further that "it would be concluded that one of the principal
purposes of each of PepsiCo and SVC in entering
into or carrying out the
relevant scheme was to obtain a tax benefit (namely not being liable to pay
Australian royalty withholding
tax) and to reduce foreign tax (namely, US tax on
their income)", observing that "the terms of the EBAs are contrived, in that
that are ostensibly for concentrate alone are in substance for both
concentrate and the licence of valuable intellectual
On this basis,
the primary judge concluded that if the royalty withholding tax provisions did
not apply, the DPT provisions would
the Full Court majority considered that the schemes represented by the EBAs did
not include elements to the effect that "(a) the
grant of the licence to
use the intellectual property had an economic value from PepsiCo's perspective
having regard to all of the
terms of the EBA; and (b) the concentrate price
included that value",
followed that, by reference to s 177CB(4)(a)(i), the "commercial and
economic substance of the scheme[s]" and the Commissioner's
two postulates were
"quite different" and did "not correspond", which indicated that the postulates
were not reasonable alternatives
Full Court majority also considered that there were no reasonable alternative
postulates because the "only postulates which can
bring the payments to tax are
ones in which [SAPL's] payments for concentrate can be seen as being made in
part for the grant of
the [intellectual property] rights" but "no such postulate
can be a reasonable alternative given the terms of the scheme[s] and the
of the evidence".
this it followed that it was not the case, as provided for in
s 177C(1)(bc), that if the schemes had not been entered into or
out, the taxpayers might reasonably be expected to have been liable to pay
royalty withholding tax on the amounts paid by
concentrate.
there was no tax benefit. On this basis, for the Full Court majority, the
requisite principal purpose under s 177J(1)(b)(i)
Otherwise, the
Full Court majority, on what for them would be the "highly artificial" contrary
assumption that under the EBAs the
price of concentrate included a royalty,
"would have concluded that the requisite purpose under s 177J(1)(b)(i) had
established".
agreed with the Full Court majority that if the amounts to be paid by SAPL under
the EBAs did not include a royalty, the
requisite principal purpose under
s 177J(1)(b)(i) did not
If, however,
those amounts included a royalty (as Colvin J concluded they did) then, as
his Honour put it, "it is the mechanism by
which [under the EBAs] the Related
Entity [PBS] could be nominated as the Seller (and be the party to whom payment
would be made)
that means that there is no income in the form of a royalty that
may be the subject of a withholding tax liability on the part of
On that basis,
"the EBAs resulted in a tax benefit because, if the EBAs had not been entered
into, then a reasonable postulate was
that the EBAs would have provided for the
royalty to be paid to PepsiCo or SVC (as the case may be) as the holder of the
Colvin J observed that this accorded with the Commissioner's second
should be accepted that it is a refinement of that postulate. According to
Colvin J, as the Full Court majority reasoned,
the requisite principal
purpose under s 177J(1)(b)(i) should be found to have existed based on this
reasonable alternative
and as will be explained, the reasoning of Colvin J in this regard should
be accepted.
Consideration
Tax benefit
Consistently
with the reasoning of Colvin J, on their proper construction and
characterisation, the EBAs each provide for a single,
integrated and indivisible
transaction of which the sale of concentrate by PepsiCo or SVC (as applicable)
or their nominated PepsiCo
Group member to SAPL forms one inseparable part, from
which it follows that the price said to be for the sale of concentrate has
within it a component for the transfer of the intellectual property rights (the
royalty). Once that is accepted, it also follows
that PepsiCo and SVC have not
discharged their onus by negativing the reasonable alternative postulate to the
schemes that PepsiCo
and SVC would be the nominated sellers under the EBAs in
circumstances where, as discussed, the price payable by reference to units
concentrate to be sold included a royalty for the use of the intellectual
property rights granted by PepsiCo and SVC to SAPL under
the EBAs. On this
reasonable alternative postulate to the schemes under s 177CB(3), PepsiCo
and SVC each obtained a tax benefit (s
177C(1)(bc)) as, but for the
schemes, each might reasonably be expected to have been liable to pay
withholding tax on the amount
if the scheme had not been entered into or carried
out (s 177C(1)(g)).
177CB(3) (the requirement for a postulate that is a reasonable alternative to
entering into or carrying out the scheme) is
to be applied having particular
regard to the matters in s 177CB(4). This means that the specified matters
are to be a centrally
relevant consideration in and focal point of the court's
decision-making
The required
focus on the "substance of the scheme" (s 177CB(4)(a)(i)) should exclude
from the range of potential reasonable alternative
postulates hypothesised
dealings that conflict with or bear no resemblance to the commercial and
economic essence of the scheme.
The relevant Explanatory Memorandum, in saying
that a reasonable alternative "should
to the substance of the
understood as indicating no more than that a reasonable alternative postulate,
in its commercial and economic substance
or essence, should generally accord
with the scheme, in its commercial and economic substance or essence. In the
present case, the
postulate Colvin J proposed (that, but for the schemes,
the EBAs would have provided for the royalty to be paid to PepsiCo or SVC
relevant, being the holders of the rights to the intellectual property) accords
with the commercial and economic essence of the
schemes. The change is that
PepsiCo and SVC would each be the seller at the agreed prices said in the EBAs
to be payable for the
concentrate in consideration for the sale of concentrate
and the grant of the intellectual property licences, a position for which
EBAs each expressly provided. At the least, PepsiCo and SVC did not discharge
their onus of proving that this would not be a
reasonable alternative postulate,
essentially for the same reasons the primary judge gave in accepting the
Commissioner's two postulates
as reasonable alternatives to the schemes.
required focus on any result or consequence for the taxpayer that is or would be
achieved by the scheme (other than a result
in relation to the operation of the
ITAA) (s 177CB(4)(a)(ii)) should exclude from the range of potential
reasonable alternative postulates
hypothesised dealings that are inconsistent
with or undermine important non-tax objects of the taxpayer that the scheme
In this case, the focus of PepsiCo and SVC was on the objective of
ensuring simplicity in the pricing model for franchising and that
the postulates
would involve complex discussions and conflict with the simplicity of the
franchising model. As the primary judge
concluded, however, in circumstances
where the onus of proof was on PepsiCo and SVC, the evidence indicated that
there "is considerable
scope to negotiate the pricing terms and that such terms
can have a degree of complexity to
and that "there
is considerable scope for variation in exclusive bottling agreements, including
pricing terms, and that the pricing
terms can have some
complexity".
event, the price would not change under Colvin J's postulate; only the
option for PepsiCo and SVC to nominate another seller
within the PepsiCo Group
would change.
and contrary to submissions for PepsiCo and SVC, it is not the case that the
Commissioner included as an element of the
scheme under each EBA that "no
royalty was paid" for the intellectual property. As Colvin J recognised and
these reasons confirm,
in fact a royalty was paid for the intellectual property,
and the price for concentrate SAPL paid to PBS included that royalty to
extent. In any event, it does not follow that, if the scheme included no royalty
payment, a reasonable alternative postulate
must not include a royalty payment.
If that were so, the DPT provisions could never operate.
saying that a reasonable alternative postulate must involve a "sufficiently
reliable" prediction of what might reasonably be
expected to have happened but
for the scheme,
not support that sweeping proposition.
it is accepted that the payments under the EBAs were to any extent consideration
for the intellectual property licences (and
subject to the principal purpose
requirement being satisfied, as discussed below), the question becomes one of
valuation, which was
not an issue in these appeals. It may be noted, however,
that the primary valuation methods of both valuation experts proceeded on
basis that the payments said to be for the concentrate in the EBAs were,
some extent
, consideration for the intellectual property
This accords
with our reasoning.
these reasons, the primary judge was correct to conclude that "each of PepsiCo
and SVC obtained a tax benefit in connection with
the relevant
Accordingly,
it is unnecessary to consider the Commissioner's further submission that the
Full Court majority erred in their approach
to the onus of proof as it applies
to s 177C(1)(bc) of the ITAA by contemplating that a taxpayer may discharge
that onus by proving
that there is no reasonable alternative to a
Requisite principal purpose
requisite principal purpose is of enabling the relevant taxpayer to obtain a tax
benefit, or both to obtain a tax benefit and
to reduce one or more of the
relevant taxpayer's liabilities to tax under a foreign law, in connection with
the scheme (s 177J(1)(b)(i)).
The question posed by s 177J(1)(b) is:
would it be concluded (having regard to the matters in s 177J(2)) that the
taxpayer who entered
into or carried out the scheme or any part of the scheme
did so for a principal purpose of, or for more than one principal purpose
includes, that requisite purpose?
error is apparent in the reasoning of the primary judge that the considerations
in s 177J(2) (which include those specified in
s 177D(2)) weigh in
favour of the existence of the requisite principal purpose on the part of
PepsiCo and SVC. Several considerations
the primary judge identified carry
substantial weight in reaching that conclusion, particularly when assessed in
the context of PepsiCo
and SVC being the parties bearing the onus of proof and
being the only parties capable of adducing evidence of all circumstances
relevant to the statutory question of purpose. In giving little weight to the
somewhat vague and over-generalised evidence that PepsiCo
and SVC did adduce in
that regard, the primary judge was doing no more than giving effect to the
orthodox approach that "all evidence
is to be weighed according to the proof
which it was in the power of one side to have produced, and in the power of the
contradicted".
as the primary judge concluded, there was "no detailed and comprehensive
evidence as to why, as at 2009, the PepsiCo Group
generally adopted that pricing
structure in its exclusive bottling agreements" and it "would not be safe to
assume that tax considerations
did not have a role to
It followed
that the evidence that the PepsiCo Group franchising model had been in place
since the early 1900s and that simplicity
of the model was desirable provided
only slight support for the contention of PepsiCo and SVC against their
principal purpose being
that specified in s 177J(1)(b) of the
This remains an
effective answer to the submissions for PepsiCo and SVC that the franchising
model was instituted at a time when
royalty withholding tax could not have been
a consideration and that it therefore should be assumed that this has continued
referring to s 177D(2)(b), the primary judge rightly concluded that there
was a disconnect between the form and substance
of the EBAs in that in form the
payments to be made by SAPL were for the concentrate alone and not for the
licence of the trade marks
and other intellectual property but, in substance,
the payments to be made by SAPL were for both the concentrate and the licence
the trade marks and other intellectual
referring to s 177D(2)(e), the primary judge said that while the amount of
withholding tax that PepsiCo and SVC did not have
to pay is "not large in the
context of the total payments under the EBAs", this change in financial position
resulting from the schemes
"tends to support the Commissioner's position as to
referring to s 177J(2)(c), the primary judge considered that, on the
evidence, the schemes would have achieved a reduction
in US tax for PepsiCo and
SVC and that the reduction "would appear to be substantial" for the period prior
to 31 December 2017. The
primary judge said that this "supports the
Commissioner's position as to requisite
referring to s 177J(2)(d), the primary judge accepted that the amount of
the tax benefit was not large in the context of the
total payments under the
EBAs but considered it sufficiently material to support the Commissioner's
position as to requisite
in response to a submission for PepsiCo and SVC as to the fact that the amounts
SAPL paid to PBS to purchase concentrate were
included in PBS's assessable
income in Australia and that, after claiming deductions for the purchase of the
concentrate, PBS paid
tax in Australia on the margin it earned, the primary
judge observed that it needed to be understood that the deductions claimed
PBS for purchase of concentrate from CMSPL represented almost the entirety of
the amounts PBS received from SAPL, therefore PBS
paid only a small amount of
tax and it was likely that CMSPL paid little tax on the payments it received for
concentrate from PBS
in Singapore, Singapore being a low or no tax
it is not a matter of finding the requisite principal purpose to have existed
merely because another means of achieving
the same or a similar outcome which
results in more tax payable can be
identified.
extent PepsiCo's and SVC's notices of contention so asserted, the assertion is
unsustainable. It is the commercial and economic
substance of the schemes, in
which the parties to the EBAs have executed an indivisible transaction involving
interlocking promises
including the sale of concentrate and the grant of the
intellectual property licences along with other promises of value, which drives
the outcome. Within that indivisible transaction, there is no doubt that the
intellectual property licences are of fundamental importance
and substantial
value. The evidence exposes that, without them, SAPL would have no interest in
buying the concentrate and, indeed,
PepsiCo and SVC would not sell SAPL the
concentrate to enable it to market the drinks under different brands. The entire
the EBAs was to enable and to maximise the sale in Australia of the
under the globally famous trade marks. This objective
character of the transactions drives the conclusion that SAPL's promise in
respect of the purchase of and payment for concentrate, to some extent, included
consideration for the intellectual property licences.
submissions for PepsiCo and SVC that, if the material disadvantages of all
alternative postulates were not accepted to make those
postulates unreasonable,
those alternatives were at best commercially and economically "neutral", with
the consequence that, as PepsiCo
and SVC put it, it equates to a "conceded
absence of anything commercially to commend them", elide two separate concepts:
of the postulates and their commercial desirability. If these
submissions were correct, there would also be nothing commercially
the schemes in the EBAs. Yet the EBAs have existed in one form or another since
2009 (and continue to exist) so there
is something commercially to commend them
to the parties. The point is that the reasonable alternative postulates,
contrary to the
case for PepsiCo and SVC, do not substantially alter the
features of the EBAs that commercially commended them to the parties.
these reasons, the primary judge correctly concluded that, if the royalty
withholding tax provisions did not apply, the DPT provisions
appeals, accordingly, as the royalty withholding tax provisions do not apply,
the DPT provisions do apply. As no issue was
taken with the primary judge's
valuation, the orders to be made should reflect the primary judge's conclusions
in that regard.
orders which should be made in the withholding tax appeal involving PepsiCo
(1) Appeal allowed.
(2) Set aside the orders made by the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia on 16 July 2024 in proceeding VID 27 of 2024 and
in their place order
(a) the appeal be dismissed;
(b) the appellant (PepsiCo, Inc) pay the respondent's (Commissioner of
Taxation) costs.
(3) There be no order as to costs in respect of this proceeding, being
(4) The respondent (PepsiCo, Inc) pay the appellant's (Commissioner of Taxation)
costs in relation to special leave application proceeding
orders which should be made in the withholding tax appeal involving SVC
(1) Appeal allowed.
(2) Set aside the orders made by the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia on 16 July 2024 in proceeding VID 28 of 2024 and
in their place order
(a) the appeal be dismissed;
(b) the appellant (Stokely-Van Camp, Inc) pay the respondent's (Commissioner of
Taxation) costs.
(3) There be no order as to costs in respect of this proceeding, being
(4) The respondent (Stokely-Van Camp, Inc) pay the appellant's (Commissioner of
Taxation) costs in relation to special leave application
proceeding M68/2024.
orders which should be made in the DPT appeal involving PepsiCo for the year
ended 30 June 2018 are:
(1) Appeal allowed.
(2) Set aside the orders made by the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia on 16 July 2024 in proceeding VID 74 of 2024 and
in their place order
(a) the appeal be allowed;
(b) the notice of amended diverted profits tax assessment dated 6 March
2023 for the year ended 30 June 2018 be varied so as to
reflect the respondent's
liability to pay diverted profits tax in the amount of $7,133,336 for the year
ended 30 June 2018;
(c) the respondent (PepsiCo, Inc) pay the appellant's (Commissioner of
Taxation) costs.
(3) There be no order as to costs in respect of this proceeding, being
(4) The respondent (PepsiCo, Inc) pay the appellant's (Commissioner of Taxation)
costs in relation to special leave application proceeding
orders which should be made in the DPT appeal involving SVC for the year ended
30 June 2018 are:
(1) Appeal allowed.
(2) Set aside the orders made by the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia on 16 July 2024 in proceeding VID 76 of 2024 and
in their place order
(a) the appeal be allowed;
(b) the notice of amended diverted profits tax assessment dated 6 March
2023 for the year ended 30 June 2018 be varied so as to
reflect the respondent's
liability to pay diverted profits tax in the amount of $1,559,552 for the year
ended 30 June 2018;
(c) the respondent (Stokely-Van Camp, Inc) pay the appellant's (Commissioner of
Taxation) costs.
(3) There be no order as to costs in respect of this proceeding, being
(4) The respondent (Stokely-Van Camp, Inc) pay the appellant's (Commissioner of
Taxation) costs in relation to special leave application
proceeding M71/2024.
orders which should be made in the DPT appeal involving PepsiCo for the year
ended 30 June 2019 are:
(1) Appeal allowed.
(2) Set aside the orders made by the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia on 16 July 2024 in proceeding VID 75 of 2024 and
in their place order
(a) the appeal be allowed;
(b) the notice of amended diverted profits tax assessment dated 6 March
2023 for the year ended 30 June 2019 be varied so as to
reflect the respondent's
liability to pay diverted profits tax in the amount of $7,718,552 for the year
ended 30 June 2019;
(c) the respondent (PepsiCo, Inc) pay the appellant's (Commissioner of
Taxation) costs.
(3) There be no order as to costs in respect of this proceeding, being
(4) The respondent (PepsiCo, Inc) pay the appellant's (Commissioner of Taxation)
costs in relation to special leave application proceeding
orders which should be made in the DPT appeal involving SVC for the year ended
30 June 2019 are:
(1) Appeal allowed.
(2) The orders made by the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia on 16
July 2024 in proceeding VID 77 of 2024 be set aside
and in their place order
(a) the appeal be allowed;
(b) the notice of amended diverted profits tax assessment dated 6 March
2023 for the year ended 30 June 2019 be varied so as to
reflect the respondent's
liability to pay diverted profits tax in the amount of $1,553,568 for the year
ended 30 June 2019;
(c) the respondent (Stokely-Van Camp, Inc) pay the appellant's (Commissioner of
Taxation) costs.
(3) There be no order as to costs in respect of this proceeding, being
(4) The respondent (Stokely-Van Camp, Inc) pay the appellant's (Commissioner of
Taxation) costs in relation to special leave application
proceeding M72/2024.
EDELMAN, STEWARD AND GLEESON JJ. The PepsiCo Group operates a global
beverage business. Two companies resident in the United
States of America form
part of the PepsiCo Group – PepsiCo, Inc ("PepsiCo") and Stokely-Van Camp,
Inc ("SVC"). PepsiCo is the
owner of a world‑wide portfolio of trade
marks, designs, and other rights and assets relating to the Pepsi and Mountain
brands. On or about 3 April 2009, a Restated and Amended Exclusive
Bottling Appointment ("the PepsiCo EBA") was entered into between
the Concentrate Manufacturing Company of Ireland ("CMCI") and Schweppes
Australia Pty Ltd ("SAPL"), an Australian company
owned by Asahi Breweries,
under which PepsiCo appointed SAPL "to bottle, sell and distribute" certain
beverages, and CMCI appointed
SAPL "to bottle, sell and distribute" other
beverages, in each case as its sole and exclusive licensee within
the Commonwealth of
Australia ("the Territory").
is the owner of a world-wide portfolio of trade marks, designs, and other rights
and assets relating to the Gatorade and Propel
brands. There were separate
arrangements between SVC and SAPL recorded in a Restated and Amended Exclusive
Bottling Agreement under
which SVC appointed SAPL to "manufacture, package,
distribute and sell" certain beverages as its exclusive licensee within the
("the SVC EBA"). Throughout these reasons, the world-wide
portfolio of trade marks, designs, and other rights and assets owned by
and SVC will be collectively referred to as "the PepsiCo Intellectual Property".
Similarly, the beverages the subject of
the PepsiCo EBA and the SVC EBA will be
collectively referred to as "the Beverages".
to these appeals is that the PepsiCo EBA, and separately the SVC EBA, provided
that PepsiCo or SVC respectively would sell
(or cause to be sold by one of its
subsidiaries) to SAPL the flavour concentrates for the manufacture of the
Beverages by SAPL. At
the relevant times, SAPL bought concentrate from, and
paid, PepsiCo Beverage Singapore Pty Ltd, a PepsiCo subsidiary incorporated
Australia ("PBS"). SAPL made no payments to PepsiCo or SVC. No provision
was made in either EBA for the payment by SAPL to PepsiCo
or SVC respectively of
a royalty for its use of the PepsiCo Intellectual Property.
December 2020 and January 2022, the appellant ("the Commissioner")
issued notices of assessment to each of PepsiCo and SVC for
the years ended
30 June 2018 and
30 June 2019.
The notices were issued on the basis that part of the payments made by SAPL to
PBS for the supply of concentrate was a royalty paid
to or derived by PepsiCo or
SVC on which withholding tax was payable under
Tax Assessment Act 1936
(Cth) ("the ITAA 1936"), and, in the
alternative, effected a diversion of profit which accrued to PepsiCo or SVC for
which they were
liable to pay diverted profits tax ("DPT") under
of the ITAA 1936.
appeals arise from proceedings brought by PepsiCo and SVC in the Federal Court
of Australia challenging the
assessments.
primary judge held that "the payments were, to some extent,
consideration
the use of, or the right to use, the relevant trademarks and other
intellectual property"
on which royalty withholding tax was payable, and, alternatively, that DPT was
payable. A majority of the Full Federal Court allowed
the appeals brought by
PepsiCo and SVC.
Commissioner pursued three grounds of appeal before this Court: first, that
the Full Federal Court ought to have found that payments
made by SAPL to PBS
included a "royalty" paid "as consideration for" the use of or right to use the
PepsiCo Intellectual Property
licensed to SAPL, within the meaning of
the definition of "royalty" in
of the ITAA 1936; second,
and related to the first appeal ground, that the Full Federal Court ought
to have found that the "royalty"
was income "derived" by and "paid to"
PepsiCo or SVC under
of the ITAA 1936, and that withholding
tax was therefore payable under
; third, and in the alternative,
that if no royalty withholding tax was payable by PepsiCo or SVC, the Full
Federal Court ought to
have found that PepsiCo and SVC were liable for DPT for
the purposes of
of the ITAA 1936.
Commissioner's argument ultimately depended on two related ideas: first, that
PepsiCo and SVC had licensed SAPL to use the PepsiCo
Intellectual Property; and
second, that, unless part of the price SAPL paid to PBS for concentrate was a
royalty paid to or derived
by PepsiCo or SVC, SAPL obtained the licence to use
the PepsiCo Intellectual Property for nothing. As these reasons will show,
SAPL did obtain a licence to use the PepsiCo Intellectual Property, no
part of the price for the concentrate was payment for that
But SAPL did not obtain the licence for nothing. The right to use the
PepsiCo Intellectual Property was part of a comprehensive
arrangement, an essential element of which obliged SAPL to build PepsiCo's
and SVC's brands and strengthen the PepsiCo
Intellectual Property. The more
successful SAPL was, the more valuable the PepsiCo Intellectual Property became.
SAPL's agreement
to build the brands was of real value to PepsiCo and SVC. It
was not "nothing". The Commissioner was wrong to assert that part of
arm's length price paid by SAPL to PBS for concentrate had to be treated as
payment from SAPL to PepsiCo or SVC for the right
of SAPL to use the PepsiCo
Intellectual Property. There is no legal or economic reason to make that leap in
logic. To do so would
involve assigning part of the fair price paid for goods to
a different commercial bargain. The Commissioner's appeals to this Court
should be dismissed.
to the resolution of these appeals is the proper construction of the agreements
between SAPL and PepsiCo, and between SAPL
and SVC. Importantly, the agreements
either acknowledged or contained positive obligations upon SAPL to bottle,
market, promote,
distribute, and sell the Beverages. The PepsiCo EBA
recorded that a Performance Agreement regarding the operation of SAPL had been
entered into between Pepsi-Cola International, Cork, a subsidiary of PepsiCo,
and SAPL ("the Performance Agreement"). The PepsiCo
EBA also recorded
that SAPL would actively advertise the Beverages and vigorously engage in sales
promotion activities for the Beverages
in the Territory, and that SAPL and
PepsiCo (or one of its subsidiaries) would enter into a Co‑operative
Advertising and Marketing
Agreement which would govern all matters relating to
the advertising and marketing of Beverages in the Territory.
A representative
annual Co‑operative Advertising and Marketing
Agreement between PBS and SAPL dated 1 January 2017
("the 2017 Annual Co-op A&M
Agreement") was provided to the Court
by the parties. The Performance Agreement recorded that the Performance
Agreement, the PepsiCo
EBA and the annual Co‑operative Advertising
and Marketing Agreement contained the entire agreement between the parties.
entire agreement will be referred to as "the SAPL Bottler, Seller and
Distributor Agreement".
was common ground that the SVC EBA included within it, rather than by separate
agreement, obligations in not dissimilar terms
to those found in
the Performance Agreement and the 2017 Annual Co‑op A&M
Agreement. Consistent with the manner in which
the parties argued these appeals
in this Court, these reasons will address PepsiCo and the SAPL Bottler, Seller
and Distributor Agreement
and refer only to SVC and the SVC EBA where necessary
to do so. These reasons should be taken to apply to SVC and the SVC EBA except
where otherwise noted. It is necessary to address the terms of the SAPL
Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement in some detail.
Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement
SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement was a composite agreement
recorded in three agreements, to be read together: the
PepsiCo EBA, the
Performance Agreement, and the 2017 Annual Co-op A&M Agreement.
The specific contractual rights and obligations
of the parties to the
SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement are to be construed
objectively, by reference to the language
used, circumstances addressed and
commercial purpose or objects to be
PepsiCo EBA restated and amended an earlier Exclusive Bottling Appointment dated
6 December 2000 between SAPL, PepsiCo and CMCl.
Under the PepsiCo
EBA, SAPL was exclusively appointed by PepsiCo "to bottle, sell and distribute"
certain beverages under the trade
marks PEPSI, PEPSI MAX, PEPSI LIGHT, PEPSI
LIGHT CAFFEINE FREE and MOUNTAIN DEW and by CMCI "to bottle, sell and
distribute" certain
beverages under the trade mark SEVEN-UP ("the Trade
Marks") within the Territory, for ultimate resale within the Territory, on
terms of the PepsiCo
SAPL accepted the
appointment "to bottle, sell and distribute" the Beverages on the terms of
the PepsiCo EBA and agreed that it would
do so only for ultimate resale to
consumers in the
the PepsiCo EBA created or was deemed to create any relationship of agency,
partnership or joint venture between SAPL
be seen, SAPL's appointment is multifaceted and interconnected – to
"bottle, sell and distribute". It is necessary
to address each aspect of that
appointment.
the General Manager of PepsiCo Global Concentrate Solutions, whose evidence the
primary judge relevantly accepted, gave
evidence that bottlers mostly use a
standardised and well-known "cold fill process" which involves pouring the
ingredients and blends
from a concentrate kit into a mixer and adding water, and
sometimes sugar or a sweetener, and blending it. That mixture is then put
bottle or can with carbon dioxide and enclosed in the approved packaging.
Mr Lovorn described the bottling process as "compared
to baking a cake
using store‑bought cake mix because it involves taking a product which is
homogenous, blended in specific
proportions, engineered to produce a particular
kind of cake with a familiar taste, to which the home baker usually adds basic
ingredients".
Put in different terms, PepsiCo took away all the complexity
from the process. PepsiCo provides the ingredient; PepsiCo provides
proprietary formulations; and PepsiCo works with the suppliers in qualifying
ingredients that the bottler buys from PepsiCo's
qualified suppliers. The
bottler manufactures the beverage.
first aspect of the PepsiCo EBA was the supply of concentrate required for the
manufacture of the Beverages. This aspect was
the focus of
the Commissioner's case against PepsiCo. Under cl 4(a) of the
PepsiCo EBA, PepsiCo agreed to "sell or cause to be sold
by one of its
subsidiaries" ("the Seller") to SAPL and SAPL agreed to "buy only from
[the] Seller" all units of concentrate required
for the manufacture of the
Beverages by SAPL.
That obligation
in cl 4(a), properly construed, was a promise by PepsiCo to sell or cause
to be sold by the nominated Seller, and
a promise by SAPL to buy from PepsiCo or
the nominated Seller, concentrate in the future. Contrary to
the submissions of the Commissioner,
it was not a "sale clause". It was a
promise to enter into future agreements for the sale and purchase of
concentrate.
be accepted that the PepsiCo EBA dictated some of the terms of those future
sales of concentrate between SAPL and the Seller.
For example, the prices
per unit of concentrate for the 2009 calendar year were set out in cl 4(a)
of the PepsiCo EBA
the Seller was required to be paid in full for each order of concentrate within
seven days of
Although the
PepsiCo EBA dictated some of the terms of those future sales of concentrate,
cl 4 did not provide for or conclude a
sale. Instead, it spoke of
obligations (or their terms) in the future: PepsiCo "will sell or cause to be
sold" and SAPL will "buy
only from [the] Seller ... all units of concentrate".
the case of the SVC EBA, that proposition is even clearer. Clause 7.1(b)
provided: "If the [concentrate] is supplied by a Related
Corporation of [SVC] or
a Company Affiliate, the terms of this Agreement, to the extent that they are
relevant, apply to transactions
between [SAPL] and the Related Corporation of
[SVC] or Company Affiliate". The reference to "transactions" and to such
transactions
being governed by "terms" self-evidently contemplates a series of
future contracts for the sale of concentrate.
with cl 4(a) of the PepsiCo EBA, on 8 December 2015 SAPL was notified
that, with effect from 1 January 2016, the Seller
of the concentrate
would change to PBS and that "all purchase orders should be sent to [PBS]".
On 11 January 2016, PBS provided SAPL
with its bank account details.
From that point, SAPL sent purchase orders to PBS to buy specified quantities of
concentrate and SAPL
was invoiced by PBS for the concentrate supplied. Properly
construed, each purchase order and invoice evidenced a contract for the
of concentrates between PBS and SAPL.
paid PBS for the concentrate invoiced by making payments to PBS' nominated bank
account. PBS' financial statements recorded
a profit of $59,000 for the year
ended 31 December 2018 and a profit of $231,000 for the year ended
31 December 2019. On total sales
of concentrate during that period of
approximately $240 million, PBS' margin was 0.05 per cent.
in turn, purchased the concentrate from concentrate manufacturers and, during
the relevant period, purchased the concentrate
under a separate Concentrate
Distribution Agreement ("the CDA") between PBS and Concentrate Manufacturing
(Singapore) Pte Ltd ("CMSPL"),
a member of the PepsiCo Group incorporated in
Singapore. Under the CDA, effective 1 January 2018, CMSPL produced the
concentrate
and supplied that concentrate to PBS for distribution to bottlers in
Australia, the Republic of Korea, Vietnam and Thailand. PBS
purchased the
concentrate from CMSPL at the price equal to PBS' sales price less a
"Distribution Discount". The Distribution Discount
constituted the sole monetary
consideration to PBS for distributing the
concentrate.
licensed certain intellectual property rights to CMSPL for use in connection
with the Beverages in the Territory (together
"the CDA Intellectual Property").
Subject to the terms of the CDA (including any and all applicable Specifications
and Style Standards),
and to enable PBS to perform its obligations under the
CDA, under s 5.1 of the CDA CMSPL granted PBS a "royalty-free, limited,
temporary ... sub-licensable licence to use and/or to authorize its
Approved Resellers
to use the [CDA] Intellectual Property within the Territory solely in
connection with Distribution
PBS agreed with CMSPL that any agreement that PBS entered into with a
Bottler and/or Approved Reseller would bind the Bottler and/or
Approved Reseller
to the same obligations that bound PBS under Art 5 of the CDA in relation
to intellectual
at this point, the agreements which have been described show that the objective,
unchallenged evidence was that SAPL placed
orders for and paid for concentrate
in accordance with invoices for the sale of concentrate issued by PBS. The
concentrate sold by
PBS had been purchased by PBS from CMSPL. In Australia,
PBS returned and reported amounts paid by SAPL to PBS in its Australian income
tax returns as income derived by it.
the purchase of the concentrate is not the end of the analysis in relation to
the manufacture and bottling of the Beverages.
As Mr Lovorn explained,
PepsiCo necessarily retained significant control over the manufacture and
bottling of the Beverages. SAPL
was required to follow "all instructions and
directions issued by [the] Seller ... for preparing and bottling
Beverages".
SAPL, "in preparing, bottling, selling and distributing" Beverages, was required
to use only the concentrate purchased
from PBS and the packaging specified by
PepsiCo was
required to provide to SAPL, from time to time, reasonable specifications on all
other materials required for the Beverages
(including bottles, cartons, cases
and containers) and SAPL was required to only use those materials in preparing,
bottling, selling
and distributing
addition to being required to follow all instructions and directions issued by
PepsiCo for preparing and bottling Beverages, SAPL
was required to "maintain and
operate in the Territory one or more bottling plants, properly and adequately
equipped and staffed
to bottle, sell and distribute sufficient
Beverages".
SAPL was required to conform to the standards dictated by PepsiCo in other
ways. For example, SAPL was required to keep the bottling
plant or plants and
all equipment used in a clean and sanitary
filter all water used in bottling the Beverages through a method specified in
the PepsiCo EBA or from time to time by
SAPL was also
required to provide PepsiCo with adequate samples of the Beverages and of the
water used in bottling
the Beverages;
permit agents of PepsiCo to enter SAPL's plant to inspect the facilities,
equipment and materials used in preparing, bottling,
selling and distributing
the Beverages, to check operations and methods and to take
complete records of all tests made of the bottling, sale and distribution of the
maintain sufficient inventory of bottles, cartons, containers and cases as may
be required "to meet [PepsiCo's] standards
of quality and appearance as may be
reasonably specified to [SAPL] from time to
and distributing
the PepsiCo EBA, SAPL was appointed as a seller and distributor of the
Beverages. In discharging its appointment as seller
and distributor, SAPL
was required to "sell Beverages in the Territory in agreed packages and
proprietary packages as [PepsiCo] may
from time to time
anticipated that SAPL would sell the Beverages in the Territory at prevailing
competitive market
required: to use its "reasonable endeavours to maximise the sale of
Beverages throughout the Territory", including using
its reasonable endeavours
to "fully meet and increase the demand and share of market for Beverages
throughout the Territory"; to
"fully exploit new packages, new package sizes and
new Beverage opportunities"; to "service all accounts with frequency adequate
keep them at all times fully supplied with Beverages"; to use its own
salespeople and trucks; and to "cooperate in [PepsiCo's]
cooperative advertising
and sales promotion programs and
campaigns".
permitted activities were to "sell and distribute Beverages under the Trade
[M]arks" and SAPL was to make only such representations
concerning the Beverages
as had been previously authorised in writing by
The decision of PepsiCo on all matters concerning the Trade Marks was final
and conclusive and not subject to question by
PepsiCo agreed
to protect and defend the Trade Marks at its sole cost and
Despite the
SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement, and the PepsiCo EBA in
particular, not expressly licensing SAPL to use
the PepsiCo Intellectual
Property, it was common ground that the agreement contained an implied licence
to this effect. As the primary
judge held, the agreement could not operate
PepsiCo EBA recorded that SAPL would actively advertise the Beverages and
vigorously engage in sales promotion activities for
the Beverages in the
consistency of image, SAPL could use only advertising strategies for the
Beverages that PepsiCo developed for the Territory
and SAPL could use only
advertising and promotion materials furnished or caused to be furnished by
PepsiCo or approved by
PepsiCo EBA also recorded that the Performance Agreement regarding the operation
of SAPL had been
Performance Agreement was between a subsidiary of PepsiCo and SAPL. It set
minimum annual sales
distribution
and quality
standards for the
To facilitate SAPL meeting the performance targets and maximising the sales
of PepsiCo products, the Performance
PepsiCo EBA
that, during each calendar year, PepsiCo (or a subsidiary of PepsiCo) and SAPL
would discuss in good faith with the intention
of entering into a
Co‑operative Advertising and Marketing Agreement (relevantly, the
2017 Annual Co-op A&M Agreement).
2017 Annual Co-op A&M Agreement was between PBS and SAPL, being the
agreement required under the PepsiCo
Performance Agreement,
and governed all matters related to the advertising and marketing of Beverages
in the Territory.
2017 Annual Co-op A&M Agreement specifically recorded that in
consideration of the "mutual promises contained" in the agreement,
PBS and SAPL
agreed, among other things, to "contribute financially towards the advertising
and marketing of the Beverages in
and to a Target Annual Sales Volume and minimum volume of Beverages in the
2017 Annual Co-op A&M Agreement also recorded the total target amount
to be spent by PBS on advertising and marketing of
the Beverages
as the current proposed allocation of expenditure by
In addition to
expenditure on marketing, the 2017 Annual Co‑op A&M Agreement
recorded that PBS may furnish SAPL with advertising
materials relating to the
Beverages and that the cost of those materials together with the cost of
packaging and shipping such materials
to SAPL would form part of PBS' share of
the expenditure.
agreed not to use any art work depicting images of PepsiCo brands which had not
been approved by PBS.
The agreement also contained processes for reconciliation of spending to ensure
no party incurred a "disproportionate share" of
expenditure.
of the 2017 Annual Co-op A&M Agreement provided that "[SAPL]
acknowledges that its contribution to the Expenditure
is for the purposes of
improving its sales of the Beverages, not to build the brands of the Beverages".
As PepsiCo submitted, this
was a "lawyer's clause" inserted to protect PepsiCo,
similar to and consistent with the terms of cl 5(d) of the PepsiCo EBA,
provided that nothing in the PepsiCo EBA was to be construed as
conferring upon SAPL any right or interest in the Trade Marks used
connection with the Beverages. Contrary to the Commissioner's contention,
cl 16 of the 2017 Annual Co-op A&M Agreement did
not support
the proposition that SAPL specifically acknowledged that, when making
contributions pursuant to those arrangements, it
was doing so in a way that
"does not constitute a payment for the use of the brands". That proposition
is otherwise inconsistent
with the SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor
Termination
mutuality of the promises in the SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement
necessarily gave rise to the ability to terminate
for breach. So, for example,
cl 22(b) of the PepsiCo EBA provided that PepsiCo, not PBS, indemnified
SAPL from any loss resulting
from any breach of or deemed breach of the PepsiCo
EBA, the 2017 Annual Co‑op A&M Agreement or the Performance
by PepsiCo or PBS including "any breach of the warranty contained in
clause 5(a) [dealing with the Trade Marks] or resulting from
concentrate", provided that the indemnity in respect of the concentrate would
arise only if SAPL had strictly complied
with PepsiCo's instructions for the
handling, storage, and usage of the concentrate, and for the bottling of the
Beverages. On the
other hand, the PepsiCo EBA, for example, could be terminated
by one month's written notice to SAPL if SAPL failed to perform or
comply with
one or more of the material terms or conditions of the PepsiCo EBA and such
failure was not
addition to that right and all other rights and remedies under the PepsiCo
EBA, in the event that any party "failed to make
timely payment under [the
PepsiCo EBA] or any related agreement", that party was liable for the payment of
interest for any such
outstanding.
sum, the use of a local bottler such as SAPL was mutually beneficial for both
PepsiCo and the bottler. SAPL was able to leverage
the PepsiCo Group's
innovation and marketing capabilities and PepsiCo received the benefit of SAPL's
local investment in bottling
and distribution equipment and capabilities.
Another mutually beneficial aspect of the SAPL Bottler, Seller and
Distributor Agreement
was described by Mr Williams, who had worked for the
PepsiCo Group in marketing and bottling franchise‑related roles for over
35 years and ultimately became President of the PepsiCo Group's Global
Beverage Group and the Franchise Team. Mr Williams said in
evidence that
the bottler helped build the brand of the Beverages. Under the SAPL
Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement, SAPL
was appointed and accepted
appointment as the exclusive bottler, seller and distributor of the Beverages as
part of a comprehensive
arrangement involving an exchange of promises, on an
arm's length basis, which included the promise in cl 4(a) to purchase
concentrate
at agreed prices which were not disproportionately high, as well as
the conferral of intellectual property rights.
exchange of promises in the SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement
between PepsiCo and SAPL was separate from the future
agreements that may be,
and were, entered into by SAPL for the sale and purchase of concentrate. Indeed,
as the PepsiCo EBA contemplated,
the future contracts for the purchase of
concentrate by SAPL were not with PepsiCo but were with PBS, as the
nominated Seller. PBS,
which had no need for the PepsiCo Intellectual Property
other than to sell the concentrate to SAPL, sold the concentrate to SAPL
margin of 0.05 per cent. The Commissioner did not allege that the
transactions for the sale of concentrate by PBS to SAPL
were a sham or that PBS
received any part of the payments from SAPL for the concentrate as agent or
trustee for PepsiCo. The price
paid by SAPL to PBS for the concentrate did not
move the transfer of the PepsiCo Intellectual Property from PepsiCo to SAPL.
is then necessary to consider the two issues – royalty withholding tax and
Royalty withholding tax
Division 11A
of Pt III of the ITAA 1936 imposes, amongst other things, royalty
withholding tax on non-residents. A non‑resident
who derives income
which consists of a "royalty" that is paid to the non‑resident by a person
to whom s 128B in Div 11A
and is not an
outgoing wholly incurred by that person in carrying on business in a foreign
country is liable to pay income tax in
A "royalty"
is "deemed to have been paid by a person to another person although it is not
actually paid over to the other person
but is ... otherwise dealt with on behalf
of the other person or as the other person
The legislative
machinery is not in dispute. Rather, what is in dispute is whether, as the
Commissioner contended, part of the payments
made by SAPL to PBS for concentrate
constituted a royalty derived by PepsiCo for the use by SAPL of the PepsiCo
Intellectual Property.
The answer to that question turns upon
the definition of the words "royalty" and "royalties" in s 6(1) of the
ITAA 1936, which relevantly
is in the following terms:
includes any amount paid or
credited, however described or computed, and whether the payment or credit is
periodical or not, to the
extent to which it is paid or credited, as the case
may be, as consideration for:
(a) the use of, or the right to use, any copyright, patent, design or model,
plan, secret formula or process, trade mark, or other
like property or right;
(d) the supply of any assistance that is ancillary and subsidiary to,
and is furnished as a means of enabling the application or
enjoyment of,
any such property or right as is mentioned in paragraph (a) ..."
There was no dispute that if, properly construed, SAPL's obligation to pay
for concentrate under the SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor
included, in part, a payment which was consideration for the use of the PepsiCo
Intellectual Property, then such a payment
would be a "royalty" within the
meaning of that defined term in s 6(1) of the ITAA 1936.
were therefore two questions. First, were the payments made by SAPL to PBS
"consideration for" the use of the PepsiCo Intellectual
Property and therefore a
"royalty" within the meaning of that defined term in s 6(1) of
the ITAA 1936 and, second, if so, was that
"royalty" "derived by" and
"paid or credited" to PepsiCo?
Decisions below
relation to the first question, the primary judge held that
5.88 per cent of the amounts paid was a royalty. The primary judge
primarily relied on decisions of this Court in
Chief Commissioner of State
Revenue (NSW) v Dick Smith Electronics Holdings Pty
Commissioner of State Revenue (Vic) v Lend Lease Development Pty
necessary to address those decisions below.
primary judge's conclusion that 5.88 per cent of the amounts paid by
SAPL was a royalty was explained by reference to the following
matters: one of
the parties to the PepsiCo EBA – PepsiCo – was the owner of the
PepsiCo Intellectual Property whereas
the Seller of the concentrate, PBS, was
not a party to the PepsiCo EBA; the PepsiCo EBA contained an implied licence by
SAPL to use the PepsiCo Intellectual Property; the licence of
the PepsiCo Intellectual Property was fundamental to the PepsiCo EBA
because, without the licence, SAPL would not be able to package and sell the
Beverages; a failure by SAPL to perform its payment
obligations could result in
the termination of the PepsiCo EBA and therefore the licence; and it
would be "very surprising" if PepsiCo
would be willing to license the PepsiCo
Intellectual Property, which is some of the strongest and most valuable in the
global beverage
industry, "for nothing".
relation to the second question – whether the royalty income had been
derived by and paid to PepsiCo for the purposes of
s 128B(2B) – the
primary judge dismissed PepsiCo's submission that it had not derived the
relevant income. The primary judge
also considered that, because PepsiCo
had nominated PBS as the Seller of the concentrate, PepsiCo had thereby directed
SAPL to pay
PBS and, as a result, the royalty components were "dealt with on
behalf of [PepsiCo]" or dealt with "as [PepsiCo] directs". The primary
therefore held that the relevant portions of the payments were deemed to
have been paid to PepsiCo.
the Full Federal Court, the majority rejected the proposition that SAPL obtained
the benefit of the PepsiCo Intellectual Property
"for nothing" on the basis that
a complete view of the licence granted by PepsiCo to SAPL was one which
acknowledged not merely (a)
the benefits obtained by SAPL in being
permitted to use the goodwill attaching to the Trade Marks but also
(b) the restrictions as
to both product and marketing imposed on SAPL
in its utilisation of that goodwill, (c) the burdens placed upon SAPL
in complying
with testing and inspection regimes, and (d) the benefits
obtained by PepsiCo in having SAPL sustain and promote its goodwill in
Australia. In short, the licence obtained by SAPL was part of a package
involving substantial obligations upon SAPL and substantial
benefits to PepsiCo
and not merely benefits to SAPL. The majority found that, once that complete
view of the licence was appreciated,
the Commissioner's submission that PepsiCo
was giving away the right to use the PepsiCo Intellectual Property for nothing,
some element of the price for the concentrate was seen as embedding some
value for the licence, must be rejected. The decisions in
were distinguished by the majority.
Those cases, it was said, concerned agreements where multiple promises for the
payment of money
or for the performance of other obligations constituted, in
aggregate, the consideration for the transfer of shares (in
) and parcels of land (in
). In contrast,
the majority construed SAPL's promise to pay for concentrate as a promise for
the transfer of those goods, and for
nothing else.
the conclusion reached on the first question, the majority recognised that it
was strictly unnecessary for them to consider
whether any amount received by PBS
from SAPL could be income which was derived by PepsiCo. Nevertheless, the
majority held that PepsiCo
did not derive any of the amounts paid by SAPL to
PBS. The majority accepted that a direction by a creditor to a debtor to pay a
third party constitutes a payment to the
but held that
there can be no payment by direction unless there is an antecedent monetary
obligation.
majority held that there was no antecedent monetary obligation owed by SAPL to
PepsiCo and that, properly construed, the PepsiCo
EBA did not create a monetary
obligation owed by SAPL to PepsiCo. Rather, the PepsiCo EBA contemplated that
PepsiCo would be the
Seller of concentrate, or would cause one of its
subsidiaries or company affiliates to be the Seller of concentrate, the latter
which is what happened when PBS sold concentrate to SAPL. In addition, the
majority held that the payments made by SAPL to PBS were
not income derived by
PepsiCo because the payments did not "come home" to
this Court, the Commissioner sought to reagitate both questions. For the reasons
that follow, the answer to both questions should
be "No". The payments made by
SAPL to PBS were for concentrate and did not include any component which was a
"royalty" for the use
of the PepsiCo Intellectual Property. The payments
made by SAPL to PBS were not made "as consideration for" the use of the PepsiCo
Intellectual Property and therefore did not include a "royalty" within the
definition of that term in s 6(1) of the ITAA 1936. And,
in any event,
the payments were received by PBS on its own account. The payments were not paid
to and cannot be said to have been
paid to PepsiCo. Put simply, the payments
made by SAPL to PBS were not brought to tax under s 128B(2B) because there
was no "royalty"
as required by s 128B(2B)(b) and the payments made by SAPL
to PBS were not "income ... derived by" PepsiCo within the meaning of
s 128B(2B)(a). Each question will be considered in turn.
Payment not "consideration for" right to use PepsiCo
Intellectual Property
the payments for concentrate from SAPL to PBS were in part "consideration for"
the right of SAPL to use the PepsiCo Intellectual
Property turns on the proper
construction of the whole SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement of
which the PepsiCo EBA formed
a part – what the parties had agreed,
ascertained
objectively.
parties bargain that the payments made by SAPL to PBS for concentrate were in
part to be a recompense to PepsiCo for the
right to use the PepsiCo Intellectual
"Consideration for"
word "consideration" has multiple meanings and shades of meaning. In the
modern law of contract, "consideration" has developed
as a concern with
reciprocity,
quid pro quo
" between an offered promise and
acceptance.
another meaning of consideration which applied in circumstances broader than
modern contracts, such as a conveyance or the making
of a payment, was a "moving
cause" or a "material cause" for the
broader, alternative sense, the "consideration" for a payment was the "purpose"
of the payment or
conveyance,
"basis" or "condition" upon which it is
Archibald Howie Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Stamp Duties (NSW)
Dixon J explained that in s 66 of the
Stamp Duties Act
(NSW) the word "consideration" refers to the "money or value
passing which moves the conveyance or
a consequence or aspect of an offer and acceptance. Similarly, the phrase
"consideration for" in the definition of "royalty"
in s 6(1) of the
ITAA 1936 is unlikely to be confined to whether there is a
in the making of an offer and acceptance of that offer.
The definition of "royalty" refers to an amount "however described or
and to an amount "to the extent to which" it is paid as consideration
for the right to use intellectual property. The phrase "consideration
the definition of "royalty" in s 6(1) of the ITAA 1936 extends to
the "basis", "purpose", or "condition" for a transaction
by which one party
confers a benefit upon
Of course, whether a payment is a basis, purpose or condition "for" the
conferral of the use of intellectual property will always
depend upon what the
parties have agreed. In that respect, the word "for" connotes a causal
connection between the making of a promise
to pay or confer some other benefit
and the receipt of a right to use the intellectual property. That connection
will be satisfied
when the giving of the promise can be seen to be the basis
for, or a condition of, that receipt. In the present case,
SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement
composite SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement, including the
PepsiCo EBA, was not an agreement for the sale of goods
or an agreement to sell
goods in the future.
It was an agreement that SAPL would manufacture, bottle, sell and distribute the
Beverages in the Territory and, to facilitate those
functions, PepsiCo licensed
SAPL to use the PepsiCo Intellectual
of contrast, the contracts between SAPL and PBS, at arm's length, were for the
sale and purchase of concentrate.
the licence for the PepsiCo Intellectual Property was a significant part of the
architecture of the entire SAPL Bottler,
Seller and Distributor Agreement, the
Commissioner's contention that the payments for concentrate from SAPL to PBS
were in part "consideration
for" the right of SAPL to use the PepsiCo
Intellectual Property must be rejected. There was no basis for concluding that
the PepsiCo
Intellectual Property was given away for "nothing", or that PepsiCo
was not being properly compensated for the use of the PepsiCo
Intellectual
Property. The "consideration" in the sense of the basis for, or a condition of,
the use by SAPL of the PepsiCo Intellectual
Property was the performance of the
monetary and non‑monetary undertakings by SAPL under the composite
SAPL Bottler, Seller
and Distributor Agreement, including the performance
of undertakings or exchange of promises in cl 4 of the PepsiCo EBA, one of
was SAPL's promise to pay agreed unit prices for
concentrate.
Commissioner submitted that the PepsiCo EBA should be construed as recording the
true bargain of the parties with part of the
payments made by SAPL to PBS being
the consideration for the use of the PepsiCo Intellectual Property. Any other
construction, the
Commissioner submitted, would be commercially unrealistic
given that SAPL made one payment but received in return both the concentrate
the use of the PepsiCo Intellectual Property; without the latter, it was
emphasised, SAPL would not have a viable business. This
argument was reflected
in the following reasons of Colvin J, in dissent below:
"Importantly, the trade marks are known to the parties to be strong and
valuable. That is to say they have considerable existing
goodwill. If the amount
that is required to be paid under the EBAs is for the concentrate alone then the
right to distribute the
branded products is being afforded without any part of
the monetary consideration being attributable to the licence to use the
brands of PepsiCo. That is a commercially unreasonable view of the
terms of the EBAs considered as a whole."
the case of the PepsiCo EBA, the Commissioner principally relied on three
textual considerations. The first was that cl 4 of the
PepsiCo EBA did not
expressly confine the listed prices as being the consideration for the
acquisition of concentrate. The second
was that cl 24(a)(i) gave PepsiCo a
right to terminate the contract on the failure by SAPL, amongst other
things, to make the payments
specified by cl 4. And the third was
cl 27(a), which provided that, upon termination, SAPL would be unable
to use any of the "Trade
[M]arks, marks, names, symbols, slogans, emblems,
insignia or other designs". These clauses demonstrated, it was submitted,
link between the making of the cl 4 payments and the
continuing right of SAPL to use the PepsiCo Intellectual Property. It followed,
the Commissioner submitted, that the parties must have agreed to make the
payments a condition of the grant of the intellectual property
analysis oversimplifies what the parties agreed and misconceives
the overall arrangement and hence the basis or condition for
the licence to
SAPL to use the PepsiCo Intellectual Property. The SAPL Bottler, Seller and
Distributor Agreement constituted a complex
exchange of valuable promises.
Clause 4(a) of the PepsiCo EBA contained one such exchange of promises.
As its heading stated, this clause was concerned with the supply of
concentrate. It was clearly forward looking. It provided that
PepsiCo "will sell
or cause to be sold by one of its subsidiaries" and SAPL "will buy" "units of
concentrate" "at the following prices",
which were then specified on
a per unit basis. Such language contradicts the Commissioner's case.
It reflects a bargain made, within
the context of the broader exchange of
promises contained in the SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement, as to
what the prices
for concentrate would be and no more. In other words, it
specified the monetary condition for the transfer of units of concentrate
PepsiCo (or the nominated Seller) to SAPL.
Critically,
the Commissioner did not contend that these prices were incorrect or had been
inflated to hide some secret royalty outlay.
Different Beverages were,
unsurprisingly, listed at different prices. Clause 4(b) provided for those
prices to be adjusted annually.
Clause 4(c) addressed the delivery of the
units and allocated responsibility for the payment of customs duty, GST, import
and permits. Clause 4(d) obliged SAPL to carry a certain inventory
of minimum units. Self-evidently, the subject matter of these
clauses was the
sale of concentrate and nothing else.
invoices sent by PBS to SAPL do not support the Commissioner's argument. A
sample was produced to this Court. They show a detailed
breakdown of different
unit prices for different concentrates, such as "Pepsi Flavor" and "Black
Raspberry" flavour. It was never
contended that these prices,
which inferentially accord with the prices set out in the PepsiCo EBA (as
adjusted), were inflated or
had embedded in them some form of royalty. In the
circumstances here, and in the absence of evidence to the contrary, they may be
taken to be the accurate business records of
and, as such,
they contradict the Commissioner's case.
also agreed to make annual payments for the marketing of the Beverages in
circumstances where the marketing enhanced the ongoing
value of the PepsiCo
Group business and its brands but did not permanently enhance the value of
SAPL's business as SAPL could not
own the brands and related intellectual
property. Indeed, it was agreed that upon termination of the PepsiCo EBA SAPL
the right to use or have any interest in the PepsiCo Intellectual
Property. That was to be expected. Why, in such circumstances,
would the PepsiCo
EBA be construed as requiring the payment of a royalty? As the majority of
the Full Federal Court correctly observed
"The licence rights did not exist in isolation. Rather, they were intertwined
with [SAPL's] obligations to distribute the beverages
in Australia under the
Pepsi, Mountain Dew and Gatorade trade marks using PepsiCo/SVC's can and bottle
designs and to do so under
the strict quality control of PepsiCo/SVC and in
accordance with its detailed stipulations about how the trade marks were to be
Court's decisions in
require no contrary
conclusion.
concerned the taxation of a dutiable transaction
for the purposes of the
Duties Act 1997
(NSW), being a
sale of shares. That Act charged duty on the dutiable value of dutiable
Act, the dutiable value was determined, relevantly, as the consideration
for the dutiable
transaction.
was whether the performance of two distinct promises made by the purchaser in
favour of the vendors constituted the consideration
for the transfer of shares.
Applying the broader meaning of the word "consideration" in conveyancing rather
than the sense in simple
contracts, a majority of this Court held that the
performance of both promises was needed to "move" the
was another State
case. The dutiable
transaction was the sale of parcels of land. The purchaser had made a
number of contractually distinct promises
to pay the vendor. Once again, the
issue for determination was the correct identification of the consideration for
those sales.
This Court decided that the consideration which moved the transfers by the
vendor to the purchaser was the performance, by the purchaser,
promises it had given to pay
the vendor.
Commissioner relied on those cases to contend that it was necessary for the
Court to look beyond the construction of the agreement
to the whole of
the arrangement and commercial dealing between the parties, including the
value of the PepsiCo Intellectual Property
and the pricing model adopted in
other jurisdictions for other products, in order to characterise the
consideration. Both cases turn
upon an application of a State
to their particular
And neither
case involved looking outside the terms of the arrangements and
the transactions involved. Neither case supports the
Commissioner's
contentions.
consideration given by SAPL for the licence to use the PepsiCo Intellectual
Property was
the payments SAPL made to PBS for the sale and supply of
concentrate. The basis or condition for those payments was only the receipt
the concentrate. But, the basis or condition that moved PepsiCo to provide the
licence for SAPL to use the PepsiCo Intellectual
Property was
the performance of monetary and non-monetary undertakings by SAPL under
the SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement,
including the entry by
SAPL into separate arrangements for the sale and purchase of concentrate from
PepsiCo or a nominated Seller.
Contrary to the approach taken in
, it is the Commissioner who here seeks to
isolate the performance of one of the promises given by SAPL, and wrongly seeks
to allocate
the performance of that promise as the consideration for all that
SAPL obtained.
do not support such a
narrow approach.
contractual price paid by SAPL to PBS for the concentrate was the price paid for
goods sold and delivered. The Commissioner did
not dispute that it was an arm's
length price, or a fair price, or that it was not disproportionately high. When
the price paid for
goods has those characteristics, it cannot be said that
a part of the price paid for those goods is payment of a royalty for the
use of intellectual property applied to products partly made with those goods.
Observing that the sale of the products produced using
the goods increased the
value of the PepsiCo Intellectual Property does not show that SAPL paid any part
of the amount paid for concentrate
to, or for the benefit of, PepsiCo for using
the PepsiCo Intellectual Property. The majority of the Full Federal Court were
to conclude the amounts paid by SAPL to PBS for concentrate were
not "consideration for" the use of the PepsiCo Intellectual
Payments not derived by, or paid or credited to,
Irrespective
of whether part of the payments made by SAPL to PBS for concentrate was a
"royalty" within the definition of that term
in s 6(1) of
the ITAA 1936, no part of those payments was "derived by", or "paid or
credited" to, PepsiCo, that latter requirement
being an essential element of
liability for royalty withholding tax in s 128B(2B) in Div 11A of Pt
III of the ITAA 1936, read with
the definition of "royalty" in
Commissioner's contentions
Commissioner did not deny that all payments were made by SAPL to PBS and that no
relevant payment was made to PepsiCo. Instead,
the Commissioner reagitated
his contention that SAPL's liability to make payments was owed at all times to
PepsiCo and that when
the payments were made by SAPL to PBS, those payments were
made at the direction of PepsiCo within the meaning of s 128A(2) of the
ITAA 1936. In this Court, the Commissioner accepted that, for a payment to
be made under direction, there must be an antecedent obligation
between PepsiCo
and SAPL. The Commissioner submitted such an obligation existed.
to that contention, it was contended, was that the contract for sale of the
concentrate was the PepsiCo EBA, to which PBS
was not a party, and that there
had never been any contract or contracts for the sale of concentrate under which
PBS was entitled
to payment from SAPL. In support of that contention,
the Commissioner relied on the fact that cl 4(a) of the PepsiCo EBA
no promise by SAPL to pay PBS and, indeed, cl 4(c) merely
provided for payments to be made within seven days without specifying to
they were to be made. In short, PepsiCo controlled where the money might go.
In addition, the Commissioner relied upon the fact
that a failure by
SAPL to make payments as required gave PepsiCo a right to terminate the PepsiCo
EBA and any failure to make timely
payment gave rise to a liability to pay
interest, presumably to the counterparty, namely
sense, the Commissioner submitted it would make no commercial sense for PepsiCo
to be entitled to be compensated for a late
payment if it did not have an
underlying entitlement to be paid. All of this was said by the Commissioner to
evidence an existing
antecedent monetary obligation owed by SAPL to PepsiCo, as
SAPL was contractually obliged to make payment to PepsiCo, or as it
No antecedent monetary obligation owed by SAPL to
again, the proper construction of the SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor
Agreement provides a complete answer. Contrary to
the Commissioner's
contention, there was no antecedent monetary obligation owed by SAPL to PepsiCo.
the SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement, once PepsiCo nominated
a Seller, SAPL was under an obligation to buy from
that entity.
That remained the case even though some of the terms of that sale were
fixed under the SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor
matter that PBS was not a party to the SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor
Agreement. PBS was the nominated Seller. At
no point did PepsiCo have title to
the concentrate.
The attempts by the Commissioner to contend there was an antecedent
monetary obligation owed by SAPL to PepsiCo cannot sit with the
the SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement allowed PepsiCo to
sell the concentrate itself
nominate a subsidiary to do so, and
that PepsiCo nominated PBS.
is necessary to address the specific matters relied upon by
the Commissioner. First, the Commissioner submitted that, as cl 4(c)
of the PepsiCo EBA required payment to be made in full within seven days of
delivery of the concentrate and did not identify to whom
payment was to be made,
the obligation to pay must be properly read as owed to PepsiCo as the
counterparty to the PepsiCo EBA. That
argument impermissibly took and construed
cl 4(c) in isolation, rather than as part of cl 4 as a whole, which
was titled "Supply
of Concentrate" and which identified that concentrate would
be sold by the nominated Seller (cl 4(a)), for certain prices
cl 4, there was no ambiguity regarding to whom payment was to be made.
the Commissioner made a similar submission in respect of cl 26(a) of the
PepsiCo EBA, which provided for interest for late
again, the submission impermissibly read that part of the clause in isolation,
ignoring that it provided for interest where a
party "has failed to make timely
payment under [the PepsiCo EBA] or any related agreement", recognising that
interest would be owed
in the context of the composite SAPL Bottler, Seller
and Distributor Agreement, subsequent related agreements and the identity of
aspects particular to the SVC EBA were emphasised by the Commissioner. The
Commissioner submitted that cl 7.4(f) of the SVC EBA,
which stated that
payment should be made by telegraphic transfer to a USA bank account as
specified by SVC or a company affiliate
unless the parties agreed otherwise,
meant that SVC was free to nominate the recipient of the payment and could
direct SAPL to pay
any third party nominated. Once again, that submission
misconstrues the text and operation of the SVC EBA. It was PBS, as the company
affiliate, who provided its bank account details to SAPL. In any event, the
owner of the bank account does not transform the nature
of the transaction
between PBS and SAPL.
The conclusion that there is
no antecedent monetary obligation owed by SAPL is further strengthened by
cl 7.1(b) of the SVC EBA, which
stated that, if concentrate was supplied by
someone other than SVC, then the terms of the SVC EBA (to the extent they were
applied to transactions between SAPL and the nominated company as if
they were parties to the SVC EBA.
the letter sent by PepsiCo to SAPL in 2015 nominating PBS as the Seller of
the concentrate
not, contrary to the submissions of the Commissioner, constitute a
direction by PepsiCo to pay for the purposes of s 128A(2)
ITAA 1936. Consistently with the terms of the SAPL Bottler, Seller and
Distributor Agreement,
the letter was notification by PepsiCo of an intention to satisfy its
obligations under the PepsiCo EBA to sell or cause to be sold
concentrate to
SAPL by causing a subsidiary, namely PBS, to make such sales. That is why the
letter stated that "the Seller of [concentrate]
will change to [PBS]".
Thereafter it was PBS, and not PepsiCo, that gave SAPL the details of its own
bank account because it was,
to use the language of PBS' letter to SAPL,
the "Seller of [concentrate] from 1 January 2016". Indeed, each
contract for the sale
of concentrate between PBS and SAPL was evidenced by SAPL
giving purchase orders to PBS, by the giving of invoices by PBS, by the
of concentrate by PBS to SAPL, by PBS giving to SAPL its bank account details,
and by the payment by SAPL of funds into
PBS' bank account in accordance
with the invoices it
objective facts evidence a manifestation of mutual assent between PBS and SAPL
to be legally bound to those essential elements
of a contract for the sale of
concentrate.
sale of the concentrate, PBS thereby derived the payments made into its
bank account by SAPL and correctly returned such
income as Australian assessable
income for income tax
Commissioner contended that PepsiCo had never pleaded the existence of contracts
of sale between PBS and SAPL, and that it should
not now be permitted to assert
their existence. He submitted that PepsiCo had always contended that sales had
taken place under the
terms of the PepsiCo EBA. He referred, for example,
to the PepsiCo amended statement of claim, which pleaded that the sales
place "in performance of the EBA". The Commissioner's point has no
merit. The pleading went on to state that PepsiCo caused PBS to
sell units of
concentrate to SAPL and that SAPL purchased units from PBS and made payments to
PBS. That all of this took place in
accordance with the EBA may not be doubted.
But that was not the end of the analysis. The PepsiCo EBA was not a
the sale of concentrate, but a contract, amongst other
the making of such sales in the future, and, if necessary, by
PepsiCo causing its subsidiary to be the Seller. The EBA was, in a
an umbrella agreement which governed the relations of the parties going
forward, and which contemplated the entry into of
further agreements, such as
the Performance Agreement, and the contracts for the sale of concentrate.
In that respect, PepsiCo correctly
conceded that sales of concentrate took place
under and in accordance with the PepsiCo EBA, which gave valuable remedies to
But that conclusion did not deny the entry into contracts
sale of concentrate as between SAPL and PBS.
monetary obligation was owed by SAPL, or payment made by SAPL, to PepsiCo for or
in respect of the concentrate. That was not what
the PepsiCo EBA provided in its terms, substance or effect. Title to the
concentrate was never with PepsiCo; title transferred
from PBS to SAPL. The
Commissioner's reliance on cll 4(a) and 4(c) of the PepsiCo EBA does not
alter the fact that, on the proper
construction of the SAPL Bottler, Seller
and Distributor Agreement, cl 4 of the PepsiCo EBA required SAPL in the
future to enter
into a contract to buy concentrate where that contract had to
include at least the terms set out in the PepsiCo EBA. That clause
imposing those obligations on SAPL – did not change the parties to the
subsequent transactions for the sale of concentrate,
namely PBS and SAPL. If
SAPL failed to pay for the concentrate supplied by PBS, it was PBS as the
contracting party that had an action
for debt under those sale transactions.
Under the PepsiCo EBA, PepsiCo only had an action for specific performance.
Commissioner's appeal grounds in relation to royalty withholding tax are
Diverted profits tax
no royalty withholding tax was payable by PepsiCo or SVC, the Commissioner
then sought to reagitate the contention that PepsiCo
and SVC were liable under
the DPT provisions of Pt IVA of the ITAA 1936. That appeal ground must
also be rejected.
Legislation
DPT provisions
anti-avoidance provisions introduced into Pt IVA of the ITAA 1936 by
Treasury Laws Amendment (Combating Multinational Tax Avoidance) Act
(Cth). Section 177H(1) in
states that the primary
objects of the DPT provisions are "(a) to ensure that the Australian tax
payable by significant global entities
properly reflects the economic substance
of the activities that those entities carry on in Australia; and (b) to
prevent those entities
from reducing the amount of Australian tax they pay by
diverting profits offshore through contrived arrangements between related
Section 177J(1)
states that
applies to a scheme, in relation to a tax benefit,
defined as "the DPT tax benefit", if a number of elements are
relevantly:
"(a) a taxpayer (a
) has obtained,
or would but for section 177F obtain, the DPT tax benefit in connection
with the scheme, in a year of income; and
(b) it would be concluded (having regard to the matters in subsection (2))
that the person, or one of the persons, who entered into
or carried out the
scheme or any part of the scheme did so for a principal purpose of, or for more
than one principal purpose that
includes a purpose of:
(i) enabling the relevant taxpayer to obtain a tax benefit, or both to obtain a
tax benefit and to reduce one or more of the relevant
liabilities to tax under a foreign law, in connection with the scheme; or
whether or not that person who entered into or carried out the scheme or any
part of the scheme is the relevant taxpayer ..."
A tax benefit can be, relevantly, a taxpayer not being liable to pay
withholding tax on an amount where the taxpayer either would
have, or might
reasonably be expected to have, been liable to pay withholding tax on the amount
if the scheme had not been entered
into or carried
Section 177CB
sets out the bases for identifying tax benefits and relevantly
"(1) This section applies to deciding, under section 177C, whether any of
the following (
tax effects
) would have occurred, or might
reasonably be expected to have occurred, if a scheme had not been entered into
or carried out:
(e) the taxpayer being liable to pay withholding tax on an amount;
(3) A decision that a tax effect might reasonably be expected to have occurred
if the scheme had not been entered into or carried
out must be based on a
postulate that is a reasonable alternative to entering into or carrying out the
(4) In determining for the purposes of subsection (3) whether a postulate
is such a reasonable alternative:
(a) have particular regard to:
(i) the substance of the scheme; and
(ii) any result or consequence for the taxpayer that is or would be achieved by
the scheme (other than a result in relation to the
operation of this Act);
(b) disregard any result in relation to the operation of this Act that would be
achieved by the postulate for any person (whether
or not a party to the scheme).
(5) Subsection (4) applies in relation to the scheme as if references in
that subsection to the operation of this Act included references
the operation of any foreign law relating to taxation:
(a) if this Part applies to the scheme because of section ... 177J; or
(b) for the purposes of determining whether this Part applies to the scheme
because of section ... 177J."
Section 177J(2)
then specifies the matters to which regard must be had in applying
s 177J(1)(b), namely:
"(a) the matters in subsection 177D(2);
(b) without limiting subsection 177D(2), the extent to which non-tax
financial benefits that are quantifiable have resulted, will
result, or may
reasonably be expected to result, from the scheme;
(c) the result, in relation to the operation of any foreign law relating to
taxation, that (but for this Part) would be achieved
by the scheme;
(d) the amount of the tax benefit mentioned in paragraph (1)(b)."
ascertaining the principal purpose of a taxpayer, s 177J(2)(a) requires
consideration of the factors listed in s 177D(2). Those
"(a) the manner in which the scheme was entered into or carried out;
(b) the form and substance of the scheme;
(c) the time at which the scheme was entered into and the length of the period
during which the scheme was carried out;
(d) the result in relation to the operation of this Act that, but for this Part,
would be achieved by the scheme;
(e) any change in the financial position of the relevant taxpayer that has
resulted, will result, or may reasonably be expected to
result, from the
(f) any change in the financial position of any person who has, or has had, any
connection (whether of a business, family or other
nature) with the relevant
taxpayer, being a change that has resulted, will result or may reasonably be
expected to result, from the
(g) any other consequence for the relevant taxpayer, or for any person referred
to in paragraph (f), of the scheme having been entered
into or carried
(h) the nature of any connection (whether of a business, family or other nature)
between the relevant taxpayer and any person referred
to in paragraph (f)."
Factors (a) and (b) were the focus of the parties' submissions.
the other aspects of
, the DPT provisions do not turn upon the
Commissioner making a
determination.
Section 177N(a) provides that, if
applies to a scheme
because of s 177J, s 177P applies to the relevant taxpayer mentioned
in s 177J. Section 177P then creates the
liability to pay the DPT at
the rate declared by Parliament, namely 40 per cent of the profit
alternative postulates and issues
identified schemes for PepsiCo and SVC are relevantly identical. Consistent with
the approach in the Full Federal Court, although
these reasons should be
understood to apply to both PepsiCo and SVC, for ease and unless otherwise
specified this section of the
reasons will be confined to the scheme alleged in
the case of PepsiCo.
Commissioner's identified scheme was, in substance, entry by PepsiCo into the
PepsiCo EBA with SAPL on terms where SAPL bought
concentrate and was licensed to
use the PepsiCo Intellectual Property but paid no royalty for the use of
the PepsiCo Intellectual
Property ("the Scheme"). There was no issue about
the identification of the
Commissioner's case was that, had the Scheme not been entered into or carried
out, there were two alternative postulates. The
first alternative postulate was
that the PepsiCo EBA would or might reasonably be expected to have expressed the
payments by SAPL
to be for all the property provided by and promises made by the
PepsiCo Group entities rather than for concentrate only. The second
alternative postulate was that the PepsiCo EBA would or might reasonably be
expected to have expressly provided for the payment by
SAPL for the concentrate
to include a royalty for the provision to SAPL of the PepsiCo Intellectual
Property. On either basis, the
Commissioner contended that a royalty would or
might reasonably be expected to have been paid by SAPL to PepsiCo or to another
on PepsiCo's behalf, or as PepsiCo directed. PepsiCo contended that
neither postulate was reasonable within the meaning of s 177CB(3).
were two issues: whether PepsiCo obtained a tax benefit in connection with the
Scheme for the purposes of s 177J(1)(a) of the
ITAA 1936, and, if so,
whether it would be concluded, having regard to the matters in s 177J(2),
that the person, or one of the persons,
who entered into or carried out the
Scheme or any part of the Scheme did so for the principal purpose, or for more
than one principal
purpose that includes a purpose, of enabling PepsiCo to
obtain a tax benefit, or both to obtain a tax benefit and to reduce PepsiCo's
liability to tax under a foreign law, in connection with the
Decisions below
primary judge held that it was reasonable to expect that, but for the Scheme,
PepsiCo would have been liable to pay royalty withholding
tax. His Honour
considered that each of the Commissioner's alternative postulates was reasonable
for a number of reasons. First,
the substance of each postulate was
the same as the substance of the PepsiCo EBA. Second, the financial and
other consequences for
PepsiCo under the postulates were comparable to those
resulting from the PepsiCo EBA. Third, given the importance of using the brands
for SAPL's business, an alternative that provided more clearly for the payment
of a royalty as consideration for the use of the PepsiCo
Intellectual Property
was reasonable. Much of this reasoning was premised on his Honour's view
that the PepsiCo EBA in fact required
the payment of a royalty.
assessing the principal purpose of PepsiCo in entering into and carrying out the
Scheme, the primary judge considered that the
"principal purpose" in s 177J(1)(b) referred to a purpose that is a
prominent, leading or main purpose and noted also
that there can be more than
one such purpose. Neither party disagreed with this. It is also unnecessary to
set out his Honour's analysis
of each of the factors under s 177D(2).
Suffice to say, some favoured PepsiCo, some favoured the Commissioner and
yet others were
characterised as "neutral". The primary judge reasoned
that, in the absence of evidence detailing why the pricing structure was adopted
by the parties in 2009, it "would not be safe to assume that tax
considerations did not have a role to play". What role they played,
and whether
they were Australian or American tax considerations, was not set out.
primary judge took into account, as required by s 177J(2)(c), the result,
in relation to the operation of any foreign law relating
to taxation, that (but
would be achieved by the Scheme. In that respect, PepsiCo
conceded that the Scheme achieved a reduction in the amount of income tax
payable in the United States by PepsiCo arising from the non‑derivation in
that country of royalty income. The primary judge
found that this supported the
Commissioner's contentions concerning purpose.
The primary judge
ultimately concluded that the terms of the PepsiCo EBA were "contrived"
because "payments that [were] ostensibly
for concentrate alone [were] in
substance for both concentrate and the licence of valuable intellectual
That conclusion could only have been reached on the assumption
that the primary judge's earlier conclusion concerning the actual substance
the PepsiCo EBA was correct. As we have seen, it was not.
majority of the Full Federal Court found that the Scheme had been entered into
and carried out for the principal purpose of obtaining
the tax benefit
identified by the primary judge, but nonetheless held that PepsiCo had
discharged its onus of demonstrating that
it had not obtained any tax benefit.
Critical to the reasoning of the majority was that the commercial and
economic substance of
the Scheme was "that the price agreed for concentrate was
for concentrate". That differed from the substance of the two alternative
postulates relied upon by the Commissioner, where part of what SAPL might
reasonably have been expected to have paid would have been
a royalty. It was
observed that notable features of these alternatives were that they eschewed
either identifying the actual price
of the concentrate or advancing an
element from which it might be inferred that the concentrate price
reflected the value of a licence
to use the PepsiCo Intellectual Property. In
those circumstances, the majority decided that the Commissioner's postulates
reasonable, in the sense required by s 177CB(3), and that PepsiCo
had discharged its onus of showing that no reasonable alternative
existed which conformed to the commercial substance of the Scheme identified by
the Commissioner.
the question of purpose, the majority considered that it did not warrant "overly
close attention"
because that part of the primary judge's reasons was not
dispositive and because the assumptions that needed to be made in order to
permit the issue to be examined were "somewhat artificial", namely that the
alternative postulates to the Scheme were reasonable
and that as a matter of
commercial and economic substance the payments made by SAPL included a royalty
for the use of the PepsiCo
Intellectual Property. Having made those assumptions,
however, the majority would have reached the same conclusion as the primary
judge and affirmatively answered the question posed by s 177J(1)(b)(i) on
the basis that PepsiCo had the purpose of obtaining a tax
benefit and also of
obtaining a reduction in its liability to tax in the United
Issues on appeal
two issues in this Court were: (1) did PepsiCo obtain a "DPT tax benefit"
in connection with a scheme within the meaning of s
177J(1)(a);
and (2) even if PepsiCo obtained a tax benefit, was the condition in
s 177J(1)(b) regarding "principal purpose" satisfied
in relation to the
scheme in the relevant year of income? The Commissioner's case fails at the
first question – PepsiCo did
not obtain a tax benefit in connection with
the Scheme.
Tax benefit
there is a "tax benefit" in connection with a scheme is to be established as an
objective fact.
inquiry directed by
requires a comparison between the scheme and an
alternative postulate.
Courts must be careful to avoid the false dichotomy between a rational
commercial decision and obtaining a tax
inquiry involves events and circumstances that did not actually happen,
"[a] decision that a tax effect might reasonably be
expected to have
occurred if the scheme had not been entered into or carried out must be based on
a postulate that is a reasonable
alternative to entering into or carrying out
the scheme".
The majority
of the Full Federal Court correctly understood that PepsiCo at all times bore
the onus of proving that it had not obtained
a tax benefit in connection with
the Scheme. As their Honours observed:
"Whilst the Commissioner identifies two postulates which he says are reasonable
alternatives to the entry into or carrying out by
PepsiCo of the scheme, the
question in this Court is not whether the postulates he suggests are
unreasonable. In review proceedings
of the present kind, it is the taxpayer
which bears the burden of proving that the assessments are excessive ... Proving
Commissioner's postulates are unreasonable does not in itself discharge
that burden."
The question, however, is what a taxpayer must do to discharge the onus, cast
Taxation Administration Act 1953
("the TAA"), of demonstrating that it did not obtain a tax benefit in
connection with the scheme. The Commissioner contended
that, to discharge that
onus, PepsiCo had to prove the existence of an alternative postulate in which it
liable to pay royalty withholding tax, and that this postulate
had to be reasonable in the sense required by s 177CB(3). It was not
sufficient, the Commissioner submitted, for PepsiCo merely to demonstrate that
the Commissioner's alternative postulates were not
reasonable.
Commissioner submitted that the majority of the Full Federal Court misidentified
the operation of the onus of proof imposed by
of the TAA in the
event that no reasonable alternative to a scheme could be identified on
the evidence before the Court. The Commissioner
submitted that the majority
of the Full Federal Court erred in finding that a taxpayer could discharge the
onus by showing that no
reasonable postulate existed.
That submission
should not be accepted, having regard to both the text of s 177CB(3) and
use of the word "must" in s 177CB(3), namely that "[a] decision that a tax
effect might reasonably be expected to have occurred
if the scheme had not been
entered into or carried out
be based on a postulate that is a
reasonable alternative to entering into or carrying out the
mandates that
there cannot be a tax benefit if there is no postulate that is a reasonable
alternative to a scheme. Put another way,
reaching a decision that a "tax
effect" in s 177C(1)(bc) might reasonably be expected to have occurred if
the scheme had not been
entered into or carried out "must" be based and only
based on a postulate or postulates that is or are "reasonable". If none
no relevant "tax effect" can be demonstrated.
Commissioner also relied upon a number of authorities, including
Commissioner of Taxation v Trail Bros Steel & Plastics Pty
Ltd v Federal Commissioner of
more recent decision in
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Guardian AIT Pty
in support of
the contention that PepsiCo had to prove the existence of an alternative
postulate in which PepsiCo was not liable
to pay royalty withholding tax, and
this postulate had to be reasonable in the sense required by s 177CB(3).
Those authorities do
not support the Commissioner's contention.
, the plurality of the Full Federal Court observed, in relation
to s 177C, that "[t]he legislation requires a comparison between the
relevant scheme and an alternative postulate" and that "[t]he alternative
postulate requires a 'prediction as to events which would
have taken place if
the relevant scheme had not been entered into or carried out and that prediction
must be sufficiently reliable
for it to be regarded as
reasonable'".
Honours stated, "[a] reasonable expectation requires more than a
possibility".
the later decision of the Full Federal Court in
, the Court put
the correct position in these
"Even if a taxpayer establishes that the Commissioner's counterfactual is
unreasonable, it will not necessarily follow that [the
taxpayer] has established
that the assessment is excessive. That is because the issue is not whether the
Commissioner puts forward
a reasonable counterfactual or not; it is a question
of the court determining objectively, and on all of the evidence, including
inferences open on the evidence, as well as the apparent logic of events,
what would have or might reasonably be expected to have
occurred if the scheme
had not been entered into."
can be accepted that a taxpayer who merely demonstrates that the postulate
relied upon by the Commissioner is unreasonable does
not demonstrate that it has
not obtained a tax benefit. But it does not follow that the only way a
taxpayer can discharge its onus
of proof is to lead evidence of another
reasonable postulate in which the taxpayer obtains no tax benefit.
The question, relevantly
posed by s 177C(1)(bc), is whether the
taxpayer would have, or might reasonably be expected to have, been liable to pay
withholding
tax if the scheme identified by the Commissioner had not been
entered into or carried out. As the Full Federal Court said in
is a question to be determined objectively on all of the evidence "including
inferences open on the evidence, as well as the
apparent logic of events",
and it is for the taxpayer to answer
that respect, it can be accepted that a taxpayer may more usually demonstrate
the absence of a tax benefit by identifying, on
the evidence, a postulate or
counterfactual which shows what it might reasonably be expected to have done,
had it not entered into
or carried out a relevant scheme. Such a postulate must
be a reasonable one, its reasonableness being measured, in accordance with
s 177CB(4), by reference to the substance of the scheme, and any result or
consequence for that taxpayer achieved by the scheme.
Nevertheless, in unusual
cases, a taxpayer may demonstrate the absence of a tax benefit by establishing
that there is no postulate
that is a reasonable alternative to entering into or
carrying out the scheme.
Substance of the Scheme
DPT provisions direct attention to the "economic substance" of
the activities in Australia of "significant global entities" and
diversion by such entities of profits offshore "through contrived arrangements
between related parties" with a consequential
reduction in Australian
correct understanding of the economic substance of the contractual arrangements
is important to an application of the DPT provisions.
It is important in
relation to the identification of a tax benefit because in determining, for
the purposes of s 177CB(3), whether
a given postulate is a reasonable
alternative, s 177CB(4) requires a consideration of the "substance of the
result or consequence for the taxpayer that is or would be achieved by
the scheme".
is also important in relation to the question of purpose because
s 177D(2)(b) requires the form and substance of a scheme to be
considered.
these appeals, the central question is the economic and commercial substance of
the Scheme, as distinct from its legal shape or
The Commissioner submitted that the economic and commercial substance of
the Scheme was that, in return for the making of each payment
from SAPL to
PBS, SAPL received two valuable benefits – the concentrate and the PepsiCo
Intellectual Property. In this respect,
the Commissioner submitted that the
allocation of the total contract price to concentrate was not the substance
of the Scheme but
was only a means and form to give it effect. As explained
above, that misconceives and oversimplifies the composite SAPL Bottler,
Seller and Distributor Agreement.
true economic and commercial substance of the composite SAPL Bottler, Seller and
Distributor Agreement was that SAPL was appointed
and accepted appointment as
the exclusive bottler, seller and distributor of the Beverages as part of a
comprehensive arrangement
involving an exchange of promises, on an arm's length
basis, which included the promise to purchase concentrate at agreed prices
were not disproportionately high, as well as the conferral of intellectual
property rights. That conferral of rights did not
take place "for nothing".
Under the SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement, other monetary and
non‑monetary consideration,
including the exchange of promises in
cl 4 of the PepsiCo EBA, flowed in exchange for the PepsiCo Intellectual
particular, SAPL agreed to build the PepsiCo brands. The PepsiCo Intellectual
Property was essential for SAPL to perform that
obligation including for the
benefit of PepsiCo.
Commissioner's alternative postulates not
is then necessary to consider the Commissioner's two identified alternative
postulates, which the Commissioner contended were
reasonable because they
exhibited the same commercial and economic substance as that which he contended
subsisted under the PepsiCo
EBA. In sum, the Commissioner submitted that under
the identified alternative postulates SAPL receives the same property (the
concentrate
and the PepsiCo Intellectual Property) and pays the same amounts as
under the PepsiCo EBA. The only difference, it was said, between
the PepsiCo EBA and the alternative postulates is a minor textual change in
the form of the clauses dealing with payment. In contrast,
it was said, the
majority below confused the economic substance of the Scheme with the form or
mechanism by which the Scheme was
implemented. It was also said that
the majority ignored the Commissioner's expert who opined that, given that
the intellectual property
was of value, it was reasonable to expect that
appropriate compensation would have been paid for it.
just explained, the problem with the Commissioner's position, and
the reason that his alternative postulates were not reasonable,
misconceived the economic and commercial substance of the Scheme.
As the majority of the Full Federal Court rightly observed,
postulate to be a reasonable alternative it "should correspond to the substance
of the scheme". It was not the case that the
payments made by SAPL to PBS were
consideration for the receipt of two benefits. Rather, as the majority
below correctly concluded,
"[t]he commercial and economic substance of the
[S]cheme was that the price agreed for concentrate was for concentrate".
the SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement, and the PepsiCo
EBA in particular, to provide for some part of that price to
be also a royalty
involves far more than a simple textual change. It involves the entry into a
fundamentally different arrangement.
facts, unique to these appeals, enabled PepsiCo to demonstrate that there were
no other reasonable alternative postulates
and therefore no relevant tax effect.
The first is that the substance of the Scheme (as properly construed and
characterised) included
that the price paid for concentrate was for concentrate
and nothing else. The second is that the Scheme was a product of arm's length
dealings between unrelated parties.
the absence of a royalty was market standard, a substantive element of the
business model which was adopted by the PepsiCo
evidence before the primary judge, largely accepted by his Honour, that
PepsiCo (and other beverage competitors) used a
"franchise‑owned bottling
operation" or "FOBO" model. This commenced in the early 1900s when the
Pepsi-Cola Company started
to sell Pepsi syrup to third party bottling companies
within the United States.
FOBO model requires joint investment by both PepsiCo and the bottler to develop,
manufacture, bottle and distribute the beverages
and to engage in marketing to
promote sales, using both "push" and "pull" strategies. Generally speaking,
the franchise bottler makes
substantial contributions to the cost of local
advertising and marketing and is responsible for "pushing" the brand in the
stores, by addressing the pricing, the display of the product, and its
location in stores, as well as trade promotions. In contrast,
the PepsiCo Group
is responsible for strategies that encourage the consumer to "pull the brand off
the shelf". This includes advertising,
sponsorship and sampling. The
foregoing permits the PepsiCo Group to carry out what it does best, such as
the innovation and development
of the "brands", which includes the trade marks,
the get-up, and the shape of the bottle, leaving the local bottler to focus
business of bottling, selling and distributing finished beverages. These
features of the FOBO model are carefully reflected in the
terms of the SAPL
Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement and, as explained above, benefit both
PepsiCo and SAPL.
the FOBO model, it could not be doubted that the PepsiCo brands were critical to
the sale of the Beverages. As the primary
judge accepted, the concentrate
and the brands "always go together".
PepsiCo got the benefit of SAPL's
knowledge of the local market and access to its distribution equipment,
capacities and network,
sales force, leadership, and relationships with traders
and regulators. In return, SAPL got access to the PepsiCo Group's innovation
marketing capabilities, and the benefit of its brand recognition in the local
market. Nonetheless, the terms of the SAPL Bottler,
Seller and Distributor
Agreement – including that SAPL could only purchase concentrate from a
nominated Seller and could not,
subject to express exclusions, bottle and
distribute any rival product – protected the PepsiCo brands and
reputation.
primary judge found, however, and this was not challenged,
that the FOBO model did not deploy a fixed template. The evidence
that there was considerable scope for variation in exclusive bottling
agreements, including pricing terms, and that the pricing terms
could have some
complexity. In that respect, the Commissioner relied upon three bottling
agreements in which a royalty was charged
by the PepsiCo Group for the right to
use the intellectual property in Vietnam, Thailand and Korea. Although
a royalty was charged
in those agreements, none of them involved the sale
of concentrate. Rather, they involved the sale of a water product and of juice.
The relevance of these alternative contracts, concerning as they do the sale of
different products, is doubtful, and cannot in any
event be the basis for any
analogy without an analysis of the full suite of contracts and legislative
arrangements in those
remains that PepsiCo used a FOBO model and the essential features of that model
were deployed here with the appointment
of SAPL under the SAPL Bottler, Seller
and Distributor Agreement as bottler, seller and distributor. That agreement,
as the primary
judge found, was a contemporary example of the
application of PepsiCo's standard way of conducting a beverage business
internationally,
namely FOBO.
on those facts, and also the logic of the events, PepsiCo showed that it was
probable that no different arrangement might reasonably
be expected to have been
entered into. PepsiCo demonstrated that any postulate in which the payments for
concentrate are seen as
made in part for the grant of the right to use the
PepsiCo Intellectual Property was not a reasonable expectation. As this Court
observed in
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Peabody
, "[a] reasonable
expectation requires more than a
possibility".
words, the only postulate here that might have exhibited the same substance and
achieved the same results as that found
in the Scheme was the SAPL Bottler,
Seller and Distributor Agreement. Where the substance of the Scheme does not
permit the conclusion
to be drawn that the price for concentrate included a
royalty, that conclusion is not reasonably open.
those reasons the majority of the Full Federal Court were correct in concluding
that PepsiCo obtained no tax benefit.
Principal purpose
the conclusions reached in relation to the lack of reasonable alternative
postulates, it is unnecessary to address the question
of principal purpose or
the notices of contention filed by PepsiCo and SVC seeking to contend that
the Full Federal Court's decision
that Pt IVA of the ITAA 1936
did not apply to the Scheme should be affirmed on the additional or alternative
ground that, even if
PepsiCo obtained a "DPT tax benefit" in connection with the
Scheme within the meaning of s 177J(1)(a), the condition in
s 177J(1)(b)
(regarding "principal purpose") was not satisfied in relation
to the Scheme in the relevant year of income. It is, however, appropriate
make the following observations.
considering whether a scheme was entered into for the principal purpose of
enabling the taxpayer to obtain the tax benefit as
required by
s 177J(1)(b)(i), the Court has regard to the matters in
ss 177J(2) and 177D(2). The parties' submissions primarily focussed
matters – (1) the manner of entry into the scheme
(s 177D(2)(a)) and (2) the form and substance of the scheme
(s 177D(2)(b)).
Manner in which the Scheme was entered into or
carried out
primary judge found that the manner in which the Scheme was entered into or
carried out supported PepsiCo's case, "but only slightly".
The Commissioner's submissions on this issue may be characterised as having
been faintly put. He submitted that the historical practices
of the PepsiCo
Group, including the FOBO model, were not relevant in seeking to identify the
principal purpose of the Scheme on the
basis that the Scheme was entered into in
2009 at a time when the royalty withholding tax provisions were in place.
The Commissioner,
in that respect, embraced the primary judge's observation
that it would not be safe to assume that tax considerations did not have
to play here.
primary judge's observation is plainly correct. It would be unthinkable to
suppose that sophisticated commercial operators did
not take tax outcomes into
consideration in negotiating the form of a transaction. As this Court observed
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Spotless Services Ltd
, "tax laws
are one part of the legal order within which commerce is fostered and
protected".
tax outcomes into account does not necessarily justify an application of
Pt IVA of the ITAA 1936, or, indeed, the imposition
of DPT. The choice
of leasing rather than buying business premises, as described by Gleeson CJ
and McHugh J in
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v
illustrates
that reality.
most significant features about the manner in which PepsiCo entered into and
carried out the Scheme are three-fold. First, the
Scheme was the product of an
arm's length negotiation between experienced and large commercial enterprises.
Second, the Scheme produced
a price payable for concentrate that was not
disproportionately high and which was paid to an Australian resident taxpayer.
the Scheme followed broadly a pre-existing and entirely commercial way of
doing business: namely the FOBO model. It follows that
a consideration
"of the way in which and method or procedure by which the particular
scheme in question was
established"
carried out does not support the conclusion that PepsiCo had a principal purpose
of enabling it to obtain a tax benefit.
Form and substance of the
Commissioner submitted that the form and substance of the Scheme did not match
and that this difference strongly supported the
Scheme having been entered into
for the principal purpose of enabling PepsiCo to obtain the tax benefit. He
contended that the substance
of the Scheme was a commercial bargain under which
SAPL was provided with the means to manufacture and sell the Beverages for which
SAPL paid amounts of money. By way of contrast, it was said, the form of the
Scheme was that SAPL paid amounts as consideration for
concentrate alone, and no
part of that payment was for the right to use the PepsiCo Intellectual Property
even though those intellectual
property rights were indispensable to SAPL's
the reasons already given, the Commissioner's argument is flawed because it
misstates the true economic and commercial substance
of the Scheme. In reality,
because the price agreed for concentrate was for concentrate and nothing else,
the form and substance
of the Scheme were the same. In other words,
the composite SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement was a
correct and accurate
record of the bargain ultimately struck by the parties. It
follows that this factor strongly favours the conclusion that the Scheme
entered into for the principal purpose of enabling PepsiCo to obtain the
tax benefit.
Other s 177D(2) matters
other matters set out in s 177D(2) were not the subject of oral argument
and assumed less importance in the written submissions.
Indeed, no submissions
were made by the Commissioner concerning the result in relation to the operation
of the ITAA 1936 that would
be achieved but for an application of
Pt IVA (s 177D(2)(d)) and neither party made any submission about the
time when the scheme
was entered into and carried out (s 177D(2)(c)).
As for the former, as PepsiCo submitted, the royalty withholding tax said to
been avoided represented about one per cent of the total payments
made by SAPL; this is a negligible sum for such large commercial
enterprises.
That fact militates strongly against the presence of the required principal
purpose. As for the issue of timing, it
was not suggested that when the
composite SAPL Bottler, Seller and Distributor Agreement was entered into
was affected by considerations
for any change in financial position of the relevant taxpayer or any person who
has or has had any connection with the relevant
taxpayer (s 177D(2)(e) and
(f)), PepsiCo submitted that the composite SAPL Bottler, Seller and
Distributor Agreement was a restated
exclusive bottling appointment which did
not result in any immediate financial change as it provided for the continuation
of an existing
business arrangement. The Commissioner submitted that under this
factor a comparison should be made with the financial position under
the alternative postulates he
However, as
these are not reasonable alternative postulates, such a comparison is of no
utility. This factor favours PepsiCo.
for the nature of any connection between the relevant taxpayer and any person
who has had a change in financial position as a
result of the scheme
(s 177D(2)(h)), the Commissioner accepted that SAPL was independent of
PepsiCo, but nonetheless submitted that
the parties did not act at arm's length
in relation to the allocation of the amounts paid by SAPL as being for
concentrate only.
The Commissioner referred to
Collis v Federal
Commissioner of
unnecessary to address that decision as the Commissioner's contention was not
supported by any finding made by the primary
judge or by the Full Federal Court
that the parties had not dealt with the issue of pricing of concentrate at arm's
length, and it
was squarely contradicted by the Commissioner not disputing that
it was an arm's length price, or a fair price, or a price that was
disproportionately high. Otherwise this factor, which highlights the arm's
length dealing which had taken place between the parties,
favours PepsiCo's
should finally be noted that the Commissioner also relied upon a finding below
that less tax was paid in the United States by
PepsiCo. The relevance of any
reduction in foreign tax is mandated by s 177J(1)(b). As has been
explained, a saving in tax in the
United States was conceded by PepsiCo,
but no actual amount of tax saved was determined below, save that the savings
before December
2017 were said to appear to be "substantial". It follows that
this factor must favour the Commissioner.
of the s 177D(2) factors, save for the last, strongly support
the conclusion that the principal purpose of PepsiCo in entering
carrying out the Scheme was not to obtain the tax benefit identified by the
Commissioner. In any event, for the reasons
already given no such tax
benefit was ever obtained.
Conclusion and orders
those reasons, each appeal is dismissed with
As in force in the relevant income
years ending 30 June 2018 and 30 June 2019.
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner of
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 333-334 [18].
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 12-13
, 14 [44]-[46], 25-26
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 47
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 48
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 48
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 49
PepsiCo EBA, cl 3(a); SVC
EBA, cl 3(a).
PepsiCo EBA, cl 4; SVC EBA,
cll 7.1, 7.2 and 7.3.
PepsiCo EBA, cl 5; SVC
EBA, cl 6.3.
PepsiCo EBA, cll 6 and 7;
SVC EBA, cl 5.
PepsiCo EBA, cl 8; SVC
EBA, cl 5.4(a).
PepsiCo EBA, cl 9; SVC
EBA, cl 5.4(b).
PepsiCo EBA, cl 11; SVC
EBA, cll 9.1 and 9.2.
SVC EBA, cl 4.
PepsiCo EBA, cl 5; SVC
EBA, cl 6.1.
PepsiCo EBA, cll 18 and
SVC EBA, cll 10 and
SVC EBA, cl 16.
PepsiCo EBA, cl 4(c).
PepsiCo EBA, cl 26(a).
SVC EBA, cl 7.1(b).
SVC EBA, cl 7.4(f) and
SVC EBA, cl 7.5.
CDA, s 1.5.
CDA, ss 1.2, 1.4, 1.16 and
CDA, s 2.1.
CDA, s 2.2.
CDA, s 3.1.
CDA, s 3.2.
CDA, s 4.5.
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 331 [7], 352 [119]-[125].
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 356 [155]-[156], 357 [159].
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 358 [168].
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 359 [169].
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 359 [173].
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 359-360 [175].
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 359-360 [174]-[176].
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 362-363 [186]-[188].
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 362 [182].
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 376-377 [244], [245] (emphasis added and
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 10
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 10
[1948] HCA 28
; (1948) 77 CLR 143.
[1958] HCA 22
; (1958) 100 CLR 392.
[2005] HCA 3
; (2005) 221 CLR 496.
[2014] HCA 51
; (2014) 254 CLR 142.
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 12
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 12
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 45
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 45-46
Archibald Howie Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Stamp Duties (NSW)
[1948] HCA 28
; (1948) 77 CLR 143 at 152.
Davis Investments Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Stamp Duties (NSW)
[1958] HCA 22
; (1958) 100 CLR 392 at 407-408.
Davis Investments Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Stamp Duties (NSW)
[1958] HCA 22
; (1958) 100 CLR 392 at 408-409.
Chief Commissioner of State
Revenue (NSW) v Dick Smith Electronics Holdings Pty Ltd
[2005] HCA 3
; (2005) 221 CLR 496
Archibald Howie Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Stamp
Duties (NSW)
[1948] HCA 28
; (1948) 77 CLR 143 at 152.
Chief Commissioner of State
Revenue (NSW) v Dick Smith Electronics Holdings Pty Ltd
[2005] HCA 3
; (2005) 221 CLR 496
, 518 [72]-[73].
Commissioner of State
Revenue (Vic) v Lend Lease Development Pty Ltd
[2014] HCA 51
; (2014) 254 CLR 142 at 159-163
Archibald Howie Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Stamp Duties (NSW)
[1948] HCA 28
; (1948) 77 CLR 143 at 151;
Investments Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Stamp Duties (NSW)
[1958] HCA 22
; (1958) 100 CLR 392
Chief Commissioner of State
Revenue (NSW) v Dick Smith Electronics Holdings Pty Ltd
[2005] HCA 3
; (2005) 221 CLR 496
Commissioner of State Revenue (Vic) v Lend Lease Development Pty
[2014] HCA 51
; (2014) 254 CLR 142 at 147
Income Tax Assessment
Amendment Act 1980
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 20 March 1980 at
(1978) 36 FLR 334.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Income Tax Assessment Amendment Bill 1980
Tax (International Agreements) Amendment Bill 1980
, Explanatory Memorandum
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 8
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 9
Commissioner of State
Revenue (Vic) v Lend Lease Development Pty Ltd
[2014] HCA 51
; (2014) 254 CLR 142 at 163
Electricity Generation
Corporation v Woodside Energy Ltd
[2014] HCA 7
; (2014) 251 CLR 640 at 656-657
Commissioner of State
Revenue (Vic) v Lend Lease Development Pty Ltd
[2014] HCA 51
; (2014) 254 CLR 142 at 155
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 37
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 37
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 10
Davis Investments Pty Ltd v
Commissioner of Stamp Duties (NSW)
[1958] HCA 22
; (1958) 100 CLR 392 at 408.
ITAA, s 128B(2B)(a).
s 128B(2B)(b)(i).
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 378 [255].
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 378 [256].
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 13
Commissioner of Taxes (SA) v
Executor Trustee and Agency Co of South Australia Ltd
[1938] HCA 69
; (1938) 63 CLR 108 at
Arthur Murray (NSW) Pty Ltd
v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1965] HCA 58
; (1965) 114 CLR 314 at 318.
Arthur Murray (NSW) Pty Ltd
v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1965] HCA 58
; (1965) 114 CLR 314 at 318.
Subject to cl 7.1(b) of
the SVC EBA.
ITAA, s 177J(1)(a).
ITAA, s 177P(1)(a).
A "scheme" means "(a) any
agreement, arrangement, understanding, promise or undertaking, whether express
or implied and whether
or not enforceable, or intended to be enforceable, by
legal proceedings; and (b) any scheme, plan, proposal, action, course of
or course of conduct": ITAA, s 177A(1).
Defined in ITAA, s 177A(1)
to include ss 177H, 177J, 177N and 177P.
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 20
, referring to
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v Guardian AIT Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 3
; (2023) 115 ATR
RCI Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
(2011) 84 ATR 785 at 842-843 [128]-[131].
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Tax Laws Amendment (Countering Tax Avoidance and
Multinational Profit Shifting) Bill 2013
, Explanatory Memorandum at 21
[1.86]-[1.87].
(1994) 181 CLR 359 at 385.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Tax Laws Amendment (Countering Tax Avoidance and
Multinational Profit Shifting) Bill 2013
, Explanatory Memorandum at 24
[1.103], [1.106].
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Tax Laws Amendment (Countering Tax Avoidance and
Multinational Profit Shifting) Bill 2013
, Explanatory Memorandum at 25
See Australia, House of
Representatives,
Treasury Laws Amendment (Combating Multinational Tax
Avoidance) Bill 2017
Diverted Profits Tax Bill 2017
, Explanatory
Memorandum at 21 [1.45]-[1.47].
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Hart
[2004] HCA 26
; (2004) 217 CLR 216 at 233
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 18
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 415 [430].
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Treasury Laws Amendment (Combating Multinational Tax
Avoidance) Bill 2017
Diverted Profits Tax Bill 2017
, Explanatory
Memorandum at 21 [1.45]-[1.46].
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 417 [443] (emphasis omitted).
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 421 [465].
PepsiCo Inc v Commissioner
of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 421 [466].
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 22
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 23
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 25
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 25-26
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 26
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 32
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 48
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 48
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 49
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 49
PepsiCo Inc v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 86
; (2024) 303 FCR 1 at 49
R v Hunt; Ex parte Sean
Investments Pty Ltd
[1979] HCA 32
; (1979) 180 CLR 322 at 329;
Port of Newcastle
Operations Pty Ltd v Glencore Coal Assets Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] HCA 39
; (2021) 274 CLR
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Tax Laws Amendment (Countering Tax Avoidance and
Multinational Profit Shifting) Bill 2013
, Explanatory Memorandum at 24
[1.106] (emphasis added).
PepsiCo Inc v
Commissioner of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 416 [438].
PepsiCo Inc v
Commissioner of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 417 [439].
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Peabody
(1994) 181 CLR 359 at 385.
PepsiCo Inc v
Commissioner of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 380 [269].
PepsiCo Inc v
Commissioner of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 417 [443] (emphasis
Blatch v Archer
[1774] EngR 2
; (1774) 1 Cowp 63 at 65
ER 969 at 970].
PepsiCo Inc v
Commissioner of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 418 [452].
PepsiCo Inc v
Commissioner of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 418 [452].
PepsiCo Inc v
Commissioner of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 418-419 [453].
PepsiCo Inc v
Commissioner of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 419 [457].
PepsiCo Inc v
Commissioner of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 420 [463].
PepsiCo Inc v
Commissioner of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 421 [464].
PepsiCo Inc v
Commissioner of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 419 [456].
Minerva Financial Group
Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2024] FCAFC 28
; (2024) 302 FCR 52 at 66
[60(4)-(6)]
PepsiCo Inc v
Commissioner of Taxation
(2023) 117 ATR 328 at 421 [466].
The Commissioner issued
amended notices of royalty withholding tax to PepsiCo and SVC on 6 March
2023. The Commissioner also issued
amended notices of diverted profits tax
assessments on 3 December 2021 to PepsiCo and on
6 March 2023 to PepsiCo and SVC.
Under Pt IVC of the
Taxation Administration Act 1953
s 14ZZO(b)(i)
, PepsiCo and
SVC had the burden of proving that each assessment was excessive or otherwise
Emphasis in original.
Mount Bruce Mining
Pty Ltd v Wright Prospecting Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 37
; (2015) 256 CLR 104
PepsiCo EBA, cll 3(a)
PepsiCo EBA,
PepsiCo EBA, cl 21.
Clause 4(b) of the
PepsiCo EBA also recorded that those prices were to be adjusted annually based
on the Australian Consumer Price
PepsiCo EBA,
CDA, s 3.1.
Defined to mean "[a]ny party
in the Territory to whom PBS may sell Concentrate, as CMSPL may agree to in
writing": CDA,
Defined to mean "[a]ll
distribution, sale, and related activities and materials concerning the
Beverages within the Territory":
CDA, s 5.7.
PepsiCo EBA, cl 6.
PepsiCo EBA, cl 7 read
with cl 11.
PepsiCo EBA, cl 7.
PepsiCo EBA,
PepsiCo EBA,
PepsiCo EBA,
PepsiCo EBA, cl 13.
PepsiCo EBA, cl 14.
PepsiCo EBA, cl 15.
PepsiCo EBA, cl 12.
PepsiCo EBA,
PepsiCo EBA,
PepsiCo EBA,
PepsiCo EBA, cl 17(a)
read with cl 5.
PepsiCo EBA,
PepsiCo EBA,
cf SVC EBA, cl 4.1,
which expressly grants an "exclusive royalty-free licence" to use the PepsiCo
Intellectual Property.
PepsiCo EBA, cl 18.
PepsiCo EBA, cl 20.
PepsiCo EBA, cl 19.
Performance Agreement,
Performance Agreement,
Performance Agreement,
Performance Agreement,
PepsiCo EBA, cl 18.
PepsiCo EBA, cl 18.
Performance Agreement,
PepsiCo EBA, cl 18.
2017 Annual Co-op
A&M Agreement, cl 2.
2017 Annual Co-op
A&M Agreement, cl 3(a) and (b).
2017 Annual Co-op
A&M Agreement, cl 3(d).
2017 Annual Co-op
A&M Agreement, cl 8 and Appendix B.
2017 Annual Co-op
A&M Agreement, cl 9.
2017 Annual Co-op
A&M Agreement, cl 9.
2017 Annual Co-op
A&M Agreement, cll 11, 12, 14.
PepsiCo EBA,
cl 24(a)(i).
PepsiCo EBA,
By ITAA 1936,
s 128B(1A): "a reference to a person to whom this section applies is a
reference to ... a person who is, or persons
at least 1 of whom is, a
s 128B(5A) read with sub-ss (2B)(a) and (2B)(b)(ii).
s 128A(2); cf
Income Tax Assessment Act 1997
[2005] HCA 3
; (2005) 221 CLR 496.
[2014] HCA 51
; (2014) 254 CLR 142.
Tarrant Enterprises Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 142
299 FCR 204 at 212-214
ABB Australia Pty Ltd v
Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[2007] FCA 1063
; (2007) 162 FCR 189 at 226
Payment Obligations in Commercial and Financial Transactions
(1983) at 11.
Commissioner of Taxes
(SA) v Executor Trustee and Agency Co of South Australia Ltd
[1938] HCA 69
; (1938) 63 CLR
108 at 155;
Arthur Murray (NSW) Pty Ltd v Federal Commissioner of Taxation
[1965] HCA 58
; (1965) 114 CLR 314 at 318.
Mount Bruce Mining
[2015] HCA 37
; (2015) 256 CLR 104 at 116
A Historical
Introduction to the Law of Obligations
(2006) at 141-145.
Australian Woollen Mills
Pty Ltd v The Commonwealth
[1954] HCA 20
; (1954) 92 CLR 424 at 456‑457.
A History of the
Common Law of Contract: The Rise of the Action of Assumpsit
424-426, 485.
Roxborough v Rothmans of
Pall Mall Australia Ltd
[2001] HCA 68
; (2001) 208 CLR 516 at 556-557
Martin v Andrews
(1856) 7 El and Bl 1 at 4
[1856] EngR 944
; [119 ER 1148 at 1149].
Redland City Council v
[2024] HCA 7
; (2024) 98 ALJR 544 at 579
; 418 ALR 1 at 44.
[1948] HCA 28
; (1948) 77 CLR 143 at
Redland City Council
[2024] HCA 7
; (2024) 98 ALJR 544 at 579
; 418 ALR 1 at 44.
See [130]-[131] above.
See [141] above.
See [128]-[148] above.
Similar clauses existed in
the SVC EBA, cll 4.1, 7.4(f), 18.2(a), 18.5(b)(ii).
Corporations Act 2001
Duties Act 1997
Duties Act 1997
s 21(1)(a).
[2005] HCA 3
; (2005) 221
CLR 496 at 519
Duties Act 2000
s 20(1)(a).
[2014] HCA 51
; (2014) 254
CLR 142 at 159‑160 [50].
The same observation may be
made about the Commissioner's reliance upon
Freedom Foods Pty Ltd v Blue
Diamond Growers
[2021] FCAFC 86
; (2021) 286 FCR 437 at 453
in the courts below; those
dicta concerned the terms of the particular licence agreement.
PepsiCo EBA,
See [131] above.
PepsiCo EBA,
See [166] above.
See [146] above.
See [133] above.
See [130]-[131] above.
See [133] above.
Realestate.com.au Pty Ltd
v Hardingham
[2022] HCA 39
; (2022) 277 CLR 115 at 132-134
; see also 147-148
[82]-[86]. See also
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union
v Personnel Contracting Pty Ltd
[2022] HCA 1
; (2022) 275 CLR 165 at 231-232
See [137] above.
ss 177H‑177R read with, among other provisions, ss 177D and
See Australia, Senate,
Treasury Laws Amendment (Combating Multinational Tax Avoidance) Bill 2017
Diverted Profits Tax Bill 2017
, Revised Explanatory Memorandum at
See ITAA 1936,
s 177A(1) definition of "DPT tax benefit".
s 177C(1)(bc) read with s 177C(1)(g).
cf ITAA 1936,
Diverted Profits Tax Act
s 177A(1) definition of "scheme".
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Peabody
(1994) 181 CLR 359 at 382.
Federal Commissioner of
Taxation v Hart
[2004] HCA 26
; (2004) 217 CLR 216 at 243
Commissioner of Taxation v
Guardian AIT Pty Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 3
; (2023) 115 ATR 316 at
[2004] HCA 26
; (2004) 217 CLR
Commissioner of Taxation v Macquarie Bank Ltd
[2013] FCAFC 13
; (2013) 210 FCR 164
Commissioner of Taxation v Spotless Services Ltd
[1996] HCA 34
; (1996) 186 CLR 404 at
s 177CB(3).
Emphasis added.
[2010] FCAFC 94
; (2010) 186 FCR 410.
(2011) 84 ATR 785.
[2023] FCAFC 3
; (2023) 115 ATR 316.
[2010] FCAFC 94
; (2010) 186 FCR 410 at 418
(emphasis omitted), quoting
Federal Commissioner of Taxation v
[2008] FCAFC 50
; (2008) 167 FCR 255 at 278
, in turn quoting
(1994) 181 CLR 359 at 385.
[2010] FCAFC 94
; (2010) 186
FCR 410 at 418
[2008] FCAFC 50
; (2008) 167 FCR 255 at 278
turn quoting
(1994) 181 CLR 359 at 385.
(2011) 84 ATR 785 at 843
(2011) 84 ATR 785 at 843
s 177CB(4)(a)(i).
s 177CB(4)(a)(ii).
See Australia, House of
Representatives,
Tax Laws Amendment (Countering Tax Avoidance and
Multinational Profit Shifting) Bill 2013
, Explanatory Memorandum
24 [1.103]; see also
[2004] HCA 26
217 CLR 216 at 245
See [128]-[148] above.
Commissioner of
Taxation v Mochkin
[2003] FCAFC 15
; (2003) 127 FCR 185 at 209
, 216 [136], [137].
Federal Commissioner
of Taxation v Orica Ltd
[1998] HCA 33
; (1998) 194 CLR 500 at 531
(1994) 181 CLR 359 at
[1996] HCA 34
; (1996) 186 CLR 404 at
[2004] HCA 26
; (2004) 217 CLR 216 at 227
[1996] HCA 34
; (1996) 186
CLR 404 at 420.
Guardian AIT
[2023] FCAFC 3
; (2023) 115 ATR 316 at 359
(1996) 33 ATR 438.
RTF format (719 KB)
Signed PDF/A format