Berglund & Ungureanu [2025] FedCFamC1F 666 (24 September 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Berglund & Ungureanu
FedCFamC1F 666
File number(s):
PAC 400 of 2025
Judgment of:
RIETHMULLER J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
- PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE –
– Proceedings pending
in the Supreme Court against husband and wife for
recovery of misappropriated funds prior to commencement of family law
proceedings
– Supreme Court injunction restraining husband from dealing
with property – Dispute between wife and creditors in property
proceedings – Parties consenting to transfer – Application granted
Legislation:
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
Family Law Act 1975
Real Property Act 1900
Cases cited:
B Pty Ltd v Ungureanu
[2025] NSWSC
Hickey & Hickey and the Attorney General for the Commonwealth of
Australia (Intervener)
(2003) FLC 93-147
[2003] FamCA 395
Valceski v Valceski
(2007) 70 NSWLR 36
[2007] NSWSC 440
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Sydney Metropolitan Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
The Respondent appeared in person.
Counsel for the Intervener:
Solicitor for the Intervener:
Bartier Perry Lawyers
PAC 400 of 2025
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
MS BERGLUND
MR UNGUREANU
RIETHMULLER J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
the proceedings be
transferred to Supreme Court of New South Wales, Sydney Registry.
costs of the application in a case to transfer the proceedings be
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
RIETHMULLER J
intervener, B Pty Ltd, filed an application in the proceedings, seeking orders
pursuant to the
the proceedings to be transferred to the Supreme Court of NSW to be heard with
proceedings between the parties (and an
additional party) that are pending in
the Supreme Court (file number ...).
proceedings pending in this court are the wife’s application for property
settlement orders pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
The first of the orders sought by the wife is an order to sever the joint
tenancies between the respondent husband and applicant
wife in three real
properties. The second and third orders sought are in the following terms:
in the event of the sale of any or all of the above properties as the result of
proceedings commenced by way of Statement of
Claim filed 14 October 2024 by [B
Pty Ltd] as plaintiff in proceedings case number [...] then the nett proceeds
arising from the
sale of one or all of the above mentioned properties shall
become as to the total of the said nett proceeds the sole property of
applicant wife to the exclusion of so much of the said proceeds as may be
allocated to the respondent husband pursuant to the
provisions of
Family Law Act 1975
particularly pursuant to
of the Act the respondent husband shall
transfer to the applicant wife an amount equal to 50% of any funds received by
result of the sale of the above mentioned properties in satisfaction
of the wife’s entitlement to an adjustment of property
interests as
between herself and the husband taking into account in the course of these
proceedings those matters which are thereto
and favour the applicant
wife also seeks orders that the parties otherwise retain the property in their
respective possession (Order 5), the husband pay
her costs (Order 4), and that
the husband indemnify her against any costs order in the Supreme Court
proceedings (Order 6).
Supreme Court proceedings were brought by the intervener to recover over $3m
taken by the husband from the intervener, when carrying
out his employment with
C Pty Ltd (“C Pty Ltd”) who had been engaged to provide the
intervener with accounting services.
In early 2025, the intervener obtained
summary judgment against the husband for around $3,324,460.00 together with
interest and costs:
B Pty Ltd v Ungureanu
[2025] NSWSC .... In mid-2024
Parker J made freezing orders against the husband preventing him from taking
steps to “in any
way dispose of, deal with or diminish the value of [his]
assets in Australia” up to a value of just over $3.077m.
are a number of outstanding issues to be determined in the Supreme Court
proceedings. The intervener claims to have an equitable
proprietary interest in
the husband’s real properties and also seeks to recover against the wife
and C Pty Ltd. C Pty Ltd has
cross claimed seeking indemnities from the husband
and wife. The substantive claim against the wife is that a portion of the
misappropriated
monies was applied for her benefit. However, the intervener does
not claim a proprietary interest in the wife’s real property,
because it is not alleged that the wife was a party to the misappropriation of
monies by the husband.
the hearing before me, the wife provided interlocutory orders that she sought
with the husband’s consent (although he did
not appear) to which the
intervener also consented. Those orders provided that:
(1) The joint tenancies of the husband and wife in the three properties be
(2) The Husband’s superannuation be split to provide almost all of the
husband’s superannuation to the wife; and
(3) The Application be transferred to the Supreme Court for final determination.
wife’s counsel was unable to explain why she could not effect a severance
of the joint tenancies by notice as provided for
Real Property Act 1900
(NSW), which provides:
(1) Registration of a transfer by a joint tenant of the joint tenant’s
interest in the land that is the subject of a joint
tenancy to himself or
herself severs the joint tenancy.
(2) If a joint tenancy is proposed to be severed by unilateral action by one
joint tenant, the Registrar-General may require the
person who proposes to sever
the joint tenancy to provide the Registrar-General, before recording the
instrument that severs the
joint tenancy, with—
(a) the names and addresses of the joint tenants or, if the addresses are
unknown, evidence of the efforts made by the person to
locate the addresses of
the joint tenants, and
(b) a statement that the person is not aware of any limitation or restriction
on his or her capacity or entitlement to sever the
joint tenancy (arising, for
example, from the capacity in which the person holds an estate or interest in
the land concerned or from
a private agreement).
(3) The Registrar-General may require the person who proposes to sever a joint
tenancy to provide additional information concerning—
(a) other persons who may be affected by the severance of the joint tenancy,
(b) any limitation or restriction on the capacity or entitlement of the person
to sever the joint tenancy, and
(c) any other matter that the Registrar-General considers appropriate.
(4) The Registrar-General may require any information provided for the purposes
of this section to be provided by statutory declaration
or verified in a way
approved by the Registrar-General.
(5) The Registrar-General must give notice of the lodgment of a dealing for
registration or recording that may sever a joint tenancy
to all joint tenants in
the joint tenancy (other than any joint tenant who executed the dealing, or on
whose behalf the dealing was
Section 12A
(2) and (3) applies to and
with respect to a notice given under this section.
(6) Despite subsection (5), the Registrar-General is not required to give notice
of the lodgment of a dealing for registration or
recording that may sever a
joint tenancy to a joint tenant in any of the following circumstances—
(a) if the proposed severance is to arise from the recording of a court order
made in proceedings to which the joint tenant is a
(b) if the proposed severance is to arise from the registration of a transfer
pursuant to a writ in respect of an interest of any
of the joint tenants,
(c) if the dealing concerned is witnessed by the joint tenant and the dealing
indicates that the joint tenancy is to be severed,
(d) if the dealing is accompanied by a written acknowledgment by the joint
tenant that he or she has received legal advice as to
the effects of the
severance of the joint tenancy,
(e) if the proposed severance is to arise out of registration following an
application under
section 90.
made submissions to the effect that his solicitor had told him of difficulties
in dealing with PEXA, who it was alleged had
demanded a court order. No evidence
of the interactions with PEXA was placed before the court. Counsel was unable to
articulate what
reason or explanation was given by PEXA. I am not persuaded that
the wife’s difficulties with PEXA provide a basis for making
the order, at
least without evidence or explanation of the reason for the difficulty.
husband’s consent to an order severing the joint tenancies is a dealing
with the real property interests which is a prima
facie breach of the orders of
Parker J in mid-2025.
wife deposes to a desire to transfer her share of the real property to the
children, which would potentially place it beyond the
reach of the intervener
and C Pty Ltd. If the severance of the tenancies is done by Notice pursuant to
Real Property Act
and it has any impact upon the rights of the intervener or
the cross-claimant in the Supreme Court, it can be subject to challenge
potential fraud on creditors, which may not be open if the severance is by way
of a court order. If the severance is to be ordered
by consent, it is
appropriate to make the orders in the Supreme Court where all of the potentially
affected parties are parties to
the proceedings and where the existing freezing
order can be altered if need be.
this stage of the proceedings, I therefore decline to make the order severing
the joint tenancies.
husband and wife seek an order splitting almost the entirety of the
husband’s superannuation to the wife (approximately
$68,000). It is well
accepted that power to make property settlement orders pursuant to
Family Law Act
may only be exercised once see
Hickey & Hickey and the
Attorney General for the Commonwealth of Australia (Intervener)
[2003] FamCA 314
. This does not prevent the making of interim or partial property
settlement orders dealing with property of the parties, however,
as the final
order must be just and equitable, any interim or partial settlement order
potentially limits the options open to the
court when making the final
determination. In this case there is a real possibility that there will only be
a very modest pool of
assets other than superannuation. If the wife has already
received the husband’s superannuation, this may weigh against her
receiving a larger share of the other assets (if any) available for settlement.
made submissions, unsupported by any affidavit evidence, that the real purpose
of the superannuation splitting order was to
enable the wife to then seek
permission to withdraw some of the superannuation under the hardship provisions.
Counsel was unable
to identify the provisions, any guidelines, or any maximum
amount that may be withdrawn. There was no evidence to support these
propositions.
It was then put from the bar table that there are school fees to
be paid, however there was no evidence in the material about this
am not persuaded to make interim or partial property settlement orders by way of
the superannuation split sought on the material
currently before the court.
provides power for the
court to cross-vest the proceedings to the Supreme Court of NSW. The section
provides that:
(a) a proceeding (in this subsection referred to as the relevant proceeding) is
pending in the Federal Court or the Federal Circuit
and Family Court of
Australia (Division 1) (in this subsection referred to as the first court);
(b) it appears to the first court that:
(i) the relevant proceeding arises out of, or is related to, another proceeding
pending in the Supreme Court of a State or Territory
and it is more appropriate
that the relevant proceeding be determined by that Supreme Court;
(ii) having regard to:
(A) whether, in the
opinion of the first court, the relevant proceeding or a substantial part of it
would have been incapable of being
instituted in that court, apart from this Act
and any law of the Australian Capital Territory or the Northern Territory
to cross‑vesting of jurisdiction; and
(B) whether, in the opinion of the first court, the relevant proceeding or a
substantial part of it would have been capable of being
instituted in the
Supreme Court of a State or Territory, apart from this Act and any law of a
State or Territory relating to cross‑vesting
of jurisdiction; and
(C) the extent to which, in the opinion of the first court, the matters for
determination in the relevant proceeding are matters
arising under or involving
questions as to the application, interpretation or validity of a law of the
State or Territory referred
to in sub‑subparagraph (B) and not within the
Capital Territory or the Northern Territory relating to
cross‑vesting of jurisdiction; and
(D) the interests of
it is more appropriate that the
relevant proceeding be determined by that Supreme Court;
(iii) it is otherwise in the interests of justice that the relevant proceeding
be determined by the Supreme Court of a State or Territory;
the first court shall transfer the relevant proceeding to that Supreme Court.
law is well summarised in
Valceski v Valceski
[2007] NSWSC 440
(2007) 70 NSWLR 36.
, equity proceedings between the spouses and extended family
members were transferred to the Family Court to be determined with the
settlement proceeds as they formed part of the same justiciable controversy. The
equity proceedings were a smaller part
of the larger controversy between the
husband and wife and commenced after the property settlement proceedings.
the Supreme Court proceedings and the property settlement proceedings in the
present matter will, in large part, focus upon the
tracing of funds that have
resulted in the husband and wife’s interests in the real properties. The
issues are summarised by
the wife in her affidavit where she says:
Intervenor further asserted that the Tainted Funds were applied by [Mr
Ungureanu] in acquiring and/ or improving the NSW Properties
being three parcels
of real estate particulars of which are set out hereunder
[D Street, Suburb E], NSW [...] being the land comprised in Folio
Identifier [...].
[F1 Street, Suburb G], NSW [...] being the land comprised in Folio
Identifier [...].
[F2 Street, Suburb G], NSW [...] being the land comprised in Folio
Identifier [...]
Intervenor asserts that the NSW Properties are substantially properties in
respect of which the Intervenor is entitled to a Declaration
that they have been
acquired by monies misappropriated by [Mr Ungureanu] when acting as the
Intervenor’s accountant.
Funds used to acquire the NSW Properties
do not concede that the three parcels of real estate have been acquired wholly
from the Tainted Funds but rather from the following:
Savings accrued by [Mr Ungureanu] and I throughout the earlier years
of our marriage.
From gift monies we received for our wedding in [Country H] and our
welcome to Australia from [Country H] as a married couple.
Monies generated by [Mr Ungureanu] from his employment which were
wholly legitimate and untainted by fraud until he commenced employment
Intervenor as an Accountant.
From the sale of a vacant block of land in [J Street, Suburb E] which
[Mr Ungureanu] and I purchased from our own savings. On or
2021 [Mr Ungureanu] and I received instalments of $369,258.60 and $52,435.47,
respectively.
From a gift in the sum $300,000 given to us by my mother-in-law, as
evidenced by Annexure “A” above.
From income received by myself from artefacts made by me which
I sold to friends and others with whom I came into contact.
From monies received by me as a result of my status as the mother of
three children which made it possible for me to contribute
to the payment of
loans secured by mortgage over the NSW Properties.
From our own resources.
Loans advanced to [Mr Ungureanu] and I by National Australia Bank
state that income received by me from all sources was applied by me (other than
income spent on living expenses) in order to make
mortgage payments to the NAB,
and avoid our defaulting in making the monthly mortgage payments.
issues between the spouses and the other parties will require a determination of
the proprietary interests of the husband, and
in particular whether those
interests differ from the registered titles held by the husband. To the extent
that the intervener establishes
equitable proprietary interests, that part of
the husband’s property will no longer be property of the parties for the
Family Law Act
the existing judgment against the husband is for a sum greater than his half
interest in the net equity in the three real properties,
there is likely to be a
dispute between the intervener and C Pty Ltd on the one hand and the wife on the
other as to whether the
wife is able to obtain orders settling part of the
husband’s property upon her pursuant to
, even though this would
effectively give her priority over the creditors. The court has a discretion to
make such orders provided
consideration is given to the interests of the
creditors: see
Family Law Act
. The circumstances leading to
the debt and any findings as to the benefits received by the spouses as a result
of the misappropriation
of funds will be important considerations when
exercising the discretion pursuant to
Family Law Act
. As a result,
it is likely that the intervener and C Pty Ltd will participate in the property
settlement proceedings if any judgment
against the wife is not greater than her
potential property settlement entitlements pursuant to
identified in
at paragraphs [52] – [59], the matters
relevant to the exercise of the discretion pursuant to
are far broader than
the issues that will arise between the parties in the Supreme Court proceedings.
requires consideration of the parties financial and non-financial
contributions as identified in
, and the list of other factors set out in
However, in this case these other issues do not appear to be the
subject of any real dispute: the wife has been a homemaker and had
children, she was not able to work whilst caring of the children and will
continue as the primary carer of the children into
the future. The child support
issues are determined under the
Child Support (Assessment) Act 1989
and are the subject of an administrative assessment. In short, whilst the
property settlement proceedings require consideration
of numerous additional
issues, it appears that on a practical level the issues that do not directly
involve the other parties are
unlikely to consume any significant trial time.
turn to addressing the matters listed in
(Cross-vesting) Act
(1) The property settlement proceedings are pending the Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 1).
(2) The property settlement proceedings are related to the proceedings in the
Supreme Court as those proceedings will determine the
real property interests of
the husband, the debts of the parties to the intervener and C Pty Ltd and will
traverse many of the facts
and circumstances likely to be significant when
considering whether property settlement orders should be made that may reduce
amount the other parties can recover from the husband.
(3) The property settlement proceedings were able to be instituted in this court
without reliance on the
. The property
settlement proceedings could not have been instituted in the Supreme Court apart
from reliance on the
. The matters
pending in the Supreme Court were not within the original jurisdiction of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 1) at the time they were
(4) The interests of justice require consideration of the various matters
discussed above. The parties do not suggest that there
are any geographical
issues, not that there would be relevant differences in the time until hearing
between the two courts. On a
practical level the property settlement issues must
be determined after the civil claim (whether in the same judgment or separate
proceedings). The factual basis of the two disputes has a significant overlap.
Unlike the facts in
Valceski’s Case
, the parties seek to have both
disputes heard together. The alternative is for the family law dispute to await
determination of the
Supreme Court proceedings. However, it is likely that the
other parties will have to participate in the family law proceedings. I
make orders uplifting the Supreme Court dispute to this court (even if that were
an appropriate course), and thus the only
court that is able to hear the whole
of the controversy is the Supreme Court, if orders to cross-vest the proceedings
in this court
to the Supreme Court are made. The matrimonial dispute did not
trigger the Supreme Court proceedings, nor do issues in the Supreme
Court arise
from dealings with the extended family. In this sense the controversy does not
arise as part of the broader matrimonial
dispute. Rather, the likely contests
between the wife and the other parties draw those parties into the matrimonial
dispute. Importantly,
there does not appear to be any opposition by the husband
to the wife’s claim in the family law dispute – supporting
argument that the family law dispute will be largely a dispute between the wife
and the other parties. The interests of justice
favour the property settlement
proceedings being determined by the Supreme Court together with the claims of
the other parties to
save the intervener and C Pty Ltd from having to
participate in two proceedings in separate courts.
the circumstances of this case, it is appropriate to transfer the property
settlement proceedings to the Supreme Court.
I certify that the preceding twenty-two (22)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Riethmuller
Dated: 24 September 2025
RTF format (416 KB)
Signed PDF/A format