White Motor Corporation (Australia) Pty Ltd v McConnell Seats Australia Pty Ltd [2018] ADO 1 (18 January 2018)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE
REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re: Examination
of design number 201314797 (registration number 352779) in the name of McConnell
Seats Australia Pty Ltd and request
for examination by White Motor Corporation
(Australia) Pty Ltd
Debrett Lyons
REPRESENTATION:
Fidel Dela Paz of protectmyidea.com.au
Byron Bowman of Griffith Hack
Examination requested under
subsection 63(1)
other than the owner or the Registrar; Design new and distinctive; Design to be
Seats Australia Pty Ltd (‘McConnell’) is the current owner of design
number 201314797 (‘the Design’)
filed under the
Designs Act
(Cth) (‘the Act’) on 23 September 2013 (‘the Priority
Date’), registered on 9 December 2013, allocated registration
352779, and entered on to the Register of Designs.
Design product is described as a “Seat for a passenger vehicle”,
representations of which taken from the Register
of Designs are shown
3 July 2015 McConnell made a request for examination of the Design. The Design
was duly examined by this Office and on 10 August
2015 the Design was certified
and advertised as such in the
Australian Official Journal of Designs
13 August 2015.
30 September 2015 a request for examination of the Design
(‘re-examination’) was made by a third party, White Motor
Corporation (Australia) Pty Ltd (‘White’). The re-examination
request was supported by a Declaration of Neil Bamford,
CEO of White, made on 29
September 2015 (‘Bamford’) together with other documents referred to
later (‘the
material’).
was then provided with a copy of the
material and invited to pay the
owner’s portion of the examination fee in accordance with reg. 11.05 of
Designs Regulations 2004
(Cth). Upon payment of this fee the Design
was re-examined and 10 February 2016 a ‘Notification of Intention to
was sent to both parties. The notification indicated that the
examiner was satisfied that no ground for revocation had been made
re-examination.
10 March 2016 White asked to be heard on the matter of the re-examination. On
19 April 2016 a ‘Direction Notice” was
sent to the parties wherein
both were given an opportunity to file evidence in support, but only the
McDonnell opted to do so. That
evidence comprised the Statutory Declaration of
James Lowe, General Manager of McConnell, made on 16 June 2016
was given the opportunity to file evidence in answer no later than 6 September
2016 but did not do so. At that point the Office
considered the evidence stages
complete and gave until 10 October 2016 for the parties to indicate how they
wished to be heard.
McConnell advised the Office that they would attend a
hearing if White asked to be heard in person. White had no reaction. A hearing
date was set down for 18 October 2017 and I was appointed to take the hearing in
my capacity as a delegate of the Registrar of Designs.
the reasons which follow the hearing was vacated and the parties notified that
this decision would follow based on the evidence
Legal framework
65(1) requires the Registrar to consider whether there is a ground for revoking
registration of the Design.
request for re-examination was accompanied a letter from its representatives
dated 29 September 2015 stating that there
was evidence of prior use and prior
publication of the Design.
65(2)(a) provides that a ground for revocation will exist if the Design is found
to not be a ‘registrable design’.
Section 15(1) provides the
relevant definition:
Registrable designs
(1) A design is a
registrable
if the design is new and distinctive when compared with the
prior art base for the design as it existed before the priority date of
prior art base
for a design
designated design
) consists of:
(a) designs publicly used in Australia; and
(b) designs published in a document within or outside Australia;
(c) designs in relation to which each of the following criteria is
(i) the design is disclosed in a design application;
(ii) the design has an earlier priority date than the designated
(iii) the first time documents disclosing the design are made available
for public inspection under section 60 is on or after the
priority date of the designated design.
16 of the Act provides:
Designs that are identical or
substantially similar in overall impression
(1) A design is new unless it is identical to a design that forms part
of the prior art base for the design.
(2) A design is distinctive unless it is substantially similar in
overall impression to a design that forms part of the prior art
base for the
design (see section 19).
Determination
of whether designs are ‘substantially similar in overall impression’
requires a weighing of the factors
in section 19, the relevant parts of which
are reproduced below:
Factors to be considered in assessing
substantial similarity in overall impression
(1) If a person is required by this Act to decide whether a design is
substantially similar in overall impression to another design,
the person making
the decision is to give more weight to similarities between the designs than to
differences between them.
(2) The person must also:
(a) have regard
to the state of development of the prior art base for the design; and
design application in which the design was disclosed included a statement (a
statement of newness and distinctiveness
) identifying particular
visual features of the design as new and distinctive:
particular regard to those features; and
(ii) if those
features relate to only part of the design--have particular regard to that part
of the design, but in the context of
the design as a whole; and
(c) if only
part of the design is substantially similar to another design, have regard to
the amount, quality and importance of that
part in the context of the design as
a whole; and
(d) have regard
to the freedom of the creator of the design to innovate.
(3) If the design application in which the design was disclosed did not include
a statement of newness and distinctiveness in respect
of particular visual
features of the design, the person must have regard to the appearance of the
design as a whole.
(4) In applying subsections (1), (2) and (3), the person must apply the
standard of a person who is familiar with the product to
which the design
relates, or products similar to the product to which the design relates (the
standard of the informed user
Evidence and Findings
22 August 2017 McConnell’s representatives wrote to the Office submitting
that since White “has not filed evidence
against the decision of the
Designs Office to Certify ...the oral hearing set for 18 October 2017 has not
[sic] reasonable prospects
of overturning the decision to certify the
registration.” On 19 September 2017 McConnell’s representatives
then requested
that the hearing be “dismissed”.
wrote to White’s representatives asking about their intentions with
respect to the hearing having regard to the fact that
there had been nothing
more from them since their request to be heard following the 10 February 2016
‘Notification of Intention
to Certify’. In particular, White had
not filed evidence in support and had not responded to McConnell’s
evidence in
the absence of a satisfactory reply I advised both sides that it was my
intention to vacate the hearing date and issue a decision
on the written record
having formed the opinion that an oral hearing would not advance my
understanding of the matter and cancellation
of the hearing would not prejudice
the position of either party.
submissions were made either in connection with that expression of intention,
nor in relation to the examiner’s reasoning
in the ‘Notification of
Intention to Certify’.
stated, the Design product is described as a “Seat for a passenger
vehicle”. Lowe states that McConnell designs and
; whether it makes those seats
itself is not stated. Bamford states that White is an importer, distributor and
retailer of ‘HIGER’
brand buses which are made in China
(‘Higer buses’).
Bamford states that a third party contractor in China makes seats to order for
Higer buses.
Bamford declares that
in 2011 that Chinese seat maker was instructed to produce bus seats compliant
with Australian laws governing
such matters and that by 2012 those seats had
made their way to Australia where they were publicly
Bamford states that the
Design was not new or distinctive at its priority date, 23 September 2013,
having regard to the design features
of those seats made to order in China.
Bamford further states that the section 69 material shows other bus seat designs
available in Australian before the priority date of the Design which
provide a ground for revocation of the Design.
re-examination of the Design, the examiner wrote that “although the
designs submitted [with the section 69 evidence] do form
part of the prior art
base, they are neither identical nor substantially similar in overall impression
to the [Design].”
task is to make my own assessment of those issues, taking into account as
necessary the evidence in support, being the later Lowe
declaration which was
not available to the examiner. I note in that regard that Lowe essentially
references the Australian laws
with which bus seats must comply, information
which guides me with respect to that part of the Act which requires
consideration of
the Design creator’s freedom to
some preliminary findings. Bamford and some other of the section 69 material
are directed towards Innovation Patent no. 2015100568,
filed contemporaneously
with the application for the Design. I note that there is no claim that
Innovation Patent no. 2015100568
itself prior publishes the Design and I make
the finding that it does not.
and with particular regard to that finding, there is nothing else in the section
69 evidence which might suggest that the
Design is not new and so the question
reduces to whether or not the Design is ‘distinctive’ as that term
is understood
in the Act.
although there is no direct evidence of the actual Chinese made bus seats which
entered Australia in 2012 under order by
White, the section 69 material taken as
a whole carries with it a sufficient inference that the imported seats
corresponded with
the technical drawings therefor produced by the Chinese maker
and shown in evidence. I am thus satisfied to count that material
the prior art base.
and for the purposes of section 19 of the Act concerned with the factors to be
considered in assessing substantial similarity
in overall impression, I am in
agreement with the examiner that the standard which I should apply is the
standard of an informed
someone that deals with the Design product in the course of their daily work,
such as a vehicle registration inspector or transport
safety regulator.
the section 69 evidence is to some extent evidence of the state of development
of the prior art base for the purposes of
section 19(2)(a). In particular,
Bamford characterizes the Design product as “a 2/3 seat design ... having
two individual
back support sections ... separated by a bridging
It is clear from
the evidence as a whole that the reference to “2/3” is to a seating
capacity for 2 or 3 persons and
that the “bridging section” provides
the seating location for the possible third person, necessarily being a small
White catalogues for sale its so-called “Phoenix” and
“Apollo” 2/3 seats. Further, the section 69 evidence
shows the 2/3
seat design of a third party sold under the name “Traveller”.
to the merits of the matter, the view expressed by Bamford is that “the
shape and configuration of [the Design] is not
new and distinctive at its
priority date” having regard to the section 69 material.
am mindful of the direction given in section 19(1) that in deciding whether the
Design is substantially similar in overall impression
to anything in the prior
art base, I must give more weight to similarities between the compared designs
than to differences between
them. Although there is no direct evidence of the
matter I can reasonably infer that the design of a multiple occupancy bus seat
of this kind is subject to certain physical constraints. Lowe provides evidence
that such seats are also subject to detailed legal
requirements
which I read as
constraining in some ways the design of such seats.
have also borne in mind that the Design carries a Statement of Newness and
Distinctiveness which is cast in general terms in so
far as it refers to
features of shape and configuration of the Design as a whole and does not
highlight particular aspects of the
Design as those which are new and
distinctive.
my assessment this decision is not improved or made more intelligible by the
inclusion of representations of the prior art seats
shown in the section 69
evidence. It is enough to say only that I have understood and am in agreement
with the assessment made after
re-examination that when comparing the
similarities and the differences in each case, there are discernable differences
and configuration between the Design and the prior art in terms of the
seat headrests, squabs, and the bridging sections (or third
seats). Applying
the standard of the informed user to the section 19 criteria (outlined above) I
find those differences outweigh
the similarities which the designs share.
follows that I find the Design to be both new and distinctive.
form of my decision is mandated by section 65 of the Act and after consideration
of all of the facts I find no ground for revocation
of the Design.
Accordingly,
I direct that the Design be certified and I order that a Certificate of
Examination be issued.
Debrett Lyons
Hearing Officer
Trade Marks and Designs Group
And of the invention according
to Innovation Patent no. 2015100568, not the subject of this
In particular, the
Vehicle Standard (Australian Design Rule 58/00 – Requirements for
Omnibuses Designed for Hire and Reward) 2006.
RTF format (1.36 MB)
Signed PDF/A format