Partington & Partington [2025] FedCFamC1A 208 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1) APPELLATE
Partington & Partington
FedCFamC1A 208
Appeal from:
Partington & Partington
[2025] FedCFamC2F 1226
Appeal number
NAA 411 of 2025
File number
SYC 1179 of 2024
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
APPLICATION IN AN APPEAL –
Provision of transcript –
Where the appellant seeks an order that the Court procure the transcripts of
several hearing dates
at its own expense – Where the transcript for the
date of the appealed orders has already been made available to the appellant
– Where appellant argues that earlier transcripts are necessary to
demonstrate apprehended bias on the part of the primary
judge – Where the
appeal concerns an event which has already passed – Where there are
several issues that are currently
reserved to the primary judge – Held
there is no utility in the Court providing the transcripts at its own expense
Application dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules
(Cth) rr 13.19, 13.20, 13.21 and 13.22
Cases cited:
Naparus & Frankham
[2018] FamCAFC
Naparus & Frankham (No. 2)
[2020] FamCAFC 238
Pitman & Hynes (No. 3)
[2021] FamCAFC 82
Reece & Reece
[2011] FamCAFC 24
Sampson & Hartnett (Provision of Transcript)
(2013) FLC 93-542
[2010] FamCAFC 220
Smits & Jansen
[2025] FedCFamC1A 164
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
The Appellant:
Litigant in person
Solicitor Advocate for the Respondent:
Ms Statham-James
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Sexton Family Law
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
JLM Family Lawyers Pty Ltd
SYC 1179 of 2024
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
DIVISION 1 APPELLATE JURISDICTION
MR PARTINGTON
MS PARTINGTON
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Application in an Appeal filed 3 September 2025 is dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Partington & Partington
has been approved pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
CHRISTIE J:
27 August 2025 a judge of the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Division 2) made an interim parenting order and some
case management
directions.
the primary judge made orders and delivered reasons, the appellant foreshadowed,
and then subsequently filed, an application
that the primary judge recuse
himself. That application is yet to be determined.
29 August 2025 the appellant filed a Notice of Appeal. While the Notice of
Appeal seeks leave to appeal, the appellant is entitled
to appeal an
interlocutory parenting order as of right.
3 September 2025 the appellant filed an Application in an Appeal. The
Application in an Appeal seeks the following orders:
(1) Court to urgently provide transcripts of 28 Feb, May final hearing, and 27
Aug 2025 (judgment reasons), directly relevant to
the Appeal; Respondent is
impecunious; alternatively permit party procured transcripts with Registry
audio/visual, transcripts shared,
costs shared, costs reserved.
(2) ICL to urgently ascertain [X (“the child’s)] views on Communion
attendance and report by 5 Sept 2025 for the purposes
of the pending Appeal.
(3) Balance of 27 Aug 2025 Application in a Case to be urgently listed before
another Judge, given recusal is not listed until November;
reserved judgment
from May 2025 final hearing not to be delivered pending recusal, stay, and
appeal; matter to be reallocated if
recusal/appeal succeeds.
Minute note: Further particulars, including proposed interim event orders
regarding [X’s] First Holy Communion should the appeal
be successful,
appear in the Urgent Further Minutes filed with the cover letter of 2 Sept 2025.
only part of that Application in an Appeal which seeks orders in an appeal is
proposed order 1. The affidavit of 3 September 2025
filed in support of the
Application in an Appeal says:
8. The transcripts necessary for this appeal and related applications
directions/compliance hearing on 28 February 2025;
final hearing days conducted in May 2025; and
directions hearing on 27 August 2025, which contains His Honour's oral
oral reasons constitute " reasons for judgment'' within the meaning of s
94AAA(9) of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) and must be made available to
the parties.
my circumstances —as evidenced by my Health Care Card' (
– I cannot afford transcript fees. I respectfully request that the Court
provide the transcripts without charge, in light
of my financial hardship and
the urgency of these proceedings. I also ask that the Court direct VIQ Solutions
to urgently prepare
the transcripts listed above, so that this appeal may be
properly conducted without further delay.
transcript of 27 August 2025 will also confirm the precise wording of His
Honour's refusal to abridge time and refusal to consider
the 26 August 2025
affidavit and submissions. I will tile a supplementary affidavit annexing the
relevant passages once the transcript
has been received.
(Emphasis in original)
Reasons for Judgment dated 27 August 2025 are available. The transcript of
proceedings before the primary judge on 27 August 2025
are also available and
have been made available to the appellant.
appellant submitted that earlier transcripts were necessary because the primary
judge had heard the evidence in the parties’
final proceedings in May 2025
and in reasons for judgment in the interim matters said the following at
The timing of this application has given me advantages often not available in
interim hearings. I have received a much greater volume
of evidence than is
otherwise available at an interim stage. I have heard some of that evidence
tested by cross-examination. I have
heard the final submissions of each party. I
am in the midst of reviewing all of that evidence, and the submissions made, and
my judgement. Indeed, the matter might be considered to be all but
concluded save for the father’s application to reopen his
case. Despite
all of those advantages, noting that I am yet to determine the father’s
application to reopen his case and noting
the extraordinary volume of further
material the father wishes the court to consider, I have maintained a degree of
circumspection
application.
accept that the primary judge had regard to that which was before him on the
final application when determining the interlocutory
application.
Essentially,
the appellant submits that the earlier transcripts are necessary if he is to
establish that the primary judge’s
order on 27 August 2025 is impugned by
apprehended bias.
appellant submitted that the transcript of the hearing in May 2025 would
demonstrate that he was “cut off” by the
primary judge,
“gaslit” by the primary judge and told to “get a real
job”. Further, he said that the primary
judge disagreed with his
interpretation of scripture, mocked his father who was a witness, yelled, caused
his solicitor to sweat,
and engaged in sexism, religious bigotry and
discrimination on the basis of his Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
The appellant submitted that the earlier transcript would demonstrate
that the primary judge had “tag teamed” with senior
cross-examine him and prevented his lawyers’ proper cross-examination of
the respondent.
appellant was legally represented when the matter was initially before the
primary judge and appeared on his own behalf when the
matter was before the
Court on 27 August 2025. No application for recusal was made until after
judgment was delivered on 27 August
is important to understand that the substantive appeal against the Orders of 27
August 2025 relates to an order which restrained
the appellant from attending a
First Holy Communion on a date which has now passed.
PROVISION OF TRANSCRIPT
contents of an appeal book are not prescribed except in so far as required by
Rules 13.20
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) (“the Rules”).
the appeal book is to contain transcript, the Rules provide at
The appellant, or if so ordered the cross‑appellant, is responsible for
obtaining any transcript of the hearing relevant to
the appeal or
cross‑appeal.
provides that if transcript has been ordered to be filed, failure to do so
will see the appeal deemed abandoned.
appellant, in his affidavit at [9] refers to a section of the
(Cth) which has not been in force since 31 August 2021 as
supportive of the proposition that the “reasons for judgment”
be made available. It was not. In any event, that has occurred.
appellant contends that transcript of the following additional dates is
necessary to prosecute this appeal:
(a) 28 February 2025;
(b) May 2025.
separate issues arise: Firstly, are the transcripts necessary to prosecute the
appeal? Secondly, do the factual circumstances
of this case warrant provision of
further transcripts by the Court contrary to the terms of Rule 13.19(4)?
the purpose of this application, I accept that the appellant cannot fund the
transcript.
as Austin J observed in
Smits & Jansen
(2025) FedCFamC1A 164
The Court is only funded to decide litigation, not to fund the litigation. Only
in exceptional cases will an appellant be relieved
of the usual burden of
providing the trial transcript for an appeal and instead have the transcript
provided by the Court at its
own expense for the appellant’s benefit
Forbes & Bream
[2008] FamCAFC 189
(2008) 222 FLR 96
to the appellant’s submission, there is no statutory requirement for the
Court to provide transcripts. The principles
which emerge from the case law are
(a) The obligation to provide transcript usually resides with the appellant;
(b) The obligation to provide transcript may be waived;
(c) If the interests of justice so require, the Court may provide transcript in
whole or part;
(d) The circumstances in which transcript is provided by the Court are likely to
be exceptional.
the Court has provided the transcript of the interlocutory hearing on 27 August
Sampson & Hartnett (Provision of Transcript)
(2013) FLC 93-542
[16] the Full Court emphasised the discretionary nature of the decision but
noted that the following matters may be of utility
when considering the exercise
of that discretion:
(a) Whether the case is a financial or parenting case.
(b) Whether the whole transcript or part thereof is necessary for the
determination of the appeal or part of the appeal.
(c) The likely cost of the relevant transcript and whether the applicant can
afford all or part of the cost of the transcript.
(d) The proportionality of the cost of the transcript to the appellant’s
anticipated costs in relation to the whole appeal,
including the preparation of
the appeal book(s).
(e) The prima facie merits of the appeal.
(f) Whether the question of providing a transcript can be left to the Full court
hearing the appeal.
(g) Any other relevant facts or circumstances.
is important then to reflect on the nature of the proposed appeal. It seeks to
appeal an order that the appellant be prevented
from attending an event that has
already occurred.
Court would not ordinarily allow an appeal, even if the grounds of appeal
contain some merit, if there would be no utility in
allowing the appeal
Reece & Reece
[2011] FamCAFC 24
Naparus & Frankham
FamCAFC 190
Naparus & Frankham (No.
[2020] FamCAFC 238
Pitman & Hynes (No. 3)
FamCAFC 82).
Given the event has come and gone, that would appear to be the
position here.
appellant said that the appeal was not futile because he has other children who
will in due course receive sacraments, and he
is not confident about when the
proceedings will be resolved. However, the ability of the appellant to attend at
religious events
of significance to the children is a final issue in a case
which is presently reserved.
those circumstances this is not a case in which I could be satisfied that it is
incumbent on the Court in the interests of justice
to provide transcripts. The
application will be dismissed.
appellant’s appeal against the interlocutory order remains outstanding.
The appellant’s application for the primary
judge to recuse himself
remains outstanding, and the primary judgment in the proceedings is reserved
pending the determination of
the recusal application.
appellant will have the opportunity to argue that, notwithstanding the date of
the particular event has passed, the appeal is
not futile and make argument
the day on which the
order was made.
recognise that given the outstanding applications outlined above, my
determination of this particular application may not finalise
the issues which
the appellant seeks to ventilate, but I am satisfied that the interests of
justice do not require provision of further
transcripts in relation to this
I certify that the preceding thirty (30)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 13 November 2025
RTF format (360 KB)
Signed PDF/A format