Deacon & Deacon [2025] FedCFamC2F 1066 (6 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Deacon & Deacon
[2025] FedCFamC2F
File number(s):
PAC 3032 of 2022
Judgment of:
JUDGE OBRADOVIC
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
FAMILY LAW –
PARENTING –
Allegations of grooming and sexualised behaviour – Unilateral suspension
of time – Whether there is
an unacceptable risk of harm to the children
including of sexual harm – Where s 69ZT applies to some of the evidence
Where the evidence of each parties’ case is lacking – Where
the children can have a meaningful relationship
Legislation:
Evidence Act
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
Australian Securities and Investments
Commission v Union Standard International Group Pty Ltd (No 4)
Bain v Bain
[2017] FamCAFC 80
(2017) 319 FLR 119
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Isles v Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
Pickford & Pickford
[2024] FedCFamC1A 249
[1997] FamCA 57
(1997) 22 Fam LR 592
(1997) FLC 92-787
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
7-9 April 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Berrell Tinker Solicitors
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Cathy Stevenson & Associates
PAC 3032 of 2022
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
JUDGE OBRADOVIC
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
parties have joint decision-making responsibility in relation to all major
long-term issues for the children, X born in 2014,
Y born in 2016, and Z born in
2019 (collectively “the children”).
children live with the Respondent, Ms Deacon (“mother”).
children spend time with the Applicant, Mr Deacon, (“father”) as
(a) During school terms:
(i) Commencing on the first week of the school term and each alternate week
thereafter, from after school (or 3pm) on Friday to before
school (or 9am) on
(b) During school holidays:
(i) For the first half in odd numbered years and the second half in even
numbered years, except for the 2025 school year when Z shall
spend time with the
father for 5 days only during the term 3 school holidays, and 10 days only
during the term 4 school holidays.
(c) At all other times as agreed to between the parties in writing.
children may have telephone or electronic communication with either party at any
reasonable time in accordance with the children’s
the purposes of changeover, otherwise than at the children’s school(s),
the father will collect the children at the commencement
of the children’s
time with the father from the mother’s home, and the mother will collect
the children at the conclusion
of the children’s time with the father from
the father’s home.
parties are both restrained by injunction from making critical or derogatory
comments about the other party in the presence or
hearing of the children, or
permitting or allowing any third party from doing so.
the event that any of the children become unwell and require urgent medical
treatment, suffer an injury or become hospitalised,
the party with whom the
child is with at the time is to notify the other party as soon as reasonably
practicable and provide all
relevant information to the other party.
party is at liberty to attend all school and extra-curricular events that
parents would ordinarily attend including but not limited
to assemblies,
performances, and parent teacher interviews.
party shall keep the other advised in writing at all times of their current
telephone number and email address, and will notify
each other of any change
within 24 hours of such change.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE OBRADOVIC:
Deacon (“father”) and Ms Deacon (“mother”) are the
parents of:
(a) X (“X”) who is 11 years old;
(b) Y (“Y”), who is 9 years old; and
(c) Z (“Z”), who is 6 years old.
(“children”).
father has two other children from a previous relationship, 16-year-old B, who
lives with the father,
12-year-old C, who lives with the father on a week about basis. The children are
close with both B and C.
separation in June 2020 and to final hearing, the children have remained living
with the mother. Most recently, the children
had been spending time with the
father in accordance with interim orders made in early 2023, but the mother
unilaterally suspended
time in March 2025. At the time of final hearing in
early April 2025, the children were not spending time with the father.
mother’s reason for failing to comply with Court orders and for suspending
the children’s time with the father was
because of an alleged disclosure
by Y, namely “secret cuddles” in the shower. The mother further
alleges that the father
has acted inappropriately towards X in that he has
engaged in “grooming” behaviours, namely a “tongue-kissing
and hugging her inappropriately. Lastly, the mother alleges that the
father has acted inappropriately towards both X and Z in that
he has engaged in
“grooming” behaviours towards them, namely having the children sit
on his lap and kiss them on the
back of the neck at a physical culture event,
when there was no need for them to be sitting on his lap.
only have the mother’s allegations not been established on the evidence,
but the mother has acted in a manner which resulted
in a risk of the
children’s relationships with the father being negatively impacted
reasons which follow, the Court finds that it is in the children’s best
interest that the parents both have decision-making
responsibilities in respect
of all long-term decisions regarding the children, and that the children, while
continuing to primarily
live with the mother, will spend time with the father,
being 4 nights each fortnight during school terms, and time during school
PARTIES’ APPLICATIONS AND EVIDENCE BEFORE THE
Documents relied upon
father relied on the following documents:
(d) Initiating Application filed 7 June 2022;
(e) Affidavit of Mr Deacon filed 2 April 2025;
(f) Affidavit of Mr Deacon filed 21 March 2025; and
(g) Outline of Case document filed 3 April 2025.
mother relied on the following
(a) Amended Amended Response to Initiating Application filed 26 March 2025;
(b) Affidavit of Ms Deacon filed 27 March 2025;
(c) Affidavit of Ms Deacon filed 27 February 2025;
(d) Affidavit of Mr D filed 20 January 2025;
(e) Affidavit of Mr E filed 20 January 2025; and
(f) Outline of Case document filed 2 April 2025.
the Court was the Family Report of single expert, Ms F, dated 30 August
The parties’ cases
Court relies on parties’ legal representatives to not only assist the
Court in accordance with their professional obligations,
but moreover, to assist
the parties in being prepared for the hearing, and in preparing their cases.
Documents which are prepared
for filing should be carefully drafted, with a view
to being accurate and precise, and not simply “cut-and-paste” of
previously prepared documents.
it is not always wise for the Court to note such matters in judgments in that it
may cause embarrassment to the profession,
it is sometimes important to do so,
not only for the benefit of the parties to the litigation, but also for the
benefit of other
litigants and their representatives.
these proceedings, the preparation of the parties’ respective cases, and
in particular their evidence in chief, left much
to be desired. Many relevant
matters were simply not the subject of
sworn first-hand evidence
whatsoever.
Furthermore,
many matters that were referred to in the parties’ case outlines were not
the subject of any evidence. Such matters
have not been given any weight.
of the factual findings herein, in particular much of the chronology and
background, are taken from Ms F’s report, noting
the lack of primary
evidence by the parties in respect of such matters.
21 March 2025, the Court made an order pursuant to s 69ZT(3) of the
Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“Act”) in respect of allegations of family
violence, and in particular the allegations of sexual abuse, and inappropriate
touching, of the children by the father.
objections to evidence were taken, mostly limited to evidence which had been
filed without leave. Otherwise, the evidence, having
been tendered and admitted
without objection or limitation, is available for use for all
While the words
“not admissible” mean “not admissible over
objection”,
the lack of
objection does not necessarily make such evidence probative or relevant, nor
does it give it any particular weight.
the commencement of the final hearing, the father moved the Court for orders
that the parties have equal shared parental responsibility
for the children, and
that the children live with the mother and father in “equal
amounts”; namely on a rotating fortnightly
basis with each parent during
school term, and half school holidays.
the commencement of the final hearing, the mother moved the Court for orders
that she have sole parental responsibility, the children
live with her and spend
time with the father supervised by G Centre for no less than two hours on a
weekly/fortnightly basis.
mother also sought an injunction against the father restraining him from
approaching the children at their school, attending
a venue where the children
are engaged in extra-curricular activities, removing the children from the
mother’s care, approaching
or contacting the mother, members of her
family, or the children.
the closing of the parties’ evidence, the Court indicated that a finding
that the father posed an unacceptable risk
of sexual harm to the children was
not open on the evidence, and invited further instructions to be obtained.
the conclusion of the final hearing, the father submitted that he would not be
heard against an order that was not for equal time,
but slightly more than the
recommendations of Ms F.
the conclusion of the final hearing, the mother submitted that she would not be
heard against an order in line with the recommendations
of Ms F, albeit she
maintained that time should be supervised in the first instance pending the
outcome of a police investigation.
Her position was confusing.
following documents were exhibits in the proceedings:
(a) Exhibit 1 being photographs of the father and X (2 pages).
(b) Exhibit 2 being NSW Police Case Report ..., being documents produced
pursuant to
, being the records of notes of child interviews
conducted at H Police Station in March 2025 for X, Y, and Z (2 pages).
(c) Exhibit 3 being letter from J School to the mother dated
19 September 2024 authored by the principal Mr K (2 pages).
(d) Exhibit 4 being the school reports of X and Y for semester 1 2024 and
semester 2 2024, and Z’s transition to school digital
(28 pages).
(e) Exhibit 5 being letter from L Clinic to Dr M dated 8 August 2024 RE: Z (3
(f) Exhibit 6 being letter from L Clinic headed “Instructions for Trial of
Intuniv” dated 17 January 2025 (1 page).
(g) Exhibit 7 being psychological assessment report for Z dated 14 May 2024 from
L Clinic (8 pages).
(h) Exhibit 8 being Occupational Therapy Progress Report for Y dated
1 February 2023 (8 pages).
(i) Exhibit 9 being Speech Pathology Review Assessment of Y at numerous dates of
assessment (13 pages).
(j) Exhibit 10 being Confidential Psychological Report for Y, date of assessment
6 March 2023 and report completed April 2023 (29
(k) Exhibit 11 being audio recording of conversation between the mother and Y on
11 March 2025 together with the transcript found
at annexure 1 of the
mother’s affidavit filed 27 March 2025 (2 pages).
father was the sole witness in his case, and he was cross-examined.
mother was a witness in her case, as were the maternal step-grandfather, Mr D
and the mother’s partner, Mr E. The mother
was the only witness in her
case who was cross-examined.
parties cross-examined Ms F.
RELEVANT LEGAL PRINCIPLES
children’s best interest remains the paramount consideration in respect of
any parenting orders the Court makes.
2 of Part VII of the Act deals with parental responsibility. Section 61C
provides that each of the parents of a child has
parental responsibility,
subject to orders. Section 61D provides that a parenting order that deals with
the allocation of parental
responsibility may provide for joint or sole
decision-making in relation to all or specified major long-term issues.
responsibility orders may be made in favour of a parent or some other
If an order provides for
joint decision-making, it requires the parties who hold parental responsibility
to consult and make a genuine
effort to come to a joint
determining what is in the children’s best interest, the Court must
consider the matters set out in s 60CC(2) of the Act
and, if the children are
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander, the matters set out in s 60CC(3) of the
60CC(2) of the Act specifies the non-hierarchical criteria which must be
considered in all cases when arriving at a conclusion
as to what is in the
children’s best interests, namely:
(a) what arrangements would promote the safety (including safety from being
subjected to, or exposed to, family violence, abuse,
neglect, or other harm) of:
(i) the child; and
(ii) each person who has care of the child (whether or not a person has parental
responsibility for the child);
(b) any views expressed by the child;
(c) the developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural needs of the child;
(d) the capacity of each person who has or is proposed to have parental
responsibility for the child to provide for the child’s
developmental,
psychological, emotional and cultural needs;
(e) the benefit to the child of being able to have a relationship with the
child’s parents, and other people who are significant
to the child, where
it is safe to do so;
(f) anything else that is relevant to the particular circumstances of the child.
considering what arrangements would promote the safety of the children and of
each person who has the care of the children, the
Court must consider any
history of family violence, abuse or neglect involving the children or a person
caring for the children together
with any family violence order that current or
has previously applied to the children, or a member of the children’s
violence is defined in s 4AB of the Act, to mean violent, threatening or other
behaviour by a person that coerces or controls
a family member of the person's
family, or causes the family member to be fearful.
s 4AB provides are: assault, sexual assault or other sexually abusive behaviour,
stalking, repeated derogatory taunts, intentionally
damaging or destroying
property, intentionally causing death or injury to an animal, unreasonably
denying the family member the financial
autonomy that he or she would otherwise
have had, unreasonably withholding financial support needed to meet the
reasonable living
expenses of the family member or his or her child, at a time
when the family member is entirely or predominantly dependent on the
financial support, preventing the family member from making or keeping
connections with his or her family, friends or
culture, unlawfully depriving the
family member, or any member of the family member's family, of his or her
liberty. Furthermore,
a child is exposed to family violence if the child sees or
hears family violence or otherwise experiences the effects of family violence.
is apposite to be reminded of the wording of s 140
Evidence Act
(1) In a civil proceeding, the court must find the case of
a party proved if it is satisfied that the case has been proved on the
balance of probabilities.
(2) Without limiting the matters that the court may take into account in
deciding whether it is so satisfied, it is to take into
(a) the nature of the cause of action or defence; and
(b) the nature of the subject - matter of the proceeding; and
(c) the gravity of the matters alleged.
order to be satisfied as to proof of any act, the Court must feel an actual
persuasion of its occurrence or existence before it
can be found. It cannot be
found as a result of a mere mechanical comparison of probabilities independently
of any belief in its
reality. The seriousness of an allegation made, the
inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of the given description, or the gravity
of the consequences flowing from a particular finding are considerations which
must affect the answer to the question whether the
issue has been proved to the
reasonable satisfaction of the
proofs, indefinite testimony, or indirect inferences are insufficient to ground
a finding of violence and abuse.
The party alleging the fact bears the burden of proving it and the standard of
the burden is the balance of
probabilities.
proceedings remain adversarial, and it still stands true that those who assert a
fact must prove that fact.
is well recognised that where evidence is uncontradicted and is not otherwise
inherently improbable or inherently incredible, and
where the other party has
not elicited in cross-examination or led in evidence some material to overcome
it, either by proving the
contrary or throwing the matter into doubt, it should
be accepted.
However, this does
not mean that it must be accepted.
of the parties is required to put before the Court all such evidence as each is
willing and able to bring in support of the findings
60CG of the Act further requires the Court to ensure that any parenting order it
makes is consistent with any family violence
order and that it does not expose a
person to an unacceptable risk of family violence, but only to the extent that
it is possible
to do so consistently with the children’s best interest
being the paramount consideration.
issues of family violence and risk are two separate questions. It is important
that they not be conflated. On the one hand, the
Court may need to determine
whether or not allegations of family violence are proven on the balance of
probabilities, and on the
other, whether or not an unacceptable risk of harm is
demonstrated, regardless of the finding made in respect of the allegations
family violence.
conjecture about the future is based on historical facts and circumstances, it
is only the relevant historical facts which need
be proven on the balance of
probabilities.
The assessment of
risk is still, however, an evidence-based conclusion and is not
discretionary.
An assertion that
a parent poses an unacceptable risk of harm does not however mean that the
parent against whom the assertion is
made, must then show that he/she does not
pose such a risk.
The finding
circumstances, is either open on the evidence or
assessing whether the risk of harm is unacceptable, the Court is not merely
evaluating whether the risk will occur, but also the
magnitude of the risk and
the potential consequences of the risk being
Background and Chronology
father was born in 1985. He is currently 39 years old.
mother was born in 1988. She is currently 37 years
parties met in 2007. They started their relationship and cohabitation in 2009.
2009, the father’s child from a previous relationship, B
(“B”), was born. She is currently 16 years old. B lives
father but spends about half her time at the home of her boyfriend’s
parents, who live relatively close to the father’s
noted to Ms F that B is hardly ever at the father’s home.
2012, the father’s child from a previous relationship, C
(“C”), was born. She is currently 12 years old. C currently
with the father on a week-about basis.
was born in 2014. X is currently 12 years old. She has a close and loving
relationship with her siblings, including her half-siblings.
father’s home she is particularly close to C.
was born in 2016. Y is currently 9 years old. Y has been diagnosed with Level 2
Autism Spectrum Disorder (“ASD”) and
a mild speech delay.
parties married in 2017.
2019, Z was born. Z is currently 6 years of age and has been diagnosed with
Level 2 ASD, Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder
emotional dysregulation, speech disorder and speech difficulties. Z has been
prescribed Intuniv for ADHD.
1 June 2020, the parties separated on a final basis.
early 2021, the mother commenced her relationship with Mr E. The mother and the
children have been living with Mr E since January
2023, the mother’s first child from her relationship with Mr E, N
(“N”), was born. N will turn 2 very shortly.
2024, the mother’s second child from her relationship with Mr E, O
(“O”), was born.
late 2024, the mother observed Z and X interchangeably sitting on the
father’s lap, and the father kissing them on the back
of the neck and
cheeks. These observations were made at an event the two girls participated in.
February 2025, the mother observed what she considered as inappropriate
behaviour between X and the father at a sports event, a
few days after being
told, by another parent, of similar behaviour between X and the father.
March 2025, Y said to the mother that he showers with the father and that they
have “secret cuddles” in the shower.
last time the children spent time with the father was on 10-11 March 2025.
children were interviewed by the Police in March 2025.
final hearing took place on 7-9 April 2025.
The Children
children were all interviewed by Ms F, and their interactions with the parents
and other significant family members, was observed.
the assessment for the preparation of Ms F’s report, X presented as neatly
attired, clearly anxious, and was observed to
repeatedly wring her hands and
withdrawn. X said that the parties had spoken to her about the reason for the
interviews but could
not remember what they said. Additionally, X said neither
party had spoken to her about their respective proposals, but was worried
both of them is proposing she not see the other parent again, which she would
not like. X seemed relieved upon being told
such was not the case.
described the mother as “fun”, “helpful” and “the
best parent I have”. She said that the mother
was good at managing the
household routine, organising things and making sure she has what she needs for
school. She also said that
the mother is affectionate, and that she can talk to
the mother about her worries. Moreover, X said the mother does not try to tell
her or imply to her how she should think or feel about family matters. X said
she feels close to the maternal grandparents as they
are very kind to her,
enjoys spending time with them and having sleepovers at their home.
said that the father “he’s kind to me but when Y and Z are naughty
he shouts”. However, she said he is “not
scary”. She described
Mr E as “fun and nice” and mentioned how he organises outings as a
said the father is generally a kind father but gets “grumpy” when he
is on the phone and interrupted by Z and Y. She
said he is “on the phone a
bit, but not a lot”. With a nervous laugh, X said the father is
“quite a bit less organised
than Mum”. It was clear to Ms F that X
felt reluctant to speak negatively about the father and even went on to blame
saying that she is not an organised person. X also said that the father
does not play with the children much, sometimes takes them
on outings and used
to take them to his workplace but no longer does.
F observed that when asked about the paternal grandmother, X did not smile like
she did when discussing other family members. She
said that the paternal
grandmother can be fun at times but that “we don’t usually see her
that much”, around once
a month. Ms F then asked about the paternal uncle
and observed that X smiled widely, described him as “very fun and kind and
nice” and said that she likes seeing his son, P.
said she feels very close to C and enjoys spending time with her. She also said
that B now rarely spends time with the father and
estimated that the last time
she saw B was in 2023 because “[B] doesn’t really get along with
Dad”. X commented
that the mother supports her to have a good relationship
with her half-siblings.
relation to Y and Z, X said that Y has autism, making his behaviour challenging
and often finding him annoying. She maintained
that Y becomes dysregulated in
both parents’ care but said that when Y returns from the father’s
care he “doesn’t
listen to anyone and is very rude” and takes
a long time to calm down. X said that Z can be annoying, hard to calm when
finds it difficult to move between the two homes and “won’t
leave me alone”.
firmly stated that she does not want to give her view about parenting
arrangements. Ms F opined that she appeared anxious when speaking
seemed as if she did not want to upset or disappoint her parents. X also said
that she was happy for the Judge to
decide the parenting arrangements.
presentation to Ms F was consistent with a child who has moderate autism and
possibly ADHD. She observed that Y made little
eye contact, was easily
distracted, moved around the room throughout the interview and found it
difficult to attend to the questions
said that although the mother can be “grumpy” sometimes, she is
mostly kind to him and helps him. He said that the mother
is only grumpy when he
has been naughty and that she does not smack him but rather will say
“don’t do it”.
described Mr E as “funny”. He also said he is only scared of Mr E
when he is “really grumpy”, which is not
often. Y reported that Mr E
occasionally smacks but said it was okay as “it makes me know not to do it
anymore”. Y agreed
Mr E cares about him.
described the father as a “fun” parent who gives him cuddles. He
then said with excitement, “When we ask for technology
he always says yes.
Mum doesn’t”. Y said he likes the father’s house as he knows
how to use the television, his
father cares about him, and he is not scared of
the father.
said he feels close to X and Z and that he likes seeing C sometimes. Ms F opined
that in a matter-of-fact tone, Y said he does not
see B much as “Dad tells
her to do stuff, and she doesn’t like doing it”. Y spoke warmly
said he likes spending time with the maternal grandparents and feels close to
them, and that the paternal grandparents are friendly
said that the father speaks negatively about the mother, and that the mother
used to also do such behaviour but stopped “a
while ago”.
preference was that he live in an equal time arrangement “so it’s
even and fair”.
presented as somewhat young for her age in terms of her verbal and social
skills. Ms F observed that Z was easily distracted and
consistently moved around
the room throughout the interview. Z provided limited information and the
interview was ended early.
said the mother can be grumpy but is mostly kind, that she is not fearful of
her, and indicated she is very comfortable living with
the mother. Z said the
father is kind to her and loves her. She said she likes seeing the father but
only likes being there “for
a little bit” and is not fearful of
described Mr E as grumpier than the mother, can be kind, and said she is not
fearful of him. She spoke warmly about the maternal
grandparents, indicating
that she likes spending time with them. Z said the paternal grandmother is more
grumpy than kind but can
said she likes playing with her siblings, sees C frequently but does not see B
much. It was this point Z declared she wanted to
stop talking and the interview
Children’s time with the Father
Post-separation,
the children spent time with the father on an
basis, and as the
mother decided. X and Y eventually started spending one overnight per fortnight
with the father while Z only spent
time with the father during the day.
13 February 2023, interim orders were made for the children to live with the
mother and spend time with the father, gradually increasing.
30 June 2023, X and Y were to spend time with the father every second week from
after school on Friday to before school on Monday,
and Z every week from after
school on Friday to 4pm on Sunday.
17 July 2023, X and Y were to spend time with the father every second week from
after school on Friday to before school on Tuesday,
and Z’s time was
increased to before school on Monday.
is unclear on the evidence what time the children spent with the father between
February 2023 and mid-2024. There was some evidence
that time did not occur
on particular occasions, and it appears that the mother did not facilitate time
between Z and the father
for a few months in mid-late 2023.
the time of the interviews with Ms F in mid-2024, X and Y were spending time
with the father from after school on Friday to before
school on Tuesday, while Z
was spending time with the father from after school on Friday to before school
on Monday, albeit time
did not always occur. This seems to be largely because
the mother believed that Z was not coping and was distressed at being away
her and with the father.
was also disrupted in March 2025, following Y telling the mother about showering
with the father. This and other concerns the
mother raised about the
father’s behaviour towards the children are discussed in more detail later
in these reasons.
orders have been in place for some time for the children to speak to the father
on the telephone, such time does not always
occur. This upsets X in particular.
It is not clear whether the children have the capacity and freedom to telephone
either of their
parents while in the other parent’s care. This would
likely overcome any difficulties with any failures by the father to call
only set times. It would also provide the children with more flexibility. In the
lives of these children, it is likely a flexibility
that will assist their
relationships.
Parties’ Mental Health
of the parties has some mental health vulnerabilities.
father has been taking anti-depressant medication for years, which was
prescribed by his general practitioner. He has had a suicide
attempt in the
mother had been diagnosed with anxiety and depression in her late teens. She
manages her conditions with counselling and anti-depressants.
is no evidence that either party’s mental health poses any risk to the
Communication between Parties
have been some ongoing difficulties with the parties’ communications,
albeit such difficulties are capable of resolution
with some practical changes.
The parties have also spoken poorly to each other.
parties have a shared calendar where the mother inputs the children’s
appointments. The father does not always get such
information. This has at
times, resulted in the father not providing input into the children’s
assessment and/or treatment.
It appears that the mother is aware of the
father’s difficulties with the calendar. It also appears that the father
follow up with the mother where he is aware that he is missing
information, but instead expects the mother to remind him of any upcoming
appointments.
is not a child focused approach from either of the parties.
is not for the mother to keep reminding the father about appointments and
information that he might want to provide. The father
must take on the
responsibility of ensuring that he is informed and aware of what is going on.
There is no reason why the father
could not make his own enquiries with the
children’s treaters, or the parties could not instruct those treaters
provide information to both of them simultaneously, thus taking the
burden off the mother to provide such information to the father.
father needs to step up in this regard.
parties are both intelligent and capable adults who are perfectly able to sort
out this hiccup without a Court order.
is no reason why the parties cannot send each other either an email or a text
message with the relevant information. There is
also no reason why the parties
could not avail themselves of a parenting application, such as “My Family
Wizard”, and
share the cost equally, to assist them in better
communication.
Parents’ and Family Members’ Attitudes
F described the father as presenting hostile towards the mother, and very
hostile towards the maternal grandmother. She also described
the father as
presenting somewhat hostile towards Mr E.
father had previously held concerns about Mr E potentially sexually abusing Z,
but while such concerns were noted by Ms F, they
were not live concerns at the
time of final hearing. The father was not cross-examined about these matters at
F described the mother as presenting as frustrated with and disgusted by the
father, rather than openly hostile towards him. She
described the mother as
presenting as somewhat disgusted by the paternal grandmother’s lack of
interest in being involved in
caring for the children. The mother spoke warmly
E is very critical of the father. He describes him as a “manipulator of
the children”.
the father and the mother spoke warmly about the children to Ms F.
her interview with Ms F, the mother said in respect of the children’s time
with the father as follows:
I have been quite honest with the kids and said if they really don’t want
to go, I would never force them to do something they
don’t want to do.
I don’t see the point of forcing them to go if it’s going to upset
or distress them.
F noted that while such statements were concerning to her, the impression that
was given by the mother was that she was making
these comments with the belief
that the children love the father, want to maintain a relationship with him and
will regularly choose
to spend time with him.
is not the impression that the Court gained after hearing the mother in the
witness box. Rather, the mother impressed as rather
rigid in her attitude, and
very conservative and old-fashioned particularly in respect of the way she
expected the father to behave
towards the children. In the context of such
impression and the way the mother ran her case at final hearing, the
statements to Ms F as noted at [107] above, are indicative of a
poor attitude towards the children’s relationship with the
Physical Culture End-of-Year Showcase in 2024
late 2024, the parties attended the 2024 Physical Culture end-of-year
presentation at Q School, where X and Z performed. The concert
from around 6pm to 8:30pm.
mother was seated in the front row facing the stage in around the centre and the
father was seated on the right side of the stage.
parties were around eight metres away from each other and the father attended
the presentation with B, who sat next to him. The
mother claimed that her view
was “unobstructed”.
the showcase, X and Z moved between the mother and the father to sit with each
of them during breaks. The mother directed X
and Z to sit with their group, but
they returned to the father. The father said that the children were only
required to sit with
their groups when marshalling took place before an event
occurred. The father did not encourage X and Z to sit with their groups,
were happy sitting where they were, where they also played with their friends.
mother criticised the father’s interaction with the children asserting it
was inappropriate as follows:
(a) X and Z were seated on the father’s lap instead of the empty seats
next to him;
(b) The father kissed X on the back of the neck at least three times whilst she
sat on his lap and hugged her as she faced forward;
(c) The father would lift X onto his lap, held her around her lower back and
leaned in to kiss her cheek and neck while she squirmed
and giggled; and
(d) The father would also place Z on his lap and kiss her cheek and neck.
father conceded that X and Z were seated on his lap “at some points”
but not every time they were with him. The father
was asked whether Z was on his
lap and whether when Z got up for her performance, X then sat on his lap, to
which he responded “possibly”.
The father also confirmed that when X
was seated on his lap, there were two spaces to the left of him.
father further conceded that it was “highly probable” he showed Z
and X physical affection at the event and added
that as they were children he
would have given them a cuddle or a kiss, including when they were seated on his
lap. The father also
did not deny leaning in to kiss X on the cheek repeatedly,
kissing X on the neck, saying that when the children sit on his lap he
them on the top of their head but on this occasion could not as they had
specific hairdos for their performances. When asked
whether he kissed X three
times on the neck, the father said, “if you say so”, noting that he
does not count the number
of kisses he gives his children. When asked whether X
squirmed or giggled as the father kissed her neck, he said “they all
did” as they were being tickled, adding that he generally tickles the
children around the belly and on the arms.
father also agreed that when X got up for her dance, Z sat on his lap. When
asked whether the father did the “same type
of behaviour” with Z as
he did X, he responded “sure”. The father accepted that he would
have kissed Z on the cheek
and neck a few times.
response to questioning put to him during cross-examination, the father said he
did not know whether other parents at the event
kissed their children on the
neck or three or four times on the cheek. When asked about the appropriateness
of his behaviour, the
father said his behaviour was appropriate, not unusual,
and that “on the mouth would be unusual”.
mother “intervened” twice by asking X and Z to sit with their class
and prepare for their performance, which they
eventually did. During
cross-examination, the father said that when the mother intervened, the children
did not follow as they wanted
to stay sitting with him.
is this type of behaviour, as well as what is referred to at [121] and
thereafter, which the Court understands the mother considered
“grooming” and inappropriate.
Father’s Interactions with X at Sports in February
big part of the mother’s case at final hearing was the so called
“tongue-licking game” which the mother asserted
the father played
with X. The mother also raised concerns about the father hugging and touching X
inappropriately.
difficulty for the mother however, is that she did not put on any evidence in
chief about what the “tongue-licking game”
was, when it was said to
have occurred, or what was
Doing the best that it
can from the parties’ oral evidence, the Court understands that the
“tongue-licking game”
was said to have been observed by another
parent at sports training in February 2025.
February 2025, the mother discussed appropriate and inappropriate behaviours
with X. In her oral evidence, the mother said that
the conversation was as
Mother: As you get older there are certain behaviours like hanging off adults
and constantly hugging and seeking affection from
them, is not appropriate.
[X]: I do not do that.
Mother: There was another parent there that told me they witnessed you playing a
game with dad that involved one person sticking
their tongue out and the other
one licking it.
[X]: That never happened.
Mother: I can only tell you what I’ve been told.
Mother: That type of behaviour is just not appropriate.
her oral evidence, the mother said that she did not believe X as X is
“very protective” of the father and would not
want him in trouble.
When asked whether the mother believes that X and the father were touching
tongues at her athletics training
on a Tuesday afternoon in plain sight of all
the other children and parents, the mother responded “yes”. The
mother then
conceded that she did not consider the possibility that it did not
18 February 2025, the mother took two photographs of X’s interactions with
the father at her sports event.
mother describes her observations of the father and X as follows:
I witnessed [Mr Deacon] embracing [X] in a bear hug and holding her wrists. When
[X] tried to move away, he did not release her until
I, as the age group
manager, asked all the girls to line up.
At the [sports] event, I saw [X] hanging onto [Mr Deacon], while he was speaking
with another parent. I also observed [X] playing
with [Mr Deacon]’s hair
and stroking his face and beard. Please see Appendix 2, Photos I took of the
interaction.
two photographs are exhibit 1 in the proceedings.
first photograph shows the father and X facing each other, with their upper
bodies slightly touching and X’s arms around
her father’s neck.
X’s head is tilted upwards towards her father’s face. The
father’s head is turned slightly
to the side. X is smiling. The father is
holding a water bottle in his right hand.
second photograph shows X standing with her heels on the father’s toes,
with her back to the father. X’s arms are
crossed across her stomach, and
the father is holding onto her wrists from behind. He is leaning to the left
with his head down looking
down towards the ground, and X’s head is turned
to the side facing left, looking into the distance.
is nothing explicitly inappropriate or sexual about the positioning of either
the father or X in the two photographs.
his oral evidence the father said he has no idea what the tongue-licking game
is, denied ever playing a tongue-kissing game with
X, denied ever kissing or
licking X on the tongue, denied ever physically touching X in the “bum
area”, and denied ever
pinching X on the bum.
his oral evidence the father said that the photographs depicted him giving X a
cuddle and denied that exhibit 1 demonstrated inappropriate
behaviour. The
father further said he gave X a bear hug, would have held her for a couple of
seconds in a “big tight squeeze
bear cuddle”. The father said he
held “not so much her wrists, around here [witness showed crossing his
arms out front
and hugging his arms touching the backs of his arms and top of
his shoulders]”. The father said that the hug would have been
appropriate
and normal.
19 February 2025, the mother had a further discussion with X, during which she
explained that the following behaviours were inappropriate:
Hanging onto
her father with arms around his neck;
Allowing him to
hold and hug her from behind;
released when she tried to move away; and
Engaging in the
cross-examination, the mother was asked about why it was inappropriate for X to
hang onto the father with her arms around his
neck. The mother said it was her
opinion that being that affectionate and close with any adult at any time is
inappropriate. When
asked about why she held that opinion the mother said
“it is just my opinion”. The mother’s oral evidence is that
the behaviour she observed was sexualised behaviour and that it was X who was
displaying the sexualised behaviour, and not the father
towards X. When asked
whether it was sexualised behaviour for X to hug the mother around the neck, the
mother said “yes”.
mother accepted that there was a possibility the conversation she had with X on
19 February 2025 could have damaged X’s
relationship with the father,
and she did not consider talking to the father first about the issue. When asked
whether she had this
discussion with X so that X can protect herself in the
future, said “Yes, so she is aware of what I consider appropriate and
inappropriate behaviour”.
F opined it would be concerning if the mother has hypervigilance for something
not there, which in turn would induce X into feeling
concerned or ashamed. In
respect of the mother’s conversation with X, Ms F suggested that the
mother could easily have had
that conversation with X but said “It is okay
with dad but you wouldn’t do that with anyone else would
Showers with Y and “Secret Cuddles”
7 March 2025, the mother whilst driving the children to the father’s home,
reminded them to take a shower at the father’s
conversation, Y said “I like having showers with Dad. We have secret
cuddles in the shower”. The mother
then asked Y what a secret cuddle was,
and he responded that it was a cuddle only him and the father knew about because
just the two of them in the shower”. The conversation
occurred in front of X, who according to the mother looked surprised
was saying. The mother dropped the children at the father’s house but then
felt physically ill upon arriving home
for leaving them there.
11 March 2025 at 3:21pm, the mother recorded a conversation between herself and
Y without Y’s knowledge. The conversation
between the mother and Y was as
([Y]): So, I'll tell you the tale of when the dog was sleeping, there's a pile
of cat's skeletons next to it,
([Mother]): Yeah
([Y]): and then the cat exploded, and the dog ran out the side with its ears
chewed off from the cat and holes in its side.
([Mother]): Oh, my lordy!
([Y]): But that's just one of them, there lots of different ones (and now sings
The Cat Came Back
by Laurie Berkner) but the cat came back the very
next day, he told me he was a goner, but he wouldn't
([Mother]): How was your weekend?
([Y]): Good.
([Mother]): Yeah, did you have a shower and wash your hair at all?
([Y]): Yeah
([Mother]): Yeah.
([Mother]): Remember last week when we were talking about showering at Dad's
([Y]): Yeah
([Mother]): And you said that you have your showers in the morning
([Y]): Yeah
([Mother]): Do you have your showers by yourself?
([Y]): With Dad
([Mother]): With Dad?
([Y]): I like them with Dad
([Mother]): And you said that you had um, secret cuddles in the shower
([Y]): Yeah
([Mother]): What's a secret cuddle, can you tell me?
([Y]): So, he just stands there, and I'm on his body, then he cuddles me like
this, then I hold his arms
([Mother]): Oh, is he standing behind you
([Y]): Yeah
([Mother]): And he cuddles with his arms around you
([Y]): And I cuddle his arms
([Mother]): So why is it a secr.., you said it was a secret?
([Y]): Well, it’s not really a secret but it’s a special one because
no one really knows what it is, and we do it every
time... it’s special
and kind-of a secret
([Mother]): Do you wash yourself? Or does Daddy wash you?
([Y]): I wash myself
([Mother]): Yeah, does Daddy wash himself or do you help?
([Y]): I like helping him. I pretend he's my son, and wash his back for him like
he washes my back, because we can't reach each other's
back, because I can't
reach my back, I can't reach my back and he can't reach my back, I can't reach
my back and he can't reach his
([Mother]): Is that the only bit that you help each other with?
([Y]): Yeah
([Mother]): Do you ever shower by yourself?
([Y]): When I wet my bed that's the only time I just get up, shower myself,
shower by myself without Dad and try to have one with
Dad.... or if he's
([Mother]): Yep
([Mother]): Do any of the girls have showers with Dad?
([Mother]): No?
([Y]): They don't really ask.... But they do ask for a shower in the morning. Is
that the Southern Cross?
([Mother]): No, that's just the logo of that car
([Y]): It looks like a bit of a Southern Cross
([Mother]): It does a little bit, doesn't it
([Y]): (Now singing again) But the cat came back the very next day, bom, bom,
bom.... The first line is the cat came back the very
her oral evidence the mother explained that she recorded the conversation
because Y has a speech delay, expressive language disorder
and impaired
executive functioning, and she needed to make sure she was understanding what he
was saying. She also said that he is
known to mix up his words and she wanted to
be able to go back and listen to the conversation to ensure she was not
misunderstanding
what Y had said. The mother said that she used the words
“secret cuddles” in the recording these were the words used
Friday before. The mother said she had no concerns she had misheard the term
“secret cuddles” in that initial
conversation. This was the only
time she ever recorded any of the children for the purpose of the proceedings.
her conversation with Y, the mother asked X about the “secret
cuddles”. X told her she does not shower with the
father, but that Y and Z
father generally showers in the mornings and once or twice a fortnight with Y.
During cross-examination, the father confirmed
that he and Y are nude during the
showers, that the size of the shower is a metre and a half by a metre and a half
and that the showers
usually last “2 minutes tops maybe”. The father
also said that Y washes himself but had recently asked the father to
loofah to wash his back between his shoulder blades. The father added that Y had
also recently asked to wash the father’s
back, and that he lets him. The
father said that Y is behind him when he washes the father’s back, and in
front of him when
he washes Y’s back. When asked whether it was
“normal behaviour” to wash someone’s back, the father said
that it depends on context and that he has no issues if his children shower with
him before reaching puberty.
father also gave evidence that X stopped showering with anyone including her
sister once she reached the “pre-pubescent”
stage and that the last
time he showered with X would have been when she was around 7 years of age. The
father confirmed that such
showers would have been in the nude, adding that the
mother used to do the same. Further, when asked whether it was appropriate to
shower with a 7-year-old girl, the father responded, “God no, but my
daughter nothing wrong”. The father said he showered
with the children
when the parties resided together and that the mother did not ever express
concern about the father continuing
to do that post-separation. The father said
they did not talk about it during the marriage but admitted he could appreciate
has concerns about him showering with Y, adding that if the roles
were reversed, he too would be concerned about Y’s comments,
have firstly discussed the issue with the mother directly. The father further
said that Y likes affection and love and
that there is nothing sinister about
the showers.
father also said that he usually hugs Y before he gets out of the shower, after
which Y leaves, wrapping a towel around himself
and going to his room to dry and
dress himself.
father was asked about Y’s mention of “secret cuddles”. The
father said there is no secret cuddle, it is just
“something he [Y] calls
it” and that use of the term “special” to also describe the
hug would be Y’s
“wording of the same thing”. The father
agreed during cross-examination that it was reasonable for the mother to have
sought clarification on “secret cuddles” and that such phrasing
would have been a “red flag type of word”.
Court accepts the father’s evidence about showering with Y.
Police Interviews of the Children
12 March 2025, the mother spoke to the Police about Y’s comments to her,
and was asked to bring in all three children to
be interviewed.
speaking to the Police, the mother told the children that “for now”
they would need to stay with her. The mother
told the children that once she
became aware of the date for the interviews she told the children they would be
interviewed by the
Police, and once the mother knew more information about when
they could go back to the father she would let them know. The mother
specifically tell the children she had made the decision for them not to spend
time with the father.
at the final hearing, the last time X and Y spent time with the father was on
11 March 2025, and the last time Z spent time with
the father was on 10
March 2025.
27 March 2025, X, Y and Z were interviewed by the Police at Suburb H Police
attending the police station, the mother told the children they were going to be
asked some questions about herself and the
father. The children attended the
police station with the mother and the maternal grandmother. The mother said
that even though she
took the children to the Police station, she did not know
it would be a uniformed officer interviewing the children.
2 in the proceedings comprises the NSW Police Case Report detailing X, Y, and
Z’s interviews. The mother was only in
the room for Z’s interview.
from X’s interview are as follows:
stated that
shes at the police station to talk about mum and dads divorce and how she feels
...stated that
she spends “some time” with dad and “some time” with
indicated that
she loves dad and wants to spend more time with dad, “always wants to go
she likes being
at dads when the other younger children aren’t there, and when she is with
her older half sisters 13 &
sometimes [X]
stays an extra night
interview it appeared that there was more information that she wanted to say but
didn’t have the language explain
it. Appeared nervous. uncomfortable means
you don’t like what they are doing – did not identify anything that
feel “uncomfortable”.
Errors in original.
cross-examination, the father said that X is not often alone with him and has
been “maybe once or twice in the last six
from Y’s interview are as follows:
stated that
he’s come to the station to talk about ... mum, mummas and dads.
likes going to
dads but doesn’t like that he has to do a “little while” at
dads and a “big while” at
wants to do a
week on week off with dad and mum
morning if we are not running late i have a shower with dad”
states that at
mums he showers on his own
likes having a
shower with dad, states that he does want to have a shower on his own but doesnt
say anything. Says that every now
and then he has a shower on his own.
others ask if they can have a shower with dad too, dad sometimes says yes”
– [X] and [Z] ask that question
Police asked
“has [X] ever had a shower with dad?..” “I think she
asked if there
was anything that he doesn’t like about being at dad?... “when I get
asked what do
you do in the shower?... “we get washed, we have a cuddle and then i get
out... after i get out, but usually
every second day he stays in and washes his
when [Y] is
giving dad a cuddle. “we stand the exact same way”dad stands in the
back. During this conversation [Y] became
much more reserved and quite.
was asked what
it means to feel uncomfortable – [Y] had his eyes closed and said
“yes but i cant really explain’..
was asked if he ever feels
“yuucky or uncomfortable” with dad... he said “Yep” i
said when do you feel yucky?...
long pause then [Y] smirked and said “I
don’t know”... then said “i barely get sick. Unable to
if he was referring to being physically sick and feeling yucky and
uncomfortable or, being in discomfort from certain actions
[Y] said that
dad hasn’t ever told him to keep a secret.
Errors in original.
cross-examination, the father said that he does not instigate the showers with Y
and clarified that Y asks to have a shower,
the father says “fine in you
go” and that “he’ll get in, I’ll get in, he’ll get
relation to Y’s comment that he wants to have a shower on
his own but does not say anything, the father said that Y had not
said that to
him and that Y only showers with him when he asks to. The father clarified that
he does not force Y into the shower
or tell him to come. When asked that what Y
is saying is not true, the father responded “Correct, as true as a
9-year-olds
statement could be”. The father also added that Y likes having
a shower with him and that as Y does not see him often, likes
one-on-one time he gets with the father. When asked whether Y ever feels
“yucky” the father said “Of
course” and that Y often
gets “a bit crook and feels yucky or has a sore tummy” and that it
had nothing to do with
the shower. The father also confirmed that Y does not say
he feels “yucky” before, during, or after he showers with the
or as the father hugs or cuddles him.
from Z’s interview are as follows:
she sleeps in
her own bed, and in the morning she will go and get into dads bed.
cross-examination, the father said that Z has her own bed but when she wakes in
the morning generally between 5am and 6am,
will come to his bed and lay next to
mother read exhibit 2 for the first time during cross-examination. The mother
agreed that what she read in exhibit 2 was in line
with the Y’s
discussions with her. The mother conceded that none of the children had
disclosed anything sexual during their
interviews and admitted that she did not
think the children were lying to the Police.
mother has not spoken to the Police since March 2025. There is no evidence that
the Police contacted the father after interviewing
the children.
BEST INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS
discussion of the best interest consideration below is informed by the
Court’s findings and is to be read together and understood
in the context
of those findings.
Arrangements that would promote the safety of the children and
each person who has care of the children
evidence does not establish any inappropriate or sexual behaviour towards the
children by the father on any of the occasions the
mother speaks to.
evidence does not establish any risk of harm of sexual abuse of the children by
the father.
father conceded in his oral evidence that he would be willing to stop showering
with Y and showing affection to X if the mother
is concerned about those things.
The mother is clearly concerned about these things, and the father is on notice.
While these are
not safety issues
the parties working together in
regard to these matters and addressing each other’s concerns in an open
and honest manner, would
go a long way to assist their children in feeling safe
and loved in both homes.
Court has some concerns about the unilateral suspension of the children’s
time with the father and the interviews by the
Police, and the impact these
might have on the children and their relationships with the parties. The mother
did not adequately explain
to the children why they were visiting the police
station at the time of the interviews. Ms F’s opinion is that the children
would be curious and would start asking questions of the mother.
F opined, it was possible for X to make a link between the trip to the police
station and not seeing the father, and agreed that
if X makes that link and
becomes aware she can only see the father under supervised circumstances, she
could come to think the father
has done something wrong. When asked about the
impact of that on the relationship with the father, Ms F said it can go one of
ways, one being that X sees the father as wronged and impacting her
relationship with the father, or she becomes concerned the father
something wrong to her or someone else and will view him negatively.
F further opined that X’s relationship with the mother would be impacted
if she thinks the father did nothing wrong. She
said that it would be
“confusing” as X has a relationship with the mother being someone
she trusts but someone who is
also implying that someone else X loves and views
as safe, is somehow causing harm. Ms F added that it may also cause X to align
more strongly with the father and begin to view the mother negatively.
Any views expressed by the children
the time of family report interviews, according to Ms F, the children were not
at an age or stage of development where the Court
would place significant weight
on their views surrounding parenting arrangements. This is so even in relation
to X, who was clearly
conflicted about expressing a particular view to Ms F.
9 months later, in late March 2025, to the Police, X said that she wants to
spend more time with her father. Y’s views
had not changed from the family
report interviews to the police interviews, he wants to spend equal time with
each of his parents.
The developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural needs
of the children
is currently 12 years old. She has a close and loving relationship with her
siblings, including her half-siblings. In the father’s
particularly close to C.
is currently 9 years old. Y has been diagnosed with Level 2 ASD and a mild
speech delay.
is currently 6 years of age and has been diagnosed with Level 2 ASD, ADHD,
emotional dysregulation, speech disorder and speech difficulties.
prescribed Intuniv for her ADHD.
The capacity of each person who has or is proposed to have
parental responsibility for the children to provide for the children’s
developmental, psychological, emotional and cultural needs
mother has been the children’s primary carer throughout their lives. She
is the parent who takes on the bulk of the responsibility
in relation to their
everyday needs, as well as their long-term needs.
Unfortunately,
the father has not always been available to the children and for the children,
and the reasons for this are multifaceted
as noted earlier in these reasons.
is the Court’s assessment though that the father, to use the colloquial,
needs to “step up” and take on more
responsibility to ensure that
the children are well supported and that the mother is well supported.
the father is the less organised of the two parents, he has the capacity to
provide for the children’s needs. It may always
be slightly more chaotic
in the father’s home than in the mother’s home, in terms of routines
and practices, but this
is not a prohibiting factor to the father meeting the
children’s needs and being available for them to spend time with him.
in the Court’s assessment, the father does not have the capacity to care
for the children on an equal time basis.
F was of the view that children can flourish in an equal time arrangement with
the support of a co-parenting relationship characterised
by “low conflict,
high respect and trust, and civil and constructive communication”. Such
was “clearly” absent
in the parties’ parenting relationship.
Accordingly, and given the children’s developmental issues and needs, an
time arrangement is “contraindicated” for this family.
her report, Ms F was of the view that the parental conflict between the parties
is too high to support a substantial time arrangement
of five nights per
fortnight for the father with the children. Given Y and Z’s needs and the
high conflict, Ms F assessed it
in the children’s best interests to have
one parent, being the mother, who primarily organises and facilitates the
attendance for treatment of their special needs. Accordingly,
Ms F assessed that spending a four-night block per fortnight with the
would be the best balance for the children’s needs for meaningful time
with the father whilst still providing them a
primary carer who provides a calm,
organised environment.
expert did not deviate from her stated opinion during cross-examination. She
elaborated on her reasoning stating that her proposal
is underpinned by making
sure that “the things that need to get done is done” whilst
providing the children the opportunity
to have meaningful time with the father
and their half-siblings.
Court accepts Ms F’s evidence in this regard.
The benefit to the children of being able to have a
relationship with the children’s parents, and other people who are
significant
to the children, where it is safe to do so
the observations of the children with the parents and other important family
members by Ms F, the children all appeared comfortable
with both of their
parents, Mr E, and the grandparents.
children all have close and loving relationships with each other and with their
half siblings, in both parents’ households.
children have a “very close, loving and trusting relationship” with
the mother.
children will benefit from spending time with the father, not only because of
the importance of their relationships with him,
but also because of the
importance of their relationships with their half-sisters in the father’s
Any other relevant matters
evidence does not suggest that either party has ever refused to follow medical
advice in relation to the children, although there
have been some
misunderstandings between the parties; for example, in relation to melatonin,
and whether this had been a medical
requirement. At times, rather than working
together for the benefit of the children, the parents have each pulled in their
own direction.
The children’s welfare is not about the parents being
right, it is about doing what is objectively best for the children, and
best may mean a range of different things in different circumstances.
flexibility and understanding is important. The parties both have the capacity
children ought to be able to attend extra-curricular activities as they choose
and as the parties, or either of them, deem appropriate.
The cost may be shared,
but does not need to be so. The parties have different financial circumstances;
this is a reality of life.
DETERMINATION
Where the Children live and time with the other parent
is in the children’s best interest that they live with the mother.
father does not pose a risk of unacceptable harm to the children.
evidence does not support an order for ongoing supervision of the
children’s time with the father, nor does it support the
orders sought by
the mother at the commencement of the hearing.
evidence does not support an order for equal time.
evidence does support an order for the children to spend meaningful time with
the father.
carefully considered all of the evidence, and after taking the time to reflect,
the Court finds that it is in the children’s
best interest to spend four
nights per fortnight with the father during school term, and half school
will allow the children time to settle into the father’s home, while still
spending the majority of their time in the mother’s
stability and safety for the children, in allowing them to have a relationship
with both of their parents while
retaining their primary residence in the
mother’s home. It will also allow them the opportunity of having
relationships with
all of their siblings.
orders will provide for all three children to commence spending time with the
father for 4 nights per fortnight immediately. While
Z has not yet spent as many
nights with the father as have her siblings, the time when Ms F recommended Z
would be able to cope with
having 4 nights away from the mother was from the
commencement of 2025.
is now significantly older than at the time of the interviews with Ms F, and is
in all likelihood better able to cope with this
additional change. This is in
the context of the many changes Z has had in the mother’s home, including
the mother re-partnering
and giving birth to two more children.
respect of school holidays, while half school holidays are overall in the
children’s best interest, there needs to be a slight
lead in time for Z in
this regard. This will mean that at the end of term 3, she will spend 5 nights
with the father rather than
half the holidays, and at the end of term 4, she
will spend 7 nights with the father rather than half the holidays. In 2026, she,
like the other two children, will have the benefit of half school holidays with
each of the parents.
Court appreciates that this will mean that in even numbered years, the children
will be spending Christmas with the mother and
in odd numbered years with the
father. For these particular children, and given the parental attitudes as have
been found, this will
likely be a more stable arrangement, rather than having
the special days split up and all the stress associated with having to split
holidays between their parents’ homes.
respect of special days, such as religious celebrations, birthdays, and
Father’s/Mother’s Day, the children will spend
time with their
parents as those special days fall during the time which is occurring in
accordance with the final orders.
parties always have the option of coming to an agreement about special days and
indeed, about other days as may be suitable.
there is no evidence that the parties speak poorly of each other to the
children, or in their hearing or presence, the observations
of Ms F about the
presentations she observed are sufficient to warrant a non-denigration order.
This will ensure that the parties
are, as best as possible, aware of how their
words and unspoken actions, might impact upon the children.
remainder of the orders are self-explanatory or have been explained elsewhere.
Parental Responsibility
there has been conflict between the parents and while the father has at times
been a slow-moving iceberg in terms of decision
making, the evidence still
supports an order for joint decision making.
is important for the children to know and understand that both of their parents
care deeply about them, and about what happens
to them. Given the
children’s particular needs, it is important, if not imperative, that both
parents have an input into any
medical or allied health treatments the children
receive and how they progress in school.
this regard, it is instructive to remind the parties that the effect of a
parenting order that provides for joint decision making
issues is taken to require each of the parties to consult each other party in
relation to each such decision,
and to make a genuine effort to come to a joint
decision. It does not require any other person to establish, before acting on a
communicated by
one of the parties, that the decision has
been made jointly.
Ms F was of the view that the orders should be prescriptive in this regard, the
Court does not find that this is so. The parties
are both adults, interested in
the welfare of their children. Even though there is existing conflict which has
been present over
many years, such conflict had not prevented any decisions
being made in relation to the children’s long-term welfare.
all of the circumstances and for all of the reasons explained, the orders as set
out at the forefront of these Reasons for Judgment
are in the children’s
best interests.
Court so orders.
I certify that the preceding two hundred and
eight (208) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Dated: 6 August 2025
It is noted though that B
spends time away from the father’s home when she stays in the home of her
boyfriend’s parents.
Subject to objections.
Affidavit of Single Expert filed 30 September 2024.
Australian Securities and
Investments Commission v Union Standard International Group Pty Ltd (No 4)
[2024] FCA 1481
Isles v Nelissen
[2022] FedCFamC1A 97
not a typographical error by the
Family Law Act 1975
s.60CC(2A).
See s 69ZT of
the Act with respect to the relevant parts of the
Evidence Act 1995
which do not apply to child-related proceedings. Chapter 4 remains applicable.
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
[1938] HCA 34
& Briginshaw
[1997] FamCA 57
(1997) 22 Fam LR 592
(1997) FLC 92-787
603; see also
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[2024] FedCFamC1A 249
Bain v Bain
[2017] FamCAFC 80
(2017) 319 FLR 119
Isles v Nelissen
Ibid at [85].
The Court is mindful that
the civil burden of proof does not apply to the assessment of risk.
See in general
Isles v Nelissen
Amended Amended Response filed to Initiating Application sealed 26 March 2025 at
Hearsay evidence
Affidavit of the mother
filed 27 February 2025 at [32].
Exhibit 11.
Act s 61DAA.
RTF format (704 KB)
Signed PDF/A format