EBS Holdings Pty Ltd v Ardex GmbH [2025] ATMO 221 (30 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by EBS Holdings
Pty Ltd to applications under
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) by Ardex GmbH to remove trade mark numbers 1368512
eco build SOLUTIONS economical
light-weight insulated building systems (figurative)
– and 2079898
Ecobuild Solutions
in the name of EBS
Holdings Pty Ltd
Louise Tuohy
REPRESENTATION:
Kerry Chrysiliou of Chrysilou IP
Michelle Calder of Spruson & Ferguson
2025 ATMO 221
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) – applications under
sections 92(4)(a)
section 92(4)(b)
considered and
not established – exercise of Registrar’s discretion not appropriate
– trade marks to be removed
from the Register
21 November 2023 Ardex GmbH (‘Removal Applicant’) filed applications
ss 92(4)(a)
(4)(b) of the
Trade Marks Act 1995
Application(s)’) for the complete removal from the Register of Trade Marks
(‘Register’) of the
following registered trade marks in the name of
EBS Holding Pty Ltd (‘Removal Opponent’):
number: 1368512
Trade mark:
(‘512 Mark’)
Filing date: 24 June 2010
Specification: Class 19:
Building elements of stone; building
materials in the nature of slates for tiling; building products of slate;
mineral based building
materials having insulating properties; non-metallic
building materials in the form of boards; non-metallic building materials in
form of panels
(‘512 Goods’)
Trade mark number: 2079898
Trade mark: Ecobuild Solutions (‘898 Mark’)
Filing date: 6 April 2020
Specification:
Acoustic building materials (other than for
insulation); Building materials made of fibre cement; Building materials made of
fibres; Building materials made of mineral wool; Cementitious building
materials (other than in the nature of paint); Laminated building
(non-metallic); Mineral based building materials having fire protection
properties; Non-metallic building materials; Non-metallic
building materials for
flooring; Non-metallic building materials for use in cladding; Non-metallic
building materials having insulating
properties; Non-metallic building materials
having thermal insulation properties; Non-metallic building materials in sheet
(‘898 Goods’)
(collectively referred to as the ‘512 and 898 Marks’ and
‘512 and 898 Goods’)
22 December 2023 the Removal Opponent filed its Notices of Intention to Oppose
the Removal Applications, followed by its Statements
of Grounds and Particulars
on 22 January 2024. On 29 February 2024 the Removal Applicant filed it Notices
of Intention to Defend
the Removal Applications.
the Removal Opponent filed the following evidence in support in accordance with
the Regulations and filed essentially identical
evidence in respect of both
oppositions:
Declaration of
Herbert Gunther Klintworth, Director and Secretary of Ecobuild Solutions
(Operations) Pty Ltd for the Removal Opponent,
made on 7 June 2024, with
Annexures HGK-1 to HGK-27 (‘Klintworth’).
Removal Opponent did not file evidence in answer.
time for filing evidence had ended the parties were given an opportunity to
request a hearing. Both parties requested an oral
hearing by videoconference.
The matter was allocated to me to determine as a delegate of the Registrar of
Trade Marks (‘Registrar’).
I heard the matter on 8 October 2025.
Kerry Chrysiliou of Chrysiliou IP appeared on behalf of the Removal Opponent.
Michelle Calder
of Spruson & Ferguson appeared on behalf of the Removal
Applicant. The parties’ oral submissions were supplemented by written
submissions filed prior to the hearing.
Legal Framework
9 of the Act deals with the removal of trade marks from the Register due to
92(4)(a) and 92(4)(b) provide:
application under subsection (1) or (3) (
application
) may be made on either or both of the following grounds, and
on no other grounds:
(a) that, on the day on which the application for the registration of the
trade mark was filed, the applicant
for registration had no intention in good
(i) to use the trade mark in Australia; or
(ii) to authorise the use of the trade mark in Australia; or
(iii) to assign the trade mark to a body corporate for use by the body
corporate in Australia;
in relation to the goods and/or services to which the non‑use application
relates and that the registered
(iv) has not used the trade mark in Australia; or
(v) has not used the trade mark in good faith in Australia;
in relation to those goods and/or services at any time before the period of one
month ending on the day
on which the non‑use application is filed;
(b) that the trade mark has remained registered for a continuous period of
3 years ending one month before the
day on which the non‑use application
is filed, and, at no time during that period, the person who was then the
registered owner:
(i) used the trade mark in Australia; or
(ii) used the trade mark in good faith in Australia;
in relation to the goods and/or services to which the application relates.
Note 2: If non‑use of a trade mark has been established in a particular
place or export market, then instead of the trade mark
being removed from the
Register, conditions or limitations may be imposed under section 102 on the
registration of the trade mark
so that its registration does not extend to that
place or export market.
Note 3: For when the registration of a trade mark is taken to have
effect, see sections 72 and 239A.
proceeding, I note that the Removal Opponent submits that the non-use removal
action under s 92(4)(b) in relation to the 898
Mark was filed prematurely. The
Removal Opponent states that the 898 Mark was entered on the Register on 16
November 2020 and that
s 92(4)(b) says that: “(b) that the trade mark has
remained registered for a continuous period of 3 years ending one month
the day on which the non-use application is filed...”. For the Removal
Opponent the registration was not vulnerable
to removal for non-use until after
it had remained registered until 16 November 2023. As the non-use application
was filed on 21
November 2023 and the one month before the day on which the
non-use application was filed ended on 21 October 2023 and the registration
not remained registered for a continuous period of 3 years on that date.
period referred to in s 92(4)(b) refers to the period in which the ‘trade
mark has remained registered’. The starting
point for this period is
determined by s 72, which states that a registration is taken to have effect
from the filing date of an
application which in this case is 6 April 2020. This
is what is intended by the inclusion of Note 3, which directs the reader to
to determine the date for when registration of a trade mark is taken to have
effect. The Removal Application was filed on 6
April 2020, as such it was made
after 3 years from the date the trade mark was entered into the Register.
Therefore, the application
for removal under s 92(4)(b) in relation to the 898
Mark was properly filed in accordance with s 93.
Removal Opponent nominated grounds under ss 92(4)(a) and 92(4)(b). Given the way
that s 92(4)(a) is expressed, this provision
essentially merges with
s 92(4)(b) once a trade mark has been registered for 5 years in the case of
the 512 Mark and 3 years in the
case of the 898
Accordingly, it is only
necessary to consider the s 92(4)(b) ground.
s 92(4)(b) the relevant period during which the Removal Opponent must establish
use of the 512 and 898 Marks is the three year
period ending on 21 October 2023
(‘Relevant Period’).
to s 100(1), the Removal Opponent bears the onus of rebutting an allegation made
under s 92(4)(b).
Woolly Bull Enterprises Pty Ltd v Reynolds
, Drummond J observed that the
expression ‘use in good faith’ has a well understood meaning in
terms of s 92, namely it
is ‘real, as opposed to token, use in a
commercial sense’.
the use is in good faith, a ‘single bona fide use of the mark’ may
be enough to rebut an allegation of
Little weight is to be
given to assertions of use which are not supported by documentary
Nodoz Trade
, Wilberforce J said that if a registered owner relies on one single act
of use of the trade mark, then that single act ought to be
established by
‘if not conclusive proof, at any rate overwhelmingly convincing
principles regarding use as a trade mark were recently summarised in
Self Care IP Holdings Pty Ltd v Allergan
Australia Pty Ltd
, in which the High Court noted the
Use of a trade mark in relation to goods means use of a
trade mark upon, or in physical or other relation to, those goods, and so
include use of the mark on product packaging or marketing such as on a website.
There is a distinction, although not always easy
to apply, between the use of a
sign in relation to goods and the use of a sign as a trade mark. A trade mark is
a sign used, or intended
to be used, to distinguish goods dealt with by one
trader from goods dealt with by other traders; that is, as a badge of origin to
indicate a connection between the goods and the user of the mark.
Whether a sign has been "use[d] as a trade mark" is assessed objectively
without reference to the subjective trading intentions of
the user. As the
meaning of a sign, such as a word, varies with the context in which the sign is
used, the objective purpose and
nature of use are assessed by reference to
context. That context includes the relevant trade, the way in which the words
displayed, and how the words would present themselves to persons who
read them and form a view about what they connote. A well known
example where
the use was not "as a trade mark" was in Irving's
Yeast-Vite Ltd v
, where the phrase "Yeast tablets a substitute for 'Yeast-Vite'"
was held to be merely descriptive and not a use of "Yeast-Vite" as
a trade mark.
Therefore, it did not contravene the YEAST-VITE mark.
The existence of a descriptive element or purpose does not necessarily
preclude the sign being used as a trade mark. Where there are
several purposes
for the use of the sign, if one purpose is to distinguish the goods provided in
the course of trade that will be
sufficient to establish use as a trade mark.
Where there are several words or signs used in combination, the existence of a
dominant "brand" is relevant to the assessment of what would be taken to
be the effect of the balance of the label, but does not
mean another part of the
label cannot also act to distinguish the
proceed on the basis that the burden of proof is the ordinary civil standard of
the balance of probabilities.
accordance with s 101, if the grounds for removal are established, I may
decide to remove the 512 and 898 Marks from the Register
in respect of any or
all of the goods identified in the Removal Applications, or if satisfied it is
reasonable to do so, decide not
to remove the 512 Mark and 898 Marks from the
Use of the 512 and 898 Marks during the Relevant
proceeding, I note that the Removal Opponent claims use of a ‘slightly
modified version’ of its 512 Mark as
(‘Logo Mark’)
Removal Opponent submits that the Logo Mark qualifies as use under s 100(2), as
being the 512 Mark with additions or alterations
not substantially affecting its
Removal Applicant argues that use of the Logo Mark and the Removal
Opponent’s additional logo trade mark
(‘ES Logo Mark’) which appears in the
Annexures HGK-21,HGK-24 and HGK-27 to Klintworth, are not use of the 512 Mark
additions or alterations affecting its identity.
s 100(3)(a), I must consider whether use of the Logo Mark and/or the ES Logo
Mark is use of the 512 Mark with additions or alterations
not substantially
affecting its identity. The test is the same as the test in respect of
substantial identity and this requires that
the trade marks are considered side
by side while having regard to the essential features of the trade
Where a total impression of
resemblance emerges from the comparison, the trade marks will be considered
substantially identical.
For the purposes of comparison, I have reproduced the
respective trade marks
ES Logo Mark
a side by side comparison, I find the 512 Mark and the Logo Mark are
substantially identical. The essential elements of both trade
marks are the
logo which consists of the letters EC superimposed on a device of two leaves and
the letter O inside a square with
rounded corners, beside the word BUILD
superimposed on the word SOLUTIONS. The 512 Mark consists of the additional
words ECONOMICAL
LIGHT-WEIGHT INSULATION BUILDING SYSTEMS which appear directly
under the essential elements. I consider the additional words in the
are non-distinctive elements and a total impression of resemblance emerges.
find that the 512 Mark and the ES Logo Mark are substantially identical. The
essential elements of both trade marks are the logo
which consists of the
letters EC superimposed on a device of two leaves and the letter O inside a
square with rounded corners, beside
the word BUILD superimposed on the word
SOLUTIONS. The 512 Mark consists of the additional words ECONOMICAL LIGHT-WEIGHT
BUILDING SYSTEMS which appear directly under the essential elements.
In comparison the essential elements in Logo Mark are underlined
additional words ECOBUILD SOLUTIONS appear below the line. I consider the
additional wording in both trade marks are non-distinctive
elements. As such a
total impression of resemblance emerges from a side by side comparison.
Removal Opponent also argues that the ES Logo Mark should be considered as two
trade marks, that is, use of the 898 Mark near
(underneath) the Logo Mark. In
response the Removal Applicant argues that the ES Logo Mark has been used solus
and not together and
should not be considered as two trade marks. I agree with
the Removal Applicant, Annexures HGK-21, HGK-24 and HKG, 27 to Klintworth
show the ES Logo Mark used as a whole. While the Removal Opponent argues that
the use of the words ECOBUILD SOLUTIONS underneath
the essential elements of the
Logo Mark is use of the 898 Mark in the same manner as Allsop J in
Anheuser-Busch, Inc v Budejovicky Budvar, Narodni Podnik
Budejovicky
Budejovicky Budvar used “Budweiser Budvar” as a trade mark on its
labels and packaging notwithstanding the
presence of a clear, dominant brand:
Budejovicky Budvar. In my opinion
Budejovicky Budvar
can be distinguished
from the present matter. In this case the essential elements in the Logo Mark
are distinctive material and when
viewed in close proximity to the words
ECOBUILD SOLUTIONS have the effect of substantially diluting any trade mark
significance that
attached to the plain words ECOBUILD SOLUTIONS by
themselves.
declares that he is the sole Director of the Removal Opponent and Ecobuild
Solutions (Operations) Pty Limited (‘EBSO’)
and the 512 and 898
Marks are used in Australia under a common control and authority. Klintworth
annexes current and historical company
extracts from the Australian Securities
& Investment Commission confirming his directorship of both
extracts from the
Internet Archiving Service Wayback Machine of the website
https://ecobuildsolutions.com.au/
(‘EBS Website’) dated between 28 October 2020 to 25 March 2023. The
extracts show the EBS Website’s home page which
displays the following
trade marks and statements about the Removal Opponent and its
Ecobuild Solutions are experts in researching, sourcing, inspecting and
testing building products. Our focus is on sourcing and supplying
high quality
magnesium oxysulphate (‘MOS’) cement boards (ie: non-chloride MgO
boards) and complementary products.
In our quest to optimise our MOS products, we have vetted dozens of
factories, finalised board formulations and specifications, conducted
testing, and considered building techniques and installation methodologies. The
net result is the supply of high quality,
extreme strength MOS cement boards
which provide unrivalled benefits to our end-customers.
Our MOS cement boards are branded OxyMag and distributed exclusively via our
partners ITI and John Cook & Sons throughout Australia.
Stockists of our
OxyMag cement boards can be found at the following websites:
www.itiaustralia.com.au
www.johncooks.com.au
states that the Removal Opponent uploaded a promotional video on YouTube on 8
August 2019 in relation to the OxyMag product.
Annexure HGK-22 to Klintworth is
a screenshot from the video dated 24 January 2024 displaying the
trade mark (‘OxyMag Mark’) and the following channel
Confidential
Annexure HGK-23 to Klintworth comprises copies of purchase confirmation
documentation for OxyMag products issued by EBSO
to ITI Pty Ltd
(‘ITI’) dated between August 2021 to September 2023 and to John Cook
& Sons Pty Ltd (‘JCS’)
dated February 2022. The purchase
confirmations issued to ITI display ITI’s trade mark (‘ITI
Mark’) as follows:
Confidential
Annexure HGK-24 to Klintworth comprises copies of tax invoices issued by EBSO to
ITI for MOS products dated between November
2020 to July 2023. The tax invoices
from November 2020 to March 2021 are issued under the 512 Mark and the invoices
issued from September
2021 to July 2023 were issued under the ES Logo Mark.
Confidential
Annexure HGK-25 to Klintworth comprises average sales of building products sold
under the 512 and 898 Marks in Australia
for the years 2021 to 2023.
states that since around August 2023, when OxyMag products are shipped to
customers in Australia, the Removal Opponent
supplies a hood which includes the
898 Mark. Annexure HGK-26 to Klintworth comprises a copy of the artwork for the
hood and photographs
of the hood which shows that the goods are supplied by
Ecobuild Solutions. I have reproduced an image of the hood
my assessment of the evidence before me, I am not satisfied that the Removal
Opponent has used the 512 Mark in relation to 512
Goods or the 898 Mark in
relation to the 898 Goods in the Relevant Period.
EBS Website page shows use of the 898 Mark in the domain name and the ES Logo
Mark at the top of the page. The page states that
the Removal Opponent is an
expert in researching, sourcing, inspecting and testing building products and
that it supplies MOS cement
products branded OxyMag. These OxyMag cement goods
are distributed exclusively via it partners ITI and JCS. As such I consider that
the Removal Opponent’s statements on the EBS Website demonstrates that it
is operating as a wholesaler. This is because it
has direct relationships with
the manufacturers by sourcing products and then suppling those products to its
stockists, not directly
to the market, in a tiered distribution system.
the bottom of the page the ITI Mark appears next to the OxyMag Mark which
further emphasises that it is ITI that supplies the OxyMag
products to the
market and not the Removal Opponent. Moreover, the Removal Applicant has
submitted the OxyMag Mark is a registered
trade mark of the
and I note that the Removal
Opponent has not provided any licencing agreements with ITI which supports that
it is the owner of OxyMag
Mark in Australia.
Removal Opponent’s You Tube account shows use of the 898 Mark on the
handle. However, the screenshot from the Removal Opponent’s
video does not
demonstrate the OxyMag goods are available for sale.
Removal Opponent’s sales figures over the Relevant Period are moderate and
supported by its evidence of purchase confirmations
and invoices. However, none
of the documentation reference ecobuild solutions products and only demonstrate
that EBSO is the supplier
of OxyMag or MOS goods to its stockists ITI and JGS.
Removal Opponent’s evidence of the hood covering for the OxyMag products
it supplies to ITI shows clear use of the ITI Mark
and OxyMag Mark. The hood
also includes wording which says that the items are supplied by ECOBUILD
SOLUTIONS, and while I consider
this inclusion shows use of the 898 Mark, it
only identifies the Removal Opponent as providing wholesale services rather than
the Removal Opponent submits that the 512 Mark and the 898 Mark are house brands
and OxyMag is a sub-brand the evidence before
me does not support this finding.
Therefore, I find that the Removal Opponent has not used the 512 Mark in
relation to the 512 Goods
or the 898 Mark in relation to the 898 Goods in the
Relevant Period, rather they operate to identify it as a provider of wholesale
Obstacles to Use
Removal Opponent does not formally submit that there have been any matters that
amount to an obstacle to the use of the 512 and
898 Marks for the 512 and 898
Goods in the Relevant Period, pursuant to s 100(3)(c) and in the interests of
completeness I have been
unable to identify any such obstacles.
there is no obstacle to use of the 512 and 898 Marks, it is therefore necessary
to consider whether I should exercise the discretion
to allow the 512 and 898
Marks to remain on the Register for any of the 512 and 898 Goods.
Registrar’s discretion
101(3) provides:
If satisfied that it is reasonable to do so, the
Registrar or the court may decide that the trade mark should not be removed from
the Register even if the grounds on which the application was made have been
established.
Removal Opponent bears the onus of satisfying the Registrar that the discretion
under s 101(3) ought to be exercised in its
this matter, the question is whether it is reasonable not to remove the 512 Mark
in respect of the 512 Goods and the 898 Mark in
respect to the 898 Goods even
though the Removal Opponent did not establish that it had used the 512 Mark and
898 Mark in relation
to the respective
Somers Enterprises Australia Pty Ltd v Basefun Pty
Bennett J stated that
the range of factors considered in the exercise of the discretion has included
whether or not:
(a) there has been abandonment of the mark;
(b) the registered proprietor of the mark still has a residual reputation in
(c) there have been sales by the registered owner of the mark of the goods
for which removal was sought since the relevant period
(d) the applicant for removal had entered the market in knowledge of the
registered mark;
(e) the registered proprietors were aware of the applicant’s sales
under the mark;
(f) A further factor, explicitly noted in s 101(4), but which falls within
the scope of the discretion in s
, is whether or not
the trade mark under consideration has been used by its registered owner in
respect of similar goods or closely
services...
public interest and the interests of the parties are inherent in the above
factors. In this regard
Austin, Nichols & Co Inc v Lodestar
provided the
following guidance:
The purpose of Part 9 is to provide for the
removal of unused trade marks from the Register. In that regard it is plainly
to protect the integrity of the Register, and in this way, the
interests of the consumer. At the same time, however, it seeks to
accommodate,
where reasonable, the interests of the registered trade mark
Removal Opponent submits that it has not abandoned its 512 and 898 Marks and
that it has made sales in 2024. The Removal Opponent
argues that it still has a
residual reputation in the 512 and 898 Marks and Klintworth annexes four
examples of building products
the Removal Opponent has promoted under the 512
and 898 Marks between 2012 and 2020:
Realstone: being
building element of stone, building element in the nature of slates for tiling
and building products for
InsuWall: being
a mineral based building materials having insulating properties, non-metallic
building materials in the form of boards
and non-metallic building materials in
the form of panels.
InsulFloor:
being non-metalllic building materials in the form of boards and non-metallic
buildng materials in the form of
Removal Opponent submits that it also used the 512 and 898 Marks in relation to
the following building product between 2017 and
magnesium oxide building product being a mineral based building material, a
non-metallic building material in the form
of boards and a non-metallic building
material in the forms of panels.
annexed an extract from Wayback Machine featuring the ‘about us’
page from the EBS Website dated February 2017.
The page states that the Removal
Opponent provides innovative building materials and solutions that address the
needs of builders,
and that its ‘simple and direct route to market’
as well as its low fixed costs business structure allows it to distribute
products at the most affordable prices possible.
Removal Opponent submits that the Removal Applicant filed a trade mark
application under number 2300668 for the following trade
mark in classes 1 and
(‘RA Mark’)
Removal Opponent argues that there are similarities between the RA Mark and the
512 and 898 Marks, and if a third party were to
adopt a trade mark similar to
either of its trade marks, and use that trade mark for building products in
Australia, there would
be confusion and/or deception because purchasers would
assume that the third party products were sold by, or connected with the Removal
response the Removal Applicant submits that the removal of 512 and 898 Marks
would not lead to deception or confusion as there
is no evidence to show that
consumers associate the 512 and 898 Marks with any goods offered by the Removal
Removal Applicant submits that the 512 and 898 Marks have been abandoned insofar
as the Opponent’s 512 and 898 Goods are
concerned, as there is no evidence
that the Removal Opponent has ever sold or intended to sell, or offered for
sale, any goods under
or by reference to the 512 and 898 Marks.
Removal Applicant argues that the Removal Opponent has not established a
residual reputation in its 512 and 898 Marks, and if
a residual reputation
exists, that reputation does not subsist in the context of the goods. The
Removal Applicant avers that the
Removal Opponent could only possibly
demonstrate a residual reputation in supplying goods in the flooring or building
field. Furthermore,
there is a public interest in the Register reflecting what
is being used by traders.
my view the Removal Opponent use of the 512 and 898 Marks prior to the Relevant
Period is in relation to the sourcing of building
products and in the direct
market sale of those products. However, I am not satisfied that the Removal
Opponent has used the 512
and 898 Marks in relation to the 512 and 898 Goods.
The building products promoted by the Removal Opponent appear to be advertised
under the Removal Opponent’s private labelling, that is, under the names
RealStone, InsuWall, InsuFloor and EcoEasy, and the
market recognition in the
512 and 898 Marks is solely for the Removal Opponent’s services as the
sourcing agent and direct
market seller of the goods. As such I am not satisfied
that the Removal Opponent has a residual reputation in the 512 and 898 Marks
relation to the 512 and 898 Goods.
the Removal Opponent has argued that it has not abandoned the 512 and 898 Marks,
and highlights sales of the OxyMag product
by the Removal Opponent into 2024, it
has only demonstrated market recognition and value in respect of services and
not the in the
512 and 898 Goods.
Removal Opponent asks that if use is only found in relation to services, then I
am to consider whether or not the 512 and 898
Marks have been used in respect of
closely related goods. The Removal Opponent has used the 512 and 898 Marks in
relation to sourcing,
direct sale, wholesale and in the supply of building
materials. Consumers generally obtain building materials through retail or
outlets that are often owned by the manufacturers. In this case the
Removal Opponent researches, sources, inspects and test building
products to
supply them to the market. The building product goods are not manufactured by
the Removal Opponent, they are promoted
under privately labelled names and the
512 and 898 Marks are used to identify the Removal Opponent as the sourcing
agent and the
direct market seller/wholesaler/supplier of the goods. I believe
consumers of building materials are aware of the surrounding circumstances
relating to the Removal Opponent’s services and are unlikely to be
confused by the use of similar trade marks in relation to
agree with the Removal Applicant that the removal of the 512 and 898 Marks will
not affect the Removal Opponent’s ability
to continue to provide its
services. While the Removal Applicant’s private interest in this matter is
clear, having applied
to register the RA Mark, I am unpersuaded that the removal
of the 512 and 898 Marks for the 512 and 898 Goods would result in consumers
confusion or practically impact on the interests of the Removal Opponent.
I note the public interest in maintaining the integrity of the Register, which
necessitates the removal of unused trade marks.
Health World Ltd v
Shin-Sun Australia Pty Ltd
, on the subject of the condition of the Register,
the Court said:
[T]he legislative scheme reveals a concern with the
condition of the Register of Trade Marks. It is a concern that it have
“integrity”
and that it be “pure”. It is a “public
mischief” if the Register is not pure, for there is “public
in [its] purity”. The concern and the public interest, viewed from the
angle of consumers, is to ensure that the Register
is maintained as an accurate
record of marks which perform their statutory function – to indicate the
trade origins of the
goods to which it is intended that they be
Considering
all of the above, I am not satisfied that it is reasonable to exercise the
Registrar’s discretion to allow the 512
and 898 Marks to remain registered
in respect of the 512 and 898 Goods.
Removal Opponent has not established its oppositions to removal of trade mark
registrations 1368512 and 2079898. I direct that
registrations 1368512 and
2079898 be removed from the Register in respect of all the 512 and 898 Goods,
one month from the date of
this decision. In the event of an appeal, I direct
that the removal shall not occur until the appeal has either been discontinued
or, in the event of a decision from the Court, that the registrations be dealt
with as the Court sees fit.
parties sought an award of costs. It is usual for costs to follow the event, and
I see no reason to depart from that principle
here. I award costs in respect of
trade mark number 1368512 against the Removal Opponent as allowed by Schedule 8
of the Regulations.
In respect of trade mark number 2079898 I award reduced
costs against the Removal Opponent in the same manner as indicated in
Industries (Malaysia) Berhad v James Hardie & Coy Pty
Louise Tuohy
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and Designs
Unless otherwise indicated,
any references to sections or regulations, below, are references to sections or
regulations of the
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) (‘Act’) or the
Trade Marks Regulations 1995
(Cth) (‘Regulations’),
respectively.
Per s 93(2) prior to the
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment (Productivity Commission Response Part 1
and Other Measures) Act 2018
as applies in the present matter. The updated s
93(2) applies to trade mark applications filed from 24 February 2019 onwards.
Moores MDP Pty Ltd v Moore Stephens International Licensing
[2023] ATMO 86
Auswool Products Pty Ltd v Source Co International Pty
[2022] ATMO 173
Bangkok Broadcasting & TV. Co Ltd v Seven
Network (Operations) Limited
[2021] ATMO 78
Live Entertainment
Investments III Pty Ltd v The Education Group Pty Ltd
[2018] ATMO 3
[2001] FCA 261
Great White Shark
Enterprises Inc v Joose Apparel Pty Ltd
[1998] ATMO 8 (Hearing
(1962) RPC 1
[2023] HCA 8
CJ, Gageler, Gordon, Edelman and Gleeson JJ) (citations omitted).
Telstra Corporation Limited
v Phone Directories Company Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot
and Edelman JJ), albeit in respect of an action opposing registration rather
than removal.
The Shell Company Australia
Ltd v Esso Standard Oil (Australia) Limited
[1963] HCA 66
(1963) 109 CLR 407
(Windeyer J).
[2002] 390, 191
Sports Warehouse, Inc v
Fry Consulting Pty Ltd
[2010] FCA 664
, [133] (Kenny J).
Klintworth, Annexures HGK-1
Klintworth, Annexures HGK-21
and HGK-27.
Verified on the Register of
Trade Marks, trade mark number 1870779.
Optical 88 Ltd v Optical
[2010] FCA 1380
, [273] (Yates J).
Austin, Nichols & Co
Inc v Lodestar Anstalt
[2012] FCAFC 8
, [28] (Jacobson, Yates and Katzmann
JJ) (‘Austin’).
[2025] FCA 218.
Ibid [43] (citations
[2012] FCAFC 8.
Klintworth, Annexure HGK9,
HGK-10, HGK-12 and HGK-13.
Klintworth, Annexure HGK-6
Klintworth, Annexure HGK-8,
HGK-14 and HGK-15.
Klintworth, Annexure HGK-11,
HGK16 and HGK-17.
Verified on the Register of
Trade Marks.
[2010] HCA 13
(French CJ,
Gummow, Heydon, Crennan and Bell JJ) (citations omitted).
[2001] ATMO 78
(Hearing Officer
RTF format (3.99 MB)
Signed PDF/A format