BJHK and Secretary, Department of Employment and Workplace Relations (Social security second review) [2025] ARTA 2392 (11 November 2025)
BJHK and Secretary, Department of Employment and Workplace Relations
(Social security second review) [2025] ARTA 2392 (11 November
Applicant: BJHK
Respondent: Secretary, Department of Employment and Workplace
Tribunal Number: 2022/1600
Tribunal: Deputy President K Dordevic
(second review)
Place: Sydney
Date: 11 November 2025
The Tribunal sets aside the decision under review and remits
the matter for reconsideration in accordance with the order that:
(i) the Applicant was overpaid in jobseeker payment and COVID-19 supplement in
the amount of $6,891.29 during the period 3 September
2020 to 6 January 2021;
(ii) the overpayment is a debt and is recoverable by the Commonwealth;
(iii) the Secretary is to recalculate the interest charge imposed on the debt;
(iv) the interest charge, as recalculated, is a debt due to the Commonwealth.
...............................
.........................................
President K Dordevic
Names used in all published decisions are pseudonyms. Any references
appearing in square brackets indicate that information has been
removed from
this decision and replaced with generic information so as not to identify
involved individuals as required by
subsections 201(1A)
(1B) of the
Security (Administration) Act 1999
SOCIAL SECURITY – jobseeker payment – COVID-19 Supplement
– debt recovery – applicant’s living circumstances
facto relationship – applicant’s reporting requirements – debt
recalculations according to law –
repayment of debt by instalments –
special circumstances not established – debt recoverable at law –
decision under
review set aside and remitted
Legislation
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
Social Security Act 1991
Social Security (Administration) Act 1999
Beadle and Director-General of Social Security
[1984] AATA 176
Chaplin v Sectary, Department of Social Services
[2025] FCAFC 89
Dranichnikov v Centrelink
[2007] FCA 25
(2007) 100 ALD 9
FTXB and Secretary, Department of Social Services
[2024] AATA 3021
Groth v Secretary Department of Social Security
(1995) FCA 1708
Judd and Secretary, Department of Social Services
[2022] AATA 727
Lyall and Secretary, Department of Social Services
[2023] AATA
Sectary, Department of Social Security v Hales
(1988) 82 FCR 154; FCA
application is brought by the Applicant who is seeking review of a decision to
raise and recover an overpayment of jobseeker
payment and COVID-19 supplement.
RELEVANT BACKGROUND
27 April 2020 the Applicant lodged a claim for jobseeker payment. In his claim
he declared that he had never married or lived with
30 April 2020 Services Australia –
granted the Applicant
jobseeker payment at the single rate with effect from 16 April 2020.
1 July 2021 Centrelink raised a debt in the amount of $3,467.65 for the period
of 11 September 2020 to 6 January 2021 (
relevant period
) on the basis
that the Applicant had failed to advise that he was a member of a couple during
the relevant period and so received
more jobseeker payment than he was entitled
27 July 2021 the Applicant requested an internal review of the decision and on
10 September 2021 an authorised review officer affirmed
the decision.
4 November 2021 the Applicant applied to the then Social Services and Child
Support Division of the Administrative Appeals Tribunal
) and on 11
January 2022 the Tribunal at first review affirmed the decision.
26 February 2022 the Applicant applied to the then General Division of the AAT
for review of the decision.
25 October 2023 the Tribunal convened a directions hearing. As the Applicant
failed to attend the matter was dismissed pursuant
to section 42A(2)(a) of the
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
4 June 2024, relying on special circumstances, the Applicant applied for
reinstatement of his application, which was not objected
to by the Secretary,
Department of Employment and Workplace Relations. On 6 September 2024 the matter
was reinstated.
14 October 2024 the AAT became the Administrative Review Tribunal
). This decision and statement of reasons is made by the
Tribunal at second review.
hearing took place on 27 October 2025. The Applicant was self-represented. The
Secretary was represented by Mr David Rowe of Counsel.
The Tribunal has before
it in evidence the Joint Tender Bundle as provided by the parties (Exhibit 1),
the Respondent’s amended
Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions dated
23 October 2025 and the amended MultiCal – Centrelink debt calculations
on 24 October 2025 (Exhibit 2).
issues to be determined in this application are:
whether the
Applicant was overpaid jobseeker payment and COVID-19 supplement during the
relevant period; and, if so
what is the
quantum of the overpayment;
interest charge should apply to the overpayment;
whether the
overpayment is a debt? and, if so
whether all or
part of the debt should be recovered.
LEGISLATIVE SCHEME
statutory provisions relevant to this review are contained in the
Security Act 1991
(Act) and the
Social Security (Administration) Act
(Administration Act).
Tribunal must have regard to the legislative provisions that were in place
during the relevant period. Therefore, any reference
to the Act and
Administration Act refers to the provisions as in place during the relevant
period, unless otherwise stated.
Act sets out the requirements for jobseeker payment. In short, subsection 593(1)
of the Act states that a person is qualified
for the payment if the person is
unemployed, at least 22 years of age and not age pension age, is an Australian
resident, not in
receipt of youth allowance and meets the requirements of
subsections 593(1A) and (1AC). Subsection 593(1A) applies if a person is
incapacitated for work and subsection 593(1AC) is satisfied if a person is
willing to actively seek, accept and undertake paid work
in Australia among
other criteria. It is the latter provision that is relevant in the
Applicant’s case.
643 of the Act provides that the rate of jobseeker payment is to be worked out
using the Benefit Rate Calculator B at the
end of section 1068. Subsection
1068(2) of the Act states that where the person is in a de facto relationship,
their rate of payment
is to take into account the ordinary income and assets of
the partner when applying the income and asset tests respectively.
and employment income is defined in section 8 and subsection 8(1A) respectively.
Subsection 8(2) provides that an income amount
‘earned, derived or
received’ refers to an income amount earned, derived or received from any
source and by any means.
23 of the Act defines ‘instalment period’ to mean a period
determined by the Secretary under section 43 of the
Administration Act to be an
instalment period of the person. Subsection 43(1) of the Administration Act
states that a payment is
to be paid in arrears and in instalments not exceeding
G of that calculator sets down the income test, whereby a person’s maximum
rate of payment is reduced by a person’s
ordinary income. Module G7A
provides that ordinary income is taken into account in the fortnight in which it
is first earned, derived
or received.
1073B of the Act, as introduced on 20 September 2003, set down the requirements
for the daily attribution of income provided
the person was in receipt of a
pension or benefit, their rate of payment was worked out under the income test
module in the same
chapter and the person earns, derives or receives employment
income during the person’s particular instalment period. If all
criteria are met, the person is taken to earn, derive or receive the income
on each day in that instalment period, an amount of employment income
worked out by dividing the total amount of the employment income
the person’s instalment period “
by the number of days in the
7 December 2020 the rate calculator in Module-G7A no longer applied. Part 3.10,
Division 1AA came into effect and section 1073A,
as came into effect on 7
December 2020, set down the requirements for the attribution of income provided
the person was in receipt
of a pension or benefit, their rate of payment was
worked out under the income test module in the same chapter and where the
income was in respect of employment period/s are paid in an
instalment period to or for the benefit of the person by the same employer.
all these criteria were met, subsection 1073A(2) declared the person was taken
to receive the income “
over a period (the
assessment period
that consists of the number of days that is equal to the sum of the number of
days in each employment period, where the assessment
period begins on the first
day of the instalment period in which the amounts of employment income are
2 August 2023, following a referral from Services Australia and the Secretary,
the Commonwealth Ombudsman undertook an investigation
into how Services
Australia had been apportioning income to calculate social security payment
rates before 7 December 2020. The Ombudsman
found that since at least 2003
Services Australia was unlawfully apportioning customers’ income across
two or more Centrelink
646 of the Act provides for the payment of COVID-19 supplement if a person was
in receipt of jobseeker payment from 27 April
1229A(1) of the Act provides that if a person is given notice of a debt and the
debt remains unpaid on which the debt is
due to be paid, then the person is
liable to pay a penalty of an interest charge. Subsection 1229A(2) of the Act
states that the
period starts at the beginning of the day after the due day and
ends at the earlier of either debt or interest charge remains unpaid
before the first day on which the person makes a payment under an arrangement.
Subsection 1229A(3) describes how the interest
charge is worked out and section
1229D sets out how to calculate the interest charge. Subsection 1229C of the Act
states that an
interest charge is a debt due to the Commonwealth.
1229E and 1229F set down, respectively, when a person is exempt from interest
charge or where the Secretary may determine
that an interest charge is not
1223(1) of the Act states that if a social security payment is made to a person,
and the person who obtains that payment
was not entitled to receive that
benefit, the amount is a debt due to the Commonwealth when the benefit is
1236 of the Act provides for a discretion to write off a debt if the debt is
irrecoverable at law, the debtor has no capacity
to repay the debt, or the
whereabouts of the debtor are unknown after all reasonable attempts to locate
the debtor have been made
or it is not cost effective to take recovery
1236(1B) states that a debt is taken to be irrecoverable at law if, and only if
there is no proof of the debt capable of
sustaining legal proceedings for its
recovery, or the debtor is discharged from bankruptcy and the debt was incurred
before the debtor
became bankrupt and was not incurred by fraud or the debtor
has died leaving no estate or insufficient funds in the debtor’s
repay the debt.
1236(1C) then states that a debtor is taken to have a capacity to repay the debt
by way of deductions from a social security
payment, deductions under
A New Tax System (Family Assistance) (Administration) Act 1999
(the Family Assistance Administration Act) or setting off under
section 84A of the Family Assistance Administration Act, unless recovery
those means would result in the debtor being in severe financial hardship.
1237A of the Act permits waiver of a debt, or a part of a debt, arising from
sole administrative error provided that the debtor
received the overpayment in
good faith, provided the debt was not raised within a period of six weeks from
the first payment that
gave rise to the debt or if the debt arose because the
person had complied with their notification obligations and the debt was not
raised within six weeks from the end of the notification period, whichever is
1237AAD of the Act provides that all or part of a debt may be waived if the debt
did not arise, wholly or in part, because
the debtor or another person made a
false statement or representation and there are special circumstances (other
than financial hardship
alone) that make it desirable to waive the debt, and it
is more appropriate to waive rather than write off all or part of the debt.
68(2) of the Administration Act provides that Centrelink may issue a notice
requiring a person to advise of a change to
their circumstances, or the
likelihood of such a change, or provide a statement about any matter that might
affect their payments.
CONSIDERATION
Was the Applicant overpaid jobseeker payment and
COVID-19 supplement during the relevant period?
all relevant times the Applicant was paid jobseeker payment at the single rate.
He was also in receipt of COVID-19 supplement in
the amount of $2,300 during the
period 28 September 2020 to 4 January 2021.
30 April 2020 Centrelink informed the Applicant that he was required to advise
within 14 days of any changes or events in circumstances
affecting his payment
in accordance with s 68(2) of the Administration Act.
Applicant became a member of a couple on 11 September 2020, this being the day
that he and his partner began sharing a home. At
no time during the relevant
period did the Applicant advise Centrelink of the change to his relationship
status or of his partner’s
employment and other income.
Applicant does not dispute that he was overpaid jobseeker payment and COVID-19
supplement during the relevant period. His evidence
is such that he was a member
of a couple during the relevant period and did not advise Centrelink of this
fact. Therefore, his partner’s
income during the same period was not taken
into account and he was paid in excess of his entitlement. After consideration
evidence before me, I find accordingly.
What is the
quantum of the overpayment?
9 April 2024 the Secretary advised the Applicant that he was overpaid $7,569.32
($5,269.32 in jobseeker payment and $2,300 in COVID-19
supplement) during the
period 28 September 2020 to 4 January
Secretary provided two sets of updated calculations on 13 March
The first was $6,891.29
(including COVID-19 supplement overpayment of $1,750) calculated based on the
Secretary’s preferred
construction.
calculation was based on the methodology outlined in Tribunal’s decision
(differently constituted) in
and Secretary, Department of
Social Services (Social Services Second
in the amount of
$6,945.43 (including COVID-19 supplement overpayment of
note that on 15 July 2025 the Full Federal Court held in
v Secretary, Department of Social
that the Tribunal
in finding that income was ‘earned’ at the time
at which a person had a legally enforceable right to require
and, applying the correct
construction of the Act, income from employment is to be taken into account in
the fortnight in which it
was ‘received’ where the evidence does not
establish in which fortnight it was
Secretary provided an updated debt calculation undertaken on 20 October 2025 in
light of the Full Federal Court’s decision
, indicating
that the Applicant was overpaid a total of $7,580.98 ($5,280.98 in jobseeker
payment, $2,300 in COVID-19 supplement)
and was also charged $1,138.31 in
hearing the Secretary submitted that its calculations dated 24 October 2025 is
its preferred calculation method and is consistent
with the recent Full Federal
Court decision of
. These calculations are that the Applicant was
overpaid a total of $6,891.29 ($5,141.29 in jobseeker and $1,750 in COVID-19
supplement).
The Secretary
submitted that the calculations made in line with the decision of
Secretary, Department of Social Services and
should be disregarded
given that the Full Federal Court overturned that decision in
find that during the relevant period the Applicant’s partner worked in
real estate. She received fortnightly income, monthly
commission and a one-off
bonus in late December 2020.
is self-evident that the debt period straddles section 1073B in place prior to
the 7 December 2020 amendments to the Act and section
1073A of Act in place from
7 December 2020.
note that the decisions of
Judd and Secretary, Department of Social
Secretary, Department of Social
dictate that
where it cannot be determined when income was earned it is appropriate to use
the dates on which the income was received.
accept the Respondent’s preferred approach to the calculation of the
summarised as follows. In
respect to the pre-7 December 2020 amendments, the Applicant’s
partner’s income was assessed
on the date that it was earned during the
period 9 to 20 November 2020, consistent with Module-G7A.
7 December 2020 section 1073A and the other employment income attribution
provisions of the Act do not address the precise methodology
to be employed in
assessing the income of a jobseeker payment recipient’s partner. The
Secretary submits that in such circumstances
it is preferrable to assess the
Applicant’s partner’s fortnightly income from 7 December 2020 in the
instalment period
in which it was received. Thus, the Secretary assessed the
Applicant’s partner’s income earned from 23 November 2020
instalment period that it was received. I am satisfied that this is the most
appropriate method to employ in the circumstances.
to the Applicant’s partner’s monthly commission income, it is to be
treated differently given the legislative changes
enacted from 7 December 2020.
Prior to those amendments assessed such income as a periodic payment, applying
Module G8 as it stood
prior to the amendment. That is, the receipt method is
applied and the commission was taken to have been received as a daily amount
that income per day of the month. However, post 7 December 2020, Module G8
expressly excludes employment income. The Secretary
submits that the commission
payments received after 7 December 2020 should be taken into account in the
instalment period in which
they were received. Again, I am satisfied that this
is the most appropriate method to employ in the circumstances.
finally, in respect of the one off $1,000 bonus received by the
Applicant’s partner on 22 December 2020 the Secretary was
not satisfied
that it was employment income as there is no evidence regarding how she became
qualified for the payment and whether
it was referrable to her work performance.
Therefore, the Secretary treated it as a gratuity whereby section 1073 of the
Act provides
that it is applied from date of receipt on 22 December 2020
prospectively over the next year.
the limited evidence before me I cannot be satisfied that this bonus constitutes
employment income. I am satisfied that section
1073 of the Act is relevant and
stipulates that the income should be assessed over a 52 week period. I note that
this is an advantageous
method for the Applicant given that the debt period ends
on 6 January 2021.
summary, I am satisfied that the Respondent’s preferred approach is the
correct methodology to apply when calculating the
quantum of the overpayment
made to the Applicant during the following period.
follows that I am satisfied that the Applicant was overpaid
in jobseeker payment
and COVID-19 supplement during the relevant period.
interest charge apply to the overpayment?
make the following findings in respect of correspondence received by the
Applicant after advice of the debt.
Applicant was advised on 6 July 2021 that he was overpaid $3,467.65 in the
relevant period and this was due and payable on 2 August
9 April 2024 the Applicant was given notice that he was overpaid $7,569.32 and
that a failure to enter into a payment arrangement
would result in a daily
interest charge.
Considering
the debt action summary screens in evidence I am satisfied that the Applicant
only made repayments to the debt consistent
with a payment plan from 1 July 2025
and that interest was charged to the debt from 3 May 2024 to 27 June
I understand from the
Secretary’s submissions that interest accrued from 5 April 2024 to 30 June
It is not in dispute that
the Applicant was not receiving a social security payment during this period.
The Tribunal is not persuaded
that any of the other circumstances set out in
section 1229E apply to the Respondent’s circumstances.
the benefit of the documentary evidence and the Applicant’s oral
submissions at hearing I am not satisfied that the Applicant
had a reasonable
excuse for failing to enter into a repayment plan during the period 5 April 2024
to 30 June 2025. Further, having
considered the Applicant’s description of
his work history, financial arrangements and family situation I am not satisfied
that during this same period the Applicant did not have the financial capacity
to enter into a payment plan to repay the debt by
instalment. Therefore, section
1229F of the Act cannot provide him with any relief.
note for completeness that the Secretary has not recalculated the interest
payable on the debt by reference to its most recent recalculations.
this basis that the Tribunal is satisfied that the matter should be remitted to
the Secretary with the direction to recalculate
the interest payable.
interest charge (as recalculated) is a debt due to the Commonwealth by operation
of section 1229C of the Act.
Is the overpayment a debt?
Application
of subsection 1223(1) of the Act means that the overpayment of $6,891.29 is a
debt due to the Commonwealth by the person
and the debt is taken to arise when
the person obtains the benefit of the payment.
Should all or
part of the debt be recovered?
evidence is unequivocal. The debts arose because the Applicant failed to
accurately report the change to his relationship status
and his partner’s
employment and other income.
am not satisfied that there is any evidence that the debt was caused by sole
administrative error. Therefore, it follows that all
or part of the debt cannot
be waived pursuant to section 1237A of the Act.
three of the above requirements in section 1237AAD of the Act are cumulative;
that is, all must be met for waiver to be considered
under this provision.
first considered whether there are special circumstances in the
Applicant’s case that would warrant waiving all or part of
term ‘special circumstances’ is not defined in the legislation. In
the matter of
Director-General of Social
Tribunal stated that the term is “
incapable of precise or exhaustive
looks to circumstances that are unusual,
uncommon or exceptional”.
In the matter of
Groth v Secretary Department of Social
the Federal Court
stated that it requires something to distinguish a person’s case from
to take it out of the usual or ordinary case
It would of course follow that if one were to conclude that
something unfair, unintended or unjust had occurred that there must be
feature out of the
SDSS v Hales
The concept of special circumstances is broad. A constellation of factors,
including financial circumstances, may fall within it.
The express exclusion of
financial hardship alone as a special circumstance is an indicator that it would
otherwise be included.
This gives some measure of the range of circumstances
which will qualify as special. But as a matter of grammar and ordinary logic,
the exclusion of financial hardship alone as a special circumstance does not
mandate its inclusion in the range of matters constituting
such circumstances
for the purpose of enlivening the Secretary’s discretion.
Dranichnikov v
, the Court noted
that other cases which have considered analogous words have concluded that what
was required are circumstances which
distinguish the current case from the usual
case, or those which are out of the
Angelakos v Secretary, Department of Employment and Workplace
... I also note that the authorities have emphasised time and again the
importance of maintaining flexibility in determining what
constitutes special
circumstances. The danger is that the test will be overstated if the word
‘exceptional’ is emphasised.
It was not the intention of Parliament
to confine the exercise of the discretion to an exceptional case. There is less
risk of overstatement
if the words ‘unusual’ or
‘uncommon’ are emphasised. Those words indicate, correctly in my
view, the fact
that there must be something that distinguishes the case from the
ordinary or usual case. It may not be easy to postulate the ordinary
case other than in quite general terms and, in doing so, close attention must be
given to the particular statutory context.
Applicant provided the following evidence regarding his circumstances during the
relevant period and since.
debt arose due to his own “
clerical error
”. He was laid off
from a company that he had been working with for eight years following the
COVID-19 shutdown. At the same
time his (then) girlfriend also lost her job, but
soon after secured other work.
was an incredibly stressful time for him. His elderly parents were in England
and he could not travel to see them. He was concerned
for their welfare. At the
time he was training for an iron-man competition. The lockdowns severely
curtailed his ability to exercise,
which further impacted his mental health. He
” and had to seek assistance for his mental health.
Such was his low mood that he simply did not attend to many tasks, including
Centrelink’s reporting requirements. He spent many days in bed.
and his girlfriend decided to move in together in September 2020. She is now his
partner and they have two children. However, in
September 2020 they had not been
together long and though they were supporting each other emotionally, they did
not share their finances
when they commenced cohabitation. Soon after starting
to live together, they discovered that his partner was pregnant. His partner
very ill in the first trimester. They only pooled their finances after the birth
of their first child in mid 2021.
circumstances are special as he was laid off, he had no family support, the
amazing curve ball
” of a pregnancy very early in his and his
partner’s relationship and the financial consequences following the period
of unemployment during COVID-19 set the family back considerably.
Applicant did not dispute that he had received notice of his reporting
requirements, however such was his levels of stress and
mental health distress,
he simply did not take the requirements “
administrative tasks during this period were “
”. He regrets not advising Centrelink at the time of his changed
relationship status. He was adamant that he did not knowingly
fail to report. He
was grateful for the financial support and simply did not turn his mind to it as
this was a period of significant
upheaval and transition. The debt accrued
during a very emotional period.
Applicant, his partner and their children are all in good physical and mental
health. They have recently purchased their first
best thing that happened to us
”. His partner’s
capacity to engage in paid work is compromised given her caring commitments. He
recently changed employment,
which saw a loss of mental health support provided
by his previous employer as well as private health insurance. His base salary
quarter, though was only paid $1,000 in the last
quarter. His partner’s
income is about $30,000 per annum. Their disposable income is severely limited
given their home purchase.
The financial consequences should he have to repay
the debt is they would have “
more meals out of tins
accept without hesitation the matters raised by the Applicant at hearing about
his circumstances. However, considering the relevant
law I was not persuaded
that the circumstances outlined by him are sufficiently out of the ordinary as
to constitute special circumstances.
the evidence before me, I find that it is not appropriate to exercise the
discretion in section 1237AAD of the Social Security
next considered whether it is appropriate to write off the debt pursuant to
subsection 1236(1A) of the Act.
am satisfied that the debt in this matter is recoverable at law, the
Applicant’s whereabouts are known and it is cost effective
Commonwealth to take action to recover the debt. Considering these matters, and
the Applicant’s current ability to
repay the debt under a payment plan of
$200 per month I am satisfied that the Applicant has the capacity to repay the
debt in this
matter. Therefore, the debt is unable to be written off under
section 1236 of the Act.
other provisions in Part 5.4 of the Act are relevant to the Applicant’s
circumstances. The debt is recoverable by the Commonwealth.
The Tribunal sets aside the decision under review and remits the matter for
reconsideration in accordance with the order that:
(i) the Applicant was overpaid in jobseeker payment and COVID-19 supplement in
the amount of $6,891.29 during the period 3 September
2020 to 6 January 2021;
(ii) the overpayment is a debt and is recoverable;
(iii) the Secretary is to recalculate the interest charge; and
(iv) the interest charge, as recalculated, is a debt due to the Commonwealth.
Date of hearing:
Self-Represented
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr David Rowe
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Ms Tutti Copping, Sparke Helmore Lawyers
Under the transitional
provisions in the
Administrative Review Tribunal (Consequential and
Transitional Provisions No.
1) Act 2024
(the Transitional
Act), applications for review to the AAT that were not finalised before 14
October 2024 are taken to be an application
for review to the Tribunal. The
Transitional Act gives the Tribunal the authority to continue and finalise any
aspect of the review
not already completed by the AAT.
https://www.ombudsman.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0040/299947/Income-Apportionment-Lawfulness.pdf
ST6, folios 238 to 240.
TB1, folios 3 to 27.
TB1, folio 3.
[2024] AATA 3021.
TB1, folio 16.
[2025] FCAFC 89.
ST5, folio 233.
[2024] AATA 3021.
[2022] AATA 727.
[2023] AATA 3356
Amended Statement of Facts,
Issues and Contentions dated 23 October 2025, [6.6] to [6.15].
TB3, folios 135 to 137.
TB4, folio 238.
TB4, folios 234 to 236.
Amended Statement of Facts,
Issues and Contentions, [6.18].
[1984] AATA 176
(1995) FCA 1708
82 FCR 154;
[2003] FCAFC 133.
Dranichnikov
[2007] FCA 25
(2007) 100 ALD 9
Ibid, [33].
RTF format (12.9 MB)
Signed PDF/A format