CVU19 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1859 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
CVU19 v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1859
File number:
SYG 1841 of 2019
Judgment of:
JUDGE KAUR-BAINS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– application for judicial
review of decision of Administrative Appeals Tribunal – Protection (Class
XA) (Subclass 866)
visa – whether the Tribunal conducted the hearing
before it fairly – allegation that the applicant’s case was not
fairly conducted because the Tribunal repeatedly asked various questions and the
applicant was confused – whether the Tribunal
failed to ask the applicant
to provide evidence in support of her claim – no jurisdictional error
disclosed – application
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) ss 424A,
Cases cited:
BGZ15 v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2017] FCA 1095
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 46 FLR
Hamod v New South Wales
[2011] NSWCA 375
Randhawa v Minister for Immigration, Local Government & Ethnic
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 124 ALR 265
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR
SZRUR v Minister Immigration and Border Protection
(2013) 216 FCR
[2013] FCAFC 146
General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Ms C Cloudsdale of Mills Oakley
Second Respondent:
Submitted appearance save as to costs
SYG 1841 of 2019
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW
Second Respondent
JUDGE KAUR-BAINS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
application is dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or order to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors (r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 24.04
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal
Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE KAUR-BAINS
applicant seeks judicial review of the decision of the Administrative Appeals
) dated 3 July 2019. The Tribunal affirmed a decision
of a delegate of the Minister not to grant the applicant a Protection (Class
(Subclass 866) visa (
protection visa
). This Court has jurisdiction to
determine this matter pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
matter raises for determination whether the Tribunal failed to consider the
applicant’s case fairly and whether the Tribunal
failed to ask the
applicant to provide information in response to the s 424A invitation dated 16
April 2019.
the reasons which follow, I find the applicant has not demonstrated
applicant is a citizen of China. She arrived in Australia on 11 November 2014 on
a student visa (Court Book (
Protection visa
17 March 2015, the applicant applied for the protection visa (CB 1 to 54). The
applicant’s claims were set out in her undated
statement attached to her
protection visa application (CB 36 and 37), which I find were fairly set out in
the Tribunal’s decision
at [4] of its reasons as follows:
operated a clothing shop in her village. There was a plastic knitting plant 200
metres away from her home which was built in 2011,
with more than 100 employees.
Waste water from the plant was discharged and this caused pollution and affected
crop yields. Surrounding
villagers were often sick, and although the issue was
reported repeatedly it was not resolved.
2013, over 10 villagers went to the plant to complain about the issue. The boss
of the plant, [JW], refused to talk with the villagers
and shouted abuse at
them. A villager, Gouliang Pan, blamed him for the problems and [JW] ordered him
to be beaten. [JW] said “no
matter where you lodge complaint against me, I
will not be worried. I have backers to support me”.
December 2013, five villagers and the applicant went to the township government.
They asked the government to investigate the pollution
caused by the plant. The
government did not respond. They then went to the Environment Protection
Administration of Zhao County to
complain about the pollution. It sent people to
investigate the plant but a report was not released.
then contacted Yanzhao Evening News and a journalist reported the pollution,
although it did not have any effect. When they contacted
him again, the
journalist said that he could not report further due to pressure from the
government.
to their complaints, [JW] incited gangsters to retaliate against them. Some were
threatened and beaten by strangers. Two rogues
went to the applicant’s
shop to make trouble. One day a rogue beat her and made her shop messy. Rogues
came to make trouble
repeatedly and in February 2014, the applicant was forced
to close her shop.
February 2014, Gaoling Pan, Jingyou Dong and the applicant petitioned to the
Environment Protection Administration in Shijiazhuang.
Because of their efforts
[JW] colluded with the township officials and police and they detained them. On
9 April 2014, they were
imprisoned at the police station for 10 days on the
charge of disrupting social order. [JW] threatened to punish them if they
to petition.
government openly assisted evil businessmen to oppress farmers and this made the
applicant worried about her safety. Through an
agent she paid 10,000 Yuan to get
a passport and then an agent helped her to apply for a visa to
Delegate’s decision
applicant attended an interview with the delegate at which time she was asked a
series of questions. On 26 May 2016, a delegate
of the Minister refused the
applicant’s protection visa application (CB 59 to 71) on the basis that it
had difficulty accepting
many elements of the applicant’s claims, finding
them to be vague, often lacking in reason and not only differing from her
written statement and oral testimony but also containing internal
inconsistencies at the interview before the delegate (CB 68).
Application to the Tribunal
26 June 2016, the applicant applied to the Tribunal for review of the
delegate’s decision (
application for review
) (CB 72 and 73).
Tribunal sent the following letters to the applicant at the email nominated on
her application for review, inviting her to provide
any evidence she wished to
in support of her claim:
(a) On 29 June 2016, inviting the applicant to provide any material or written
arguments in support of her application (CB 75 and
(b) On 15 August 2018, informing the applicant that the file was being prepared
for allocation to a tribunal member and inviting
her to provide any additional
evidence that was relevant to her application (CB 78).
21 March 2019, the Tribunal invited the applicant to attend a hearing in-person
(CB 80 and 81). The Tribunal hearing record noted
applicant attended the Tribunal hearing in-person on 11 April 2019 with the
assistance of an interpreter in the English
and Mandarin languages (CB 82 to
84). The hearing lasted two and a half hours.
16 April 2019, the Tribunal sent the applicant, at the email nominated on her
application for review, an invitation to comment
on or respond to information
pursuant to s 424A of the Act (
information letter
) (CB 90 to 93). In
the information letter, the Tribunal provided particulars of inconsistencies it
perceived in the applicant’s
evidence as to her claims and invited the
applicant to respond by 30 April 2019.
TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
Tribunal noted the applicant’s claims as set out in the statement
accompanying her protection visa application at [4] of
its reasons, which are
reproduced at [5] of this judgment. The Tribunal recorded that at the hearing,
the applicant said she had
other documents to support her claims, and the
Tribunal noted that it invited the applicant to submit further documents
her claims on or before 18 April 2019 ([7] of its reasons).
Tribunal stated that following the hearing it sent to the applicant on 16 April
2019 the information letter, which invited her
to comment on certain
information, but there was no response or further submissions from the applicant
([8] of its reasons).
Tribunal did not accept the applicant’s evidence and found there were
several inconsistencies in her evidence between her
written claims, her evidence
to the delegate and her evidence at the Tribunal hearing ([17] of its reasons).
I adopt the Minister’s
summary at [12] of the Minister’s written
submissions dated 28 July 2025 of the Tribunal’s findings as to the
applicant’s
inconsistencies as follows (amended as appropriate):
(a) The first confrontation with JW, the factory manager: Due to the
“vagaries of the applicant’s evidence and her inability
questions directly put to her at hearing”, the Tribunal doubted that she
was describing events that actually occurred
([19] of its reasons). This doubt
was further cemented by the applicant’s inconsistent claim to the Tribunal
that JW had initially
listened to her and the villagers’ complaints.
Additionally, the applicant omitted the claims that her father and other
were beaten, and that her father was hospitalised, in her evidence to
the Tribunal ([20] of its reasons). The applicant’s evidence
Tribunal did not include any event, similar to this claim, involving harm to her
father or villagers.
(b) New claim, being the fight on a road and hospitalisation in April: The
Tribunal was concerned that a new event, involving a physical
fight on a road
with security guards from the plant, and the applicant being hospitalised for a
month with severe physical injuries,
was not mentioned in the applicant’s
written claims. The Tribunal considered that if the applicant had experienced
the extent claimed she would have provided information about this with
her initial claims. The Tribunal concluded that the omission
applicant was not truthful about the events ([21] of its reasons). The Tribunal
engaged with the applicant’s suggestion
that she had in fact told the
delegate about this incident, inviting her to comment on the delegate’s
decision record that
she had instead claimed to have sustained such injuries in
JW’s office at the plant. However, the applicant maintained that
incident and the office incident were two separate events. The Tribunal did not
find this explanation satisfactory, nor
did it accept her explanation that she
could not remember the timing of the events because there were many fights ([22]
of its reasons).
(c) Imprisonment at police station: The Tribunal found that the applicant
omitted from her initial evidence at the hearing her claim
that she and two
other villagers were imprisoned at the police station. When questioned about
this omission, the applicant responded
that the Tribunal had not asked her
questions about her detention, and she thought she was required to only answer
questions put
to her. The Tribunal did not accept this explanation, noting that
the applicant was asked “open questions”. The Tribunal
this a “significant omission” from her original claims and found it
further demonstrated the “unreliability”
of the applicant’s
claims ([23] of its reasons).
(d) “Hooligans” coming to the applicant’s shop: The Tribunal
found that the applicant’s evidence on this
topic shifted during
questioning. The Tribunal found that the applicant's confirmation at the hearing
that her shop was in her house
undermined her claim before the delegate, being
she had closed it because the landlord would not renew the lease. The shifting
of the applicant’s evidence, and inconsistencies with previous
statements, led the Tribunal to conclude that her claims were
not reliable ([24]
of its reasons).
(e) Complaints to the Environmental Protection Administration (
Tribunal found the applicant’s evidence on this subject to be vague, and
noted the applicant was unable to provide “contextual
details” in
relation to these events, including the timing of when and where she made the
complaints. The Tribunal was accordingly
not satisfied that they occurred ([25]
of its reasons).
(f) Complaints made to newspaper about the plant: The Tribunal found the
applicant’s evidence at the hearing on this topic
to be inconsistent with
that given during her departmental interview in respect of her role in making
reports to the newspaper, having
spoken to a journalist and the response of the
newspaper. The Tribunal found this further demonstrated that the applicant was
a witness of truth and her claims to fear harm in China were not credible
([26] of its reasons).
(g) JW’s warnings to the applicant: The Tribunal found inconsistencies
between the applicant’s evidence to the delegate
warned her that her life would be in peril if she returned to China, and the
information given to the Tribunal
that since having departed China, JW caused
people to attend her family’s house, threaten her father, and damage their
This was inconsistent with earlier claims to the delegate that she did
not know whether anyone else had been threatened and JW had
“not to let him see her” ([27] of its reasons).
(h) Closure and ongoing operation of the plant: The Tribunal noted that at the
hearing the applicant said that the plant managed
by JW had closed down in 2016,
but this would have meant it was closed when she was interviewed by the
delegate. The Tribunal found
that the applicant appeared to “adapt her
evidence on the run, in order to address the issues raised by the
The Tribunal found this inconsistent evidence “reflected
poorly” on the applicant's credibility ([28] of its reasons).
(i) Ongoing interest of JW in the applicant: The Tribunal noted the
applicant’s claims at the hearing that she was blamed for
closure and viewed as the leader of three family groups that were involved in
complaining to the EPA and newspaper. The
Tribunal found that the applicant
appeared to be exaggerating her profile to assist her claims for protection and
was not satisfied
the applicant had established a credible reason why JW would
have any ongoing interest in her ([29] of its reasons).
GROUNDS IN THE APPLICATION
applicant’s application accepted for filing on 22 July 2019 contained the
following grounds for judicial review (as per
There exist jurisdictional errors.
Tribunal did not consider my case fairly and refused to consider claims
favourable to me.
Tribunal did not ask me to provide evidence in support of my claim.
Tribunal considered irrelevant or unimportant matters to reach conclusion.
did not consider whether the delegate disclosed relevant information to me.
PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THIS COURT
applicant appeared at the hearing before me as a litigant in person, assisted by
an interpreter in the English and Mandarin languages.
Ms Cate Cloudsdale
appeared for the Minister. Mindful of the Court’s duty to unrepresented
litigants (
Hamod v New South Wales
[2011] NSWCA 375
SZRUR v Minister Immigration and Border Protection
(2013) 216 FCR 445
[2013] FCAFC 146
), I explained to the applicant the role of the Court in
undertaking judicial review. I ensured the applicant was in possession of
relevant documents, namely the Court Book, application and supporting affidavit
accepted for filing on 22 July 2019 and the Minister’s
written submissions
dated 28 July 2025. The applicant did not provide written submissions.
applicant relied on her affidavit accepted for filing on 22 July 2019, which was
accepted as submissions. The applicant asserted
the following matters (as per
asked the government to investigate pollution caused by plastic knitting
was retaliated and detained by police.
government openly assisted evil businessman to oppress farmers, which made me
worry about my safety.
am frightened to return China to be harmed.
CONSIDERATION
Ground 1 – Whether Tribunal did not consider the
applicant’s case fairly and refused to consider claims favourable to
applicant submitted before me that the Tribunal did not consider her case fairly
(1) the Tribunal repeatedly asked her various questions during the Tribunal
hearing, and this resulted in her being confused; and
(2) the applicant contended she was asked questions about her claims that went
back many years ago and the Tribunal’s questions
jumped around in time.
first point to note is that the Tribunal is not required to accept the
applicant’s claims uncritically and it is open to
the Tribunal to ask
questions of the applicant to test the credibility of her evidence:
v Minister for Immigration, Local Government & Ethnic
[1994] FCA 1253
(1994) 124 ALR 265 (Black
CJ, Beaumont and Whitlam JJ) at [278]
Tribunal’s reasons disclose that it acted reasonably in that the Tribunal
expressly noted in assessing the applicant’s
evidence, it considered the
time that had elapsed since the applicant departed China and that the hearing
process might have been
stressful for the applicant ([30] of its reasons).
Therefore, the Tribunal considered the potential for the applicant to be
from some confusion or lapse of memory due to the passage of time,
which discloses that although the Tribunal was testing the applicant’s
evidence it was attempting to do so fairly and with a mind attuned to such
matters as it noted.
I am of the view that the Tribunal fairly gave the applicant the opportunity to
comment on or respond to the Tribunal’s
concerns as to possible
inconsistencies in her evidence both during and after the hearing as follows:
(a) During the hearing, the Tribunal raised with the applicant the reliability
of her claims, particularly due to her inability to
remember dates, sequences of
events and critical matters raised in her written claims ([30] of its reasons).
The applicant responded
that “if she had wanted to make up her claims she
would have ensured she had the date and sequence clear”. However, the
Tribunal was not persuaded by that response.
(b) After the hearing, the Tribunal sent the applicant the information letter in
which it set out in great detail the particulars
of the information whereby the
Tribunal might consider the applicant had given inconsistent evidence as to
aspects of her claim (CB
90 to 93). The information letter invited the applicant
to comment on or respond to its contents. The applicant chose not to respond
the information letter.
the extent that the applicant alleged that she was confused at the hearing, the
information letter set out in writing the Tribunal’s
extensive concerns it
had with the applicant’s evidence at the hearing, and provided the
applicant with an opportunity to respond
to the concerns or explain the
perceived inconsistencies. As noted above, the applicant did not respond to the
information letter.
relation to the applicant’s contention that the Tribunal refused to
consider claims favourable to her, I find that allegation
is unfounded as the
Tribunal fairly set out and considered the applicant’s claims from [16] to
[31] of its reasons, but ultimately
gave its findings as to the
applicant’s credibility as set out at [13] of this judgment, which led the
Tribunal not to accept
the applicant’s claims. I find there is no
approached its analysis of the applicant’s claims.
these reasons, ground 1 does not disclose jurisdictional error.
Ground 2 – Tribunal did not ask applicant to provide
evidence in support of her claim
applicant contended that she received the information letter dated 16 April 2019
from the Tribunal, being the invitation to comment
on or respond to information
letter (CB 90 to 93), however she could not read the letter. The applicant
stated that she had a lawyer
at that time but he was unwell and therefore did
not attend to her case or respond to her inquiries.
is no issue that the applicant was sent the information letter from the Tribunal
dated 16 April 2019 and that this was sent
to the email address provided by
the applicant. I note that
of the Act provides if the Minister
gives a document to a person by one of the methods in
of the Act, the
person is taken to have received the documents at the end of the day the
document was transmitted. Relevantly for
this matter,
s 494B(5)(b)
provides the methods by which the Minister gives documents to a person for the
purposes of
of the Act, which includes transmission by email address
provided to the Minister by a person for the purposes of receiving
relation to the applicant’s absent lawyer at the Tribunal hearing due to
illness, I note there is no inherent right to legal
representation. Further, and
more importantly, there is no evidence before me that the applicant sought an
adjournment from the Tribunal
due to her lawyer being unwell.
these reasons, ground 2 does not disclose jurisdictional error.
Ground 3 – Tribunal considered irrelevant and unimportant
matters to reach conclusion
applicant argued before me that the Tribunal considered irrelevant or
unimportant matters to reach its decision. Despite being
asked by me as to what
the irrelevant or unimportant matters were, the applicant was unable to expand
on this ground further.
is a matter for the applicant to raise details as to the ground and raise the
grievances she had with the decision of the Tribunal.
Ground 3, in absence of
details as to the irrelevant or unimportant matters that the applicant alleged
the Tribunal took into account,
does not reveal jurisdictional error in the
decision of the Tribunal.
these reasons, ground 3 does not disclose jurisdictional error.
Ground 4 – Tribunal did not consider whether the delegate
disclosed relevant information to the applicant
applicant contended the Tribunal failed to consider that the delegate did not
disclose relevant information to the applicant.
The applicant did not identify
what information she alleged the delegate failed to disclose.
further particulars, this ground does not reveal jurisdictional error on the
part of the Tribunal. Further, the Tribunal’s
role is to conduct a review
of the material afresh on the merits of the protection visa application. In
other words, the Tribunal
is required to conduct the hearing
does not need to consider what the delegate did or did not do, and any failure
the delegate may have engaged in:
Drake v Minister for Immigration and Ethnic
(1979) 46 FLR 409
Shi v Migration Agents Registration
[2008] HCA 31
(2008) 235 CLR 286
Tribunal reviewed the applicant’s claims and, due to significant concerns,
found them not credible ([33] of its reasons).
these reasons, ground 4 does not disclose jurisdictional error.
SELF-EVIDENT JURISDICTIONAL ERROR
the applicant was self-represented, I reviewed the reasons of the Tribunal to
determine whether there was any self-evident jurisdictional
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCA 1095
per Flick J
at [11]). I have not identified any such jurisdictional error.
no jurisdictional error has been disclosed, the application must be
will hear the parties as to costs.
I certify that the preceding thirty-seven (37)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 13 November 2025
RTF format (411 KB)
Signed PDF/A format