Ali Shafibeigli v Jones Lang Lasalle (NSW) Pty Limited - re Termination of employment - performance [2009] AIRC 908; (1 December 2009)
[2009] AIRC 908
Download Word Document
The attached document replaces the document previously issued with the above code on 1 December 2009.
Kate Turner
Associate to Commissioner Larkin
Dated 3 December 2009
[2009] AIRC 908
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Termination of employment
Ali Shafibeigli
Jones Lang Lasalle (NSW) Pty Limited
(U2009/2466)
COMMISSIONER LARKIN
SYDNEY, 1 DECEMBER 2009
Termination of employment - performance.
On 16 March 2009 Mr Shafibeigli (the applicant) lodged an application with the Australian Industrial Relations Commission under
Workplace Relations Act
(the WR Act) on the grounds that his termination of employment by Jones Lang Lasalle (NSW) Pty Limited on 25 February 2009 was harsh,
unjust or unreasonable.
The matter did not settle during conciliation proceedings. A certificate under s.650 of the
was issued on 15 April 2009 and on the same day Mr Shafibeigli elected to proceed to arbitration.
Directions were issued to the parties for the filing and serving of material and the matter listed for arbitration on 2 and 3 July
2009. Six days prior to the time that the applicant’s material was to be filed, the applicant’s representative ceased
to represent him. At the request of the applicant the directions were amended and the matter listed for hearing on 28 and 31 August
2009, with a subsequent listing on 24 September 2009.
During the proceedings the applicant was self represented. Mr Darams of counsel, by leave, appeared on behalf of the respondent with
Ms Sutherland, solicitor. Evidence was given during the proceedings by the following witnesses:
On behalf of the applicant
Mr Robertson
Supervisor, Abbey Property Services
Mr Shafibeigl
The applicant
On behalf of the respondent
Centre Manager for Richmond Marketplace
Regional Manager New South Wales, ISPT
Ms van der Westhuizen
Director, ISPT
Mr McFarlane
Portfolio Operations Director, ISPT
Regional Facilities Manager, New South Wales and South Australia
In the outline of argument the respondent outlined the nature of its business as follows:
“The respondent is involved in the business of the management of commercial, industrial and retail properties on behalf of the
owners of the properties. One such owner/client is Industry Superannuation Property Trust (
). The respondent manages 29 properties on behalf of ISPT. The respondent also provides advisory services including research and valuation,
office and industrial leasing, commercial, industrial and retail sales services to ISPT. At the material times, approximately 99
of the respondent’s workforce were engaged in work directly related to the ISPT account. ISPT is one of the respondent’s
‘most important clients’.”
The applicant commenced employment with the respondent in September 1999 as a contractor at Fairfield Forum, an ISPT property managed
by the respondent. In July 2004 the applicant commenced permanent employment with the respondent as Operations Manager for two ISPT
properties, Southgate Shopping Centre and Fairfield Forum. In 2006 the applicant’s position changed to Operations Manager for
Richmond Marketplace and Fairfield Forum and in 2007 full time at Richmond Marketplace under the direction of the Centre Manager,
In his affidavit, Mr Tulk outlined the applicant’s duties and responsibilities as follows:
“In the role of Operations Manager at Richmond Marketplace, Mr Shafibeigli was responsible for engaging contractors or consultants
using correct documentation, inducting contractors, risk management, managing the capital expense budget, sustainability, property
maintenance, security, cleaning, expense control, work place health and safety, management of contractors, tender of contracts, after
hours call outs, tenancy fitouts and staff management.”
In November 2008 a fire safety report for the Richmond Marketplace was provided by Wormald Assessment and Engineering, which indicated
that the property was non compliant and required significant work to be compliant. After advice from Mr Starr, Mr Tulk and the applicant
engaged Norman Disney & Young (NDY), a preferred consultant of ISPT, to provide an opinion on the fire safety compliance of the
In January 2009 the applicant engaged NDY. Sometime in January 2009, the respondent became aware that NDY had been engaged by the
execution of a purchase order, which it is submitted by the respondent, was incorrect documentation for the project. Between January/February
the respondent’s management held discussions in relation to this situation. On 24 February 2009 Mr Burns forwarded an email
to the applicant requesting his attendance at a meeting scheduled for 25 February 2009.
In attendance at the meeting on 25 February 2009 was the applicant, Mr Burns and a Ms Kivenson in the Sydney office with Ms van der
Westhuizen and Mr McFarlane by telephone connection. At the conclusion of the meeting the applicant was advised that his employment
was terminated.
The applicant’s letter of termination, dated 26 February 2009, stated:
I refer to our meeting on 25 February 2009. As discussed at our meeting, despite informal counselling meetings and a previous first
and final warning on a similar offence, you have failed to comply with the policy and procedures relating to engagement of contractors
and consultants in accordance with Client requirements. As a result, we have no alternative but to terminate your employment with
Jones Lang LaSalle (NSW) effective 25 February 2009.
You will be entitled to one (1) month pay in lieu of notice and your statutory entitlements. Payroll will notify you separately of
the details of these payments and will provide you with a Certificate of Service.
Please note that even after the termination of your employment your obligations in your letter of appointment with respect to confidential
information, company property and intellectual property continue to apply.
If you have any questions in relation to the termination of your employment or you wish to discuss anything further then please put
these in writing directly to me.
Yours sincerely,
Regional Manager NSW
Investor Major Accounts – PAIFM
Jones Lang LaSalle.”
The respondent terminated the applicant’s employment for the reason of an alleged breach of procedure in his engagement of the
consultant NDY and, as Mr Burns stated:
“In addition, I took into account that Mr Shafibeigli had been given a first and final warning over a similar issue in July
2008. After considering the situation, I came to the view that Mr Shafibeigli’s employment should be terminated.”
The respondent further sought to rely upon an incident related to the engagement of Abby Services in December 2008, while acknowledging
that this particular incident was not relied upon for the termination.
CONSIDERATIONS
Subsection 652(3) of the
“In determining, for the purposes of the arbitration, whether a termination was harsh, unjust or unreasonable, the Commission
must have regard to:
(a) whether there was a valid reason for the termination related to the employee’s capacity or conduct (including its effect
on the safety and welfare of other employees); and
(b) whether the employee was notified of that reason; and
(c) whether the employee was given an opportunity to respond to any reason related to the capacity or conduct of the employee; and
(d) if the termination related to unsatisfactory performance by the employee—whether the employee had been warned about that
unsatisfactory performance before the termination; and
(e) the degree to which the size of the employer’s undertaking, establishment or service would be likely to impact on the procedures
followed in effecting the termination; and
(f) the degree to which the absence of dedicated human resource management specialists or expertise in the undertaking, establishment
or service would be likely to impact on the procedures followed in effecting the termination; and
(g) any other matters that the Commission considers relevant.”
This matter concerns a termination of employment due to the alleged conduct of the applicant in relation to breaches of procedure
in the engagement of contractors/consultants. The allegations concern two specific incidents relied upon for the termination and
a third, which the respondent submitted should be taken into account in determining the applicant’s application. Those incidents
1. The engagement of NDY to provide an opinion in relation to a safety report for Richmond Marketplace in January 2009 (the 2009 NDY
2. The engagement of Australasian Anti-skip Solutions to resurface the car park at Richmond Marketplace in July 2008 (the 2008 car
park incident).
3. Contractor safety management issue concerning the engagement of Abby Services to paint the fa�ade at the Richmond Marketplace (the
January 2009 painting incident).
In this matter, there was a volume of material in the form of affidavit and oral evidence to consider and written and oral submissions
presented. I will not outline or comment upon all of the material presented, suffice to say that I have had regard to that material
were relevant to the requirements of ss.652(3), while mindful that a
fair go all round
must be accorded to the employer and the employee in this case.
The alleged breach of procedure is in connection with procedures contained in a document titled Contract Documentation (CDP). In summary,
that document outlines the requirements of the respondent’s client, ISPT, in relation to contracts for work to be performed
at ISPT properties. The Preamble to the CDP, inter alia, provides:
“1. ISPT has various standard contract documents in place that cover off risks, indemnities for specific works as well as include
the standard Trustee limitation of liability clauses. Standard contracts include:
i. Consultant agreement (for one off project)
ii. Consultants Standing Offer of Services agreement (ISPT panel appointment for range of projects)
iii. Consultant letter of appointment
iv. Minor Works contract AS 4905
v. Minor Works contract short form
2. Formal contract documentation, by way of one of the above documents, must be executed for each and every project.”
The CDP outlines who authorises contracts and/or any amendments to the standard documents. The CDP covers the procedure for appointment
of consultants, whether a consultant on the ISPT’s panel of preferred consultants or a general consultant.
If the Property Manager wishes to appoint a consultant who is on the ISPT’s preferred list of consultants a Consultants Letter
of Appointment must be completed and forwarded to ISPT with certain documents and information for ISPT to check and then sign off
The CDP, at section 18, outlines the required documentation for the appointment of contractors as follows:
“Project documentation for appointment of contractors may be in three forms:
i. sign off on quote/purchase order – for smaller and non-technical projects. Property Managers can elect to either sign off
on a quotation or alternatively issue a work order. The maximum amount allowable under a purchase order is $49,999
ii. minor works contract short form – for major projects < $100k or are of a non-technical nature.
iii. AS4905 – minor works contract – for projects of $100,000 or greater and which are of a technical nature.”
The CDP continues with sections related to the short form and AS4905 minor works contracts.
The 2009 NDY incident
In November 2008 Wormald Fire provided a safety report for the Richmond Marketplace indicating that the property was non compliant.
On my understanding, the annual fire safety statement/certificate for the Richmond Marketplace was to be provided to the relevant
Council towards the end of each year. On the material before me, the applicant was in discussion with Wormald Fire during November
2008 on this issue and the scope of work to ensure the property was compliant. During December 2008 the applicant had requested from
Council an extension for the provision of the Annual Fire Safety Statement on the property, which Council granted.
On 16 January 2009 the applicant forwarded an email to Wormald demanding further information and particulars to enable the required
statement/certificate to be signed off.
A decision was made to engage NDY for an opinion on the fire safety compliance of the property as submitted by Wormald Fire.
In January 2009 the applicant engaged NDY by execution of a purchase order and not a consultant’s letter of appointment, which
the respondent stated was required to ensure compliance with the CDP.
In his affidavit, Mr Starr explained the significance of the CDP as follows:
“JLL is required to comply with ISPT’s procedures in the management of its properties. One of the procedures is the Contract
Documentation Procedure. A copy of the Contract Documentation Procedure is attached and marked
The Contract Documentation Procedure sets out the circumstances when formal contract documentation must be executed when either a
contractor (who is engaged to undertake works on the property) or a consultant (who is engaged to provide advice in relation to the
property) is engaged. It also sets out the type of formal contractual documentation that must be entered into on those occasions.”
On 22 January 2009, at 10.53am, the applicant forwarded to Mr Starr, copy to Mr Tulk, an email attaching the NDY proposal and a quote
to prepare another safety report and sought Mr Starr’s advice on the issue.
At 11.06am on the same day Mr Starr replied as follows “
I recommend that you have the report completed by NDY, this will be able to give you a definitive answer on your systems compliance
and then would also form the basis for capital expenditure if required
On 23 January 2009, at 12.44pm, the applicant forwarded an email
to Mr Starr stating “
you please see the attached and check to see if it is ok for us to sign it
The attachment was an email, dated 22 January 2009 at 11.38am, from NDY to the applicant, stating “
Hi Ali, thanks for the go ahead. As we discussed yesterday I am already committed on Friday but will be happy to come out on Tuesday.
Is this convenient for you? Also, I just realised that I forgot to append our terms and conditions to the proposal, I believe you
already have them on record from previous work we have done for JLL but just so the records are complete i have attached them to
The next attachment was the applicant’s email to NDY of 22 January 2009 at 11.24 am, which was a reply to the NDY quote for
the work in question, stating “
Please see the attached perches
order, can you please organise for the work to be carried out ASAP
Mr Starr replied to the applicant’s request of 23 January 2009 at 12.44 pm, by email dated 27 January 2009 at 8.48am, and stated
They should be signing a contractors letter of appointment, you will need to have this signed and sent to ISPT for execution before
you engage the consultant
In his affidavit, Mr Starr stated that the applicant’s email to him of 23 January 2009 was cited by him “
on Tuesday 27 January 2009 since I attended the cricket on the Friday with other JLL managers and was therefore not at work on that
day, and the following Monday, 26 January 2009, was a public holiday
Mr Starr stated that he was surprised to see in the NDY email that the applicant “
had given NDY the “go ahead” to perform the work. I therefore reminded Mr Shafibeigli that NDY needed to sign a contractor’s
letter of appointment before JLL could engage them as a consultant
In the late morning of 27 January 2009, Mr Starr visited the Richmond Marketplace. He stated that he saw the applicant and the NDY
person in conversation. He stated that he approached the NDY person who told him that his meeting with the applicant was to discuss
the NDY report. Mr Starr stated that from this conversation he understood that NDY had already completed the work that the respondent
was going to engage them to perform. In his affidavit,
Mr Starr stated that he then had separate discussions with Mr McFarlane, Mr Tulk and Mr Burns where he informed each of them that
the applicant had engaged NDY without a signed consultant’s agreement or a letter of appointment between NDY and ISPT.
In his affidavit, Mr Burns outlined the significance of the letter of appointment as follows:
“It is my understanding, based on the ISPT Contract Documentation Procedure, and also from discussions with ISPT and other managers,
that ISPT requires a consultant’s letter of appointment or a consultant’s agreement to be in place because the consultant
is engaged to provide specialist advice to ISPT on matters that are usually complex and that relate to areas in which JLL, as the
property manager, does not have expertise. I further understand that ISPT seeks to rely on the specific obligations and indemnities
and insurances set out in a consultant’s letter of appointment or consultant’s agreement. The consultant’s agreement
or letter of appointment is also important for setting out a (
) clearly what the consultant is expected to do. This is important because JLL and ISPT need to rely on the consultant’s advice
and, in many cases, may be spending a lot of money on the basis of this advice.”
In his affidavit, Mr Tulk stated that Mr Starr had approached him in relation to NDY personnel on site and Mr Tulk replied that they
were doing the review of the Wormald report. He stated that Mr Starr asked him if the documents were in place, from which Mr Tulk
understood to be a consultant’s letter of appointment. Mr Tulk advised Mr Starr that he would check with the applicant. Mr
Tulk stated that he had received a copy of Mr Starr’s email to the applicant, of 27 January 2009
in relation to the engagement of the consultant. Mr Tulk’s evidence of his conversation with the applicant on this point follows:
“At about 3.30pm on 27 January 2009 I met with Mr Shafibeigli and we had a conversation in words to the effect of:
Me: Ali, is there a letter of appointment in place for NDY to carry out the required review?
Mr Shafibeigli: I am getting the document as quickly as possible.
Me: You need to have all documentation in place prior to consultants carrying out work.”
The applicant engaged NDY to provide a fire service report on 22 January 2009 by execution of a Purchase Order.
The NDY report was issued on 9 February 2009 and provided information that the site inspection was conducted on 27 January 2009.
In his affidavit, the applicant outlined what he stated to be the “
complexity of the work involved in achieving the property’s compliancy Certificate
without, as the applicant stated, any help offered or received from Mr Starr, who, he stated, was directly responsible for all New
South Wales properties “
accept for his constant pressure and remarks and reliving
himself from all responsibilities
The applicant stated that employing a consultant did not require a letter of appointment as the work was done through the property
operational budget. He stated that “
ISPT letter of appointments, consultant agreements, minor contracts and major contracts are only required for Capital expenditures,
where ISPT are responsible for the work
Attached to the applicant’s affidavit, under tab 25, are three documents being, Delegated Authority Levels (PMLA reference –
clause 5.5), Capital Expenditure (PMA reference – Schedule 6) and Contract Documentation (PMA Reference – Schedule 6).
The last document, Contract Documentation, is also attached to Mr Starr’s affidavit at KS1.
The applicant’s explanation for the execution of a purchase order to engage NDY was that this job was in the nature of an operational
expenditure and not a capital expenditure and, as such, the requirements of the standard contract documentation would not apply.
The applicant agreed with Mr Darams that the appointment of a preferred consultant requires a consultant’s letter of appointment
if the job was the nature of the capital expenditure
On the question of engaging a consultant by way of a purchase order, the applicant stated:
“Well, I would have to refer to delegate of authority from the ISPT procedures which has been provided behind tab 25 and that
is the only place that ISPT would touch property expenses. There is no (
) any other procedures exist in ISPT site, except delegate authority levels and it says property expenses. Now, property managers
have authority to approve all property expenses within approval delegate authority, except for capital expenditures. Other capital
expenditures is approved and paid by ISPT, refer to capital expenditure section of this manual which describe the procedures for
approval and payment of capital expenditure and non-recoverable expenses incurred by the property manager, legal fees, valuation
fees, leasing fees and property management fees. This must be approved by ISPT and forwarded back to the property manager for payment.
Number 4, after approval of these invoices the property managers forward them to … (
) Frank for payment. Now, in line 5 it says property managers delegate authority for expenses, referring to property expenditure,
excluding list that you just read, line 3, up to and including $10,000 over budget. Property managers may approve without notifying
PIM, which is property investment management of ISPT. Now, what they’re saying here is that Jones Lang LaSalle being the property
managers, they are in charge of spending the operational expenditure, therefore, they don’t have to notify ISPT nor following
that instruction that has been given in capital expenditure.”
In the execution of the purchase order to engaged NDY, the applicant relied upon the document Delegated Authority Levels. At point
3, Property Expenses, the document states, inter alia, that property managers have authority to approve all property expenses within
approved delegated authority except for capital expenditure and non-recoverable expenses incurred by the property manager, for example,
legal fees, valuation fees, etc. At point 5 of the document it states:
“Property Managers delegated authority for expenses excluding those listed in 3 are:
Up to and including $10,000 over budget Property Manager may approve without notifying PIM
> $10,000 over budget Property Manager to obtain PIM’s approval.”
The applicant referred to the Capital Expenditure document, which states:
STANDARD CONTRACT DOCUMENTATION
Contract Documentation
details the standard documents that are to be completed in relation to specific capital works projects.”
It was put to the applicant that he was now attempting to provide an explanation for why he did not follow procedure that he knew
he was required to follow in the engagement of consultants. The applicant’s reply follows:
“You are saying that I just decided to just not follow the procedures and just use the purchase order just because what, I didn’t
feel like it?
That’s exactly what I’m suggesting to you, Mr Shafibeigli?
That is incorrect. When you have got employee that has been with that company and their clients for past nine years and there is no
evidence suggesting that past nine years that there has been any breach of a procedure, having experience dealing with the client,
having the background with the client, understanding their mentality, now all of a sudden, after nine years, I decide this particular
one, no, I don’t feel like doing it. There are procedures in place and there is understanding and there is procedures for operational
expenditure and there are procedures for capital expenditure. ISPT is responsible for capital expenditures, that is the money that
comes directly out of your account, the operational expenditure Jones Lange LaSalle are in charge of spending that and making a decision
as how they spend it as per the management agreement and that money comes from outgoing the tenants of that property which means
ISPT has no responsibility to expenditure of those operational expenses.
Mr Shafibeigli, could I suggest to you that – I refer you to the document which is MB6. You in fact were instructed by Mr Starr
or advised by Mr Starr that in fact NDY had to be engaged pursuant to a letter of appointment?
That was his interpretation that we should do that.”
Unfortunately for the applicant, that was the interpretation of the procedures that the respondent’s managers expressed in their
evidence during the proceedings.
Mr McFarlane is the Portfolio Operations Director for the ISPT account. In his affidavit, Mr McFarlane gave the following evidence
in reply to the applicant’s affidavit:
“In response to paragraph 128, the consultant’s letter of appointment was required to be executed by NDY and by ISPT prior
to NDY being engaged and prior to any work commencing. I note in this regard the comments of Ms Threader which are set out in the
document which is AM-6 to this affidavit. If Mr Shafibeigli is asserting by reference to the use of the words ‘for their records’
that a consultant’s letter of appointment is sent to ISPT merely as a procedural matter, then he is not correct and I do not
agree with him.
In response to paragraph 137, the fact that this work was carried out under the property operational budget does not change the requirement
for approval by ISPT and the fact that the consultant needed to be engaged under either a consultant’s letter of appointment
or a consultant’s agreement, depending on whether or not NDY was on the ISPT panel of preferred consultants.
In response to paragraph 139, it is not true to say that ISPT have no procedures in place for property expenses. The Contract Documentation
procedure applies to all engagements of contractors or consultants, regardless of whether this is done under Capital Expenditure
or under the Property Operations Budget.”
The applicant put a number of questions to Mr McFarlane in cross examination.
In essence the questions concentrated on the point that there were no procedures and/or guidelines on the ISPT website for operational
expenditure. The applicant put to Mr McFarlane that the only specific guideline for operational expenditure was the document titled
Delegated Authority Levels which provided to the respondent’s property managers “
discretion and their procedures, as how we employ the contractors or the consultants or surveyors…
Mr McFarlane’s evidence, which I accept, was that regardless of who is funding the expense at the operational level a form of
formal agreement must be provided, whether that is a purchase order, a consultant’s document or consultant’s agreement.
As Mr McFarlane stated:
“Our role – and part of it’s incumbent in our management agreement – is that we protect ISPT’s risk,
and that is by having these specific documents such as a consultant’s agreement. Embedded in that consultant’s agreement
is things such as warranty, such as insurances, and the like, that protects ISPT. And that is our role, to protect ISPT’s risk,
and hence that’s why they have the contract documentation form. While it might not reference a specific operational instruction,
that tells us what we need to be exercising, and that’s what we need to be – to be doing.”
In his affidavit, Mr Starr stated, in reply to the applicant’s affidavit, the following:
“In response to paragraph 137, work done through the property operational budget must be done under a consultant’s letter
of appointment or consultant’s agreements where that work is carried out by a consultant. This is because consultants provide
specialist advice and therefore ISPT needs to be able to rely on the relevant indemnities and insurances from the consultant to protect
ISPT’s interests. The Contract Documentation procedure is not limited to the engagement of consultants or contractors for capital
expenditure projects.”
In cross examination Mr Starr stated the following in answer to the applicant’s question:
“Where do (
) believe that a fact knowing that I follow your instruction also seeking your advice at all times, and based on your advice also
had the contractor, or consultant sign the letter of appointment and their work was completed after that. Where have I failed?
You did not use the ISPT procedures. That is the consultant’s letter of appointment must be signed and executed by ISPT before
you engage the consultant to do the report for you. You can talk to them, you can ask them the fee proposal, and then you get their
consultant appointment signed by them and then sent to ISPT, they execute and send it back to you. Then you can engage and then have
a report written. You did not have a signed consultant’s appointment. I did not instruct you, I recommended to you to do that
thing. Your job description states what you should follow, ISPT procedures. You didn’t follow those. That’s where I said
you failed. You did not follow procedures as far as having consultants for the appointment completed before you engaged that report
done by NDY.”
In his affidavit, Mr Burns responded to the applicant’s affidavit as follows:
“In response to paragraph 126 and 137, prior to engaging NDY, Mr Shafibeigli was required to ensure that NDY and ISPT executed
a consultant’s agreement or consultant’s letter of appointment, regardless of whether the work was carried out as a capital
expense or a property expense. The budget used for the works does not change the requirement to execute the correct contractual documentation
as set out in the ISPT Contract Documentation Procedure. This procedure applies to all works carried out in ISPT properties and is
not limited to capital expenditure projects.
In response to paragraphs 138 and 139, as stated above, the ISPT Contract Documentation procedure is not limited to capital expenditure
projects. It applies to every engagement of a consultant or a contractor to perform work in relation to an ISPT property.”
The applicant stated that he did issue a letter of appointment for the job after his discussion with Mr Starr on 27 January 2009.
However, that letter of appointment from ISPT for NDY to provide the service was not received by the respondent until 24 February
2009, which was after NDY had completed the work. NDY were engaged prior to a Consultancy Letter of Appointment being signed by ISPT.
The applicant attempted to rely upon the fact that he had, at 12.44pm on 23 January 2009, provided to Mr Starr an exchange of emails
between himself and NDY which provided information that NDY were being engaged by execution of a purchase order. There are a number
of difficulties with this position. First, Mr Starr’s evidence, which I accept, was that he had not cited that email until
Tuesday 27 January 2009. Secondly, the applicant had already engaged NDY on 22 January 2009 and requested that “
you organise for the work to be carried out ASAP
NDY carried out the work they were engaged to perform on Tuesday 27 January 2009. Finally, the applicant, as the Operations Manager
at the Richmond Marketplace, was responsible, amongst other duties, for service contracts with contractors and consultants and the
client, ISPT.
In his submissions, the applicant submitted that from the evidence of Mr McFarlane at PN721 and PN727, it was obvious that Mr McFarlane
did not know that a purchase order was in place when he took part in the termination interview. The applicant submitted that Mr McFarlane
was of the belief that there was no documentation for the engagement of NDY. The applicant is incorrect on this argument and analysis
of the evidence. From Mr McFarlane’s affidavit at Exhibit R3, paragraph 67 (i) and (j) he outlines the correct documentation
that was required. Mr McFarlane’s evidence at PN721 was directed to questions associated with operational or capital expenditure
of a general nature that was not specific to the NDY incident.
In his affidavit, Mr Burns outlined the events that he stated followed the NDY incident:
“Between 27 January 2009 and 24 February 2009, I had a number of discussions with Ms van der Westhuizen and Mr McFarlane to
obtain their views on the situation. I also had some discussions (
) Vlada Kivenson, HR Business Partner, in relation to how the situation should be managed. The discussions about what should occur
in relation to this issue were put on hold for a short time in the first part of February 2009 because of the death of Ms Kontellis.
Ms Kontellis was the HR Business Partner who was responsible for the employees engaged in the ISPT business.
I do not now recall the specific details of these conversations. The substance and effect of the conversations however was that a
meeting should be held with Mr Shafibeigli to give him an opportunity to respond to the allegations that he had breached ISPT procedure.
His responses would then be discussed and considered to determine the appropriate outcome in light of the circumstances.
Ms van der Westhuizen suggested that I conduct the meeting with Mr Shafibeigli because I am the New South Wales Regional Manager and
therefore the senior person in New South Wales. I agreed with that decision.”
In cross examination, Mr Burns gave evidence in relation to the meeting with the applicant on 25 February 2009 as follows:
“We provided you with an opportunity to explain why a consultant was engaged without the appropriate documentation.
…and that meeting was to give you an opportunity to respond to that allegation. You responded to the questions that we put you,
and in those responses it was clear that there was no evidence that existed that would support an explanation as to why the procedures
were breached.”
In his affidavit
Mr Burns outlines what was said in the meeting on 25 February 2009 with the applicant. While I accept that this is not a contemporaneous
note of that conversation, it appears to be of a very short duration when one considers that the purpose was to ascertain why the
applicant had breached procedures and then the respondent would determine the appropriate outcome in light of those circumstances,
which as Ms van der Westhuizen advised Mr McFarlane prior to the meeting “
If Ali cannot satisfy our concerns about this breach of procedure in engaging NDY, we will have to consider terminating his employment
Ms van der Westhuizen in her affidavit also refers to the discussion between the applicant and Mr Burns,
which she stated was for approximately 20 minutes. Mr McFarlane’s affidavit also refers to the discussion at that meeting,
which would also indicate a limited period of time for a full understanding of the situation.
Another concern I have with the process embarked upon relating to the meeting was that the applicant was not given the benefit of
advice that the meeting may result in his termination. Nor, on my understanding, was he advised that he may seek to have a support
person with him. While the legislation in existence at the time of the applicant’s termination does not specially require this
advice, in my view, it is only fair that a person be afforded the opportunity of support in the circumstances. In cross examination,
the applicant put to Mr Burns that he, the applicant, had asked him what the meeting was about, to which Mr Burns replied “
My answer to that question was we need to meet to discuss your ongoing performance issues
In my view, in all fairness to the applicant he should have been given some indication of the seriousness of the issues to be discussed
at the meeting and that there may be the possibility of disciplinary action in the form of dismissal.
Obviously, the applicant’s first language is not English. This is not to say that the applicant’s capacity in speaking
and understanding the English language is limited. This is not the case. However, during the course of the proceedings and in reviewing
the transcript of proceedings it appears to me that the applicant did not and possibly still does not understand that he did in fact
breach the relevant procedures in engaging NDY to perform the services the respondent sought from them. NDY was a consultant and
listed on the ISPT panel of preferred consultants, (leaving aside the issue that the panel agreement had lapsed on 19 January)
and as directed by the Contract Documentation “
If a Property Manager wishes to appoint one of the consultants on the panel to a specific project,
Consultants Letter of Appointment
is to be completed…
I am not persuaded that the applicant was approving a property expense within approved delegated authority as outlined in the Delegated
Authority Levels document, which he relied upon. The difficulty with this case, however, is that I am satisfied that the applicant
in all good faith thought that he was performing his duties in accordance with the procedures for the engagement of NDY.
The 2008 car park incident
In 2008 Richmond Marketplace car park required attention in relation to cracks. The original expected cost for this item was budgeted
for in the financial year ending 30 June 2008 at a figure of $60,200.00. In relation to this work, the applicant spoke to the contractor
and from those discussions spoke to Mr Tulk, whereby the job changed from repair of the cracks to resurfacing the car park.
From Mr Tulk’s affidavit, the quotes received for the resurfacing work indicated that the cost was to be approximately $130,000.00.
Mr Tulk stated that, following the tender process, the contractor chosen to perform the work was Australasian Anti-Slip Solutions
Pty Ltd. As this figure of $130,000.00 exceeded the capital expenditure budget approved by ISPT the respondent was required to seek
approval from ISPT for the additional cost. A number of options were put to ISPT by Mr Tulk in relation to managing the budget for
the work. The ISPT decision was to split the cost of the work into two financial years with
“$60,200 (approx) already approved in the budget was to be paid for in the financial year ending 30 June 2008, and the additional
$70,658 (approx) was to be paid for out of the budget for the next financial year
The work was completed on 30 July 2008.
Mr Tulk, in his affidavit, stated:
“On or about mid-June 2008 Kevin Starr, Regional Manager NSW, approached me at Richmond Marketplace and said words to the effect
Mr Starr: There is no contract in place for the car park resurfacing.
Me: There are purchase orders in place.
Mr Starr: That is not the correct procedure. There should be contracts in place for this type of work of this value.
From my discussion with Mr Starr I understood that Mr Shafibeigli had breached the ISPT procedures by engaging the contractor using
a purchase order, when in fact a minor works contract was required.”
On 3 July 2008 Mr Tulk was directed by Mr Burns to counsel the applicant in relation to this issue. On 4 July 2008 Mr Tulk held a
counselling meeting with the applicant. Mr Tulk provided his written notes to the applicant to enable him to respond and also forwarded
a copy to Mr Burns. On 7 July 2008 the applicant provided a written response to the counselling. Mr Tulk forwarded that response
to Mr Burns. The applicant’s written response, inter alia, stated:
“I am in full understanding of the procedures of Jll and ISPT, especially in regards of contractors and contracts, and the consequence
of failure to following these procedures, therefore these procedures have always been followed at all times which you are fully aware
At this point my concern is,
• knowing that you were fully aware of the circumstance surrounding this particular work, with ISPT involvements, and the timing
of this work,
• the rush and the pursuer put to us by ISPT and the portfolio managements for completing this work to meet the KPI
• knowing that all decisions not only in this occasion but at all times is discussed either with your self or another member
of portfolio, before the execution of that decisions,
• knowing that all documentations regarding this work including an evaluation for this work being forwarded to ISPT,
• knowing that a purchase order was in place for this work based on your advice, which it is still considered as a binding contract
for this work,
• Knowing that all documentation for this work was obtained from contractor including all insurances, SWMS and MSDS.
• Knowing that not only I prepared the contract for the second stage of this work and forwarded to contractor (which it proves
that I am aware of the procedures and do follow with those procedures), I also made sure to contact the National Facility Manager,
making him aware of this particular situation and seek advice for the optimum delivery of this project.
Yet you have elected to give me counseling (
) with disregard for above mentioned and my past performances.
In conclusions, based on my past performances and the explanations offered above, I have found your counseling (
) to be out of line, and I request for immediate withdrawal of your counseling (
) and that a formal apology to be forwarded.”
On approximately 8 July 2008 Mr Burns discussed the above with Mr Tulk. Mr Burns, in cross examination, stated that Mr Tulk had advised
him that he was not aware that the procedure had been breached.
Mr Tulk was counselled by Mr Burns over his management of the applicant in relation to the above.
On 10 July 2008 Mr Burns held a disciplinary interview with the applicant, with Mr Starr in attendance, and issued the applicant with
a first and final warning over the incident.
In his evidence,
under cross examination, the applicant outlined the events associated with this incident and the rationale for the purchase order
for the first part of the work to be carried out. He stated that the original budget of $60,200.00 was to repair cracks to the top
car park at Richmond Marketplace. After discussions with the contractor the applicant realised that this budgeted work would not
fix the overall problems with the car park. The applicant stated:
“I informed Mr Tulk that the original remedy of cracking – of repair to the cracks are no correct. They will do the job
but it’s a band-aid job; eventually the client would end up spending more money. So therefore the remedy to this is to actually
resurface the area. Based on that you build a business case, which it was presented to the ISPT, that basically says that ‘That
$60,000 that you approved for repair of the crack it will be the waste of money. We have received advice from the contractor that
the actual remedy is to resurface the entire area to cover all the cracks’. At that stage ISPT then said that ‘Well,
we will have our own preferred contractor’ – which was National Contract – Concrete Solution – ‘to
evaluate your advice’. Their contractors came to – on the site. They had a look at the area and they agreed that the
area needed to be resurfaced. Then it was sent – their advice was sent back to ISPT. ISPT then decided ‘Okay, well based
on this we will re-tender for resurfacing of the car park as opposed to repair of those cracks’. That was then when I got involved
in tendering of resurfacing of the car park.”
The quoted amount for this work was approximately $130,000.00, which ISPT decided would be divided over two financial years. The applicant
stated that the advice from ISPT, based on the options put to them by Mr Tulk and the applicant, was received very close to the end
of the financial year. The applicant stated that ISPT did not want the original budgeted figure cancelled. He stated:
“Now part of that $62,000, $6000 of that was for the works not involved with the resurfacing of the car park. They were for
using of the non-slip paint on two different entrances to the shopping centre. So the actual work that we allocated for that financial
year was $54,000. Now being $4000, out of the guideline and the procedure, and being so close to the end of the financial year, and
having the relationship with the – with ISPT and working for past nine years, and understanding their mentality of there has
been time that they have bent their procedures to meet the target, I’ve told Michael Tulk that based on all of this, maybe
we should do the job on the purchase orders and we will do the first section or first stage of this work, and we will complete that
for that financial year. The second stage then it can be contracted. However, Michael Tulk informed me – I[sic] say ‘Okay,
if that is your remedy, send the advice form rather than – in fact ask Alex McFarlane. Rather than sending it directly to Sue
Palavestra, send it to Georgina Bishop, who she was in charge of Richmond Marketplace for ISPT. If she approved the procedure then
that’s how we will proceed. Therefore I’ve – did the advice form, attached it to the email to Mr McFarlane, national
facility director, and in that email I’ve asked him to send this directly to Georgina Bishop rather than Sue Palavestra, as
Georgina Bishop is aware of all of what’s happening. And if she was happy then she will send that to Sue Palavestra, they will
sign it, once they sign it we do have their approval to move on with the job. Which is on – so as per ISPT capital expenditure
procedure is that once you receive the advice from, that it is approved, then you will have to proceed with the work, and that’s
what we did. Therefore that’s how we got to do the job on a purchase order.”
The applicant’s email to Mr McFarlane, copy to Mr Tulk, is dated 16 April 2008 and states: “
Please see the attached forms, one is for this financial year and the second one is for the next financial year which has been approved
as per Georgina Bishop advice. Can you please forward this forms to Georgina direct not to Sue
”. Mr McFarlane’s email to Ms Bishop, copied to Mr Tulk and the applicant, is dated 17 April 2008 and states: “
Georgina, Please see attached as per the following e-mail. Please note copies have not been provided to Sue Palavestra as requested
by the property
Mr McFarlane, as Portfolio Operations Director for the ISPT account, is “
responsible for checking that ISPT protocols and procedures are adhered to at every property, thereby ensuring that JLL’s Management
Agreement obligations to ISPT are met
In his affidavit, Mr McFarlane stated:
“In or about the end of June 2008, I spoke to Mr Shafibeigli and we had a conversation in words to the effect of:
Mr Shafibeigli: I am just wondering how I should contract the works for the Richmond car park resurfacing because I have done the
first part under a purchase order, should I be doing the second stage the same way?
Me: Why did you do the first stage that way?
Mr Shafibeigli: I needed to meet the deadline to complete the capital expenditure before the end of the financial year.
Me: Well that is not the right thing to do. You still need to be executing the job under a minor works contract. Make sure that you
do a minor works contract for the second part of the work.
In or about the week ending 4 July 2008, I had a discussion with Mr Burns and Mr Starr by telephone. During this discussion I said
words to the effect of:
I have become aware that Ali Shafibeigli has been letting capital works under a purchase order in breach of the ISPT policy. This
exposes JLL as ISPT’s service provider to a breach of the Management Agreement. This is a very serious issue.
Mr Starr or Mr Burns responded in words to the effect of:
It is a serious issue. I will discuss this with Ali and see why he went down this path.”
In his affidavit, Mr Starr stated:
“In or about the last week of June 2008, I attended the Richmond Marketplace for a routine visit. While I was there I had a
meeting with Mr Shafibeigli. During the meeting we discussed the ongoing work on the property that needed to be completed before
June 2008. I had a conversation with Mr Shafibeigli in words to the effect of:
Me: How has the work on the resurfacing of the car park been arranged?
Mr Shafibeigli: It has been done under a purchase order.
Me: Don’t you need a contract?
Mr Shafibeigli: No, I had to get this done before the end of financial year so we had to use a purchase order. Alex said it was okay.
Me: I will speak to Alex.
Later that day I called Mr McFarlane and we had a conversation in words to the effect of:
Me: I’ve been speaking to Ali Shafibeigli about the capital works resurfacing the car park at Richmond and whether this will
be done on time. I also found out that there is no contract in place and the work is being done under a purchase order. Ali said
that you gave him the okay for it to be done under a purchase order.
Mr McFarlane: I never had a conversation with Ali about doing the work under a purchase order. I have not seen any purchase order
for this work.
Me and Mr McFarlane: We need to get a contract in place for this work.”
In his affidavit, Mr Burns stated the following in relation to this incident:
“In or about early July 2008, Kevin Starr, Regional Facilities Manager, New south Wales, approached me at JLL’s offices
in Sydney and said words to the effect of:
Look, we could have an issue with the contract documentation for the car park resurfacing project at Richmond. The work has been commenced
without the correct contract documentation in place.
In early July 2008, Mr Starr provided me with a copy of the document that Mr Shafibeigli had used to engage Australasian Anti-Slip
Solutions to perform the car park resurfacing work at Richmond Marketplace. I reviewed this document and saw that Mr Shafibeigli
had in fact engaged Australasian Anti-Slip Solutions on 22 May 2008, using a purchase order. A copy of the purchase order is attached
At this time I also reviewed the ISPT Contract Documentation Procedure.
Based on the information that I reviewed, I was satisfied that Mr Shafibeigli had breached the requirements of the ISPT Contract Documentation
procedure by using a purchase order to contract the work, because the work as valued over $49,999 and was of a technical nature,
and therefore the ISPT procedures clearly required a minor works contract to be executed for this work.”
From the above affidavits it is unclear who initially became aware of the issue of a purchase order. Mr McFarlane’s evidence
was that he became aware of the issue after his conversation with the applicant in or about end June 2008, notwithstanding the fact
that he had received an email from the applicant in April 2008, as referred to in paragraph 67 of this decision. Mr McFarlane, week
ending 4 July 2008, raises the issue in a telephone conversation with Mr Burns and Mr Starr, who stated that this is a serious issue
and will be discussed with the applicant. Mr Starr’s evidence is that in approximately the last week in June 2008 the applicant
advised him of the purchase order and that Mr McFarlane had said that it was okay. Mr Starr stated that he called Mr McFarlane who
advised him that he had not had a conversation with the applicant about the work being done under a purchase order. Mr Burns’
evidence was that Mr Starr approached him in the Sydney office in early July 2008 in relation to the documentation for the project.
Mr Burns stated that Mr Starr provided to him a copy of the documents in early July 2008.
I am reticent to draw an adverse inference in relation to the apparent contradictory evidence outlined above. First, the incident
occurred some time ago and possibly memories have faded. Secondly, the contradiction was not put to the witnesses in cross-examination.
Finally, a resolution of the conflict of evidence would not necessarily assist in determining the case. However, what it does suggest
is that in all probability the events surrounding the incident were not clear.
Mr Burns’ evidence, in cross examination, was that there were purchase orders for both stage 1 and stage 2 of the project as
the purchase orders are clear in that they quote one job number which clearly reinforces my evidence, or my comments that there was
one job of $130,000. There’s been two purchase orders issued for stage 1 of $54,094.00…and a second purchase order issued
for stage 2, under the same job number, for $55,336. That clearly indicates to me that the job is one job, it has one project number
and it’s been, and it’s been done in two stages and each of those, the value of those stages exceed the limitation on
doing works with a purchase order
Mr Burns acknowledged that the two figures did not total the figure of $130,000.00. The applicant put to Mr Burns that the three
purchase orders attached to Mr Burns’ affidavit at MB2, dated the same day, did not total the figure of $130,000.00 and that
the first two purchase orders were errors and not sent to the contractor and what was sent to the contractor for stage 2 was a minor
works contract. Mr Burns’ reply:
“That’s not correct. The purchase orders were presented as, to the contractor to engage the contractor in the work. The
work was completed prior to the execution of the, of the minor works contract.”
The applicant attached to his affidavit, under tab 9, two Capital Expenditure Forms. One was dated 16 April 2008, which provides for
the figure of $60,200.00 and states the type of document to be “
Purchase/work order
”. In the approval section the document is signed by an ISPT representative on 20 April 2008. The next Capital Expenditure Form
is dated 27 June 2008 and contains the same information in relation to the job and was signed by an ISPT representative on 3 July
2008. Under tab 10 there are two Capital Expenditure Forms, both are dated 1 July 2008, for a figure of $70,658.00 and state the
Minor Works Contract
”. One form bears a signature of an ISPT representative on 5 July 2008 and the other form is signed by ISPT on 15 August 2008.
The minor works contract document, attached to ISPT correspondence to the respondent dated 6 August 2008, is signed by the contractor
and ISPT, however, there is no date recorded as to when the parties signed the contract. I note that the first page of the contract
bears the date of 1 July 2008.
From Mr Tulk’s evidence “
The work commenced in late May 2008 and was carried out continuously until its completion on 30 July 2008
In his evidence, under cross examination, the applicant stated that it was his job to engage the contractor based on the approval
he receives from ISPT. He stated that there had been occasions where ISPT had come back to him and disagreed that a particular job
should be done as per his advice form, however, on this occasion ISPT approved the job to be done with a purchase order. He stated
that he showed the approval to Mr Tulk and based on that approval a purchase order was issued.
In cross examination of Mr Tulk the applicant referred to the meeting they had in relation to the limited time frame in which to process
a contract for the work in question and that the applicant had suggested that it would be best to do the first part of the project
by a purchase order. The applicant continued with his question: “
and in that effect you’ve said that if you send advice form to Georgina Bishop directly and she agreed with that then that would
be that we proceed?---If that was the correct documentation, yes
However, in his affidavit, Mr Tulk’s evidence on this incident was:
“I did not have any discussions with Mr Shafibeigli about the appropriate documents for contracting the work before the work
commenced. I did not direct Mr Shafibeigli to proceed with the project by way of a purchase order because of time constraints or
otherwise.”
In his affidavit, Mr Burns refers to his conversation with Mr Tulk on this issue. Mr Burns refers to the applicant’s response
to the counselling session that Mr Tulk conducted with the applicant on this issue on 4 July 2008. Mr Burns stated that he noted
that the applicant was alleging that Mr Tulk had been involved in the engagement of the contractor and he, therefore, had the following
discussion with Mr Tulk:
“[I]n words to the effect of:
Me: Michael, Ali’s letter implies that you were fully aware that Ali was using purchase orders to undertake contractor works.
This letter also implies that you provided him advice on this.
Mr Tulk: Look, I had no knowledge of the way in which the contractor was engaged.
I accepted that Mr Tulk was not directly involved in engaging the contractor and that this was not his responsibility.”
Mr Tulk was fully aware of how the contractor was being engaged and that was by way of purchase order. Mr Tulk, in cross examination,
stated that he still relied upon the applicant in relation to the correct documentation as this was part of the applicant’s
job. Mr Tulk’s evidence on this point does not erase the fact that he was involved in the process and, from the following evidence,
approved the applicant’s suggested course of action:
“My question that was put to you was that we will not meet the deadline if we did the job going, you know, trying to go through
contract, and the fastest way is to do it through purchase order. Your advice to me was send advice form to Georgina Bishop, had
she approved it then we agree we’ll take that direction?
If that’s the correct documentation that’s right, that’s yes.”
Following from the above evidence, the applicant acknowledged and Mr Tulk agreed that there was no direct instruction from Mr Tulk
for the applicant to use a purchase order.
The applicant put the following to Mr Tulk:
“So if you agree that the advice form advising ISPT that the job is getting done with the purchase order and that advice form
was signed by ISPT and returned to the property, then I have followed ISPT’s instruction?
I would have to agree with that I suppose.”
In cross examination Mr Tulk agreed with the applicant that in January 2008 he, Mr Tulk, issued a purchase order for work to the value
of $16,000.00 to rectify a compressor problem to the air conditioning system to Richmond Marketplace, which was a deviation from
procedure. However, due to the circumstances at the time Ms Georgina Bishop from ISPT approved the deviation to the correct procedures.
The applicant put a number of questions to Mr McFarlane in relation to approval for the work in question to be executed by way of
a purchase order.
Mr McFarlane acknowledged that ISPT had signed the forms submitted by the applicant, which stated that the contracting of works was
by way of purchase order. Mr McFarlane stated that this was an error. Mr McFarlane stated: “
Now the investment manager who signs that should’ve picked it up and I should’ve picked it up, because I think that’s
the point that you’re making. Is that it says – it’s a – it was allocated under a purchase order…The
error that’s in there does not override the procedures that are in place, that says that anything that’s over $50,000
should be contracted to a minor work agreement
The applicant put to Mr McFarlane the following in relation to the form:
“Having said that, that ISPT would want to be party to the documentation which means would they have a look at documentation
The nature of the tab that you're referring to can be deceptive because, as you know, in some cases there can be more than one contractor
that could be completing a project so therefore the term - where you've used purchase work order I don't believe ISPT look at that.
They should go - should I have looked at it? Yes. Should ISPT have looked at it before they've approved it? Yes. But I go back
to my original point, that if you're exercising a works for $60,000, and I refer you back to the policy document that you showed
me on page 3, section 18 of the contract documentation, it says "Any works for purchase orders are up to a maximum of $49,999."
That's correct?
It's an error that's on the form and ISPT - and my evidence, if you like, is that ISPT, because that is written in error ISPT are
not sanctioning you to breach their own policies.
But my question is, if I have send this advice form notifying yourself then has gone to ISPT and has been signed and back, does that
not suggest to me, even though I put that by mistake, the purchase order, would that suggest to me they have approved my request
to do this job with the purchase order?
So have to automatically then have to presume that they make a mistake?
No. They've made a mistake in terms of authorising something that goes against their own policy. That's how we've ended up here.
Sorry, I'll reserve that. It is an error that is written on the form. The fact that they've signed it does not mean that they're
sanctioning you to breach their own policy on the basis of timing or anything else.
Thank you very much?
I don't accept that assertion.”
In relation to the disciplinary meeting with Mr Burns on 7 July 2008, the applicant stated that Mr Burns already had the written warning
ready regardless of what he, the applicant, produced. In re-examination the applicant stated:
“Now, at no stage did I hide that procedure and go and do the job on a purchase order hoping that nobody will find out and we'll
just get the jobs done and it's done and dusted. All the opportunity was given to all the parties to have a look at that and if
they had any issues to refer to that issue and that was presented to Mr Burns in that meeting. Having said that, no matter what
I've provided, that didn't make any difference. Mr Burns in his affidavit is saying that, "Although the second stage of the
work was contracted, the first stage was on the purchase order therefore we give you a warning." Yet in his warning he's putting
the amount of $130,000. If he was correct and if I failed the procedures, should have been 60,200, not $130,000. To me is that
the way I had a feeling and with everything that has happened prior to that meeting that no matter what I would have done, I would
have got that warning, given no matter of what I explained, I still would have had that warning…”
The applicant stated that in this meeting he put forward the procedure he followed, which he stated Mr Tulk, Mr McFarlane and the
property investment manager for ISPT viewed and then ISPT approved. He stated:
“I gave example of the same what had happened previously in a different property involving myself and Mr Burns himself so it
is not an unorthodox situation. It has happened, it has happened where ISPT based on the actual fact has bent their own rules to
meet the target on KPIs. Again, none of that worked and I received my warning letter.”
In cross examination Mr Burns explained why the applicant received a first and final warning in relation to the incident, notwithstanding
the fact of no previous issues/problems with the applicant’s performance. Mr Burns stated:
“The seriousness of the breach required a first and final warning. The issue of breaching instructions under the management
agreement is severe and the risk of losing that contract with ISPT has severe consequences for all who work under that management
agreement, and a first and final warning was appropriate to be issued given the serious nature of the breach.”
It appears to me that a number of people had a finger in this particular pie. I am persuaded that, on balance, Mr Tulk was fully aware
of the situation with the purchase order for stage 1 of the project, albeit this is not what he told Mr Burns. Mr McFarlane, in his
evidence, accepted that he erred as did ISPT personnel. Ms Georgina Bishop, ISPT, was not called to give evidence in these proceedings,
therefore, I do not have the benefit of her evidence on whether she had approved the procedures taken by the applicant. The applicant’s
evidence would suggest she did “
as Georgina Bishop is aware of all of what’s happening
In all probability there may have been occasions when ISPT “
have bent their procedures to meet the target
as stated by the applicant in his evidence.
Considering all the material associated with this incident I am not satisfied that the applicant should have received a first and
final warning. I am not persuaded that a full and thorough investigation was undertaken by the respondent prior to the meeting with
the applicant on 7 July 2008. I am persuaded that, in all probability, the applicant may be correct that “
no matter what I would have done, I would have got that warning, given no matter of what I explained, I still would have had that
The January 2009 painting incident
This particular incident concerned contract painters working on the Richmond Marketplace centre’s facade. It was submitted on
behalf of the respondent that this incident was not relied upon for the dismissal, however, the Commission could have regard to it
in considering the entire factual matrix of the matter.
In his affidavit, Mr Starr outlined the following:
“JLL’s Safe Work Method Statements (
) Procedure sets out the requirements for SWMS to be completed in relation to works carried out at JLL properties. This process applies
for work carried out by contractors engaged by JLL and also where tenants carry out work on JLL’s properties. The Procedure
states that contractors can initially provide generic SWMS, however, once the scope of the work has been determined, site specific
SMSW may be required to make sure that the particular risks associated with the job have been identified and managed. Work must not
proceed until the required SWMS are in place.”
On 14 January 2009 Mr Starr attended the site for the purpose of a walk around inspection, which he conducts approximately once a
week or fortnight. On this occasion painters from Abbey Services Pty Ltd were on site. In his affidavit, Mr Starr stated he saw the
painters working on a scaffold platform painting the facade of the building and, from his observations, there appeared to be some
potential safety issues as the scaffold had not been set up correctly.
He stated that he raised this issue with the applicant in words to the effect of:
“Me: Have you been supplied with Abby’s (
) Safe Work Method Statements?
Mr Shafibeigli: Yes I have those.
Me: Well, we have to have a look at those because I don’t think that this is correct. I can see no two boards, no ladder access
and no outriggers. The contractors should not be working on that platform.
Mr Shafibeigli: Abby (
) has given me the SWMS. Dave is the contractor and he should know what is going on.
Me: No, you should have an idea of what is safe as well. You can find the Australian Standard on working at heights on the JLL website.
I recommend that the contractors don’t get up on that any more. You need to tell the contractors not to use the scaffold until
they can provide a correct SWMS and an adequate scaffold. Can you please get the SWMS for me to look at?”
Mr Starr stated that the applicant only provided to him approximately 3 to 5 SWMS from the contractor and that they were very generic
without any risk assessments in relation to working at heights. Mr Starr raised this issue with Mr Tulk and advised him to discuss
the issue with the applicant. Mr Tulk met with the applicant, with Mr Starr in attendance, on 22 January 2009. Mr Starr stated, in
his affidavit, that the applicant provided to him further SWMS from the contractor on approximately 27 January 2009.
Mr Tulk’s affidavit supports that of Mr Starr’s evidence outlined above. In his oral evidence,
however, Mr Tulk stated that on the day in question, 14 January 2009, the scaffolding was not being used at the time.
Mr Robertson, Abbey contract painter, in his evidence in chief, stated “
that area where it was, was a hard access area as there was a ramp for disabled access, and we couldn’t use the scaffold up
against the wall
In cross examination, Mr Robertson, however, could not specifically recall whether the scaffolding was usfed on the actual day of
14 January 2009.
In cross examination, Mr Robertson agreed that Abbey had been working on site for approximately one month. In reply to Mr Darams’
question, Mr Robertson stated that he did know the difference between a risk assessment and a safe work method statement:
“And what do you understand a safe work method statement is?
Safe work method statement is very similar to a risk assessment and it’s more of detailed step by step procedure and…point
form hazard preventions so you basically – it’s more in depth than what the risk assessment is.
And did you prepare a safe work method statement for the work – the painting work that was done from the scaffold at the Richmond
Marketplace on the 14th January 2009?
We did not have the safe work method statement before we started work, so we – he did it in the risk assessments and then we
were told that we needed a safe work method statement and we – we put together a safe work method statement off a friend who
has completed one. We’ve – we built that up after – I can’t exactly – I don’t know the date but
it was after a while we were working there.
Yes, and in relation to the painting from the scaffolding was it after that time that that work had started?
Yes, and were you asked by Mr Shafibeigli to undertake or provide the safe work method statement?
And you did it after the work on 14 January from the scaffold?
In closing submission, the applicant put the following argument on this incident:
“Abbey Contractors. Your Honour, it is Mr Starr's evidence is that I have finding the daily risk assessment and however he
cannot provide that for the hearing, he can't find them and the fact is that they were shown to Mr Starr and had those documentation
was not proper then the work would have been stopped immediately, if not by me would have been by Mr Starr. However they did not
occur, the work carried out and that happened on 14 January. However, they decided to talk to me on 22 January.
Now, if truly those documents wasn't adequate then why wait till from 14 January until 22 January to talk about it.”
The applicant submitted that in his 10 years of working on the ISPT portfolio there had been no issues with the contractors being
injured or a member of the public. He submitted that he did a risk assessment with the Abbey contracts on a daily basis, which made
it site specific. He submitted that the documentation was shown to Mr Starr and if that documentation was not adequate the work would
have been immediately stopped by him or Mr Starr.
It is not particularly clear on the evidence whether or not the painters were in fact on the scaffold platform on 14 January 2009.
However, I don’t believe that this is the actual issue. The issue is whether or not the correct documentation was in place
and whether or not a potential safety situation existed.
In his affidavit, Mr Starr stated that the applicant provided to him three to five SWMS from Abbey on 14 January 2009, which Mr Starr
stated were very generic without any risk assessments in relation to working at height. Mr Starr stated that he could not locate
the documents for the purpose of these proceedings. Without the benefit of sighting the documents that the applicant provided to
Mr Starr on 14 January 2009 I am unable to form a view as to their correctness. The applicant contends that he did a site specific
risk assessment with the contractor on a daily basis.
On 14 January 2009, Mr Starr was concerned “
that there were some potential safety issues in relation to the way that the scaffold had been set up
I presume that is the reason that Mr Starr asked the applicant for Abbey’s SWMS. Once provided with the documents, Mr Starr
advised the applicant that “
these are not good enough. You need to get a better set in place
On my understanding, the painters continued the work they were performing notwithstanding Mr Starr’s concerns on safety and
the lack of the necessary documentation. Further, the applicant was not spoken to in relation to these concerns until the 22 January
2009, eight days after the incident.
If it is correct that the contractors were not working safely and had not provided the required documentation, then this is a serious
issue and the applicant should have been formally counselled/ warned over the issue. However, on the material before me I cannot,
on balance, be satisfied that this was in fact the case.
OTHER ISSUES
In his affidavit, the applicant outlined his history of employment with the respondent, which commenced in 1999 as a contractor. He
stated that in early 2006 Ms Jo Flaming commenced with the respondent as a Portfolio Manager and in September 2006 changed his position
as Operations Manager Southgate Shopping Centre and Fairfield Forum to Operations Manager Richmond Marketplace & Fairfield and
in 2007 to full time at Richmond Marketplace.
He stated that as a single father with his son in school at Fairfield the transition meant extra travel time and cost and problems
with taking his son to school and picking him up. He stated that his efforts to maintain the Fairfield position were not successful,
however, he had been told that he would receive a monetary amount for the travel and flexibility in work time to enable him to pick
his son up from school.
In August 2008 the applicant forwarded an email to Ms van der Westhuizen and Mr McFarlane, which, inter alia, stated:
“In recent months, there have been various accusations, allegations and occurrences in the workplace, which has hugely impacted
on my professional life, not to mention my personal life. I feel that these allegations are of a discriminatory nature, with the
allegations relating to;
Misleading promises regarding transferring from Fairfield to Richmond Marketplace
Deframation of character
Breach of privacy, professional and personal
Workplace harassment
Until now, I have used my patience and professionalism in trying to deal with this situation by myself, in the hope that as time passed,
things would improve in the workplace. However, this has not been the case and the situation has been getting worse.
Recently, I received outside advice regarding these matters but I do not believe that the advice given to me is the most productive
way of dealing with this situation. As the allegations involve certain members of our team, I feel that I now require your assistance
in dealing with these matters.”
The certain members of our team, referred to above by the applicant were Mr Tulk, Mr Starr and Mr Burns.
In her affidavit, Ms van der Westhuizen stated that, as she viewed the allegations as serious, she organised a telephone meeting with
the applicant for 9 September 2008. Mr McFarlane was also in attendance at the meeting. After she and/or Mr McFarlane spoke with
the individuals, subject to the applicant’s allegations contained in the above email and discussed in the meeting, Ms van der
Westhuizen concluded that “
each of the allegations that Mr Shafibeigli had made about other managers were as a result of rumour and misunderstanding
In relation to the outstanding remuneration and allowances, Ms van der Westhuizen arranged for all the monies to be reimbursed to
the applicant.
On my understanding, the remuneration included the applicant’s salary review, CPI increases and a client agreed performance
bonus, which Mr Burns had advised the human resources department on 8 July 2008 not to action as the applicant was under disciplinary
Ms van der Westhuizen met with the applicant on 12 September 2008. During that meeting the applicant’s future with the respondent
was discussed. In her affidavit,
Ms van der Westhuizen advised the applicant that if he was unhappy and uncomfortable in working with the property managers in his
area then the options were finding him a new role with the respondent or assisting him in finding an external role. After this meeting
a number of emails were exchanged.
On 26 September 2008 Ms van der Westhuizen forwarded the following email to the applicant:
Thanks for the chat again today – really good to talk and resolve things.
Just to confirm that we talked about how you have thought about our recent conversation in Sydney and have decided that your future
lies in either a role outside the ISPT account with Jones Lang LaSalle or outside of the businesses. Your house is currently on the
market you would prefer for that sale to proceed prior to making this job change. Once your house is sold you will endeavour to find
a new role.”
On the same date, Ms van der Westhuizen forwarded the email exchange to Mr Doherty, Head of Property and Asset Management. Mr Doherty
replied as follows:
“Are these additional amounts recoverable or is the funding via the ISPT bonus pool?
Is there a way to put a time frame on this so that we have a final date?”
Ms van der Westhuizen replied:
“1. Yes – there is money set aside for funding from the bonus pool.
2. No. After two lengthy and complex sessions, advice from legal, Leah and Marianne – a commitment from him that his future
was not with us was an achievement. We are keen for Marianne’s memo to put to bed the issues to date and from there any future
performance factors can be dealt with on a more even playing field.”
In cross examination the applicant put to Ms van der Westhuizen what she meant by her reply to Mr Doherty in point 2 of the above
email. Ms van der Westhuizen replied:
“What I meant was exactly what I’ve said, that until these matters are resolved we can’t have a normal, just, performance
management manager employee relationship.”
Further in the cross examination:
“Can I suggest that that would mean to me is that if there – from then on, if he doesn’t leave the company, anything
that he does performance wise would be the factor to be dealt with in a even ground?
Well, my view is that if – if there is a problem or something is found to have been an error, and I found that remuneration
was a problem. And until that is resolved we can’t progress to a normal – and whether it’s a – it’s
performance management factors or day to day management staff factors, you cannot move on until that has been resolved. So Marianne’s
memos were resolving the financials that I believed you were owed.”
I would agree with Ms van der Westhuizen that it was important to the employment relationship the applicant had with his employer
to rectify the situation of monies that he was obviously entitled to, which had been withheld from him, to be paid to him forthwith.
This of itself is, in my view, good human resources policy. However, that is not the tone of Ms van der Westhuizen’s reply
to Mr Doherty’s question to her in the above email exchange.
The issues the respondent had with the applicant’s performance arose in July 2008 and January 2009. On the material before me,
there were no previous issues with the applicant’s performance of duties in the approximate nine years that he has been with
the respondent company as a contractor and then as an employee. From 2004 to approximately 2006 the applicant worked at the Southgate
Shopping Centre with Mr Burns. In cross examination Mr Burn agreed with the applicant that in this period the applicant had not breached
any procedure in relation to operational or capital expenditure.
At the time of the email exchange between Ms van der Westhuizen and Mr Doherty in September 2008, there had been only one issue with
the applicant’s performance, which was the July 2008 car park incident previously addressed in this decision. Ms van der Westhuizen’s
reply to Mr Doherty’s apparent request for a time frame/final date that the applicant would be making a job change was a definite
”, and, as Ms van der Westhuizen outlined the process, it had involved
“… two lengthy and complex sessions, advice from legal, …– a commitment from him that his future was not with
us was an achievement
”. Ms van der Westhuizen continues, that “
any future performance factors can be dealt with on a more even playing field
”. As Ms van der Westhuizen advised Mr Doherty, in September 2008, obtaining a commitment from the applicant that his future
was not with the respondent company was “
an achievement
In determining whether the applicant’s termination of employment by the respondent was harsh, unjust or unreasonable I am required
to have regard to the paragraphs under ss.652(3) of the
, where relevant to the matter. I am also required to be cognisant that a “
fair go all round
” must be afforded to the employee and the employer in this matter. The applicant’s employment was terminated due to conduct
in relation to the NDY incident in January 2009 and for the reason that he had received a first and final warning for a previous
incident in July 2008.
Previously in this decision I have considered and determined what that conduct involved. I was satisfied that the applicant did breach
the procedure in engaging the NDY consultants, however, I was not satisfied that this was a deliberate breach of procedure and that,
in my view, the applicant acted in good faith in the performance of his duties. The responsibility of engaging NDY rested with the
applicant. I am persuaded that, on balance, the applicant’s interpretation of the required proceedings was not the correct
interpretation but that it was his interpretation of how to engage NDY. In relation to the July 2008 car park incident I was not
satisfied that a first and final warning to the applicant was warranted in the circumstances. The respondent also sought that I have
regard to the January 2009 painting incident, which it was submitted was relevant to a consideration of the entire factual matrix
of the matter. For the reasons previously expressed, I am not satisfied that on balance I should have regard to this incident.
Having considered the material before me, I am not satisfied that there was a valid reason for the termination, which related to the
applicant’s conduct as alleged in the circumstances.
I am satisfied that the applicant was notified of the reason for his termination in the meeting held with him on 25 February 2009,
albeit I am not persuaded those reasons were valid.
I am not persuaded that the applicant was provided with an opportunity to respond to the reason for his termination of employment.
I am not persuaded that the opportunity afforded to the applicant in this case was genuine. I have previously in this decision expressed
a concern in relation to the process adopted in relation to the applicant’s termination meeting. Clearly on the evidence of
Mr McFarlane, Ms van der Westhuizen was of the view that, depending upon what he put to the respondent in that meeting, termination
of employment was an option. The applicant was not advised of the possible consequences of that meeting. I do not consider this to
” to the applicant in the circumstances.
On my understanding unsatisfactory performance was not an issue in these proceedings, therefore, I will not address the requirements
of ss.652 (3) (d) of the
No particular submissions were put in relation to the size of the employer’s undertaking, establishment or service or any absence
of dedicated human resources management specialists or expertise, therefore, this factor is neutral.
There are other matters that I consider relevant to the matter before me. Those matters are the length of service of the applicant,
as a contractor and an employee, and that there were no issues associated with the applicant’s conduct prior to the 2008 incident.
The applicant is 45 years of age and on my understanding has family responsibilities in relation to his 16 year old son. The applicant
further submitted that he has been unable to obtain employment due to the circumstances of his termination.
In all the circumstances of the matter I have determined that the termination of the applicant’s employment by the respondent
was harsh, unjust and unreasonable.
During the proceedings the issue of remedy was not dealt with in any great detail by the parties. I therefore advised the parties
that if I was to determine that the termination of the applicant’s employment was harsh, unjust or unreasonable I would provide
a further opportunity to address the issue of remedy. My prima facie view would be that in all probability reinstatement may not
be the appropriate remedy, in the circumstances of the case. However, I do not express a concluded view as the parties have not been
afforded an opportunity to consider and address me on the issue of remedy. In the circumstances, I have decided that it may be appropriate
that the parties further discuss the issue of remedy.
I will list the matter for mention at 10am on Thursday 17 December 2009 where the parties may advise me of the outcome of their discussions
and their suggested process to conclude the matter.
BY THE COMMISSION:
COMMISSIONER
Appearances
Mr Shafibeigli
, on his own behalf.
of counsel, with
Ms Sutherland
, Blake Dawson, on behalf of the respondent.
Hearing details:
August 28, 31
September 24.
Respondent’s outline of argument filed 20 July 2009 at paragraph 2.
Exhibit R1 at paragraph 5.
Attachment to Form R27.
Exhibit R4 at paragraph 42.
Exhibit R3 at annexure KS1.
Exhibit A1 at tab 23.
Exhibit A1 at tab 22.
Exhibit R5 at paragraphs 7 and 8.
Exhibit R5 at KS10.
Ibid at KS11.
Ibid at KS12.
Ibid at paragraph 60.
Ibid at paragraph 61.
Exhibit R5 at paragraph 65.
Exhibit R4 at paragraph 33.
Exhibit R1 at MT5.
Ibid at paragraph 36.
Exhibit R4 at MB7.
Ibid at MB8, page 2 of report.
Exhibit A1 at paragraph 133.
Ibid at paragraph 135.
Ibid at paragraph 137.
PN736 of transcript 28 August 2009.
PN739 of transcript 28 August 2009.
Exhibit A1 at tab 25, page 1.
Exhibit A1 at tab 25 (Capital Expenditure document, page 7).
PN 752 to PN 754 of transcript 28 August 2009.
Exhibit R3 at paragraph 46 (h) to (j).
For example, PN684 to PN 727 of transcript 31 August 2009.
PN708 of transcript 31 August 2009.
PN721 of transcript 31 August 2009.
Exhibit R5 at paragraph 67(j).
PN1192 of transcript 24 September 2009.
Exhibit R4 at paragraph 48(l) and (p).
PN760 to PN765 of transcript 31 August 2009; Exhibit A1 at tab 24.
Exhibit R5 at KS11, page 2 of 3.
Exhibit R1 at paragraph 5; PN361 of transcript 28 August 2009.
Exhibit R4 at paragraphs 37 to 39.
PN1082; PN1083 of transcript 31 August 2009.
Exhibit R4 at paragraph 41.
Exhibit R4 at paragraph 38.
Exhibit R3 at paragraph 33.
Exhibit R2 at paragraph 27.
Exhibit R3 at paragraphs 35 to 38 and 41.
PN1077 of transcript 31 August 2009.
Exhibit R3 at AM6; PN1138 of transcript 24 September 2009.
Exhibit A1 at tab 25.
Exhibit R1 at paragraph 9.
Exhibit R1 at MT3; Exhibit A1 at tab 6.
PN836 of transcript 31 August 2009.
PN458 to PN498 of transcript 28 August 2009.
PN458 of transcript 28 August 2009.
PN474 of transcript 28 August 2009.
Exhibit A1 at tab 8, category (4).
Exhibit R3 at paragraph 5.
Exhibit R3 at paragraphs 10 to 12.
Exhibit R5 at paragraphs 13 to 14.
Exhibit R4 at paragraphs 12 to 15.
PN989 to PN990 of transcript 31 August 2009.
PN993 of transcript 31 August 2009.
Exhibit R1 at paragraph 10.
PN88 of transcript 31 August 2009.
Exhibit R1 at paragraph 11.
Exhibit R4 at paragraphs 20 and 21.
PN165 of transcript 31 August 2009.
PN166 to PN176 of transcript 31 August 2009.
PN181 of transcript 31 August 2009.
PN728 to PN752 of transcript 31 August 2009.
PN735; PN736 of transcript 31 August 2009.
PN748 to PN752 of transcript 31 August 2009.
PN981 of transcript 28 August 2009.
PN998 of transcript 31 August 2009.
PN474 of transcript 28 August 2009.
PN981 of transcript 28 August 2009.
Exhibit R5 at paragraph 33.
Exhibit R5 at paragraph 36.
Ibid at paragraph 37.
PN202 to PN210 of transcript of 31 August 2009.
PN59 of transcript 28 August 2009.
PN129 to PN135 of transcript 28 August 2009.
PN1443; PN1444 of transcript 24 September 2009.
Exhibit R5 at paragraph 37.
Exhibit R5 at paragraph 39.
Correspondence on this issue formed attachment 4 to the applicant’s affidavit Exhibit A1.
Exhibit R2 at attachment MVDW2.
Ibid at paragraph 15.
Exhibit A1 at tab 12; PN1000 to PN1006 of transcript 31 August 2009.
Ibid at paragraph 17.
Exhibit A1 at tab 13, category (5).
PN558 of transcript of 31 August 2009.
PN561 of transcript of 31 August 2009.
PN821 of transcript 31 August 2009.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code G, PR990320>
No downloadable files available