Spotless Services Australia Limited - re s.576H - Commission may vary modern awards - application to vary the Hospitality Industry (General) Award 2010 [2009] AIRCFB 992 (30 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Commission may vary modern awards
Spotless Services Australia Limited
(AM2009/109)
HOSPITALITY INDUSTRY (GENERAL) AWARD 2010
JUSTICE GIUDICE, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT LAWLER
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
COMMISSIONER SMITH
MELBOURNE, 30 DECEMBER 2009
This is an application by Spotless Services Pty Ltd (Spotless) to vary the
Hospitality Industry (General) Award 2010
(the modern award) to add clauses in relation to stand-down and multiple engagement.
Spotless operates a number of on-site catering facilities under contract. The sites include sportsgrounds, public venues, mines, schools,
universities, manufacturing sites and commercial sites.
The application is in two parts. Firstly, the following additional clause is sought dealing with stand downs during non-operational
40. Stand-down during non-operational periods
Where an employee is employed in, or in connection with, catering functions at a site or facility that does not operate for the full
year the provisions of this clause 40 apply.
Employees may be stood down without pay during a period or periods where the site or facility does not operate (
non-operating periods
) provided that:
an employee shall be given as much notice as is practicable of the start and finish of any stand-down period. Such notice must be
at least 1 week. The notice must be provided to the employee in writing. Once the notice is provided to the employee, the period
of stand down may be varied by agreement between the employee and employer;
an employee may take accrued annual leave or long service leave during the stand down period;
all periods of stand down shall count for the purposes of accruing sick leave, annual leave and long service leave;
if appropriate work is available for the employee to perform during the non-operating period, an employee shall be offered to perform
that work. For the purposes of this sub-clause, appropriate work is work able to be performed by the employee within the employee’s
skills and experience; and
where an employee performs appropriate work, the employee shall be paid at the rate applicable to the work performed.
No employee shall have their employment terminated by reason of not being able to perform work during a non-operating period.
For the purposes of this clause, a site or facility that does not operate for the full year means a site or facility that, for operational,
technological, environmental or other reasons does not operate 52 weeks per year.”
The second part of the application seeks to include a provision dealing with multiple engagements, as follows:
“Multiple Engagements
Part-time or full-time employees may request to be separately engaged to perform work on a casual basis.
Where a part-time or full-time employee requests to perform work on a separate engagement, the employee shall be paid the appropriate
rate of pay for a casual employee engaged in the work performed while the employee is working on the separate engagement.
Work performed by an employee on a separate engagement does not count as time worked for the purposes of the employees’ usual
part-time or full-time employment.
For the purposes of this clause an employee is working on a separate engagement, where the employee is, at their request, either:
performing work that does not form part of their usual duties; or
performing work at a location other than the employee’s usual work location.
For the avoidance of doubt, nothing in this clause provides the Employer with the ability to direct an employee to undertake a separate
engagement.”
Spotless submitted that a number of its clients operate according to a non-standard working year in an education setting. Spotless
is not required to provide catering services when the client facility is not operational and therefore there is no work for employees
to perform. Spotless wishes to be in a position to stand down employees during a non-operational period when their services are not
required. It submitted that the clause it proposed, modelled on the stand-down clause for schools and colleges contained in cl.13
Catering – Victoria – Award 1998
(Catering Victoria Award), should be included in the modern award.
The Liquor, Hospitality and Miscellaneous Union (LHMU) opposed the provision. It submitted that while Spotless proposes that the modern
award should contain a stand down provision of general application whereas its arguments in support identify only a limited circumstance
in a small segment of the industry covered by the modern award. It pointed out that cl.13 of the Catering Victoria Award, relied
upon by Spotless is limited in its coverage to employees “employed in domestic work in or in connection with primary and secondary
boarding schools or residential colleges associated with tertiary educational institutions”. It also relied on the fact that
the operation of cl.13 is confined to reasonably predictable circumstances, generally known well in advance, i.e. “official
term breaks, semester breaks and the Christmas/Summer vacation”. The LHMU submitted that, in contrast, the Spotless proposal
applies to “a site or facility that does not operate for the full year means a site or facility that, for operational…,
technological, environmental or other reasons does not operate 52 weeks per year”.
LHMU further submitted that the matters raised by Spotless as justification for the proposed variation are more appropriately dealt
with in enterprise bargaining, where the specific enterprise issues can be identified and addressed.
On 15 December 2009 Spotless filed an amended application to address some issues raised by the LHMU. The amended application is relevantly
in the following terms:
“40. Stand Down
Where an employee is employed at, or in connection with, catering functions in a school, college, university or other educational
facility, the provisions of this clause will apply.
Employees may be stood down without pay during an official term breaks, semester breaks and the Christmas/summer vacation, provided
an employee shall be given as much notice as is practicable of the start and finish of any stand-down period; notice must be at least
1 week and in writing. Once notice is given, the stand-down shall not be varied unless by mutual consent between the employee and
an employee may take accrued annual leave or long service leave during term breaks, semester breaks and the Christmas/summer vacation;
all periods of stand down shall count for the purpose of accrual of personal leave, annual leave and long service leave;
if appropriate work is available for an employee during any period of stand-down, the existing employee shall be offered such employment
(whether on a fulltime or casual basis) before an additional employee is employed; the employee who has been stood down may refuse
an offer of employment without prejudice to his or her normal employment relationship;
) for the purpose of this clause appropriate work shall mean such work as is available that is capable of being performed by the employee;
remuneration for such work shall be at the rate of pay applicable to the work being performed.
No employee shall have his or her employment terminated on the grounds of work not being available due to term breaks, semester breaks
and the Christmas/summer vacation.
An employer may apply to Fair Work Australia to extend the operation of this clause 40 to a site or facility that for operational,
technological, environmental or other reasons does not operate 52 weeks per year. Where Fair Work Australia approves such an application,
the terms of this clause shall apply.
In granting an application under clause 40.4, Fair Work Australia may impose such terms and conditions on the operation of this clause
as it thinks appropriate.”
The LHMU submitted that there is serious doubt that a modern award can contain stand-down provisions of the kind sought by Spotless
because “stand down” is dealt with in
Fair Work Act 2009
(Fair Work Act). It was part of the submission that those sections prescribe the circumstances in which an employer can stand down
an employee without pay and stand down is not available in other circumstances. It submitted that it was these consideration which
had led the Commission not to include stand down provisions in modern awards.
It submitted that the
Fair Work Act
provides an exclusive default code for stand down. The
Fair Work Act
provides that an enterprise agreement (but not a modern award) may provide for stand down in a wider range of circumstances or a
more limited range of circumstances.
The stand down provision found in cl.13 of the Catering Victoria Award is limited to catering services provided to boarding schools
and residential colleges associated with tertiary educational facilities. The provision is directed to circumstances where a client
in the education sector to whom a caterer provides services does not operate for a full year. Spotless’ amended application
is limited in the same way. There is a similar provision in a modern award covering employees of schools. The provision is cl.11
- leave without pay during non-term weeks, in the
Educational Services (Schools) General Staff Award 2010
In the circumstances a provision like that in the Catering Victoria Award should be included in the modern award as proposed by Spotless
in its amended variation application. Appropriate arrangements to deal with other circumstances can be a matter for enterprise bargaining.
Further, we think the provision to be included in the award should be cast in terms of leave without pay rather than stand down so
as to avoid any potential conflict with
Fair Work Act
We will vary the modern award to include a new subcl.34.4 in the following terms:
34.4 Special leave without pay arrangements with respect to catering provided in boarding schools and residential colleges
Where an employee is employed at or in connection with catering functions in primary and secondary boarding schools or residential
colleges associated with tertiary educational institutions the following provisions apply:
An employee may be required to take leave without pay during official term breaks, semester breaks and the Christmas/Summer vacation
(the relevant period) provided that:
an employee will be given as much notice as is practicable of the start and finish of the relevant period. Such notice must be at
least one week. The notice must be provided to the employee in writing. Once the notice is provided to the employee, the period of
leave without pay may be varied by agreement between the employee and employer;
an employee may take accrued annual leave or long service leave during the relevant period;
all periods of leave without pay will count for the purposes of accruing sick leave, annual leave and long service leave;
if appropriate work is available for the employee to perform during the relevant period, an employee will be offered that work. For
the purposes of this sub-clause, appropriate work is work able to be performed by the employee within the employee’s skills
and experience; and
where an employee performs appropriate work, the employee will be paid at the rate applicable to the work performed.
No employee will have their employment terminated by reason of not being able to perform work during the relevant period.
Multiple engagements
Spotless submitted that a significant number of its employees engaged on a full-time or part-time basis at one venue choose to seek
and accept work on a casual basis at another venue. Such employees are considered to be working on a separate engagement in accordance
with the principles set out in decisions such as the
Tramways Case.
Spotless seeks an amendment to the modern award to expressly provide for the position, rather than leaving it as a question of award
interpretation. It submitted that the variation would provide employees with the ability to obtain further work at casual rates and
that employees might not otherwise be offered such work because of the additional cost in overtime or penalties to the employer.
Spotless made a minor amendment to its proposed subcl.14.4, making the two circumstances of separate engagement cumulative, rather
than separate.
The LHMU submitted that a clause in similar terms to that proposed by Spotless in its application was sought by motel employers during
award modernisation, without success. The rejection of the motel employers’ submission was unsurprising and based on a Commission
Full Bench decision, which specifically rejected an application to insert a multiple engagement clause into
The Hospitality Industry - Accommodation, Hotels, Resorts and Gaming Award 1995
This is not the first occasion on which a provision for multiple engagements has been sought in this award. On 29 October 2008, during
the consultations which followed the publication of the exposure draft for the modern award, the Hotel, Motel and Accommodation Association
sought a multi-hiring provision of general application, based on cl.2.4 of the
Hotels, Motels, Resorts and Accommodation Award - State (Excluding South-East Queensland) 2005
That claim was not successful. There is no similar provision in either the Catering Victoria Award or the
Hospitality Industry - Accommodation, Hotels, Resorts and Gaming Award 1998
A claim by the Australian Hotels Association to include such a provision in the latter award was rejected by a Full Bench, as the
LHMU pointed out.
We approach this matter against the background of the following passage from the Full bench statement of 26 June 2009:
Applications to vary the substantive terms of modern awards will be considered on their merits. It should be noted, however, that
the Commission would be unlikely to alter substantive award terms so recently made after a comprehensive review of the relevant facts
and circumstances including award and NAPSA provisions applying across the Commonwealth. Normally a significant change in circumstances
would be required before the Commission would embark on a reconsideration. A variation in the Minister’s award modernisation
request made after the modern award might constitute such a change.”
It appears to us that nothing advanced by Spotless provides a basis to review the relevant provisions of the modern award. A similar
claim has already been rejected by the Commission twice – once as part of award simplification of a significant predecessor
award and more recently in December last year when the modern award was made. Provisions of the kind sought are rare in pre-reform
awards and NAPSAs. We will not vary the modern award to include the multiple engagements provision sought by Spotless. We add two
comments. The first is that since the application was made the Full Bench has varied the part-time provisions of the modern award
to provide greater flexibility in part-time hours of work.
The second comment is that matters such as those canvassed by Spotless are capable of being addressed in negotiations at the enterprise
or workplace level. The second part of the application is rejected.
BY THE COMMISSION:
[2009] AIRCFB 1000
at para 109
(1936) 36 CAR 179.
Print P5446.
Print P5446.
[2009] AIRCFB 645
[2009] AIRCFB 967
at para 20.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR992194>
No downloadable files available