MBX25 v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1869 (14 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
MBX25 v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1869
File number(s):
SYG 3985 of 2025
Judgment of:
JUDGE MANOUSARIDIS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– practice and procedure – application for an
interlocutory injunction restraining the Commonwealth and the Secretary
Department of Home Affairs from removing the applicant from Australia pending
the determination of claims for relief the applicant
has brought in relation to
two applications the applicant made under
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) – whether applicant has a prima facie case – whether the
balance of convenience favours the granting of an injunction
interlocutory injunction granted.
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Cases cited:
Australian Broadcasting Corporation v
[2006] HCA 46
Beecham Group Ltd v Bristol Laboratories Pty Ltd
(1968) 118 CLR
Davis v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs; DCM20 v Secretary of Department of Home
[2023] HCA 10
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v MZAPC
Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd v Apple Inc.
[2011] FCAFC 156
Tait v The Queen
[1962] HCA 57
(1962) 108 CLR 620
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr H Cooper
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Counsel for the Respondents:
Mr J Barrington, by video
Solicitor for the Respondents:
Australian Government Solicitor
SYG 3985 of 2025
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
COMMONWEALTH OF
Second Respondent
SECRETARY, DEPARTMENT OF HOME
Third Respondent
JUDGE MANOUSARIDIS
DATE OF ORDER:
UPON THE APPLICANT BY HIS COUNSEL GIVING TO THE COURT THE USUAL
UNDERTAKING AS TO DAMAGES
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
to order 2 and until further order, the second and third respondents, including
by their servants and agents, are restrained
from removing the applicant from
applicant must prosecute with diligence his application for final relief.
matter be listed for a directions hearing before Judge Manousaridis at 9.30 am
on 14 November 2025.
of the interlocutory application be reserved.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or order to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors (r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 24.04
Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
the afternoon of Friday 7 November 2025 a Registrar of this Court informed me
that the applicant intended to apply for an interlocutory
injunction to restrain
the first respondent (
) from removing him from Australia to
Pakistan. The applicant was scheduled to be removed from Australia on Thursday
13 November 2025.
I informed the Registrar I was available to hear the application for an
interlocutory injunction at 10.15 am on Wednesday 12
November 2025, the
Registrar made orders that the application for an interlocutory injunction be
listed for hearing before me at
that time and date, and that the parties file
and serve written submissions by 4.00 pm on 10 November 2025.
application for an interlocutory injunction came before me for hearing at 11.00
am on 12 November 2025 after the parties requested
that the hearing commence at
that time rather than at 10.15 am. I heard oral submissions from 11.00 am until
1.45 pm, at which time
I adjourned the matter to 3.15 pm, indicating to the
parties that I would deliver judgment at that time. The matter was then
at 3.30 pm, at which time I pronounced orders. I pronounced those
orders on the basis of a draft of these reasons, indicating that
I would provide
to the parties the publishable version of these reasons on the following day.
applicant is a citizen of Pakistan, who was born in the Swat region of Pakistan,
and is of Pashtun ethnicity.
applicant arrived in Australia aboard a cargo ship. The ship was travelling from
India bound for Singapore via Australia. On disembarking
the applicant claimed
protection on the ground that he feared harm from the Taliban if he were to
taken into immigration detention.
is no dispute the applicant is an “unauthorised maritime arrival”
within the meaning of
Migration Act 1958
); and, being an “unauthorised maritime arrival”,
of the Act prevents him from making a valid application for a visa. The
applicant, however, was entitled to apply under
of the Act that the
Minister determine that
of the Act does not apply to the applicant. On
5 August 2024 the applicant made a request in writing (
First request
that the Minister lift the bar under
to enable the applicant to apply
for a Temporary Protection visa, or a Safe Haven visa.
4 September 2025 the Minister issued a document titled “Negative Personal
Procedural Decision
(Section 46A)
). By that document the
Minister decided not to consider making a substantive public interest decision
in relation to any request that was made before 4 September 2025,
subject to the exceptions identified in the PPD. The PPD also stated
Minister intended to issue new instructions to his Department to apply when
assisting Ministers in exercising their powers
of the Act; and
that a person who is adversely affected by the PPD, and who wished to have the
Minister make a decision under
, could make a new request subject to those
instructions as in force from time to time. The Minister’s decision was
by the following matters the Minister indicated he considered when
making his decision:
a large number
of requests for Ministerial intervention under section 46A of the
(Act) have been impacted because of the practice that the High
Court of Australia in
Davis v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant
Services and Multicultural Affairs; DCM20 v Secretary of Department of Home
[2023] HCA 10
held to be beyond the executive power of the
Commonwealth; and
identifying and
dealing with those requests on a case-by-case basis would involve an unwarranted
use of Commonwealth resources; and
feasible in any event for me or any other Minister to give personal attention to
those requests, having regard to our other
responsibilities; and
I intend to
issue new instructions for my Department to apply when assisting Ministers in
exercising their power under section 46A;
a person who is
adversely affected by this decision, and wishes again to have a Minister make a
decision under section 46A, could
make a new request for such a decision subject
to those instructions as in force from time to time . . .
Minister issued the new instructions to the Department on 4 September 2025.
These are titled “Ministerial Instructions for
processing requests for
Ministerial intervention under
subsection 46A(2)
Migration Act
New Ministerial Instructions
applicant was notified of the PPD by letter dated 26 September 2025 from the
Department of Home Affairs (
). The letter stated that the
Minister had decided not to consider making a substantive public interest
decision in the applicant’s
case, with the result that the
applicant’s “request has therefore been finalised”. The letter
also stated that
the Minister issued the Department with new Ministerial
instructions for dealing with requests for interventions under
of the Act, and that it was open to the applicant to submit a new request for
Ministerial intervention, and have it assessed
by the Department against the new
Ministerial instructions.
6 October 2025 the applicant received a notice of intention to remove him from
Australia. The notice stated that the applicant
was liable for removal from
Australia under s 198 of the Act, and that it was anticipated the applicant
would be removed from Australia
to Karachi on or after 21 October 2025.
7 October 2025 the applicant made a second request pursuant to s 46A(2) of the
Second request
). By letter dated 9 October 2025 the Department
informed the applicant that the Second request had been received, and that the
would advise the applicant of the outcome of the request when it is
available. As at the time of preparing these reasons, the applicant
has not been
advised of the outcome of the Second request.
24 October 2025 the applicant filed an originating application with this Court
naming not only the Minister, but also the Commonwealth
of Australia and the
Secretary of Department of Home Affairs (
). The applicant claims
three final orders: an order that the PPD be quashed; an order that the
Secretary bring the First and Second
requests to the Minister’s intention;
and an order that the Commonwealth and the Secretary be restrained from removing
applicant from Australia until the Minister deals with the First and Second
applicant applies for an interlocutory inunction in aid of the relief he claims
in the originating application; and the parties
are not in dispute about the
principles that govern the determination of applications for interlocutory
injunction in these circumstances.
determining whether to grant an interlocutory injunction the court must consider
two broad questions. The first is whether the
applicant has a prima facie case,
in the sense of there being “a sufficient likelihood of success to justify
in the circumstances
the preservation of the status quo pending the
The second is whether
“the inconvenience or injury which the [applicant] would be likely to
suffer if an injunction were refused
outweighs or is outweighed by the injury
which the [respondent] would suffer if an injunction were
As the Full Federal
Court noted in
Samsung Electronics Co Ltd v Apple Inc
. . . when considering whether to grant an interlocutory injunction, the issue
of whether the plaintiff has made out a
prima facie
case and whether the
balance of convenience and justice favours the grant of an injunction are
related inquiries. The question of
whether there is a serious question or a
prima facie
case should not be considered in isolation from the balance
of convenience. The apparent strength of the parties’ substantive
will often be an important consideration to be weighed in the balance . . .
I consider the application of these principles to the circumstances of this
case, there is a question whether a sufficient
time was available to me to
consider the application for an interlocutory injunction. That question arises
because the applicant’s
claims for relief, and the detailed written and
oral submissions that have been expertly and persuasively formulated and
by counsel for the parties, give rise to complicated legal issues; and
their determination, even on an interlocutory basis, would
require a judge to
consider carefully a number of authorities, and in particular the reasons for
judgment of the High Court in
Davis v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
, and assess their application to
circumstances the parties submit are distinguishable from those in
the limited time that was available to me, I am not in a position to give
detailed consideration to the submissions counsel
for the parties made, or to
the authorities to which counsel referred. On the basis of the thorough oral
submissions counsel for
the parties made, however, I am satisfied I have
acquired a sufficient understanding of the claims the applicant makes, and the
submissions
the parties have made, on the basis of which I can determine with
the required degree of confidence the matters I am required to
determine on the
application for an interlocutory injunction. If, however, I were not so
satisfied, then, on the authority of
I would have granted an
injunction to preserve the subject matter of this application for such time as
would have been necessary
to enable me to understand and then decide the merits
of the application for an interlocutory injunction.
PRIMA FACIE CASE
applicant submits that although the Minister is not obliged to engage the power
conferred by s 46A(2) of the Act, once he does
so, his exercise of it is not
unbounded. In particular, the Minister must exercise the power within the bounds
of legal reasonableness.
The factors that are relevant to determining the bounds
of reasonableness include considerations that relate to the circumstances
characteristics of the person or class of persons who have made an application
under s 46A(2) of the Act. The applicant further
submits that the PPD is legally
unreasonable because it purports to deal with all applications that had been
made pursuant to s 46A(2)
without reference to the circumstances and
characteristics of the persons to whom the PPD is directed; and although it is
the Minister to make a decision in relation to categories of persons,
the Minister’s identification of the class of persons
to whom the PPD is
intended to apply is itself unreasonable because it has not been made by
reference to criteria that fall within
the scope and purpose of s 46A(2).
Minister, on the other hand, submits that the power conferred by s 46A(2) of the
Act is a power which permits the Minister to
take into account political
considerations, and undefined factual matters; and the making of the PPD,
therefore, is well within the
permitted scope of the power conferred by s
46A(2). The Minister also made a number of submissions that the circumstances of
case before me are distinguishable from those in
am satisfied that the first ground on which the applicant relies, in light of
the submissions counsel for the applicant made in
support of it, has a
sufficient likelihood of success to justify in the circumstances of this case
the preservation of the status
quo pending the trial, provided the balance of
convenience otherwise favours the grant of the injunction.
principal question in relation to ground 2 is whether there was no good arguable
case that there would be any utility in the applicant
succeeding on ground 2,
assuming ground 2 was otherwise reasonably arguable. The basis of that
submission are the terms of the New
Ministerial Instructions. Counsel for the
applicant said the applicant intends to challenge the lawfulness of the New
Ministerial
Instructions on the ground that it contains provisions by which,
counsel submitted, the Minister has abdicated the powers conferred
by s 46A of
the Act; and counsel for the applicant outlined the grounds on which such
challenge would be mounted.
am not in a position to assess the apparent merits of the challenge to the New
Ministerial Instructions the applicant has foreshadowed.
But that does not
matter, because I am satisfied the applicant has a good arguable case that the
Secretary will be liable to a duty
to provide the First and Second requests to
the Minister, if the applicant succeeds on ground 1 of this application; and I
satisfied the Minister is bound to succeed in his contention that the New
Ministerial Instructions would necessarily prevent the
First or Second requests
being provided to the Minister for his personal consideration. In short, I am
satisfied that ground 2 has
a sufficient likelihood of success to justify in the
circumstances the preservation of the status quo pending the trial.
principal question in relation to ground 3 is whether s 197E of the Act
precludes the Court from granting an interlocutory injunction.
I am satisfied
that, given the judgments in
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural
Affairs v MZAPC
the applicant
would have a good arguable case that s 197E of the Act would accommodate this
Court’s granting the interlocutory
injunction for which the applicant
applies, assuming the applicant would otherwise be entitled to it.
Balance of convenience
the applicant is not granted the injunction he seeks and is consequently removed
from Australia, the subject matter of this proceeding
will be destroyed.
Further, given the claims for protection he has made in support of the First and
Second requests, there is a risk
the applicant may suffer harm if he is returned
to Pakistan. On the other hand, the Minister submits that if the applicant is
the injunction, the Commonwealth will continue to incur costs associated
with holding the applicant in immigration detention; and
it is unlikely the
Commonwealth will recover those costs by enforcing the usual undertaking as to
damages the applicant, by his counsel,
offers to the Court. The Minister further
submits that the granting of an injunction will frustrate the
legislation’s intention
as manifested by s 197E of the Act.
detriment the applicant will suffer if an injunction is not granted – the
loss of claims for relief that have a sufficient
likelihood of success, and the
risk of harm on return to Pakistan – substantially outweigh the detriment
the Minister claims
the Commonwealth will suffer. To some extent, that detriment
to the Commonwealth could be minimised by the interlocutory injunction
granted on terms that the applicant pursue his claims for relief with
am satisfied that I should grant an interlocutory injunction restraining, until
further order, the Commonwealth and the Secretary
from removing the applicant
from Australia. I will grant such injunction on terms that the applicant
prosecute with diligence his
claims for relief.
I certify that the preceding twenty-five (25)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Manousaridis
Dated: 14 November 2025
Australian Broadcasting
Corporation v O'Neill
[2006] HCA 46
Beecham Group Ltd v Bristol
Laboratories Pty Ltd
(1968) 118 CLR 618
, at page 623.
Samsung Electronics Co. Ltd
v Apple Inc.
[2011] FCAFC 156
Tait v The Queen
[1962] HCA 57
108 CLR 620.
Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs v MZAPC
[2025] HCA 5.
RTF format (372 KB)
Signed PDF/A format