Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union - re s.576H - Commission may vary modern awards - application to vary the Joinery and Building Trades Award 2010 and the Manufacturing and Associated Industries and Occupations Award 2010 [2009] AIRCFB 974 (30 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Commission may vary modern awards
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(AM2009/42)
JOINERY AND BUILDING TRADES AWARD 2010
Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union
(AM2009/43)
MANUFACTURING AND ASSOCIATED INDUSTRIES AND OCCUPATIONS AWARD 2010
JUSTICE GIUDICE, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT LAWLER
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
COMMISSIONER SMITH
MELBOURNE, 30 DECEMBER 2009
The Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU) has applied to extend the coverage of the
Joinery and Building Trades Award 2010
(JBT Modern Award)
to include glass and glazing work. This is to be achieved by including a definition of “glass and glazing work”, including
“glass and glazing work” in the industries covered by the award, adding “glass worker and glazier” to the
occupations covered by the award and including various additional conditions of employment for those performing such work.
In order to avoid overlap with other modern awards the CFMEU would agree to add to the list of employers not covered by the JBT Modern
Award employers engaged in the manufacture of glass from raw materials and employers covered by the
Vehicle Manufacturing, Repair, Services and Retail Award 2010
(Vehicle Modern Award)
. As a corollary, the CFMEU seeks to vary the
Manufacturing and Associated Industries and Occupations Award 2010
(Manufacturing Modern Award)
in two respects. Firstly to delete “glazing, cutting, bending, fixing in position or otherwise working of, or with, all types
of glass” from the industries covered by that award and, secondly, to specifically exclude “glass workers, glaziers and
employees of glass merchants and glazing contractors” from the definition of manufacturing and associated industries and occupations.
The CFMEU also seeks to alter the definition of “shopfitting” in the JBT Modern Award.
The JBT Modern Award is an industry and occupational award which covers, amongst other things, glazing contracting work. The Manufacturing
Modern Award is also an industry and occupational award which currently covers, amongst other things, the industries of “glazing,
cutting, bending, fixing in position or otherwise working of, or with, all types of glass” (cl.4.2(a)(vii)), the “manufacture,
making, assembly, processing, treatment, fabrication and preparation of … all types of flat glass and fibreglass, and all substitutes,
and all products made therefrom including but not limited to flint ware, bottles, containers, jars, bricks, light bulbs, opal ware,
pyrex ware, translucent reinforced sheeting, tubing, rods and lamp shades” (cl.4.3(ee)). However, the Manufacturing Modern
Award specifically excludes “employees of glazing contractors, being any entity principally engaged in the business of providing
glazing services on a contract basis” (cl.4.4(i)).
The application is brought on the basis that it is more appropriate to include glass work which is downstream from the manufacture
of glass from raw materials in the JBT Modern Award than in the Manufacturing Modern Award. The JBT Modern Award already covers glazing
contracting work and it would be artificial to separate other downstream glass work from such contracting work. Such separation would
require many employers to apply both awards as employees would be covered by the JBT Modern award or the Manufacturing Modern Award
depending upon the nature of the work. It was also said that the application is consistent with the scope of transitional instruments
which cover both glass merchants and glazing contractors.
The application, at least in relation to award coverage, is supported by employers in the glass industry. The Australian Government
also supports modern award coverage for the downstream glass industry being determined by way of industry and occupation rather than
the principal nature of an employer’s business. The Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries
Union known as the Australian Manufacturing Workers’ Union (AMWU) (the AMWU) supports the application provided the manufacture
of glass remains within the coverage of the Manufacturing Modern Award.
The application is opposed by the Australian Industry Group (AiGroup) essentially because it considers the application will increase
uncertainty over modern award coverage and increase costs. This is because the effect of the variations will be that the Manufacturing
Modern Award will:
cover “the manufacture, making, assembly, processing, treatment, fabrication and preparation of … all types of flat glass
and fibreglass, and all substitutes, and all products made there from including but not limited to flint ware, bottles, containers,
jars, bricks, light bulbs, opal ware, pyrex ware, translucent reinforced sheeting, tubing, rods and lamp shades” (cl. 4.3(ee));
exclude “glass workers, glaziers and employees of glass merchants and glazing contractors” (cl. 4.4(i)).
AiGroup submitted that, as the term “glass worker” is not defined by the CFMEU, it is difficult to see how employees
of primary manufacturers of glass would not be construed as glass workers, leaving the Manufacturing Modern Award without any coverage
of the glass industry.
The Australian Federation of Employers and Industries (AFEI) also opposes the variations. It does so on the basis the conditions
of the JBT Modern Award are inappropriate when compared against those in the
Glass Workers (State) Award
O’Brien Glass Industries Ltd also opposed the JBT Modern Award extending to “Windscreen Fitters”. It submitted
that the provision of vehicle glass repair services by windscreen fitters is more appropriately covered by the Vehicle Modern Award.
We have concluded that the downstream glass industry as ultimately defined by the CFMEU should be covered by the JBT Modern Award
rather than the Manufacturing Modern Award. The JBT Modern Award is the more appropriate of the two because it already covers glazing
contractors. We have decided to vary the JBT Modern Award so that it covers glass and glazing work and glass and glazing contracting,
but excludes employers and employees engaged in the manufacture of glass from raw materials and employers and employees covered by
Vehicle Manufacturing, Repair, Services and Retail Award 2010
. The award will define “glass and glazing work” as:
“(a) designing, bevelling, cutting, embossing or glazing by hand or machine, painting, silvering, sand-blasting, bending or
otherwise working of all types of glass used in the trade, as well as leadlights, spandrel panels, clear plastic, sheet acrylic or
any substitute therefore, glass lenses or prisms;
(b) fitting and/or fixing in position all types of glass used in the trade, as well as louvres, spandrel panels, glazing bars, clear
plastic, or glass lenses or prisms in domestic on site situations;
(c) packing and delivery of all types of glass used in the trade, as well as louvres, spandrel panels, leadlights, glazing bars, fibreglass,
clear plastic, sheet acrylic or any substitute therefore, glass lenses or prisms including any labouring work in connection with
any such operations;
(d) toughening, heat treating or laminating glass or safety glass;
(e) fabrication, assembly, glazing and installation of Insulation Glass units;
(f) every operation, process, duty and function carried on or performed in or in connection with or incidental to any of the foregoing.”
We are not persuaded it is necessary or appropriate to include “glass worker and glazier” in the coverage clause of the
JBT Modern Award. To the extent such employees perform glass and glazing work as defined or are employed by glass and glazing contractors
they will be engaged in the classifications in the award. A separate reference might cause confusion about the extent of coverage
of the Manufacturing Modern Award.
We shall also vary the Manufacturing Modern Award to delete the reference to “glazing, cutting, bending, fixing in position
or otherwise working of, or with, all types of glass” from cl.4.2(a)(vii) and specifically exclude “employers or employees
engaged in glass and glazing work or glass and glazing contracting covered by the Joinery and Building Trades Award 2010” from
the definition of “Manufacturing and associated industries and occupations” in cl.4.4.
With respect to the classification structure in the JBT Modern Award, subject to some exceptions we will include the glass and glazing
classifications that the CFMEU seeks be inserted into Schedule B—Classification Structure and Definitions at the levels the
CFMEU has proposed. It is appropriate to do so given the expanded coverage of the JBT Modern Award and the minimum wages paid to
such classifications in the underlying awards and NAPSAs. The exceptions relate to windscreen fixers or fitters. We do not propose
to include specific reference to such classifications in the JBT Modern Award. The classification definitions in the award are generic,
although they also refer to some specific classifications. We think that including specific reference to windscreen fixers or fitters
in the award is likely to create confusion about the coverage of the JBT Modern Award and that of the Vehicle Modern Award.
As for the conditions that the CFMEU seeks be included in the JBT Modern Award in light of its expanded coverage, we will vary the
JBT Modern Award to provide for a form of industry allowance similar to that in the underlying awards and NAPSAs. Having regard to
those awards and NAPSAs, we will also include the tool allowance, protective clothing and footwear, collection of monies, motor vehicle
allowance, performing work away from the usual place of work, rest period and washing time provisions sought by the CFMEU. However,
the laundry and silicone allowances sought by the CFMEU are not sufficiently prevalent in the underlying awards and NAPSAs to warrant
their inclusion.
We will include a plasterer’s tool allowance in the JBT Modern Award to correct an omission when the JBT Modern Award was made.
We do not propose to vary the definition of “shopfitting” in the JBT Modern Award as sought by the CFMEU. The definition
was crafted when the JBT Modern Award was made, with the coverage of other modern awards in mind. No sound case for varying the definition
has been advanced.
Orders reflecting this decision are issued in conjunction with it.
BY THE COMMISSION:
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR992061>
No downloadable files available