SZSCO & Anor v Minister for Immigration & Anor [2013] FMCA 248 (11 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SZSCO & ANOR v
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & ANOR
[2013] FMCA 248
MIGRATION – Review of Refugee Review
Tribunal decision – non appearance of the applicant at hearing.
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
First Applicant:
Second Applicant:
First Respondent:
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION & CITIZENSHIP
Second Respondent:
REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNAL
File Number:
SYG 2480 of 2012
Judgment of:
Hearing date:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
No appearance by or on behalf of the Applicants
Solicitors for the Respondents:
Minter Ellison
INTERLOCUTORY ORDERS
(1) The application is dismissed, pursuant to
13.03C(1)(c)
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(2) The first applicant is to pay the first respondent’s costs and
disbursements of and incidental to the application in the
sum of $3,239 in
accordance with
rule 44.15(1)
and item 1(b) of
of schedule 1 to the
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(3) The Court directs that the Minister is to arrange to have these orders
entered and the Minister is to cause a sealed copy of
these orders to be served
on the applicant by ordinary pre-paid post at her nominated address for service,
together with a copy of
Federal Magistrates Court Rules
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
SYG 2480 of
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION &
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
REFUGEE REVIEW TRIBUNAL
Second Respondent
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
(revised from transcript)
have before me a show cause application filed on 30 October 2012 seeking review
of a decision of the Refugee Review Tribunal (Tribunal).
The Tribunal decision
was made on 3 October 2012. The Tribunal affirmed the decision of a delegate of
the Minister not to grant
the applicants protection visas. There are two
applicants, a mother and child. The applicant mother is from Fujian Province in
China and claimed religious persecution.
the matter came before me for first court date directions on 16 November 2012
the first applicant, the applicant mother, appeared
in person with the
assistance of a Mandarin interpreter. She consented to orders, including order
6 which listed the matter for
a show cause hearing before me on 1 February 2013
at 2.15 pm. Subsequently the barrister who had been appointed to advise the
under the Minister’s panel advice scheme sought on her behalf a
deferral of the hearing date. I made orders in chambers on
relisting the matter for a show cause hearing today at 2.15pm.
the matter was called today there was no appearance by or on behalf of the first
applicant. There is no explanation for that
non-appearance. The matter has
been called twice. My deputy associate has also made two attempts to contact
the first applicant
by telephone on two telephone numbers provided by the
applicant and the Minister’s solicitor. Neither attempt was successful.
will order that the application be dismissed, pursuant to
rule 13.03C(1)(c)
Federal Magistrates Court Rules 2001
(Cth) (Federal Magistrates Court
account of the dismissal of the application, the Minister seeks an order for
costs in accordance with the Court’s scale.
I will order that the first
applicant pay the first respondent’s costs and disbursements of and
incidental to the application
in the sum of $3,239 in accordance with rule
44.15(1) and item 1(b) of part 2 of schedule 1 to the
Federal Magistrates Court
will further order that the Minister cause the orders made today to be entered
and that the Minister is to serve a sealed copy of
those orders by ordinary
pre-paid post upon the first applicant at her last known address for service,
together with a copy of
Federal Magistrates Court
I certify that the preceding six (6) paragraphs are a true
copy of the reasons for judgment of Driver FM
Date: 12 April 2013
RTF format (87.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format