Xing Wang v NICCE IP HOLDINGS LTD [2025] ATMO 211 (14 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A DELEGATE OF THE
REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by Xing Wang to
an application under
Trade Marks Act 1995
NICCE IP HOLDINGS LTD for removal of trade mark
number 1405925 (35) –
the name of Xing Wang
Nicholas Smith
REPRESENTATION:
Opponent: Self-represented
Applicant: TM LOGIC PTY
2025 ATMO 211
Trade Marks Act 1995
opposition:
application for removal - Opponent’s evidence does
not show use of the Trade Mark during the relevant period or obstacle to
– exercise of Registrar’s discretion not appropriate – Trade
Mark to be removed from the Register
decision is pursuant to an application made on 18 October 2023 under
Trade Marks Act 1995
’) by NICCE IP
HOLDINGS LTD (‘
’) to remove the trade mark detailed
below from the Register of Trade Marks (‘
application is made in respect of all the goods for which the trade mark is
registered, that is, the application is
for complete removal of the trade
Registration No.
Filing date
: Book clubs (retailing of
books); convenience store retailing; department store retailing; discount
services (retail, wholesale,
or sales promotion services); hypermarket
retailing; management of a retail enterprise for others; presentation of goods
on communication
media, for retail purposes; retail clothing shop services;
retail sale of natural and synthetic flowers and flower arrangements;
sale of prepared meat and meat products (butcher's shop); retail services;
retailing of goods (by any means); supermarket
retailing; compilation and
provision of online directories; online advertising on a computer network;
online data processing services;
online promotion on a computer network;
providing information, including online, about advertising, business management
and administration
and office functions
otherwise indicated, any references to sections or regulations in this decision
are references to sections of the Act or regulations
Trade Marks
Regulations 1995
Regulations
’) has opposed the application to remove the
Trade Mark, filing a Notice of Intention to Oppose removal on 22 December 2023
and a Statement of Grounds and Particulars (‘
January 2024. The Applicant filed a Notice of Intention to Defend on 22
February 2024.
parties filed the following evidence in this matter:
Declarant and Position
Annexures or Exhibits
Evidence in support
Xing Wang, the Opponent (‘
Evidence in answer
William Peter Wood, chief executive officer of the Applicant
Wood declaration
Evidence in reply
Xing Wang (‘
the time allowed for filing evidence had ended, the parties were given an
opportunity to request an oral hearing or a hearing
by written submissions. On
13 December 2024 the Applicant requested a hearing by oral submissions and paid
the appropriate fee.
The matter was set down for a hearing on 8 July 2025. In
line with usual practice, a letter was sent to the parties on 26 May 2025
contained a schedule for the provision of written summaries of submissions to be
filed prior to the hearing. The Applicant
filed written submissions on 1 July
Applicant’s Submissions
’). The Opponent did not
file any submissions.
am a delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks and the matter has been allocated
to me to decide, which I have done, on the basis
of the following relevant
material, any oral submissions made by the parties and the evidence listed
earlier in this decision:
The Application
for Removal;
The Notice of
Intention to Oppose and SGP;
Applicant’s Submissions.
The Relevant Provisions
of the Act deals with removal of trade marks from the Register on account of
non-use. In respect of this matter
relevantly provides:
Application for removal of trade mark from Register etc.
(4) An application under subsection (1) or (3) (
application
) may be made on either or both of the following grounds, and
on no other grounds:
(b) that the trade mark has remained registered for a continuous period of 3
years ending one month before the day on which the non‑use
application is
filed, and, at no time during that period, the person who was then the
registered owner:
(i) used the trade mark in Australia; or
(ii) used the trade mark in good faith in Australia;
in relation to the goods and/or services to which the application
Note 1: For
Note 2: If non‑use of a trade mark has been established in a particular
place or export market, then instead of the trade mark
being removed from the
Register, conditions or limitations may be imposed under
section 102
registration of the trade mark so that its registration does not extend to that
place or export market.
the relevant period during which the Opponent must establish use of
the Trade Mark is the three year period ending on 18 September
relevant period
note that an application under
may not be made before a period of
five years has passed from the filing date of the application for the Trade
and I confirm that five years
since filing the application have in fact passed.
onus of rebutting an allegation of non-use lies with the Opponent. This onus is
articulated in s 100 which provides, relevantly
100 Burden on opponent to establish use of trade mark
In any proceedings relating to an opposed application, it is for
the opponent to rebut:
(c) any allegation made under paragraph 92(4)(b) that the trade mark has not,
at any time during the period of 3 years ending one
month before the day on
which the opposed application was filed, been used, or been used in good faith,
by its registered owner in
relation to the relevant goods and/or services.
For the purposes of paragraph 1(c), the opponent is taken to have
rebutted the allegation that the trade mark has not, at any time
period referred to in that paragraph, been used, or been used in good faith,
by its registered owner in relation to the relevant goods and/or services
(a) the opponent has established that the trade mark, or the trade mark with
additions or alterations not substantially affecting
its identity, was used in
good faith by its registered owner in relation to those goods or services during
that period; or
(b) in a case where the trade mark has been assigned but a record
of the assignment has not been entered in the Register:
(i) the opponent has established that the trade mark, or the trade mark
with additions or alterations not substantially affecting
its identity, was used
in good faith by the assignee of the trade mark in relation to those goods or
services during that period
and that that use was in accordance with the terms
of the assignment; and
(ii) the Registrar or the court is of the opinion that it is
reasonable, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, to treat
of the trade mark by the assignee during that period as having been a use of the
trade mark in relation to those goods or
services by the registered owner;
(c) the opponent has established that the trade mark was not used by its
registered owner in relation to those goods and/or services
during that period
because of circumstances (whether affecting traders generally or only the
registered owner of the trade mark)
that were an obstacle to the use of the
trade mark during that period.
proceed on the basis that the standard of proof is the ordinary civil standard
being on the balance of
probabilities.
Blount Inc v
Registrar of Trade Marks
, Branson J observed:
Where the Act
requires the Registrar to be “satisfied” of any matter, it is to be
understood as requiring that he or she
be persuaded of the matter according to
the balance of probabilities (
Rejfeck v McElroy
). That is, that the
Registrar be persuaded, having given proper consideration to those factors and
circumstances that the Act requires
him or her to give consideration to, that
such matter is more probable than
accordance with s 101 I may decide to remove the Trade Mark from the Register
for all or some of the goods identified in the application
for removal, or if
satisfied it is reasonable to do so, decide not to remove the Trade Mark even if
the grounds under which the application
for removal was made are established.
further note that a single bona fide use of the Trade Mark in the course of
trade during the relevant period may be sufficient to
rebut the allegation under
s 92(4)(b),
but if a single act of
use is relied upon then it should be established by ‘if not conclusive
proof, at any rate overwhelmingly
Little weight is to
be given to assertions of use which are not supported by documentary
Undated examples of use
carry little, if any, weight in support of a claim for use of a trade mark
within the relevant period.
the Trade Mark by an authorised user (as defined by s 8) is taken to be use of
the Trade Mark by the Opponent.
principles when a trade mark has been used were recently summarised in
Care IP Holdings Pty Ltd v Allergan Australia Pty Ltd
, in which the High
Court noted the following:
Use of a trade mark in relation to goods
means use of a trade mark upon, or in physical or other relation to, those
goods, and so
can include use of the mark on product packaging or marketing such
as on a website. There is a distinction, although not always easy
between the use of a sign in relation to goods and the use of a sign as a trade
mark. A trade mark is a sign used, or intended
to be used, to distinguish goods
dealt with by one trader from goods dealt with by other traders; that is, as a
badge of origin to
indicate a connection between the goods and the user of
Whether a sign has been "use[d] as a trade mark" is assessed objectively
without reference to the subjective trading intentions of
the user. As the
meaning of a sign, such as a word, varies with the context in which the sign is
used, the objective purpose and
nature of use are assessed by reference to
context. That context includes the relevant trade, the way in which the words
displayed, and how the words would present themselves to persons who
read them and form a view about what they connote. A well known
example where
the use was not "as a trade mark" was in
Irving's Yeast-Vite Ltd v
where the phrase "Yeast tablets a substitute for 'Yeast-Vite'" was held to be
merely descriptive and not a use of "Yeast-Vite" as
a trade mark. Therefore, it
did not contravene the YEAST-VITE mark.
The existence of a descriptive element or purpose does not necessarily
preclude the sign being used as a trade mark. Where there are
several purposes
for the use of the sign, if one purpose is to distinguish the goods provided in
the course of trade that will be
sufficient to establish use as a trade mark.
Where there are several words or signs used in combination, the existence of a
dominant "brand" is relevant to the assessment of what would be taken to
be the effect of the balance of the label, but does not
mean another part of the
label cannot also act to distinguish the
further useful summary of the principles of use is set out in paragraphs 82 to
84 of the Full Court’s decision in
Halal Certification
Authority Pty Limited v Flujo Sanguineo Holdings Pty Ltd
extract below:
The primary judge referred to the summary of the
relevant principles concerning use “as a trade mark”
Nature’s Blend Pty Ltd v Nestlé Australia
[2010] FCAFC 117
(2010) 87 IPR 464 (Stone
, Gordon and
McKerracher JJ) which was a case in which the words “luscious Lips”
were used on packaged confectionary which
included lip shaped lollies. The Full
Court summarised the relevant principles as follows at [19]:
as a trade mark is use of the mark as a “badge of origin”, a sign
used to distinguish goods dealt with in the course
of trade by a person from
goods so dealt with by someone else:
Coca-Cola Co v All-Fect
Distributors Ltd
(1999) 96 FCR 107
E & J Gallo Winery v
Lion Nathan Australia Pty Ltd
(2010) 265 ALR 645
[2010] HCA 15
Lion Nathan
mark may contain descriptive elements but still be a “badge of
Johnson & Johnson Aust Pty Ltd v Sterling
Pharmaceuticals Pty Ltd
[1991] FCA 310
(1991) 30 FCR 326
[1991] FCA 310
101 ALR 700
Johnson & Johnson
Australia Pty Ltd v Kettle Chip Co Pty Ltd
(1996) 135 ALR 192
Aldi Stores Ltd Partnership v Frito-Lay Trading Co
(2001) 190 ALR 185
Aldi Stores
appropriate question to ask is whether the impugned words would appear to
consumers as possessing the character of the brand:
Shell Co of
Australia Ltd v Esso Standard Oil (Aust) Ltd
[1963] HCA 66
109 CLR 407
[1963] ALR 634
purpose and nature of the impugned use is the relevant inquiry in answering the
question whether the use complained of is use
“as a trade
Johnson & Johnson
347; ALR 723
IPR 24 per Gummow J;
422; ALR 636
Consideration
of the totality of the packaging, including the way in which the words are
displayed in relation to the goods and the
existence of a label of a clear and
dominant brand, are relevant in determining the purpose and nature (or
of the impugned words:
347; ALR 723
Anheuser-Busch Inc v
Budejovicky Budvar
(2002) 56 IPR 182
Anheuser-Busch
determining the nature and purpose of the impugned words, the court must ask
what a person looking at the label would see and take
Anheuser-Busch
at [186] and the authorities there
The fact that a mark considered as a whole is largely or predominantly
descriptive does not preclude a finding that it is also acting
as a brand.
Similarly, the fact that a product may bear more than one brand does not mean
that only one of them is used as a trade
mark. As the High Court said
...Where there are several words or signs used in combination, the existence
of a clear dominant “brand” is relevant to
the assessment of what
would be taken to be the effect of the balance of the label, but does not mean
another part of the label cannot
also act to distinguish the goods
Anheuser-Busch
[2002] FCA 390
(2002) 56 IPR 182
Anheuser-Busch
, Allsop J observed at [191]:
It is not to the point, with respect, to say that because another part of the
label ... is the obvious and important “brand”,
that another part of
the label cannot act to distinguish the goods. The “branding
function”, if that expression is merely
used as a synonym for the contents
of ss 7 and 17 of the TM Act, can be carried out in different places on
packaging, with different
degrees of strength and subtlety. Of course, the
existence on a label of a clear dominant “brand” is of relevance to
the assessment of what would be taken to be the effect of the balance of the
successfully oppose the application the Opponent must establish that it has used
the Trade Mark (or a substantially identical trade
) pursuant to s 100, either
through use or by showing circumstances that were an obstacle to use in the
relevant period (per s 100(3)(c).
the Opponent fails to establish such use or an obstacle to use, I have
discretion under s 101(3) to decide that the Trade Mark
should not be
removed from the Register.
Use of the Trade Mark in the
relevant period
Opponent’s evidence in this matter consists of two declarations by itself.
Wang 1 states that the Opponent has used the
Trade Mark since 2011 and has
purchased and continues to purchase a commercial quantity of packaging bearing
the Trade Mark. It
also asserts that it can provide evidence of the use of the
Trade Mark in the non-use period in the form of sales transaction print
The annexures of Wang 1 include:
an undated photo of packaging bearing the Trade Mark. It is unclear what goods
are sold with the packaging.
undated photo, but said to be before 2020, of packaging bearing the trade mark.
It is unclear what goods are sold in the
handwritten note said to be dated 17 August 2023, said to be for an invoice for
packaging, and a photo dated 17 August 2023
for packaging but the packaging does
not show the Trade Mark.
Annex 5, 6 and 7
contain receipts within the relevant period for sales of a NICCE necklace and a
NICCE T shirt, along with undated
photos of a necklace and t-shirt in the same
Annex 8 is an
undated photo of a cash register, with the word NICCE label printed on it.
Annex 9 is an
undated photo of a necklace and t-shirt with packaging bearing the Trade
Annex 10 is
details of a business trip taken to Beijing in August 2023 said to show active
plans to use the Trade Mark post pandemic.
2 replies to the Wood declaration and asserts that its evidence in Wang 1 shows
use of the Trade Mark in the relevant period.
It also includes an additional
piece of evidence, being an undated WeChat message, said to show communications
with a customer.
response, the EIA primarily criticises Wang 1 and submits that Wang 1 does not
show use of the Trade Mark in respect of the Registered
Services in the relevant
my review of the EIS and EIR, I entirely agree with the criticisms in the EIA.
Taking the Opponent’s evidence at
its highest, it may show that the
Opponent imported and sold a small quantity of t-shirts and necklaces under the
Trade Mark in the
relevant period. It does not show any use, either before,
during or after the relevant period, for the Registered Services.
Specifically,
the authorities referred to in paragraphs
of this decision make it clear that
use of a Trade Mark has to be in the course of trade, namely to distinguish the
Registered Services
offered by the Opponent from those services offered by other
traders. The evidence, at its highest, may establish that the Opponent
goods bearing the Trade Mark, however there is no evidence, nor does the
Opponent assert, that the Opponent has ever offered
any of the Registered
Services. For completeness, I note that merely selling one’s own goods,
under one’s own mark,
is not the offering of retail services; the mark is
used to distinguish that product from other products; it is not used to
distinguish
the retail services from the retail services offered by other
summary I am not satisfied that the Opponent has used the Trade Mark for the
Registered Services during the relevant period.
Obstacles to
Opponent does not formally submit that there have been any matters that amount
to an obstacle to the use of the Trade Mark for
the Registered Services in the
relevant period, but pursuant to s 100(3)(c) and in the interests of
completeness I note that I have
been unable to identify any such obstacles. I
note that at various points in the evidence the Opponent alludes to difficulties
sourcing packaging caused by the Covid-19 restrictions in China, but, again
taking the Opponent’s evidence at its highest,
such evidence could only
show an obstacle to use on the goods the Opponent sold under the mark, it does
not indicate any obstacles
to use for the Registered Services.
there is no obstacle to use of the Trade Mark, it is therefore necessary to
consider whether I should exercise the discretion to
allow the Trade Mark to
remain on the Register for any of the Registered
Registrar’s Discretion
Shanahan’s Australian Law of Trade Marks and Passing Off
,the policy of the Act is to facilitate the removal of an unused trade mark, and
the public interest in the integrity of the Register
will generally demand the
removal of an unused trade mark.
PDP Capital Pty Ltd v Grasshopper Ventures Pty Ltd
, the Full Court of
the Federal Court provided the following observations regarding the discretion
under s 101(3):
The following propositions are relevant to the
exercise of this discretion:
It is broad and is unfettered in the sense that there are no express
limits on it
. It is to be understood as limited only by the subject-matter,
scope and purpose of the legislation and, in particular, by the subject-matter
scope and purpose of
Trade Marks Act
(2) The scope and purpose of the
Trade Marks Act
strikes a balance
between various disparate interests. On the one hand there is the interest of
consumers in recognising a trade
mark as a badge of origin of goods or services
and in avoiding deception or confusion as to that origin. On the other is the
of traders, both in protecting their goodwill through the creation of a
statutory species of property protected by the action against
infringement, and
in turning the property to valuable account by licensing or assignment. ...
(3) The particular purpose of
, within which
falls, is to provide
for the removal of unused trade marks from the Register. It is designed to
protect the integrity of the Register
and in that way the interests of
consumers. At the same time, it seeks to accommodate, where reasonable to do so,
the interests of
registered trade mark owners. Accordingly,
the Court must be
positively satisfied that it is reasonable that the trade mark should not be
removed. The onus in this respect lies
on the trade mark owner to persuade the
Court that it is reasonable to exercise the discretion in favour of the
(4) The discretion in
is expressed in the present tense.
requires consideration of whether, at the time that the Court is called upon to
make its decision, it is reasonable not to remove
(5) The range of factors considered in the exercise of the discretion has
included whether or not:
(a) there has been abandonment of the mark;
(b) the registered proprietor of the mark still has a residual reputation in
(c) there have been sales by the registered owner of the mark of the goods
for which removal was sought since the relevant period
(d) the applicant for removal had entered the market in knowledge of the
registered mark;
(e) the registered proprietors were aware of the applicant’s sales
under the mark;
(f) A further factor, explicitly noted in
, but which falls within
the scope of the discretion in
, is whether or not the trade mark under
consideration has been used by its registered owner in respect of similar goods
related services.
Health World Ltd v Shin-Sun Australia Pty Ltd
, on the subject of the
condition of the Register, the Court said:
[T]he legislative scheme
reveals a concern with the condition of the Register of Trade Marks. It is a
concern that it have “integrity”
and that it be “pure”.
It is a “public mischief” if the Register is not pure, for there is
interest in [its] purity”. The concern and the public
interest, viewed from the angle of consumers, is to ensure that the Register
maintained as an accurate record of marks which perform their statutory function
– to indicate the trade origins of the
goods to which it is intended that
they be applied.
considering the discretion in
E & J Gallo Winery v Lion Nathan Australia
Pty Limited
Flick J stated:
Although the ‘guiding
principle behind the discretion is public interest, particularly in the
integrity of the
the private
commercial interests of both [parties] remain matters which may be taken into
account when exercising the discretion.
Trade mark law, it has been recognised,
is more complex than is suggested by the proposition that the supreme—or
predominant interest is the maintenance of the integrity of the
Speaking of the 1955
Act, Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow, Kirby, Hayne and Callinan JJ there
pointed out the balance struck
by the legislation between various interests.
Both the interests of the consuming public and the interests of traders have to
recognised.
the present case, there is no evidence that the Opponent has ever used the Trade
Mark or intends to use the Trade Mark in the future
in Australia for any of the
Registered Services. I am not satisfied, given the very limited evidence before
me, of any significant
use of or reputation in Australia on goods in the 14
years since registration. Given that, I am unpersuaded that the removal of
Trade Mark for the Registered Services would result in consumer confusion or
practically impact on the interests of the Opponent
in any way. Given the
importance of the integrity of the Registrar I do not consider it appropriate to
exercise my discretion not
to remove the Trade Mark in respect of any of the
Registered Services.
Opponent has not established its opposition to removal. Accordingly, I direct
that registration 1405925 be removed from the Register
one month from the date
of this decision.
the Registrar is served with a notice of appeal I direct that removal shall not
occur until the appeal has either been discontinued
or, in the event of a
decision from the Court, that the registrations be dealt with as the Court sees
Applicant has been successful in relation to the application for removal of the
Trade Mark and has requested its costs. I accordingly
award costs against the
Opponent under s 221 in the relevant amounts under Schedule 8 of the
Regulations.
Hearing Officer
Delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks
October 2025
Per s 93(2) prior to
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment (Productivity Commission
Response Part 1 and Other Measures) Act 2018
(Cth) sch 1
applies in the present matter. The updated s 93(2) applies to trade marks filed
from 24 February 2019 onwards.
Pfizer Products Inc. v Karam
[2006] FCA 1663
, [26] (Gyles J) and more
Telstra Corporation Limited v Phone Directories Company Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot and Edelman JJ) in respect of
oppositions under s 52.
(citation omitted).
Woolly Bull Enterprises Pty Ltd v Reynolds
[2001] FCA 261
, [17] (Drummond
Nodoz Trade Mark
(1962) RPC 1
, 7 (Wilberforce
Great White Shark
Enterprises Inc v Joose Apparel Pty Ltd
[1998] ATMO 8 (Hearing
Forno). See also
Ion Asset Management Ltd v Ion Trading UK Limited
[2015] ATMO 124
(Hearing Officer
Digitus Information
Systems Pty Ltd v Leap Software Developments Pty Ltd
[2018] ATMO 153
(Hearing Officer Wilson). See also
Simon Burke v Factor Holdings Ltd
[2019] ATMO 69
, [24] (Hearing Officer
[2023] HCA 8
, [23]-[25]
(Kiefel CJ, Gageler, Gordon, Edelman and Gleeson JJ) (citations
Certification Authority Pty Limited v Flujo Sanguineo Holdings Pty
[2023] FCAFC 175
, [82]-[84] (Nicholas, Burley and Cheeseman
Act s 100(3)(a) and
discussed in
AgCare Biotech Pty Ltd v Crop Smart Pty Ltd
[2009] ATMO 41
[10]-[21] (Hearing Officer
M Davison, I Horak
Shanahan’s Australian Law of Trade Marks and Passing Off
edition, 2022 Thomson Reuters,
[2021] FCAFC 128
[153] (Jagot, Nicholas and Burley JJ) (emphasis altered) (citations
[2010] HCA 13
[22] (French CJ, Gummow, Heydon and Bell JJ) (citations
Kowa Co Ltd v
[2005] FCA 1282
, [92] (Lander
Campomar Sociedad
Limitada v Nike International Ltd
[2000] HCA 12
E & J Gallo
Winery v Lion Nathan Australia Pty Limited
[2008] FCA 934
, [210] (emphasis
in original).
RTF format (359 KB)
Signed PDF/A format