1407729 [2015] RRTA 318 (5 June 2015)
[2015] RRTA 318
(5 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Vanessa Moss
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant
a Protection visa.
Statement made on 05 June 2015 at 12:10pm
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate that information has
been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431(2)
and replaced with generic information which does not allow the
identification of an applicant, or their relative or other dependant.
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
applicant arrived in Australia by boat without a visa or passport [in] July
2012. He claims to be an illiterate Singhalese fisherman
from Negombo, in the
Western Province of Sri Lanka. The applicant believes that if he returns to Sri
Lanka he will be arrested and
killed by the authorities, because he took part in
two protests in early 2012 against the rise in oil prices. As he was at the
of the protests he is afraid that he may be considered one of the leaders
of the protests.
applicant applied for the visa [in] February 2013 and following an interview the
delegate refused to grant the visa [in] March
2014. The delegate found the
applicant to be a credible and reliable witness. He accepted that he took part
in the fishermen’s
protests in January and February 2012 as claimed. He
did not accept that he had a political profile such that he would be of interest
to the Sri Lankan authorities.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 22 May 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments. The Tribunal hearing was conducted with
the assistance of an
interpreter in the Sinhalese and English languages.
applicant was represented in relation to the review by his registered migration
issues in this review are whether the applicant has a well-founded fear of being
persecuted in Sri Lanka for one or more of the
five reasons set out in the
Refugees Convention and, if not, whether there are substantial grounds for
believing that, as a necessary
and foreseeable consequence of his being removed
from Australia to Sri Lanka, there is a real risk that he will suffer
significant
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
Is the applicant credible as to his claim to be a
citizen of Sri Lanka?
applicant has consistently claimed to be a citizen of Sri Lanka. He has provided
some documentary evidence supporting his claims,
including a translated copy of
his birth certificate (partly in English) indicating his birth in Sri Lanka, his
seaman certificate
of discharge (in English), his driving licence (in English),
his fisherman’s identity card (partly in English), and a copy
biodata page of his Sri Lankan passport issued [in] 2008. On the basis of the
applicant’s consistent oral and written
claims to Sri Lankan citizenship,
and there being no evidence to the contrary, the Tribunal finds that he is a
national of Sri Lanka
for the purposes of the Convention and that this country
is his receiving country under
s.36(2)(aa)
of the Act.
Does he have a right to enter and reside in any other
is nothing in the evidence before the Tribunal to suggest that the applicant has
a right to enter and reside in any country
other than his country of
nationality, Sri Lanka. Therefore the Tribunal finds that the applicant is not
excluded from Australia’s
protection by
subsection 36(3)
of the Act.
Does the applicant have a well-founded fear of being persecuted for one or more
of the five reasons set out in the Refugees Convention
in Sri Lanka?
applicant’s claims are set out in his statement of 28 February 2013 and
were elaborated upon at his interview with the delegate
and at his hearing
before the Tribunal. They are summarised below.
applicant is aged [age] and married with [children]. On the basis of the
applicant’s consistent claims to be of Singhalese
ethnicity and given that
he has given his evidence in the Singhalese language throughout the processing
of his claims, the Tribunal
accepts that he is of Singhalese ethnicity. On the
basis of the biodata page of his passport the Tribunal accepts that he was born
in Negombo as claimed.
Tribunal accepts his consistent claims that he began work as a fishermen when he
was [a child] following the death of his mother
(his father died when he was
[very young]) and that he remained working as a fishermen until he left Sri
Lanka in 2012. This is consistent
with his having a fisherman’s identity
card (partly in English). It accepts his credible claims that he was a member of
certain association], a fishermen’s union with about [number] members.
applicant claims that in early 2012 he participated in two fishermen’s
protests against the Sri Lankan government’s
decision to raise the price
of fuel. He claims that the rise in fuel prices meant he had no profit from his
January protest
first protest was in January 2012 and it lasted three weeks, and most of his
village were involved. He protested for several hours
each day around the
streets of Negombo, carrying banners regarding the rising price of fuel. He
claims he was at the front of the
line. The protest was televised and he saw
himself on television. On the basis of the country information referred to in
the delegate’s
decision, which confirms that a protest by fishermen took
place in Negombo as claimed, the Tribunal accepts that the protest took
The Tribunal accepts his credible evidence of his participation in the
claims that a few days after the protest the police came looking for anyone in
the village who had protested, and the Tribunal
accepts this claim. He was at
sea at the time. He claims that the man who lived next door also took part in
the protest and that
after he came to Australia his family informed him that
this man had been found beaten to death outside the local magistrates court.
The Tribunal accepts his evidence that he does not know if his neighbour’s
death was related to the protest. Given that there
is no evidence before the
Tribunal that the neighbour’s death was related to the protest, the
Tribunal finds that there is
no connection between his neighbour’s death
and the protest. The applicant indicated that nothing happened to the organiser
of the protest, [who] was appointed by the fisherman’s [association] to be
the protest leader, and this is accepted by the
Tribunal. He confirmed that
apart from the police coming looking on this occasion nothing further happened
to him or his family after
this event, and this is accepted by the Tribunal. He
does not believe that anything happened to the people in his village who the
police spoke to, and this is accepted by the Tribunal.
February protest
claims that [in] February 2012 he protested along with about [number] others, in
[Town 1] and that he was at the front of the protests,
holding up signs and
chanting. He claims that the protest was organised by the [association] and that
a person from [a named location]
was the protest leader. The applicant indicated
that he was not involved in organising the event. He claims that the army
to fire into the crowd and that a mate called [Mr A] was shot and
killed, and that others were injured. He claims that he managed
to get home.
He was too fearful to see his friend’s body, or attend the funeral, which
was attended by some government ministers.
The Tribunal accepts the
applicant’s credible evidence of his participation in the protest.
Further, the country information
referred to in the delegate’s decision
confirms that a fisherman called [Mr A] died from gunshot injuries in a protest
1] and this is accepted by the Tribunal.
the delegate the applicant claimed that he went to back to work as a fisherman
following the protest and that the police did
not look for him or question him
following the event. He claims he spent a lot of time at sea between February
and July 2012. Before
the delegate he claimed that nothing happened to him
between when the protest ended and when he left Sri Lanka in July 2012.
contrast at the hearing the applicant stated that a couple of months after the
protest [in] February 2012 the authorities came
looking for him and that they
asked for him by name, and that they never came asking after him again. The
Tribunal asked him why
he had never made this claim to the Department, and he
responded that he had been so worried that he did not know what to say. Further
he responded that he is illiterate and does not have a record of things, that he
is not fit, does not hear well, and has a bad memory.
The Tribunal does not
accept these reasons for his failure to make this claim to the Department as it
considers that in the context
of his claims for protection, it would be
important for him to provide the Department with any examples of interest shown
by the authorities. His failure to mention that subsequent to [the]
February 2012 protest the authorities had come and specifically
asked for him is
all the more implausible given that he claimed before the Department that the
police had come to his village following
the January 2012 protest looking for
anyone who had been in the protest. For these reasons the Tribunal does not
accept this new
claim, that the authorities came and made specific enquiries
this claim in an attempt to enhance his protection claims.
Death of [Mr B]
the Department the applicant claimed that in June 2012 his friend [Mr B], who
works with him on the boat, and who had protested
with him at the front of the
demonstration, was arrested. He was questioned and told to name people who had
taken part in the protest.
He gave the police the applicant’s name and
address. He was released after 24 hours. The applicant claims that because the
police have his name he is fearful of his life and decided to come to Australia.
As he was at the front of the protest he is afraid
that he may be considered one
of the leaders of the demonstration. He believes that the protest was televised
and that he is easily
recognisable.
contrast at the Tribunal hearing the applicant indicated that his friend [Mr B]
was arrested a few days after [the] February 2012
protest. Then he indicated
that it could have been in late February or early March 2012. He further
indicated that 2-3 months after
[Mr B]’s arrest he left for Australia. He
claims that [Mr B] was being pestered to given the names of those involved in
[Town 1] protest. He stated that [Mr B] did not give them his name , but
that they could have worked it out because he and [Mr B]
are always together.
the Tribunal put these discrepancies to the applicant (regarding the timing of
[Mr B]’s arrest, and whether [Mr B] had
given the police his name) he
indicated that his claims before the Department were the correct claims, rather
than the evidence he
gave to the Tribunal at hearing. He claimed that at the
hearing he had forgotten that [Mr B] had given the police his name and address.
The Tribunal put it to him that it would expect that if this had been the
catalyst for him leaving Sri Lanka, he would remember it.
these discrepancies in his evidence the Tribunal does not accept that his friend
[Mr B] was arrested as claimed.
applicant claims that a couple of months after he arrived in Australia his wife
told him that his friend [Mr B] was dead and that
his death certificate (a copy
of which the applicant provided) states that he committed suicide. The
applicant does not believe
this as [Mr B] had a wife and child, and he believes
that the government had a hand in his death. The applicant provided no evidence
to support his belief, and conceded at hearing that he has no evidence to
support his claims in this regard. The Tribunal is prepared
to accept that his
friend [Mr B] has died, but it does not accept that the government had a hand in
it as claimed by the applicant.
Post departure
applicant confirmed that his family have not experienced any problems with the
authorities since he came to Australia in July
applicant believes that if he returns to Sri Lanka he will be arrested and
killed by the authorities, because he was at the front
of the protest.
Does he have a well-founded fear of persecution in relation to
issue for the Tribunal to determine is whether the applicant has a well-founded
fear of persecution for a Convention reason in
light of the Tribunal’s
factual findings above.
accordance with Ministerial Direction No. 56, the Tribunal has taken into
account the country information assessments prepared
by DFAT expressly for
protection status determination purposes: DFAT Country Information Reports Sri
Lanka, 3 October 2014 and 16
February 2015.
his entry interview the applicant was asked why he had come to Australia and he
responded that he thought it would be good for
jobs, When asked about why he did
not want to return to Sri Lanka he responded that it will be very difficult as
the income he got
was not sufficient and he cannot do without food and his
children need to be fed and he had no means to do so.
Tribunal put it to the applicant that in light of these comments it appeared to
the Tribunal that his economic circumstances may
have motivated his departure
from Sri Lanka. He responded that he could earn a living in Sri Lanka. On the
basis of the evidence
the Tribunal considers the applicant’s economic
circumstances to be a motivating factor in his decision to leave Sri Lanka.
Participation in the Fisherman’s protest
respect of the applicant’s claims to fear harm arising from his
participation in the two fishermen’s protests the Tribunal
indicated to
the applicant at hearing that it had not located any independent country
information to suggest that those who were
involved in the protests were
harassed or targeted by the authorities in the aftermath of the protests because
of their imputed anti-government
given his evidence, which is accepted by the Tribunal, that nothing happened to
the January 2012 protest organiser [the]
Tribunal does not consider that a
person with the applicant’s profile would be of any interest to the
authorities. And given
the Tribunal’s findings that he did not experience
any repercussions following his participation in the protests, which the
Tribunal does not accept was due to the fact that he spent a lot of time at sea,
the Tribunal is of the view that he is not a person
of interest to the
authorities.
applicant has submitted that the death of his two friends ([Mr A] and [Mr B]),
who were of the same prominence as he, means there
is a high likelihood that
what happened to them will happen to him. Further the death of his neighbour
has also led him to believe
that he is in danger.
respect of the death of [Mr A], this occurred during the protest itself when the
police opened fire on the protesters, and the
Tribunal does not consider that
this is an indicator that the applicant is of any interest to the authorities
because of his participation,
particularly in light of the absence of country
information indicating that in the aftermath of the protest those involved are
respect of his friend [Mr B]’s death, the Tribunal regards it as
speculation on the applicant’s part, that the government
was somehow
involved in his death. There is no evidence linking his death to his
participation in the February 2012 protest and the
Tribunal so finds.
respect of his neighbour’s death there is no evidence to connect his death
with his participation in the protest and the
applicant himself was unsure if
there was a connection and the Tribunal finds that there is none.
the basis of the evidence before it the Tribunal finds that there is no real
chance that the applicant would be seriously harmed
in the reasonably
foreseeable future on account of his participation in the fishermen’s
protests and that his fear of persecution
on this basis is not well-founded.
Returnees and failed asylum seekers
its July 2013, October 2014 and February 2015 reports, DFAT has provided
information on the treatment of returnees. Broadly consistent
information is
provided in these reports. As the Tribunal discussed with the applicant, the
evidence does not suggest that returnees
generally are targeted for serious harm
or significant
Tribunal relies on these
reports referred to above, which are consistent
with reports by the Danish Immigration Service and the UK Home Office,
finds preferable and authoritative and to which it attaches greater weight.
the basis of the country information referred to above the Tribunal does not
find that there is a real chance that the applicant
will be persecuted for
reasons of his membership of a particular social group of ‘failed asylum
seekers’ or any political
opinion imputed to him because he will be
returning to Sri Lanka having applied for asylum in
Illegal departure
light of the recent DFAT
the Tribunal
finds that individuals who are returned to Sri Lanka from Australia or are
identified as having departed Sri Lanka in
breach of the Sri Lankan departure
laws are being charged with breaches of those laws and held in prison on remand.
The Tribunal
accepts that the applicant departed Sri Lanka other than at a port
of lawful departure and without a Sri Lankan passport and therefore
accepts that
it is likely he will be charged with breach of the departure laws under
of the I&EA and held on remand pending a bail hearing. As put to
the applicant at the hearing, the country information indicates
returnees are
brought before a Magistrate for a bail hearing within a few days of their return
and are granted bail, based on personal
recognisance, with the requirement for a
family member to stand as a guarantor but with no payment required.
regard to the country information the Tribunal considers that it is most likely
that he will be remanded in custody when he
returns to Sri Lanka and that he may
spend up to a fortnight in gaol on
Further the
country information indicates that the most likely penalty is a fine unless a
person is considered to be an organiser
of irregular migration of people from
Sri Lanka (which the applicant is
The Tribunal
accepts the advice of DFAT that allegations of mistreatment of returnees have
not been substantiated and it has said
that it is not aware of allegations of
mistreatment of returnees while on
Tribunal discussed with the applicant the country information indicating that
the Sri Lankan departure laws are applied regardless
of ethnicity to all persons
and are not applied in a way that is
discriminatory or selectively enforced against a particular group of returnees.
The Tribunal
considers that the brief period in gaol on remand, and the
imposition of a fine, are the result of the non-discriminatory enforcement
law of general application and is not therefore for a Convention reason. Whilst
the Tribunal accepts that prison conditions
in Sri Lanka are poor it does not
accept that the applicant faces a real chance of persecution for any reason
(Convention or non-Convention
related) during this period of remand. The
Tribunal relies on the advice of DFAT that allegations of mistreatment of
returnees have
not been substantiated and it has said that it is not aware of
allegations of mistreatment of returnees while on
Cumulative consideration as a failed asylum seeker who
departed illegally from Sri Lanka
Tribunal has considered the applicant’s claims cumulatively. That is
whether a Singhalese fisherman from Negombo who illegally
departed Sri Lanka and
subsequently sought asylum in Australia, faces a real chance of persecution on
that even when the claims are considered
cumulatively there is no real chance that the applicant would be persecuted for
a Convention
reason in the reasonably foreseeable future and that his fear of
persecution is not well-founded.
Are there substantial grounds
for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the applicant
being removed from Australia
to Sri Lanka, there is a real risk that he will
suffer significant harm?
noted the Tribunal is not satisfied that the applicant would suffer harm on
protests, or his
membership of the particular social group of asylum seekers.
the Full Federal Court decision in
MIAC v SZQRB
[2013] FCAFC 33
considering
s.36(2)(aa)
the Tribunal notes that the ‘real risk’ test
imposes the same standard as the ‘real chance’ test applicable
the context of assessment of the Refugee Convention definition.
the basis of the evidence before it the Tribunal finds that there is no real
risk that the applicant would be significantly harmed
on account of his
participation in the fishermen’s protests.
Tribunal accepts that he will be charged with offences under the Immigration and
Emigration Act of Sri Lanka relating to his illegal
departure from Sri Lanka,
that he will be remanded in custody on return, and that the most likely penalty
Tribunal has considered whether a short period of remand gives rise to a real
risk the applicant will suffer significant harm.
are reports of mistreatment of both Tamil and Sinhalese prisoners in Sri
Lanka’s prison system.
Freedom from Torture
reported on a number of
claims of torture in 2012 and identified that “those at particular risk
included Tamils with an actual
or perceived association with the LTTE including
those returning from
applicant is not Tamil and does not have a profile which would cause him to be
targeted in the prison system. The evidence before
the Tribunal does not
indicate that returnees who have been charged with illegal departure and
remanded in prison have been subjected
to pain or suffering by an intentionally
inflicted act or omission intended to obtain information, a confession, to
intimidate or
coerce or for any other reason whilst on remand.
information indicates that prison conditions in Sri Lanka may not meet
international standards. Concerns include overcrowding,
poor sanitary
facilities, limited access to food, the absence of basic assistance mechanisms,
a lack of reform initiatives and instances
of torture, maltreatment and
Tribunal accepts that prison conditions in Sri Lanka are poor and overcrowded
and that the applicant may suffer discomfort whilst
in prison. The applicant may
be remanded for a short period of time. The Tribunal does not accept that in the
applicant’s case
that a relatively short period of remand amounts to an
act or omission by which severe physical or mental pain or suffering is
intentionally
inflicted on the applicant or amounts to an act which could
reasonably be regarded as cruel or inhuman. The Tribunal does not accept
relatively short period of remand amounts to an act or omission which is
intended to cause extreme humiliation which is unreasonable.
Tribunal finds that a short period of remand on return to Sri Lanka does not
give rise to a real risk the applicant will suffer
significant harm in the form
of torture or cruel or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.
under Australian law, cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment must be
intentionally inflicted and degrading treatment or
punishment must be intended
to cause extreme
humiliation.
negligence or lack of resources does not suffice to give rise to cruel or
inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment under
Australian law. The country
information referred to above indicates that the poor prison conditions in Sri
Lanka are due to a lack
of resources, rather than an intention by the Sri Lankan
government to inflict cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment or cause
humiliation. Therefore in relation to the poor prison conditions in Sri Lanka
there is no intention on the part of the Sri
Lanka authorities to harm the
applicant. The Tribunal finds that a period of remand on return to Sri Lanka
does not give rise to
a real risk the applicant will suffer significant harm
within the meaning of s36(2A) or s.5 of the Act.
Tribunal has considered whether a conviction for illegal departure under the
Immigrants and Emigrants Act
gives rise to a real risk the applicant will
suffer significant harm. As discussed with the applicant and set out above, the
information above indicates that the penalty most likely to be imposed
on the applicant is a fine. Based on this information, the
Tribunal finds that
the likelihood of a prison sentence is remote and not a real risk.
fine likely to be imposed on the applicant is between 5,000 and 50,000 Sri
Lankan rupees according to the information above. The
Tribunal does not accept
that the imposition of such a fine on the applicant will give rise to a real
risk of significant harm. The
applicant was gainfully employed in Sri Lanka from
1987 until his departure. Further the Sri Lanka legislation allows for payment
of fines by
instalment.
these circumstances the Tribunal is satisfied that the applicant would be able
to pay any fine imposed.
Tribunal finds that there are no substantial grounds for believing that there is
a real risk that the applicant would be significantly
harmed as a result of his
illegal departure from Sri Lanka.
the basis of the evidence before it the Tribunal does not accept that there are
substantial grounds for believing that, as a necessary
and foreseeable
consequence of the applicant being removed from Australia to Sri Lanka, there is
a real risk that he will suffer
significant harm because he will be returning to
Sri Lanka having left Sri Lanka illegally and applied for asylum in
the reasons given above the Tribunal does not accept that there are substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and
foreseeable consequence of the
applicant being removed from Australia to Sri Lanka, there is a real risk that
he will be arbitrarily
deprived of his life, that the death penalty will be
carried out on him, that he will be subjected to torture, that he will be
to cruel or inhuman treatment or punishment or that he will be
subjected to degrading treatment or punishment as defined. Accordingly
Tribunal does not accept that there are substantial grounds for believing that,
as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of
the applicant being removed from
Australia to Sri Lanka, there is a real risk that he will suffer significant
harm as defined in
subsection 36(2A)
Migration Act
the reasons given above, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the applicant is a
person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the
Refugees Convention. Therefore the applicant does not satisfy the criterion set
s.36(2)(a).
concluded that the applicant does not meet the refugee criterion in
the Tribunal has considered the alternative criterion in
s.36(2)(aa).
Tribunal is not satisfied that the applicant is a person in respect of whom
Australia has protection obligations under
s.36(2)(aa).
is no suggestion that the applicant satisfies
on the basis of being a
member of the same family unit as a person who satisfies
or (aa) and
who holds a protection visa. Accordingly, the applicant does not satisfy the
criterion in
Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant a Protection visa.
Vanessa Moss
RELEVANT LAW
criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An applicant for the visa must
meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c). That is,
the applicant is either a person in respect of whom Australia has protection
obligations under the ‘refugee’ criterion,
or on other
‘complementary protection’ grounds, or is a member of the same
family unit as such a person and that person
holds a protection visa of the same
Refugee criterion
36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant
for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the Minister is
satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the 1951 Convention
relating to the Status
of Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to
the Status of Refugees (together, the Refugees Convention, or the Convention).
is a party to the Refugees Convention and generally speaking, has protection
obligations in respect of people who are refugees
as defined in Article 1 of the
Convention. Article 1A(2) relevantly defines a refugee as any person
owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
nationality, membership of a particular social group
or political opinion, is
outside the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is
unwilling to avail himself
of the protection of that country; or who, not having
a nationality and being outside the country of his former habitual residence,
unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to
91R and 91S of the Act qualify some aspects of Article 1A(2) for the purposes of
the application of the Act and the Regulations
to a particular person.
are four key elements to the Convention definition. First, an applicant must be
outside his or her country.
an applicant must fear persecution. Under s.91R(1) of the Act persecution must
involve ‘serious harm’ to the applicant
(s.91R(1)(b)), and
systematic and discriminatory conduct (s.91R(1)(c)). Examples of ‘serious
harm’ are set out in s.91R(2)
of the Act. The High Court has explained
that persecution may be directed against a person as an individual or as a
member of a group.
The persecution must have an official quality, in the sense
that it is official, or officially tolerated or uncontrollable by the
authorities of the country of nationality. However, the threat of harm need not
be the product of government policy; it may be enough
that the government has
failed or is unable to protect the applicant from persecution.
persecution implies an element of motivation on the part of those who persecute
for the infliction of harm. People are persecuted
for something perceived about
them or attributed to them by their persecutors.
the persecution which the applicant fears must be for one or more of the reasons
enumerated in the Convention definition -
race, religion, nationality,
membership of a particular social group or political opinion. The phrase
‘for reasons of’
serves to identify the motivation for the
infliction of the persecution. The persecution feared need not be
attributable to a Convention reason. However, persecution for multiple
motivations will not satisfy the relevant test unless a Convention
reasons constitute at least the essential and significant motivation for the
persecution feared: s.91R(1)(a) of the Act.
an applicant’s fear of persecution for a Convention reason must be a
‘well-founded’ fear. This adds an objective
requirement to the
requirement that an applicant must in fact hold such a fear. A person has a
‘well-founded fear’ of
persecution under the Convention if they have
genuine fear founded upon a ‘real chance’ of being persecuted for a
stipulated reason. A ‘real chance’ is one that is not
remote or insubstantial or a far-fetched possibility. A person
well-founded fear of persecution even though the possibility of the persecution
occurring is well below 50 per cent.
addition, an applicant must be unable, or unwilling because of his or her fear,
to avail himself or herself of the protection of
his or her country or countries
of nationality or, if stateless, unable, or unwilling because of his or her
fear, to return to his
or her country of former habitual residence. The
expression ‘the protection of that country’ in the second limb of
1A(2) is concerned with external or diplomatic protection extended to
citizens abroad. Internal protection is nevertheless relevant
to the first limb
of the definition, in particular to whether a fear is well-founded and whether
the conduct giving rise to the fear
is persecution.
an applicant is a person in respect of whom Australia has protection obligations
is to be assessed upon the facts as they
exist when the decision is made and
requires a consideration of the matter in relation to the reasonably foreseeable
Complementary protection criterion
a person is found not to meet the refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a), he or she may
nevertheless meet the criteria for the grant of
a protection visa if he or she
is a non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied
Australia has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial
grounds for believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the
being removed from Australia to a receiving country, there is a real
risk that he or she will suffer significant harm: s.36(2)(aa)
complementary protection criterion’).
‘Significant
harm’ for these purposes is exhaustively defined in s.36(2A): s.5(1). A
person will suffer significant harm
if he or she will be arbitrarily deprived of
their life; or the death penalty will be carried out on the person; or the
person will
be subjected to torture; or to cruel or inhuman treatment or
punishment; or to degrading treatment or punishment. ‘Cruel or
treatment or punishment’, ‘degrading treatment or punishment’,
and ‘torture’, are further defined
in s.5(1) of the Act.
are certain circumstances in which there is taken not to be a real risk that an
applicant will suffer significant harm in a
country. These arise where it would
be reasonable for the applicant to relocate to an area of the country where
there would not be
a real risk that the applicant will suffer significant harm;
where the applicant could obtain, from an authority of the country,
such that there would not be a real risk that the applicant will suffer
significant harm; or where the real risk is one
faced by the population of the
country generally and is not faced by the applicant personally: s.36(2B) of the
Section 499 Ministerial Direction
accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the Act, the
Tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines
prepared by the
Department of Immigration –PAM3 Refugee and humanitarian - Complementary
Protection Guidelines and PAM3 Refugee
and humanitarian - Refugee Law Guidelines
– and any country information assessment prepared by the Department of
Foreign Affairs
and Trade expressly for protection status determination
purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the decision under
consideration.
DFAT Country
Report Sri Lanka, 3 October 2014, DFAT Country Information Report No. 10/58,
dated 21 September 2010, CX249694, R.1;
DFAT, ‘Sri Lanka: RRT Country
Information Request - LKA40999’, 19 October 2012, CX297471; DFAT Country
Information Report
No. 12/67, dated 29 November 2012, CX299951;
DFAT Country
Information Report
in relation to Sri Lanka (31 July 2013) paragraphs
3.72-3.74, 3.76; Danish Immigration Service,
Human Rights and Security Issues
concerning Tamils in Sri Lanka - Report from Danish Immigration Service’s
fact-finding mission
to Colombo, Sri Lanka, 19 June to 3 July 2010
Copenhagen, October 2010, pages 52 to 54; UK Home Office,
Sri Lanka - Country
of Origin Information (COI) Report
, 7 March 2012, paragraphs
25.29-25.35, 25-37-25.39, 25.42-25.44; UK Home Office,
Sri Lanka - Bulletin:
Treatment of Returns
, December 2012, paragraphs 3.03-3.04, 3.08-3.25,
Immigration Service,
Human Rights and Security Issues concerning Tamils in
Sri Lanka - Report from Danish Immigration Service’s fact-finding mission
to Colombo, Sri Lanka, 19 June to 3 July 2010
, Copenhagen, October
2010, pages 52 to 54; UK Home Office,
Sri Lanka - Country of Origin
Information (COI) Report
, 7 March 2012, paragraphs 25.29-25.35,
25-37-25.39, 25.42-25.44; UK Home Office,
Sri Lanka - Bulletin: Treatment of
, December 2012, paragraphs 3.03-3.04, 3.08-3.25,
Country Reports Sri Lanka 3 October 2014 and 16 February
Lanka: Asylum denied, a penalty waits at home’,
Sydney Morning
, 8 December 2012,
Country Report Sri Lanka, 3 October 2014, DFAT, ‘Sri Lanka: RRT Country
Information Request - LKA40999’, 19 October
2012, CX297471; DFAT
Country Information Report No. 12/67, dated 29 November 2012, CX299951;
DFAT, ‘Sri Lanka: RRT Country
Information Request - LKA41452’,
27 February 2013, CX304258; DFAT, ‘Sri Lanka: RRT Country Information
Request - LKA41452’,
1 March 2013, CX306710;
DFAT Country Information
in relation to Sri Lanka (31 July 2013) paragraphs 3.73, 3.75,
Country Report Sri Lanka, 3 October 2014, DFAT Country Information Report No.
12/67, dated 29 November 2012, CX299951; DFAT,
‘Sri Lanka: RRT
Country Information Request - LKA41955’, 28 March 2013,
from Torture, 2012, ‘Sri Lankan Tamils tortured on return from UK’,
13 September
Department of State 2012,
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices in 2011
– Sri Lanka
, 24 May, Section 1; UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office
Human Rights and Democracy: The 2010 Foreign and Commonwealth Office
Report – Sri Lanka
[2013] FCCA 1989
20 November
Parliament of the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka n.d.
[current],‘Code of Criminal Procedure. An Act to Regulate
the Procedure of
the Criminal Courts’, (2 July 1979) [No.26 of 1981] (amended to Act No.7
of 2006), LawNet. Government of Sri
Lanka [Ministry of Justice], Section 291
‘Provisions as to sentences of fine’
http://www.lawnet.lk/process.php?st=1981Y2V26C & hword='' & path=5
[accessed 19 January 2015]
RTF format (194 KB)
Signed PDF/A format