GEA Westfalia Separator Group GmbH [2025] ADO 1 (17 July 2025)
DESIGNS ACT 2003
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF DESIGNS WITH REASONS
Re: Registered design number
202215837 (class 14-02) –
display screen with graphical user
– in the name of GEA Westfalia Separator Group GmbH
Benjamin Goldsworthy
REPRESENTATION:
Lester Miller of Foundry Intellectual Property Pty Ltd
Designs Act 2003
(Cth) – examination of design under
– practice of viewing a product ‘at rest’ –
interpretation of the meaning of ‘visual features of a
product’ and
‘product’ – design not distinctive over the prior art base
– registered design to be revoked
matter concerns a design (‘Design’) which has been registered under
Designs Act 2003
The Design was
entered on the Register of Designs with the following
particulars:
Design number
: 202215837
: GEA Westfalia Separator Group GmbH (‘Owner’)
: A display screen with graphical user interface
: 3 October 2022
Priority date
: 7 April 2022 (‘Relevant Date’)
Convention details
: Number: 008929814-0004; Country: European Union
Intellectual Property Office (EUIPO); Date: 7 April 2022
Representations
see Schedule 1
(‘Representation’).
application for the Design contained the following statement of newness and
distinctiveness:
The new and distinctive features are the data
layout pattern and ornamentation of the display screen shown in the
representations,
including the colouring, but wherein the proportions of colours
on the ring charts and bar chart may vary, as may the numbers on
the readouts,
the location shown on the map, the machine serial numbers and the company name
in the top left corner (‘SoND’).
Examination background
3 August 2023, the Owner sought examination of the Design under s 63(1). During
the examination, the Examiner raised citations
against the Design in a written
report (‘Citations’) which I extract at Schedule 2. Upon examination
of the Design the
Examiner considered the product pictured in the Representation
to be ‘at rest’, an example depiction of which I set out
at Schedule
3 (‘Blank Representation’).
considering submissions from the Owner’s Attorney, the Examiner maintained
that the Citations meant the Design is not
new and distinctive. On 19 April
2024, the Owner requested to be heard.
hearing was scheduled and I invited the Owner to file any written submissions or
evidence by 17 March 2025. On 17 March 2025, the
Owner filed written submissions
prepared by Lester Miller of Foundry Intellectual Property Pty Ltd.
18 March 2025, I heard the matter by teleconference. Mr Miller appeared on
behalf of the Owner. I am to decide this matter as a
delegate of the Registrar
of Designs (‘Registrar’) and do so with reference to the examination
reports, written responses
and all of the Owner’s submissions. This
process is not a review of the examination, though I do refer to the examination
of the Design in determining this matter.
should first note that I am satisfied that all the Citations were published in a
document prior to the Relevant Date. I am satisfied
that the Design, if
considered ‘at rest’, is substantially similar in overall
impression, thus not distinctive, when
compared with the prior art base. This
consideration includes the prior art with a priority date of 27 January 2021 and
on 29 September 2021, shown in Schedule 2 to these written
Accordingly,
if the Blank Representation is the appropriate construction of the Design at
examination, it follows that the Design
is not distinctive and must be revoked.
Therefore, the core issue is one which has been addressed in
and more recently in
DriV IP LLC
That is, whether the Design should be examined ‘at rest’ such that
the pattern and textual matter appearing in the Representation
is effectively
practice of the Registrar is to examine designs ‘at rest’, meaning
that for the purposes of the comparison with prior
art, a product will be taken
to be switched to an off state. As a result of this practice, images that may be
displayed on a screen
when switched on, are not visual features for the purposes
of any comparison with prior art.
The basis for this approach was explained in
where a delegate of
the Registrar found that the visual matter shown as having been displayed on the
screen is not viewed as a visual
feature which is ‘
product per se.
Relevant legislation and materials
the Act a person may file an application in respect of a
An application may be in
respect of one design in relation to one product or one design that is a common
design in relation to more
set out relevant sections of the Act below:
5 Definitions
In this Act, unless the contrary intention appears:
artistic work
has the same meaning as in
corresponding design
, in relation to an artistic work, has the
same meaning as in Division 8 of Part III of the
, in relation to a product, means the overall appearance
of the product resulting from one or more visual features of the product.
Note: See also
has the meaning given by
visual feature
has the meaning given by
6 Definition of
(1) For the purposes of this Act, a thing that is manufactured or hand made
is a product (but see subsections (2), (3) and (4))
(2) A component part of a complex product may be a product for the purposes
of this Act, if it is made separately from the product.
(3) A thing that has one or more indefinite dimensions is only a product for
the purposes of this Act if any one or more of the following
applies to the
(a) a cross‑section taken across any indefinite dimension is fixed
or varies according to a regular pattern;
(b) all the dimensions remain in proportion;
(c) the cross‑sectional shape remains the same throughout, whether
or not the dimensions of that shape vary according to a ratio
or series of
(d) it has a pattern or ornamentation that repeats itself.
(4) A kit which, when assembled, is a particular product is taken to be that
7 Definition of
visual feature
(1) In this Act:
visual feature
, in relation to a product, includes the shape,
configuration, pattern and ornamentation of the product.
(2) A visual feature may, but need not, serve a functional purpose.
(3) The following are not visual features of a product:
(a) the feel of the product;
(b) the materials used in the product;
(c) in the case of a product that has one or more indefinite dimensions:
(i) the indefinite dimension; and
(ii) if the product also has a pattern that repeats itself—more than
one repeat of the pattern.
8 References in this Act to a design
In this Act, a reference to a design is a reference to a design in relation
to a product.
need not set out its contents in full, though I note that these written reasons
refer to the 74th report of the Australian Law Reform
Commission, which was
tabled in the Australian Parliament (‘ALRC
The ALRC Report
contains recommendations to modernise and simplify Australian designs law before
enactment of the Act. These recommendations
were aimed at improving the rights
of those who design the innovative visual features of manufactured products. The
Government response
to those recommendations resulted in the Act.
Relevantly,
the ALRC Report states:
In the Commission's view a screen display is
a use of a product - the monitor or other computer hardware -
itself a product
. Nor is it the visual appearance
of any product
visual appearance of the monitor or other computer hardware is the product at
rest not in use. The fact that the screen display
is generated by a computer
program does not make it the visual appearance of that program any more than a
printed page is the visual
appearance of the printer
. It follows that a
screen display does not qualify for protection as a design either as the design
of a computer program or on any
other ground
. In the Commission's view this
is appropriate and no special provision needs to be made for screen displays
either confirming or
Recommendation
20 in the ALRC Report recommended that, ‘[s]creen displays should not be
able to be protected as designs. It
is not necessary to include any special
provision in the new designs legislation to confirm this’ and the
Australian Government
responded to this recommendation with an unqualified
acceptance.
am satisfied that the ALRC Report is an extrinsic material which may be given
careful consideration in the interpretation of the
Act when appropriate, as per
the considerations set out in the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(‘AIA’), which I discuss further below.
Meaning of ‘product’
core of the Owner’s submissions is that the word ‘product’ in
the Act includes non-physical matter, such as
a graphical user interface
(‘GUI’). Indeed, the Owner submits that a GUI as such is
registrable. Whilst the Owner did
not provide specific submissions directed at
the issue of the practice of ‘at rest’ examination for the design in
to ‘a display screen with graphical user interface’, it
appears to suggest that based on its conclusion that GUI is registrable
therefore be improper for a registered design that specifies the product as
being, for example, a GUI to have visual features
disregarded, because the
GUI’s appearance is unaffected by whether the product is ‘at
rest’. The Owner then appears
to submit that more broadly the examination
of designs should not be conducted ‘at rest’. Similar submissions
the Owner’s submissions require me to assess
whether, for example, a GUI, would be registrable under the Act in its own
The delegate in
briefly dealt with this kind of
submission about the meaning of the word ‘product’
Another strand to this submission amounts to a more
ambitious claim – that screen displays are products in their own right.
do not need to deal fully with this in these reasons, since the product to which
the design relates does not claim to be a “screen
display” or the
like but a “display screen”. I would only say here that, an ordinary
reading of the term “screen
display” seems to relate only to images,
much the same as would be the case for “a projected image”. While
refer in a way to a means through which those images will manifest (a
screen and a projector respectively), but neither squarely
relate to a product
of manufacture. Both of those terms make a claim to visual features in relation
to any number of different products.
Since designs under the Act must be in
relation to a product,
“screen display” would not be registrable for want of appropriate
subject matter.
result also appears to be consistent with the decision in
Corporation
delegate decided that the word ‘product’ in the Act requires a thing
bearing visual features and that a type
font would not qualify as
... I do not think that the present design shows a product
bearing visual features. Rather, the representations show a collection
features intended to be applied to unspecified products in unspecified
arrangements.
In my view, the present design does not disclose a product bearing visual
features. It only discloses visual
features...
Owner submits that there is a broad meaning for the word ‘product’
under the Act. The definition of the word ‘product’
as appearing in
Macquarie Dictionary
includes, ‘a thing produced by any action
or operation, or by labour; an effect or
The Owner also
refers to the
Oxford Dictionary
definition of ‘manufacture’
which is ‘making something on a large scale... by manual labour’ and
that ‘GUI building would fall within this
definition’.
Owner refers to
Aristocrat Leisure Industries Pty Ltd v Pacific Gaming Pty
, where Tamberlin J observed that it, ‘is appropriate to adopt a
“liberal interpretation” to intellectual property
legislation,
including the [
(Cth)], and to avoid a narrow, literal
approach specific to a particular technology or unduly limited to the state of
the art as at
the date when the relevant provisions were
Justice Tamberlin
noted that it is ‘also important to ensure that the result contended for
reasonably arises from the language
selected by
parliament’.
starting point for determining the legal meaning of words in an enactment should
be the words themselves and their ordinary
There should be reasons
to depart from the literal or grammatical meaning of a provision and I should
strive to give meaning to every
When interpreting a
provision of an enactment the interpretation that would best achieve the purpose
or object of the enactment (whether
or not that purpose or object is expressly
stated in the enactment) is to be preferred to each other
interpretation.
must construe the words of an enactment in their legislative setting and in
accordance with the principles of statutory interpretation
and start with the
language in the Act.
is titled ‘Definitions’ and provides
in part, ‘[i]n this Act,
unless the contrary intention appears
product has the meaning given by
‘...unless the contrary intention appears...’ purports to prescribe
in plain words of necessary intendment
where a person reading the Act will
(absent a contrary intention) find the meaning of the word
‘product’. Had the legislature
intended there to be such an open
definition of product, as asserted by the Owner, it would have used open wording
such as ‘includes’
By contrast, see the inclusive definition
of ‘visual feature’ in
Further, a thing which is manufactured
or hand made would come within the description of the word
‘product’, on the ordinary
meaning of the word, without the need for
any deeming provision to make that so. As such, I proceed on the basis that the
are what provides the reader of the Act the meaning of the word
‘product’ wherever it sits in the Act, unless a contrary
can be found in any specific instance.
the definition of product in
, is the word ‘manufacture’ and the
phrase ‘hand made’. One definition of the word
‘manufacture’
Macquarie Dictionary
is that it refers
to the verb involving, ‘the making of goods or wares by manual labour or
by machinery, esp. on a large
‘hand made’ is defined therein as ‘made by hand, not
The High Court
of Australia in
National Research Development Corporation v Commissioner of
commented that the word
‘manufacture’ as ‘a word of everyday speech generally’
conveys the idea of making
The High Court in
was considering the effect of the words ‘manner of new
manufacture’ for the purposes of the
Patents Act 1952
Owner’s Attorney notes that in
the High Court, whilst
mentioning the ordinary meaning of the word ‘manufacture’, took an
expansive approach to the interpretation
of the words of the patents
legislation. I agree. However, patents law also has its own limits as to
patentable subject matter, by
the effect arising from the words of the
legislation. Moreover, what I am concerned with in this matter is the meaning of
specifically in the enactment at hand. That is, the words of the Act
not the patents legislation. The Act and its words have a different
legislative
context to the words of the patents legislation considered in
legislative context for the patents legislation included the definition of the
word ‘invention’ by reference to
those composite words ‘manner
of new manufacture’. Relevant also were the principles that developed over
time in respect
of those words. What is notable about
is that the
High Court’s approach was to consider the ordinary meaning of the relevant
words and then move to consider the effect
of the relevant words in their own
legislative setting, including the surrounding words and the principles that had
developed over
time in relation to s 6 of the
Statute of Monopolies 1624
I proceed from here to consider the language and effect of the words of the
the hearing the Owner’s Attorney summarised the meaning of the word
product as follows:
a. GUIs are a thing;
b. GUIs are built;
c. built things are made by hand or manufactured.
Owner’s Attorney also submitted that GUIs are ‘hand made’
because they involve a person clicking and/or dragging
elements appearing on a
screen leading to the building of a GUI.
‘built things’ do not necessarily fall within the meaning of the
words ‘manufactured or hand made’ as
occurring in the Act. The
interpretation suggested by the Owner would amount to giving meaning to the
words ‘manufactured or
hand made’ by the properties inhering in
another word, ‘build/built’. More conceptual things, for example, a
an argument, a principle, a business process, or a method of
construction can in a broad sense be said to be ‘built’.
that does not mean such things are necessarily protectable under the Act or
qualify as a product. Whilst I agree that persons
producing GUIs might say they
are a ‘GUI builder’; that ‘a GUI is built’; or that such
persons are working,
for example, on a ‘software build’, in everyday
speech generally a person would not say that they ‘manufacture’
GUIs. Nor would a person naturally prefer to say that these are made by hand in
such a way as argued by the Owner. These things are
likely to be referred to as
having been ‘created’, ‘coded’, ‘authored’,
or perhaps ‘built’. Such words were not
chosen by the legislature. The meaning of the words ‘manufactured or hand
made’, in the context of both s 6 and the rest of the Act, appear to be
confined to the making of a physical thing, involving
a working of a material
into a physical form for use.
meaning of a provision in an enactment must be determined by reference to the
language of the instrument viewed as a
Here this includes the
subsections in s 6 and all other sections of the
All subject matter referred
to in ss 6(2) to (5) appear to refer to physical things. For example, s 6(2)
refers to a ‘component
part’ of a ‘complex product’
which is made separately. Further, the definition for ‘complex
in s 5 includes the requirement that this type of product be
capable of both disassembly and re-assembly. Subsection 6(3) states
that things
which have indefinite dimensions may be products, subject to certain conditions.
Where the dimensions of a thing are
indefinite, but do not meet those
conditions, it may otherwise not be a product for the purposes of the Act.
Section 6(4) refers
to ‘kits’ which require assembly. On the
interpretation that the Owner asserts, how non-physical things, for example
a GUI, would interact with these subsections is not clear. All these subsections
relate to subject matter which involves, for
example, the assembly of physical
things. This language reinforces the interpretation that for the purposes of the
Act ‘product’
refers to a physical thing.
also agree with the reasons of the delegate in
where they state
that a registered design is for a product and a screen display would involve the
appearance of potentially multiple
This is because a
screen display, such as a GUI, is not physical and thus can be incorporated into
any number of different products.
I also note the comments of the High Court in
Malleys Ltd v J W Tomlin Pty Ltd
that it is ‘not the function of
design to indicate a process of manufacture; indeed, anything amounting to a
method of construction
that would permit differences of shape spells
invalidity’.
Indefinitely
dimensioned extrusions under the
Designs Act 1906
(Cth) (‘1906
for example, also
faced problems in qualifying as protectable subject matter, which required the
amendment of that legislation to
specifically include such
Things with indefinite
dimensions are now controlled by the definition of s 6(3) of the Act. Since I
have found that the definition
in s 6 is exhaustive, then (absent any contrary
intention – none of which have been drawn to my attention, nor are any
to me) the likely meaning of the word ‘product’ again does
not refer to non-physical things which can be incorporated
across multiple
products or designs of indefinite appearances.
language in the provisions of the Act outside of s 6 also confirms that the word
‘product’ for the purposes of the
Act refers to physical things, or
at least that visual features in the absence of a physical thing would not be
included in the meaning
These words generally
appear to refer to things which permit physical
connection.
Overall, the
language of the Act is currently cast to apparently concern physical things to
the exclusion of non-physical things.
the extent that it might have been necessary to consider them, extrinsic
materials to the Act also confirm the meaning of the word
as referring to physical things, or at least that a GUI would not be included in
Furthermore, to the
extent that there is ambiguity about the definition of ‘product’, it
may then also be appropriate
to have recourse to extrinsic
These extrinsic
materials include the Explanatory Memorandum to the Designs Bill 2003
(‘EM’) and the ALRC Report which
support such an interpretation.
EM states that the definition of the word ‘product’ is,
‘...intended to emphasise the industrial nature of design
protection, and
to exclude naturally occurring things from design
protection’.
statement indicates that the definitional role of s 6 involves a level of
exhaustion and the exclusion of some subject matter.
The regulation impact
statement, as part of the EM, in discussing the rationale for the legislation
notes that, ‘the Registrar
accepts an extremely diverse range of products
including light fittings, bicycles, extrusions, farm machinery, textiles, toys,
garments and statues from applicants involved in a variety of industrial
All of these are
examples of things with a physical form and bearing visual features.
ALRC Report also notes that the definition of ‘product’ is intended
to exclude naturally occurring things from protection
and emphasise the
industrial nature of design
protection.
The ALRC Report adds
that, for example, the water jet of a fountain would be excluded from the then
draft definition of product.
This is despite the direction of the flow perhaps being a result of human
intervention. This also suggests that things of a temporary
or transient nature
would be excluded from protection. The ALRC Report thus further supports an
interpretation which does not include
screen display items, such as GUIs, within
the word ‘product’ and refers to the reasons in
Re Applications
by Comshare Incorporated
view the ALRC Report as a strong signpost that the apparent status quo was to be
preserved in the repeal of the 1906 Act and enactment
of the Act and that no
substantial or specific changes would be required to achieve this. The general
discussion in the ALRC Report
also indicates that the intention of s 6 is to
control the subject matter over which an application for registration of a
may be made. Overall, I agree with the summary of this background that
the delegate provides in
Aristocrat Technologies
where they noted that,
‘[t]he new design definition [occurring in s 6] was aimed at excluding
“naturally occurring things
from design protection” but did not
substantially widen the scope of things that could attract design
protection.’
concerning different provisions and a different context, in
Lord Reid observed:
Parliament has been concerned
to see that the originator of a profitable design is not deprived of his reward
by others applying it
to their goods. But it has not given protection under the
[applicable enactment] to everything which could be called a design. To
protected the design must come within the definition. Designs which do not come
within this definition may or may not be protected
legislation.
underlying purpose of the Act is to foster innovation and reward the same, by
offering a temporary monopoly to people that come
up with new and distinctive
visual features of products. However, the Act seeks to achieve this subject to
the contouring of the
word ‘product’, and the word
‘design’, which refines the subject matter qualifying for
protection.
This is specifically
confirmed by the text of the Act, the EM and ALRC Report. Section 6 in
connection with the other provisions
of the Act has a specific role in
controlling the subject matter of protections offered under the Act.
completeness I note that the Owner’s Attorney also referred the Examiner
to the Australian Commission on Intellectual Property’s
2015 Final Report
to the Australian Government (‘ACIP Report’). The Owner submits that
this found that, ‘there
is nothing in the legislation which requires that
visual features be observable in the “resting” state or when
unconnected
to electricity. IP Australia should reconsider, and abandon, this
aspect of its practice in assessing the validity of designs.’
I note that
the ACIP Report does not directly address any of the issues outlined in past
decisions of the office concerning the practice
of ‘at rest’
examination.
I note also that
the references of the Owner to current proposals for reform of the current
legislation to cover matter as appearing
on a screen also do not assist
regarding the current legislation.
these reasons, my reading of the word ‘product’ as appearing in the
Act is that it does not refer to a GUI in the
way asserted by the Owner.
Accordingly, this argument does not assist the Owner to the extent that the
current practice of the Designs
Office is that the Design should not be examined
Conclusions on the issue of ‘at rest’
examination
an ordinary reading of the Act, the GUI as depicted in the Representation would
not amount to visual features ‘of’
the product as specified. I am
satisfied that the Design should be examined ‘at rest’. When
examined accordingly the
Design is not distinctive when compared to, at least,
the prior art which was registered and so published on 29 September 2021.
completeness I also note that the SoND when read together with the product name
and Representation do not assist in reaching any
other conclusion in this
am satisfied that examination of the Design ‘at rest’ is the correct
approach in this matter. Further, because the Design
is substantially similar in
overall impression to at least one of the Citations the Design was not
distinctive at the Relevant Date
and must be revoked.
an appeal, the Design will be revoked. If the Registrar is served with a notice
of appeal from this decision before the time
of revocation, I direct that
revocation shall not occur until the appeal has been withdrawn or discontinued.
Otherwise, the disposition
of the examination should be in accordance with the
Court’s order or direction.
Benjamin Goldsworthy
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and Designs
Publication date
Unless I have otherwise
specified, throughout these written reasons a reference to a section of an
enactment is a reference to a
section in the
Designs Act 2003
[2017] ADO 6 (Hearing
Richards) (‘
[2024] ADO 3 (Hearing
Goldsworthy).
Designs Examiners’
Manual of Practice and Procedure
Section 21.
Section 22.
Australian Law Reform
Commission,
, Report No 74 (1995) (‘ALRC
Paragraph 4.32 (emphasis
[2008] ADO 2 (Hearing
Officer Herald).
Macquarie Dictionary
(9e, 2023) ‘product’.
Owner’s Written
Submissions, [21]-[22].
[2000] FCA 1273
Aristocrat Leisure
’) referring to
Sega Enterprises Ltd v
Galaxy Electronics Pty Ltd
[1996] FCA 761 (Burchett
Aristocrat Leisure
ibid. See also,
Computer Edge Proprietary Limited v Apple Computer
[1986] HCA 19
(1986) 161 CLR 171
, 187-188 (Gibbs CJ) and
Australasian Performing
Rights Association Ltd v Telstra Corp Ltd
[1995] FCA 1476
(1995) 131 ALR 141
, 155 (Sheppard
J, dissenting).
Project Blue Sky Inc v
Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
, [69]-[71] (McHugh, Gummow,
Kirby and Hayne JJ) (‘
Project Blue Sky
Alumina Pty Ltd v Commissioner of Territory Revenue
[2009] HCA 41
(Hayne, Heydon, Crennan and Kiefel JJ).
Project Blue Sky
[71] and [78].
AIA s 15AA.
Emphasis added.
Macquarie Dictionary
(online, accessed 17 June 2025) ‘manufacture’.
Macquarie Dictionary
(online, accessed 17 June 2025) ‘handmade’.
[1959] HCA 67
, [14] (Dixon
CJ, Kitto and Windeyer JJ) (emphasis added).
Project Blue Sky
18) [69] (McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ);
Metropolitan Gas Co v
Federated Gas Employees’ Industrial Union
[1925] HCA 5
455 (Rich and Isaacs JJ).
(n 2) [19].
[1961] HCA 77
, [5] (Taylor,
Menzies and Owen JJ).
Bondor Pty Ltd v National
Panels Pty Ltd
[1991] FCA 428
CJ, Spender and Gummow JJ);
Brisbane Aliminium Fabricators & Supplies Pty Ltd v Techni Interiors Pty
[1991] FCA 805 (Pincus
Industry, Technology and
Commerce Legislation Amendment Act 1992
(Cth). See also, 1906 Act ss 18(2),
(3) and (4).
AIA s 15AB(1).
Aristocrat Technologies
Australia Pty Limited
[2021] ADO 1
, [28] (Hearing Officer Barbey)
Aristocrat Technologies
AIA s 15AB(2)(a).
AIA ss 15AB(1) and
15AB(2)(b) and (2)(e).
Recommendation 10.
ALRC Report, [4.9].
[1991] ADO 2 (Hearing
Officer Welsh). See also, ALRC Report, [4.30]-[4.32] and Recommendation 20.
Aristocrat Technologies
[18] (citations omitted).
[1972] RPC 103
The interpretation of the
word ‘product’ supplied by the Owner also may have interesting
questions for the objects and
purposes of the copyright/design overlap
provisions, including ss 18 of the Act and s 74, 75 and 77 in Part III, Division
State of Escape Accessories Pty Limited v Schwartz
[2022] FCAFC 63
(Greenwood, Nicholas and Anderson JJ) the Court stated that, ‘[t]he policy
behind the overlap provisions is to ensure
that works which are functional and
intended for mass production in three dimensional form
should not be
afforded protection under [the
]’ (emphasis added). In
Polo/Lauren Company LP v Ziliani Holdings Pty Ltd
[2008] FCAFC 195
(Black CJ, Jacobson and Perram JJ) the Full Court referred to the policy of the
legislation stating that, ‘it is plain,
we think, that the definition of
“corresponding design” is intended to cover a situation where an
artistic work is embodied
in three dimensions
’. See also,
Seafolly Pty Limited v Fewstone Pty Ltd
[2014] FCA 321
(Dodds-Streeton J).
See also the discussion of
this aspect of the ACIP Report and later government actions in
2) [29]-[31].
RTF format (5.58 MB)
Signed PDF/A format