Silent Shade Pty Ltd v Tony Hopkins [2025] APO 20 (30 June 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT
Silent Shade Pty Ltd v Tony Hopkins
Patent Applications: 2023900674 & 2023901115
Titles: Mechanical blinds system auto glide & Mechanical combined awning
and blind system
Patent Applicant: Tony Hopkins
Requestor: Silent Shade Pty Ltd
Delegate: Greg Powell
Decision Date: 30 June 2025
Hearing Date: Written submissions filed on 19 March 2025, 20 May 2025 & 2
Catchwords:
– section 36 – inventorship –
applicant is the sole inventor – whether the requestor is the sole
person – joint venture agreement – whether the agreement
exists – behaviour of the parties to agreement –
implied contract
– agreement was effectively in existence – third party employer of
the applicant – s36 considerations
do not extend to the third party
– should documents not in evidence be considered? – documents not in
evidence were not
considered – request under s36 successful – the
requestor is the sole eligible person with respect to the invention –
costs awarded against the applicant
Representation: The applicant and requestor represented themselves
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Patent Applications: 2023900674 & 2023901115
Titles: Mechanical blinds system auto glide & Mechanical combined awning
and blind system
Patent Applicant: Tony Hopkins
Date of Decision: 30 June 2025
The requestor has established that they have entitlement to the
I declare that the requestor, Silent Shade Pty Ltd, is the sole eligible
person in relation to provisional applications 2023900674
2023901115.
I award costs in accordance with Schedule 8 against the applicant, Tony
REASONS FOR DECISION
Hopkins (the
) filed provisional patent
application 2023900674 (the
‘674 application
) on 13 March 2023 and
filed provisional patent application 2023901115 (the
application
) on 16 April 2023 (collectively, the
provisional
applications
). On 7 June 2023 standard patent application 2023203556,
claiming priority from the provisional applications, was filed in the name
Jeti Enterprises Pty Ltd, listing Mr Hopkins as sole inventor.
11 July 2024, Silent Shade Pty Ltd (the
) filed a single request
under section 36 of the
Patents Act 1990
request was made with respect to standard application 2023203556 but
“This application relates to:
- Australian
Provisional Patent Application Nos. 2023900674, 2023901115 in the name of Tony
Hopkins, and
- Australian
Complete Patent Application No. 2023203556 in the name of Jeti Enterprises Pty
request sought a declaration from the Commissioner that Silent Shade Pty Ltd was
the sole eligible person in respect of the provisional
applications and the
standard application which claimed priority from the provisional applications.
The request stated:
“The inventor Tony Hopkins was a director of Silent Shade Pty Ltd
during the period in which the invention was made. He has
engaged in conduct in
breach of his fiduciary duties as a director of Silent Shade Pty Ltd, and in
contravention of a Joint Venture
Agreement signed by him on 4 July 2017. Tony
Hopkins was also employed by Abra Aluminium Pty Ltd during the period in which
invention was made, and the invention was made within the scope of his
employment with the company. Further particulars are explained
in the attached
declaration of Edward Donald Allen, a co-director of Silent Shade Pty Ltd.
The inventor, and his company Jeti Enterprises Pty Ltd, are not entitled to
the invention disclosed and claimed in the two provisional
patent applications
or the associated complete patent application. Silent Shade Pty Ltd is the sole
eligible person.”
correspondence from the Commissioner, the requestor subsequently
“split” their single request into three separate
requests (as
required by the
), one for each application.
applicant of standard patent application 2023203556, Jeti Enterprises Pty Ltd,
then requested its withdrawal on 15 August 2024.
The requestor did not dispute
this withdrawal and subsequently discontinued their s36 request against the
standard application.
As such, this decision is in relation to the provisional
applications only.
declaration of Edward Donald Allen (
) dated 9 July 2024 attached to
the request, with exhibits EDA-1 to EDA-9, formed the evidence in support
) for the request.
applicant subsequently filed their evidence in answer. It consists of a
declaration by Tony Hopkins (
) dated 11 December 2024, with
exhibits TH-2 to TH-8, TH-10 to TH-11b, TH-14 to TH-21, TH-25 to TH-34, TH-36 to
TH-38, TH-40 and TH-43
attached. While the gaps in exhibit numbering are
unusual, there are no exhibits missing.
requestor then supplied evidence in reply (
). The filed documents
were, in accordance with the Commissioner’s requirements, PDF files.
However, while the PDF file names
for the evidence indicated that the EIR
consisted of a second declaration by Edward Donald Allen, a declaration by
Harish Alakkandy
and a declaration by Peter Cock, upon reviewing the files prior
to my consideration, it was found that the Cock declaration was a
copy of the
Alakkandy declaration. The parties were informed of this situation. They were
also informed that the omission could
not be corrected by simply filing the Cock
declaration as the period for filing evidence had passed. The requestor was
that if they wished to rely on the Cock declaration, they had to file
it and explicitly request the Commissioner to consider it,
explaining why the
declaration was crucial for resolving the entitlement dispute. The requestor
filed the missing declaration and
asked that it be considered, stating that it
was “crucial” since it was from an independent witness and presented
evidence to that of Mr Hopkins as to the issue of conception of the
invention and the understanding as to the intended ownership
of the invention.
As I discuss below, I do not believe that the Cock declaration is crucial, and I
did not consider it. As such,
the EIR consists of the second declaration of Mr
) dated 20 January 2025 with exhibits EDA-10 to EDA-24, and
the declaration of Mr Alakkandy (
) dated 20 January
would observe that there is considerable dissatisfaction on the part of Mr
Hopkins with the way that Mr Allen has apparently set
up certain business
arrangements. Mr Hopkins is certain that these arrangements were deliberately
created to deprive him of what
he considers to be his rightful share of profits
arising from his inventions. This dissatisfaction is apparent in the evidence
both parties. However, whether the arrangements are in existence and
whether they are permitted under law is not something that
I must decide. My
remit is purely on the question of who the eligible persons are with respect to
the ‘674 and ‘115
provisional applications.
requestor filed their written submissions (
) on 19 March 2025, the
applicant filed their submissions in response (
) on 20 May 2025, and
the requestor filed their submissions in reply (
) on 2 June
completeness, I also note that the applicant filed what he termed “new
evidence” on 20 February 2025, seeking to have
the section 36 matter
dismissed. The evidence was a “Preliminary Signature Analysis
Report” which advanced an opinion
that there was support for the
proposition that a signature of the applicant appearing on exhibit EDA–21
was “the product
of a simulation/forgery process.” A delegate of
the Commissioner wrote to the parties on 12 March 2025 indicating that he
the view that the Commissioner did not think the new evidence should be
consulted. However, the delegate invited the applicant
to make an explicit
request for the Commissioner to consult explaining how the new evidence would be
crucial to the decision. The
requestor responded to the delegate’s letter
disputing the evidence and filing a declaration responding to the forgery
allegation.
The applicant responded to the delegate’s letter
“I do not seek to raise any further material at this
Consequently,
the delegate wrote to the parties stating:
“The Applicant’s correspondence ... states that they do not wish
to raise any further material at this stage. I take
this to mean that they will
not be making further submissions on the material they filed on 20 February.
The Requestor has filed a declaration in the name of Don Allen dated 18 March
2025, along with an annexure and related submissions.
I understand that this
material is responsive to the Applicant’s filings of 20 February 2025.
Given that the Applicant has
chosen not to pursue the matter, there does not
seem to be any need for the Commissioner to consider the Requestor’s new
for the purposes of determining this s 36 matter.”
the parties have abandoned this matter, I will not consider the new evidence or
the declaration the requestor filed in response.
That being said, like the Cock
declaration, if the parties had persisted, I do not believe that the new
evidence is crucial to my
decision and would not have considered it in any
Whether to consider the Cock declaration
an opposition under s59, regulation 5.23 of the
Patents Regulations 1991
Regulations
) can be exercised by the Commissioner to consider
late, or additional, documents and evidence. In matters under s36, regulation
5.23 has no part to play. Instead, practice and procedure are determined by the
Commissioner under regulation 22.24, applying normal
principles of fairness.
That being said, in dealing with additional evidence it is the
Commissioner’s practice to apply principles
that have been developed in
relation to regulation 5.23, but modifying those principles where the nature of
the dispute makes that
appropriate.
approach of the Commissioner in dealing with regulation 5.23 is set out in
Reflex Instruments Asia Pacific Pty Ltd v Minnovare
“Thus in order for me to determine if I should invoke regulation 5.23,
I must form a broad view of the circumstances and potential
implications should
I decide to invoke or not to invoke regulation 5.23.
To form this view, I will do so by considering the following matters:
circumstances leading up to the evidence not being filed earlier
does the evidence show
the information likely to be crucial to the delegate's decision
public interest in having the information considered
balance of convenience of the parties if the information is
considered”
importance of the third consideration was made clear in
Merial Limited v
Bayer Intellectual Property GmbH
“If the new information is not likely to change the outcome of the
opposition in a significant way, there is little advantage
gained by bringing it
opposition.”
evidence is filed out of time in a proceeding such as the present matter, these
principles provide a sensible way to assess
whether to treat the new evidence as
part of the proceeding.
Conception of the invention
the point about the conception of the invention, in their submissions the
requestor stated:
“As I explained in my first declaration, ‘
The desire for an
external window awning that could also act as a full-length blind was initially
suggested to Tony by an Abra sales
representative in about March 2022
(Allen 1 [32]). That sales representative was Mr Peter Cock who I identify in
Allen 2 [58], and Mr Hopkins mentions in paragraph
[111] of his declaration. As
I also explained ‘
Tony took the suggestion and started to develop a
blind system that eventually became the Auto Glide’
(Allen 1 [32]).
In reply, Mr Hopkins asserted in his declaration ‘
On Sunday, 23
October 2022, the inception of my invention occurred while I was solving a
problem at my own home’ and ‘the
idea came to me while standing on
my driveway
’ (Hopkins [119]-[121]).
Presented with this assertion, Mr Cock provided a declaration in which he
confirmed the accuracy my earlier statement. In particular,
Mr Cock explains in
paragraph of his declaration, that the idea for the Auto
Glide invention evolved from a discussion between himself and Mr
(italics in
requestor also submitted:
“Mr Cock does not claim to be a co-inventor but merely that he
suggested the idea to Mr Hopkins within the scope of their common
employment by
Abra. The subsequent development and engineering of the prototype by Mr Hopkins
was within the scope of his employment
with Abra (Allen 2 [25]-[26] and EDA-10
and EDA-14).
As such, contrary to Mr Hopkins assertion, he did not conceive the inventive
concept completely
independently...”
while these submissions indicate that it was Mr Cock who suggested to the
applicant the idea of a full-length blind, that
is not what Mr Cock says in his
declaration. Rather Mr Cock states in his 4
“During a discussion with Tony Hopkins the idea of a blind that could
cover an up-stairs window that would provide the features
of an existing style
of awning called an ‘Auto But with a motorized function was
verbalized.”
is noteworthy that Mr Cock does not explicitly state that
the idea. Rather, he says that the idea was “verbalized” and does
not identify who “verbalized”
the idea. The statement made by Mr
Cock does not, as submitted by the requestor, contradict Mr Hopkins’
evidence. In my opinion,
there seems to be no utility in admitting evidence
that does not support the submission made.
Intended ownership
to an understanding as to the intended ownership of the invention, the requestor
submitted that:
“All patent rights relating to the Auto Glide invention were intended
to be owned by Silent Shade Pty Ltd. This was understood
by all parties
involved (Allen 1 [33]-[38], Allen 2 [49] and EDA-23, Allen 2 [55]-[57] and
EDA-24, Allen 2 [60]-[61], Cock [final
paragraph] and Alakkandy [final
paragraph])”,
“Contrary to what Mr Hopkins now asserts, it was always his intention,
and the intention of Silent Shade and all individuals
involved, that all patent
applications for the Auto Glide were to be filed in the name of Silent Shade.
This is evident at least
from Allen 1 [33]-[40] and EDA-6; Allen 2 [25], [42]
and EDA-14; and Allen 2 [49], [55]-[57], [60] and EDA-24; and corroborated by
others in Cock [final paragraph] and Alakkandy [final
paragraph].”
this regard I note that these submissions are consistent with Mr Cock’s
statements, but I also note that the submissions
also rely on other supplied
declarations to support this same notion. I do not see why it is
“crucial” to supply another
declaration that says the same thing
that is already in evidence.
such, I do not believe Mr Cock’s declaration is likely to change the
outcome of this matter in a significant way. Accordingly,
there is little
advantage gained by bringing it in, and I decline to do so.
The invention described
will briefly describe the invention as there is little to no dispute between the
parties as to what it is. While two provisional
applications are involved, the
disclosures of each are very similar. Indeed, the specification for the
‘115 application is
quite obviously derived from the specification for the
‘674 application as both refer to the invention as the “Auto
(although, for the 2023901115 specification most (but not all)
references to “Auto Glide” have been amended to “Pivot
Blind”). There is, in effect, only one invention. For convenience, and
as has been alluded to in the submissions and
evidence that I have already cited
above, I will refer to the invention as the “
Essentially
the Auto Glide is an external window blind that can operate as an awning, which
typically projects outwardly from a window,
but can become a vertical blind,
which typically completely covers the window with minimal projection. In use,
as the Auto Glide
blind is operated it moves from its starting position, with
the blind cloth fully retracted, to an awning-type configuration, and
position that is typical of a vertical blind.
sequence is illustrated in the figures below (taken from the ‘674
application):
the roller fabric is unwound (which can be done via manual crank or an electric
motor in the header box), the side arms pivot outwardly
to form a hood
awning-type arrangement covering the top half of the window. If this is what is
desired, unwinding stops. Further
unwinding of the roller fabric allows the
side arms to pivot even more, bringing the arms more or less vertical and the
roller fabric
closer to the window. The length of unwound roller fabric may not
necessarily cover the whole window at this point. Additional
unwinding results
in the now-vertical side arms travelling further down the rails so as to
completely cover the window with roller
fabric. The position of the
blind/awning could be adjusted to suit different weather situations or times of
not directly relevant to the present matter, I note that this invention is also
the invention disclosed in WO2024/187228. This
application claims priority from
the ‘674 application, the ‘115 application, as well as provisional
application 2023901615.
Both the provisional application 2023901615 and
WO2024/187228 are in the name of the requestor, and both name Mr Allen and Mr
as inventors.
The law on entitlement
36(1) of the Act sets out that:
(a) a patent application has been made and, in the case of a complete
application, the patent has not been granted; and
(b) an application for a declaration by the Commissioner is made by one or more
persons (the section 36 applicants) in accordance
with the regulations; and
(c) the Commissioner is satisfied on the balance of probabilities, in relation
to an invention disclosed in the specification filed
in relation to the
application for the patent:
(i) that the nominated person is not an eligible person, but that the section 36
applicants are eligible persons; or
(ii) that the nominated person is an eligible person, but that the section 36
applicants are also eligible persons;
the Commissioner may declare in writing that the persons who the Commissioner
is satisfied are eligible persons are eligible persons
in relation to the
invention as so disclosed.”
A declaration must not be made without
first giving the nominated person a reasonable opportunity to be heard
(subsection 36(3)).
Dictionary at Schedule 1 of the Act defines an eligible person as
“eligible person, in relation to an invention, means a person to whom a
patent for the invention may be granted under section
15(1) of the Act states that:
“Subject to this Act, a patent for an invention may only be granted to
a person who:
(a) is the inventor; or
(b) would, on the grant of a patent for the invention, be entitled to have the
patent assigned to the person; or
(c) derives title to the invention from the inventor or a person mentioned in
paragraph (b); or
(d) is the legal representative of a deceased person mentioned in paragraph (a),
(b) or (c).”
the invention may only be granted to the inventor or someone who derives title
to the invention from the inventor. The general
approach to determining who is
an eligible person arises from
University of Western Australia v
Polwood Pty Ltd v
Foxworth Pty Ltd
and involves
the following steps:
(a) Identify the “inventive concept” of the invention as defined in
the claims.
(b) Determine inventorship including the person responsible for the inventive
concept and the time of conception as distinct from
its verification and
reduction into practice.
(c) Determine whether any contractual or fiduciary relationships give rise to
proprietary rights in the invention.
Third party employer of the applicant
observe that Abra Aluminium Pty Ltd (
), which is mentioned in the
grounds and Mr Allen’s evidence, is a company owned and operated by Mr
Allen and his son. According
to Mr Allen’s narrative, Mr Hopkins began
working with Abra to help develop Mr Hopkin’s products, and the requestor
created as part of a joint venture agreement between Mr Allen and his son
and Mr Hopkins.
also note that, while the requestor initially stated in the RS:
“we seek a Declaration under
Patents Act 1990
Silent Shade Pty Ltd is an eligible person under the Act and that Tony Hopkins
is not such an eligible person. In the alternative,
we seek a declaration that
Abra Aluminium Pty Ltd is an eligible person and that Tony Hopkins is not such
an eligible
the requestor
subsequently submitted in the RRS:
“In our earlier submissions we also named Abra as a potential rightful
owner, given the employment agreement, but submit that
all rights acquired by
Abra by virtue of Mr Hopkins’ employment have been assigned to Silent
might be said around ownership, the section 36 request was only ever made by
Silent Shade Pty Ltd. As is clear from the
text of section 36, the Commissioner
may only make a declaration with respect to the applicant and/or the requestor.
Consequently,
to dispel any doubt, it is not open to me to make any declaration
with respect to Abra.
Other commercial parties
The evidence also mentions other commercial
entities. They are:
(i) Lusso Fashion for Windows (“Lusso”) – this is a trading
name belonging to the Hopkins Family Trust. It belongs
to the applicant.
(ii) Silent Shade – this is a business name belonging to the Hopkins
Family Trust. It is distinct from the requestor (Silent
Shade Pty Ltd).
As evident from its name, the applicant is one of the trustees for the
Hopkins Family Trust. These entities do not directly impinge
Inventive concept
respect to the first step at [33] above, as noted above, the parties did not
raise any disputes as to the invention. As such,
I will proceed assuming that
what I described at [25]–[29] above is the inventive concept.
Inventorship
respect to the second step, in
JMVB Enterprises Pty Ltd v Camoflag Pty
Crennan J stated:
“Rights in an invention are determined by objectively assessing
contributions to the invention, rather than an assessment of
the inventiveness
of respective contributions. If the final concept of the invention would not
have come about without a particular
person’s involvement, then that
person has entitlement to the invention. One must have regard to the invention
as a whole,
as well as the component parts and the relationship between the
participants. The fact that the parties were in collaboration can
consideration.”
aspect of Crennan J’s decision was not considered on appeal, which was
JMVB Enterprises Pty Ltd (formerly A’Van Campers Pty Ltd) v
Camoflag Pty Ltd
passage was cited with apparent approval in
. Furthermore, in
, it was stated (emphasis in original):
“The entitlement to the grant of a patent as the inventor is not
determined by quantitative contribution. The role of joint
inventors does not
have to be equal; it is qualitative rather than quantitative. It may involve
joint contribution or independent
contributions. The issue is whether the
contribution was to the
. What constitutes the invention can be
determined from the particular patent specification which includes the claims.
In some cases,
evidence can assist. In some cases, the reduction of a concept
to a working apparatus by a person may not be part of the invention,
cases it may be. For example, the construction of an apparatus may involve no
more than carrying out the instructions in
the specification. This would not
normally entitle that person to joint inventorship. On the other hand joint
inventorship may
arise where the invention is in the apparatus itself, or where
the person constructing the apparatus contributed to a different or
working of it which is then described and claimed.
One criterion for inventorship may be to determine whether the person’s
contribution had a material effect on the final invention.
It may be that an
invention is made as part of a collaborative effort. In those circumstances, it
would ordinarily follow that
the collaborators are joint inventors of the
product of the collaboration. ...
To ascertain the inventor for the purposes of entitlement to the grant of the
patent it is therefore necessary to determine the contributions
to the invention
described in the patent application. The claims may assist in that
determination, bearing in mind that the claims
may be to less than the totality
of the invention. It may also be appropriate to investigate the contributions
to the inventive
steps giving rise to the
invention.”
Consideration
is complete agreement between the parties that the applicant, Mr Hopkins, is
entitled to be named as an inventor. The disagreement
arises over whether Mr
Allen should also be named as an inventor. In this regard, I believe that the
requestor has not discharged
the RS and the RRS have nothing to say about whether Mr Allen is an inventor,
the evidence from the requestor indicates that
Mr Allen thinks he is. In this
regard, I note that Mr Allen states:
“Tony and I developed a new combination blind and awning system that we
referred to as the ‘Auto Glide’. The desire
for an external window
awning that could also act as a full-length blind was initially suggested to
Tony by an Abra sales representative
in about March 2022. Tony took the
suggestion and started to develop a blind system that eventually became the Auto
Glide. I and
an Abra engineer were heavily involved in this
also states, with respect to provisional application 2023901615,
“I named myself as a coinventor because I provided input to the design
of the Auto Glide and additional input following the
resignation of Mr Hopkins,
prior to the filing of [provisional application
2023901615]”.
when it comes to identifying his contributions, Mr Allen’s evidence comes
up short. In his evidence Mr Allen provides:
“numerous emails between me, Tony Hopkins, Matt Doney and other Abra
personnel regarding the development of new components including
for the Auto
those emails, to my mind, do not establish any inventive contributions by Mr
Allen. If anything, the emails supplied by
Mr Allen show that Mr Hopkins was
the one undertaking further development, and actions by other employees of Abra
involved the creation
of drawings and prototypes in line with Mr Hopkins’
instructions.
that could possibly be
said to show any contribution by Mr Allen was one sent to Mr Hopkins where Mr
Allen says:
I have just made to [
] minor alterations that Harish is changing
the drawing to. One to the block to make it 25.5 by 25.5 SQ. And one to the
pin to allow
hex type or screw driver type. My thought is it would be easier to
rotate the pin with a screw driver rather than an allen key.
Your thoughts.
Hopkins replied to this email saying:
It looks great, I agree the screw driver option is a good addition to make
adjustment easier. This part for the motor end combined
with the original Nylon
part for the idler end will be perfect for the system.
Kind Regards
Tony Hopkins”
inventive concept that I have identified above is the general concept of a
window covering that operates to move to an awning
configuration to a blind
configuration and back. Changing the size of a block that already existed in
the invention and suggesting
different fasteners do not seem to alter the
general inventive contributions. Rather, they seem to be variations in a
design. For
example, the pins suggested by Mr Allen, while possibly allowing a
more convenient adjustment option (i.e. screwdriver instead of
Allen key) are no
more than an example from the general field of fasteners which could be used
secure the parts of the slider assembly
Kafataris v Davis
where Mr Kafataris was seeking to be named as an inventor because he had
suggested a casino game to which the applicant’s “secondary
wager” invention could be applied. The court noted:
“The work of Mr Kafataris, once he had examined the Provisional
Application, was to identify blackjack as being a further game
in which the
secondary wager concept could be applied, as he knew it was a game that already
offered side bets. The finding reached
by the primary judge was undoubtedly
correct that Mr Kafataris was ‘alerted to the concept or idea of a
supplementary or subsidiary
betting opportunity by Mr Thomas’ and then
considered the rules of blackjack to determine if ‘a similar opportunity
There can be no other conclusion as to how Mr Kafataris
approached his work. But his work itself then was described more in
quantitative
than qualitative terms and, as expressly found and not seriously
challenged, largely involved copying from publicly accessible material
provided to him by Mr Thomas.
At the root of the appellants’ failure was the finding that the
addition of a further card game ‘
did not bring about a change to the
invention, rather it merely provided another example
’. This finding
was undoubtedly correct. The work done by Mr Kafataris did not alter the nature
of the invention. There is
nothing novel about the game of blackjack, nor was
there anything novel about the secondary bet option for blackjack, which was an
obvious application of the inventive
In a similar way, there is nothing to suggest in this matter
that the changes suggested by Mr Allen were material to the invention.
they are mere examples of another embodiment of the invention.
parts of the evidence highlight the insufficiency of Mr Allen’s claim that
working on the invention generated an inventorship
claim. One is the fact that,
as noted at [41] above, while Mr Allen stated that he “and an Abra
engineer were heavily involved
in [the Auto Glide] project”, Mr Allen does
not seek to have the Abra engineer also named as an inventor. Another part of
the evidence is Mr Allen’s statement that the applicant “worked with
me and other Abra staff to further develop the range
of Widescreen blinds and
components” for earlier
As with the previous
piece of evidence, despite working with the applicant, Mr Allen never sought to
be named as an inventor in
the applications from arose from that work. Both of
these highlight the principle that working on an invention does not
automatically
lead to inventorship.
such, I cannot conclude that Mr Allen is an inventor with respect to the
provisional applications. Rather, Mr Hopkins is the sole
this may have some bearing on Mr Allen’s status as an inventor for
provisional application 2023901615, as well as WO2024/187228,
that is not within
the scope of this decision.
Contractual or fiduciary relationships
third step set out at [33] above is, in my opinion, the determinative factor in
this matter. Having determined that Mr Hopkins
is the sole inventor, the
question then becomes whether the requestor has the right to apply for, or hold,
a patent in relation to
the invention. At this point, all attention turns to an
alleged joint venture agreement (
) between Mr Hopkins, Mr Allen and Mr
Allen’s son, James, which gave the rights to the invention to the
requestor. Mr Allen
insists the JV existed and was in force, while Mr Hopkins
insists that the JV was never put in place.
Evidence on the joint venture
JV was provided by Mr Allen in his
The text of the JV is
as follows (the underlining is present in the original document, and the bolded
words below are in a larger
size font and in red text in the original
JV WITH TONY / SILENT SHADE
MOU for discussion
(1) A new company to be set up.
(2) 50% partnership owned between Tony Hopkins only or with wife or other of
Tony's choosing. 50% owned between Don and James Allen.
(3) Trading name to be Silent Shade
(4) All Patents to be held by the partnership company
(5) All money used to develop and finalise designs, patents and prototype to
be reimbursed to both partners when cash flow permits
Commitments from Don and James
(a) Help develop product to final acceptance
(b) Provide design and drawing assistance.
(c) Finance the development to final acceptance
(d) Facilitate all manufacturing of components and supply of extrusions
] Finance the purchase of all material, cost of promoting sales
(plus provide funds to support tony at a rate of $1,500 per week)
the company is in a position to repay any loans owing to all partners and has
cash flow to continue.
(f) Not to market other products outside the partnership that would detract
the market share of the partnership company. (Excepting
existing products
already on the market)
Commitments of Tony and other of his choosing
(a) Provide all existing and future product development of products to the JV
(b) Assist with all aspects of marketing.
(c) Not to market other products outside the partnership company that would
detract the market share of the partnership. (Excepting
existing products
already on the market)
Operation agreement
Abra will control manufacture and the purchasing of all components. Abra
will carry the purchasing accounts.
Abra will pay Silent Shade (40%) Percent of the GP upon payment of components
from customer.
When Silent Shade achieves a profit then this profit will be shared equally
between share holders at agreed intervals.
All accounts for the purchase of components and sales invoicing for Silent
Shade products to be available to Silent Shade upon request.
Funds to support Tony.
Until Silent shade generates enough profit to provide this support. These
funds will be taken from any initial profit made by Silent
Shade and Abra will
make available loans to support any short fall needed to make up the
document supplied by Mr Allen is composed of two sheets: one which is headed
“JV WITH TONY / SILENT SHADE” and the
other being headed
“Operation agreement”. At the bottom of the second page, there are
signatures from Mr Hopkins and
Mr Allen. The signatures are dated 4 July
Allen maintained that, given the existence of the JV, the inventions contained
in the provisional applications were developed on
the understanding that the
intellectual property would belong to the requestor. He states that other,
earlier provisional applications
filed by Mr Hopkins had been assigned to the
requestor in accordance with the JV, and subsequent complete and PCT
applications associated
with these earlier provisional applications were filed
in the name of the requestor. Mr Allen states:
“... it was always understood by Mr Hopkins that the Auto Glide patent
application was intended to be filed in the name of Silent
Shade Pty Ltd. This
was consistent with the Joint Venture agreement and consistent with the pattern
previously established for the
earlier ...
inventions”.
Hopkins did not dispute that his signature appears at the end of the JV.
However, he stated that the document supplied by Mr Allen
was composed of two
distinct documents and that his signature was applied only to the
“Operation agreement”. Mr Hopkins
pointed to the fact that the
“JV WITH TONY / SILENT SHADE” explicitly stated that it is a
“MOU for discussion”.
“This document outlines preliminary details meant to be deliberated
upon. Following these discussions, Mr Allen assured me
he would facilitate
drafting a formal contract encapsulating specifics for review. Mr Allen avoided
having these discussions. the
] discussions have never
Hopkins also stated:
“Mr Allen approached me to set up a company and produced a Memorandum
of Understanding (‘the MOU’) for discussion.
Mr Allen promised to
provide an actual contract for review based on our discussions. However, no
contract was ever produced as
opinion, there was no binding and enforceable agreement between himself and Mr
Hopkins indicated that:
“... the MOU is being intentionally confused by Mr Allen with the
signed Operation Agreement. The MOU was a preliminary document
for discussion,
not a binding contract. It outlined potential terms for future agreement and
was never intended to be final.
In contrast, the Operation Agreement signed on 4th July 2017 is the binding
document that governs our operational terms. These two
documents serve
different purposes and should not be conflated.
The separate Operation Agreement outlines margin distributions. The Mou is
not relevant.”
Is a joint venture in place?
a first point, I note that the references to paying, and profits of,
“Silent Shade” and sharing profits between “share
holders” in the signed “Operation agreement” suggest an
acceptance of the contents of MOU which mentions setting
up a partnership
company named Silent Shade with shareholders. As such, since the references to
Silent Shade and shareholders in
the “Operation agreement” do not
make much sense without the context of the other part of the document, it might
be said that the signatures apply to the whole document.
I also note that in evidence is an email exchange between Mr Hopkins and Mr
Allen in which Mr Allen states (presumably in
response to a (non-provided) query
from Mr Hopkins about the JV):
It looks like its my fault that the final agreement from the solicitors has
not been completed. I was waiting on final information
on your side to
Brendon’s questions below and forgot to follow up. If you can send nr
] the details I will send all off to the
solicitors for proper formatting.
sic – “anyway”
] below is what we have agreed on
in principal. There has been so much going on I actually thought you and I had
signed the final
agreement but we just agreed as per below and I did not follow
it through. Sorry mate I will have this done ASAP.
message is the text of the JV that I have set out at [52] above.
is then a response from Mr Hopkins some 6 years later saying:
This has slipped through the cracks; can we now get this
completed.”
suggests no formal document was drawn up for the signature of all
that is not an end of the matter. In Australian law, even if a joint venture
agreement is not formally signed, it can still
be legally binding if the parties
act as if the agreement is in force. This is based on the principle of implied
contracts, where
the conduct of the parties indicates their intention to be
bound by the terms of the agreement.
McBride v McBride
, Elkaim AJ stated:
“I accept that an offer can be inferred from the conduct of the
parties. The defendant referred me to
Hendricks v McGeoch
(2008) Aust
Torts Reports 81-942
[2008] NSWCA 53
‘A contract need not be made by formal offer and acceptance, or by an
overt course of negotiation. Entry into a contract can
be found in the conduct
of the parties, in what they said and did towards each other. In
Computer Services Pty Ltd v Digital Equipment Corp (Aust) Pty Ltd
BPR 97326 McHugh JA, with whom Hope and Mahoney JJA agreed, said at 11,117 -
“It is often difficult to fit a commercial arrangement into the common
lawyers’ analysis of a contractual arrangement.
Commercial discussions
are often too unrefined to fit easily into the slots of ‘offer’,
‘acceptance’, ‘consideration’
and ‘intention to
create a legal relationship’ which are the benchmarks of the contract of
classical theory. In classical
theory, the typical contract is a bilateral one
and consists of an exchange of promises by means of an offer and its acceptance
with an intention to create a binding legal relationship. cf Atiyah,
Contracts, Promises and the Law of Obligations
Quarterly Review at 194. A bilateral contract of this type exists independently
of and indeed precedes what the parties
do. Consequently, it is an error
‘to suppose that merely because something has been done then there is
therefore some contract
in existence which has thereby been executed’:
Contract, Reliance and Business Transactions
Journal of Business Law at 127. Nevertheless, a contract may be inferred from
the acts and conduct of parties as well
as or in the absence of their words:
Empirnall Holdings Pty Ltd v Machon Paull Partners Pty Ltd
Appeal) (11/11/88). The question in this class of case is whether the conduct
of the parties viewed in the light of the
surrounding circumstances shows a
tacit understanding or
agreement.”’”
(italics in original)
That is, a contract could be taken to be in
existence by actions which demonstrate an intention of both parties to be bound.
regard, I believe there is ample evidence to show that Mr Hopkins acted
as if the JV was in place.
to the evidence, there is firstly the
that the requestor exists.
It was registered as a company with Mr Allen, his son and Mr Hopkins named as
directors. Each person
was also a shareholder by virtue of the fact that the
Allen’s shares belong to a company which is stated by Mr Allen to be
“trustee for two separate family trusts owned by James and I,
respectively”,
Hopkins’ shares belong to Jeti Enterprises Pty Ltd of which he is the sole
director. Mr Hopkins had 50% of the shares
and the remaining 50% was shared
between the Allens. This is consistent with the JV requirement that “A
new company to be
set up”, “50% partnership owned between Tony
Hopkins only or with wife or other of Tony's choosing. 50% owned between
James Allen”, and “Trading name to be Silent
there is the evidence
assignment of Mr Hopkins’ earlier provisionals to the requestor and
subsequent filings of compete and PCT applications
in the name of the requestor.
This is consistent with the JV requirement that “All Patents to be held by
the partnership company”.
accept that it could be said that these inventions are not the Auto Glide of the
provisional applications and, as such, these actions
by Mr Hopkins are not
determinative. So, I will proceed to investigate Mr Hopkins’ conduct upon
conceiving of the Auto Glide
first thing I notice is that, upon having hit upon the idea that underlies the
Auto Glide, Mr Hopkins sent a video to Mr Allen,
his son and others attaching a
video. The email stated:
“Hi all, please see this video of the second prototype of the new
Widescreen AutoGlide. For those who aren’t familiar
with external blind
This video cannot be
shown to anyone outside this group to ensure we dont compromise the Patent
. It will be an easy addition to our current manufacturing. I think
its a game game [
] changer. An awning and a blind in one
(bolded part was
in red text in the email)
is a couple of things to note here. Firstly, the email talks of the
prototype of the Auto Glide, and does not explain what the Auto
Glide is. This suggests that (i) all parties were aware of what
the Auto Glide
invention was and (ii) they had either seen a first prototype, or had been told
of a first prototype. Secondly, there
is a clear intention to apply for a
patent. Mr Hopkins states that the email was “straightforward and
reflects the standard
caution necessary for new
inventions.”
“... my invention allows it to be used in conjunction with many generic
parts available to all blind manufacturers in Australia.
This aligns with my
plan to wholesale my products through my business, Lusso/Silent Shade, and to
sell components to all manufacturers
through a distributor, as I have
consistently done with other products through Andrew's company, Scottfree
Australia before and during
my tenure as a director of Silent Shade PTY LTD and
my brief employment at ABRA.
I believed that adding my invention components to the Panther Global
manufacturing of the Widescreen range would be beneficial, as
it would be for
any manufacturer capable of assembling an external roller blind. But also
provide an additional paying customer
to generate margin share for myself.
It is important to note that my invention does not rely on any of my existing
inventions or designs to function; it is a standalone
product with zero reliance
on any Widescreen component.
Mr Allen’s inclusion of the video in his declaration inadvertently
reveal that he was not involved in the invention process.
This video was the
first time Mr Allen had ever seen this invention, contradicting his claim of
being an inventor of the product
as mentioned above.
Mr Allen’s decision to shift from selling Widescreen components to
selling finished products manufactured by Panther Global
and resold through ABRA
underscores that my invention would not be confined to his business
Hopkins further stated:
“My reference to the Auto Glide as being an easy addition to
‘our’ current manufacturing was made in the context
of considering
potential manufacturing and distribution strategies. I believed that
integrating my invention into the Panther Global
manufacturing of the Widescreen
range would be beneficial, just as it would be for any manufacturer as above
mentioned. Mr Allen
is again confused as to the roles each entity has, Silent
Shade PTY LTD is not and has never been a
manufacturer.”
inference I am being invited by Mr Hopkins to draw is that, while he showed the
invention, it was not with the intent that the
invention should belong to the
requestor. But the question then arises as to whom the invention was to belong.
this regard, I note a series of emails to Mr Ray Tettman of Griffith Hack from
Mr Allen and Mr Hopkins beginning in January
. The series begins with an
email that states
“Also we have a new product that we are developing for our Blind range.
I have attached a video of a prototype showing the function.
The novel function
is this is the only blind that go from conventional blind to a complete cover of
floor to ceiling window and
completely contract back into the head box. We
would like to discuss the advantages and the patent potential
This email was from Mr Allen and was CC’d to Mr
Hopkins and, in my opinion, pertains to the Auto Glide.
response from Griffith Hack to both Mr Hopkins and Mr Allen
It was good to catch up with you last Thursday and learn more about your new
combination awning/roller blind idea. As discussed,
it is certainly the type of
thing that should be patentable, assuming it is new. We discussed the
desirability of conducting at
least some form of patent search to assess whether
the idea is new and would be considered inventive. ...
You mentioned that you would send more detailed information so that I can
initiate the search. I look forward to receiving that from
you when you get a
If you have any questions please let me know. I look forward to receiving
the more detailed information from you so that I can instruct
Hopkins responded saying:
“Thanks Ray,
I found these, our function is different however these are similar. They use
a mid bar to initiate the projection and a gas strut
to tension the
Our projection function is at the top and then closer at the bottom,
basically up side down. I think it might be hard to patent my
<various URLs are then listed>
Hack responded to Mr Allen and Mr Hopkins stating:
Good to see you've been doing your homework!
Yes, the concept of a combination roller blind and awning is clearly present
in these products but these are indeed upside down compared
to yours. I would
have thought that your arrangement has definite advantages over these products,
both in its function and simplicity.
The product shown in the first video seems
to use a gas strut but I can't see the strut in the 2nd and 3rd videos, and I
whether these products are spring tensioned arms like yours?
In any event, I would have thought having the awning deploy at the top of the
window, rather than halfway down after half the window
is already covered by a
vertical blind, would be preferable at least from the point of view of creating
shade over the window while
retaining views and light?
If we proceed with a patent application we would want to focus on your
sliding carriage, its relationship with the spring-loaded arm,
interplay/balance between these two components.
If you haven't found anything closer then it would seem that we should still
be able to obtain patent protection for your product.”
Hopkins responded to all recipients of the email saying:
Fortunately it didn’t take long to find these, it is promising I
haven’t been able to find anything with the function
of my idea.
Yes, I think they may have spring arms similar to ours.
I am glad you think we may still be able to obtain protection, when I saw the
videos I thought it was over.”
emails followed setting up a novelty search being done by Griffith Hack. Mr
Hopkins replied:
I have spoken with Don this morning, and can confirm it is ok to proceed with
a basic patent novelty search. Please let me know if
there is anything further
I can do to help.
Do you have a standard non-disclosure document I can use so I can show
selected people the product prior to application lodgement?”
Hopkins also sent another email, apparently with drawings attached,
Please see attached drawings of the invention, Please let me know if these
email thread from March 2023
(after Mr Hopkins filed the ’674 application) begins with Mr Hopkins
sending text (possibly for a website) that seems to announce
a blind that would
be displayed at an upcoming exhibition. In an email to Ray Tettman of Griffth
Hack Mr Hopkins states:
the text relating to the new blind system. I need to get
this out today, Don asked me to run this text past you prior to sending.
document is unfinished, but the text is complete”
The text sent by
Mr Hopkins includes statements such as:
“Widescreen is excited to announce the release of its newest product,
the Auto Glide, the world’s first motorised ‘automatic’
[awning with]
all the features of the traditional auto blind. This
innovative product is set to revolutionise Australian architecture and provide
customers with more applications than any other external products in the
“Widescreen is confident that the Auto Glide will be well-received by
the industry and is excited to introduce this ground-breaking
product to the
With its unique features, and innovative technology, the Auto Glide is set to
change the way customers think about external window
furnishings”
Hack responded (with a CC to Mr Allen) stating (inter alia):
“Thanks for your email, and good speaking just now. I confirm that the
proposed text is mostly good to go. It does not disclose
anything which I
consider would be confidential and should not be disclosed prior to the filing
of the provisional patent application.
However, in the second paragraph I would suggest replacing ‘Its
patented technology...’ with ‘Its patent pending
technology...’. It is now
good thing that you filed the
earlier provisional patent application because you can indeed assert that it the
product is ‘patent
pending’. However, the patent application has
not proceeded to grant so it is not yet ‘patented’. Stating that
is ‘patented’ would be an offence under the Australian
Patents Act
and could also be considered misleading within the meaning of the Australian
Consumer Law (equivalent to the old Trade Practices
It would appear that the “Discover More” link goes to your web
site but I presume there is no further information about
the new AutoGlide
system on the website. I have had a brief look and can’t see any, and I
suggest you keep it that way until
after the new provisional patent application
has been filed.
Also, as discussed, can you please send me a copy of the filing receipt for
the provisional patent application that you filed. That
will give us the number
and also the filing date from which we will need to calculate future deadlines
for this patent application.”
Mr Hopkins subsequently sent the
filing details for the ‘674 application (the ‘115 application had
not been filed at the
date of the email).
is then an email
from Mr Allen
to Mr Hopkins in April 2023 (after Mr Hopkins’ interaction with Griffith
Hack) where Mr Allen makes requests
of Mr Hopkins. He states:
I’m sending the below information to ray to help strengthen the patent
application. If you have any thing I have missed let
me know and I will add
Patent for Silent Shade
Please see the four stages that the patent for Silent Shade needs to cover.
(drawing No A003-BP-3044)
Stage 1 shows the blind in totally up position.
Stage 2 shows the blind in conventional 45 degree position.
Stage 3 shows the blind in the 90 degree position covering the complete
window. This is one of the patent features as no other blind
has the capability
Stage 4 shows the blind completely slid down position. This allows the blind
to completely cover floor to ceiling cover. This is
the main feature for the
Because this system is also motorised it will allow the blind to be fixed on
external windows above ground level. At present no other
blind of this type can
be above ground as all are operated with a rod to move the blinds up and
The way this works is using a spring arm, weighted bottom rail and motor.
When the blind is in the up position the motor is released and the blind is
unrolled by the force of the spring until it reaches the
first position. To
bring the blind down to the second position the motor is set to unroll the blind
to stop in the third position.
This uses the spring and weighted bottom rail to
achieve this position. The forth [
] position relies on the weighted
bottom rail to drop the blind as the motor unrolls the blind.
When the blind is in the third position the force of the spring is negated so
the weighted bottom only drops the blind from position
3 to position 4.
We are still working on the spring component drawings and will send them on
as soon as they are completed.
The bolded words are in red in the email, and
“Patent for Silent Shade” is in larger font.
Allen followed this email with one to Griffith Hack:
There are still some minor issues with the blind and making it work smoothly.
When the blind is rolling up and the slide carriage
hits the top stop it tends
to drop down slightly. While the blinds rolls up and takes up this slack it is
not aesthetic. We
working on a form of retention using a spring or
a magnet to hold the carriage up until the blind is completely up.
Tony is there any other things that we should add to the patent application
you filed.”
Hopkins replied:
I am working on some ideas to help with the carriage creep. Nothing to add
also note further emails
early 2023 where the drawings that Mr Allen is referring to in the email above
are created. In an email to Mr Alakkandy, Mr
Hopkins stated:
“Thanks Harish,
I need the additional views to show the Patent attorneys the function of each
The drawings look good.
Kind Regards
Tony Hopkins”
having received drawings, Mr Hopkins said:
“Thanks Harish,
Could you please give me these views plus a fully up version all un-rendered,
and also side view detail in the following positions.
A view with the Base bar fully up
A view with the Base bar at 90 degrees
A view with the bearing cradle half way down the travel rod
A view with the Base bar fully down.
Kind Regards
Tony Hopkins”
Hopkins maintains that he had not decided whether to file the application in his
own name. He stated in his evidence:
“While it is true that I provided information to Griffith Hack
regarding the invention, it is important to clarify that at no
point did I
indicate under what name the application would be filed. I had not made a
decision regarding this matter. I had invented
the Auto Glide in my own time at
my own property at my own
my mind, Mr Hopkins was the sole inventor of the Auto Glide invention; but Mr
Hopkins’ subsequent actions are not consistent
with him thinking the
invention should only be in his name. It seems clear from the emails that Mr
Hopkins involved Mr Allen and
others very soon after he conceived of the Auto
Glide invention. It is also clear from these emails that Mr Hopkins was fully
of the intention to file a patent application and found, and provided,
information when requested of him to ensure Griffith Hack
had enough information
to draft a specification. It is evident that Mr Hopkins was fully aware of the
intention to file the application
in the name of the requestor. The email from
Mr Allen to him with the unambiguous indication of “Patent for Silent
makes this very plain.
is also the explanation given by Mr Hopkins as to why he filed the ‘674
application in his name. Mr Allen’s evidence
“In or about 13 March 2023, Tony alerted me to an
‘incident’. He explained that a competitor visited his house
saw the prototype of the Auto Glide blind system installed. Tony said he wasn't
there at the time, and that his son met them,
but didn't show them anything.
Tony said he was concerned about possible disclosure. He panicked and quickly
put in a patent application
at IP Australia. Tony led me to believe that he
filed the application on behalf of Silent Shade, but it later turned out that he
had not. It was always understood that all patents were to be in the name of
Silent Shade. Tony's actions were inconsistent with
understanding.”
Hopkins responded stating:
“It is true that I was concerned a competitor might have viewed my
prototype. As a result, I registered my provisional patent
as soon as possible,
on March 13, 2023.
From the time of my application registration, Mr Allen was fully aware that
the application was in my name. I made no secret of
this does not explain his lack of protest when informed by Mr Allen that the
Auto Glide invention was to be a “Patent for
Silent Shade”, or his
continued work in providing information for Griffith Hack. To my mind, the
actions of Mr Hopkins in
performing all of these tasks, as well as including Mr
Allen in emails to Griffith Hack, reinforce the existence of an implied
While Mr Hopkins may have held an opinion that the inventions should
be in his name only, on balance, this would seem to be an incorrect
understanding of the situation.
is also the near-identicality of the specification for the ‘674 and
‘115 applications and an invention disclosure
questionnaire that Griffith
Hack had asked Mr Hopkins to complete to assist in the preparation of a
provisional application.
Hopkins stated that:
“Ray from Griffith Hack provided the questionnaire to help me describe
my invention in detail. It is important to note that
this document is not an
official document but merely a questionnaire intended to help prepare notes for
my patent application process.
Mr Allen initially sent me a copy of this questionnaire with himself
prefilled as an inventor. When I questioned him about this by
Oh, I thought that document meant something else, yes that's a
It was events and communication such as this that made me realize Mr Allen
had intention to steal my invention and other IP. As mentioned
above in this
disclosure.”
(italics in
Allen stated that Mr Hopkins returned the questionnaire to him. If the
questionnaire was for Mr Hopkins’ patent application
process, receiving
the questionnaire from Mr Allen and returning it to Mr Allen is a curious route
to take if Mr Allen was not to
be involved in the provisional application at
such, on balance, whatever motives Mr Hopkins might be ascribing to Mr Allen as
to recorded inventorship, and which may simply
have arisen because of a
misunderstanding by Mr Allen of what inventorship means, the actions of Mr
Hopkins are of a person who was
acting on the basis that any patent for an
invention was to be held by the requestor. The work by the personnel at Abra
Mr Hopkins) and the lack of any protest by Mr Hopkins are all
consistent with the requirement that are set out in the JV. These
demonstrate a tacit agreement by the parties to be bound.
Consequently,
I conclude that there was an implied contract in existence and Mr Hopkins was
bound by it. While Mr Hopkins submitted
“Silent Shade's Purpose Limited to Widescreen: Even Mr Allen's own
declarations (Allen 2 at [27], [34], and [35]) confirm that
Silent Shade Pty Ltd
was established solely to commercialise the Widescreen product. There is no
evidence that the company was ever
intended to own or control my broader
inventive work”,
seems to clear to me that, upon conceiving of the invention in the provisional
applications, he proceeded to act on the basis of
an understanding that Mr Allen
would, in accordance with the words of the “JV WITH TONY / SILENT
SHADE” part of the document,
perform his commitment to provide design and
drawing assistance, finance development, facilitate manufacturing of components,
materials, pay for promotion, and so on. It also is clear to me that
Mr Hopkins disclosed the invention in a manner that was not
inconsistent with
the obligation in the JV document that he “[p]rovide all existing and
future product development of products
to the JV Company”.
also observe that nothing in the JV limited it to Widescreen products. However,
even if it is accepted that the JV was limited
to Widescreen products, I note
that Mr Hopkins associated the Auto Glide with Widescreen. In this regard I
note the following:
(a) Mr Hopkins’ email sending the video of the invention to Mr Allen, his
son and others (see [66] above) refers to it as “the
new Widescreen
(b) the draft text to Griffth Hack announcing a blind that would be displayed at
an upcoming exhibition (see [77] above) says that
“Widescreen is excited
to announce the release of its newest product, the Auto Glide” and that
“Widescreen is confident
that the Auto Glide will be well-received”.
balance, I conclude that Mr Hopkins saw the Auto Glide as a Widescreen product.
Consequently, regardless of whether I follow the
requestor’s narrative or
Mr Hopkins’ narrative, the JV applied to the Auto Glide invention. As
such, the conditions
of the implied contract make it clear that Mr Hopkins was
required to “[p]rovide all existing and future product development
products to the JV Company”.
Fiducial duty
concluded the existence of a contract, the next question is to what duty was
owed by Mr Hopkins.
requestor was created in accordance with the implied contract, for the purpose
of holding patents for the invention. Mr Hopkins
is a director of the
requestor. As a director of the requestor, Mr Hopkins had a duty of care and
was required to act in the best
interests of the
a counter to this, it may be said that the joint venture was a single-issue
venture that did not apply to the invention for this
matter, which might be said
to be a different “issue”. It that were the case, then it could be
said that the applicant
owed no duty of care as the invention was a matter
unrelated to the company. However, the evidence makes it clear
(i) the single issue was Widescreen products (see, for example, Mr
Hopkins’ evidence at [93] above); and
(ii) the Auto Glide was a Widescreen product (see [94]–[95] above.
such, the invention was not unrelated to the company and a duty of care was
owed. Given that duty, it would be strange for a company
to be set up to hold
an invention just for a director to try to ensure that this did not happen, by
ensuring that the invention remained
with themselves. Such actions would
prioritise their own personal interests over the company’s interests and
would not be
the company’s best interest.
my opinion, these circumstances are such that I find that Mr Hopkins owed a duty
to the requestor and was required to assign his
invention to the
have found that there was an implied contract in existence and that Mr Hopkins
was bound by it. That contract required Mr Hopkins
to assign to the requestor
any rights in invention(s) that were relevant to the business of the parties. I
have also found that
the requestor was established to hold the patents for any
inventions developed. Mr Hopkins, as a director of the requestor, had
act in the best interests of the company, which interests were the holding of
relevant patents. This duty required Mr
Hopkins to assign his invention to the
requestor. Mr Hopkins would breach this duty if he claimed that the invention
should belong
to him. I am satisfied that the requestor is the eligible person
with respect to the provisional applications.
Consequently,
I will declare that the requestor, Silent Shade Pty Ltd, is the eligible person
in relation to provisional applications
2023900674 and 2023901115.
Commissioner has the power under s210 of the
to award costs in
proceeding before him. Costs are generally awarded in accordance with those
elements of parts 1 and 2 of Schedule
Regulations
applicable.
party made submissions as to costs. The normal approach is that costs should
follow the event. I see no sufficient reason
to depart from this approach. The
requestor has been successful. Therefore, I award costs in accordance with
Schedule 8 against
the applicant, Tony Hopkins.
Greg Powell
Delegate of the Commissioner of Patents
[2017] APO 8
[2015] APO 16
[2009] FCAFC
[2008] FCAFC 9
[2005] FCA 1474
[2006] FCAFC
Ibid, exhibit EDA-12
[2016] FCAFC 134
Ibid, exhibit
exhibit TH-10
Ibid, exhibit
[2024] NSWSC 45
Allen1, exhibt
Allen2, exhibits
EDA-15, EDA-16, EDA-17
Allen1, exhibit EDA-6
Hopkins at [138]
[139]-[143]
Allen2, exhibit
Ibid, exhibit
Ibid, exhibit
Ibid, exhibit
[167]-[168]
[162]-[163]
See, for example,
Corporations Act 2001
RTF format (8.91 MB)
Signed PDF/A format