1315639 [2015] MRTA 771 (10 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 771
(10 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
REVIEW APPLICANT:
Mrs Thi Hoang Huynh
VISA APPLICANT:
Miss Thuy Dung Dang
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE(S):
OSF2013/026965
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Hugh Sanderson
PLACE OF DECISION:
The tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the visa
applicant an Other Family (Migrant) (Class BO) visa.
Statement made on 10 June 2015 at 2:59pm
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
This is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the
Minister for Immigration on 26 September 2013 to refuse
to grant the visa
applicant an Other Family (Migrant) (Class BO) visa under
Migration Act 1958
The visa applicant applied for the visa on 28 February 2013. At that time,
Class BO contained three subclasses, Subclass 114 (Aged
Dependent Relative);
Subclass 115 (Remaining Relative) and Subclass 116 (Carer): item 1123A of
Schedule 1 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). In the present
case, the visa applicant is seeking to satisfy the criteria for the grant of a
Subclass 115 visa
which requires the primary visa applicant to be the remaining
relative of an Australian relative. The criteria for a Subclass 115
visa are set
of Schedule 2 to the Regulations.
The delegate refused to grant the visa on the basis that cl.115.221 was not met
because the delegate was not satisfied that the
visa applicant met the
definition of a remaining relative. Specifically, the delegate found that the
visa applicant’s father
and three half-sisters continue to live in
The visa applicant is a citizen of Vietnam and is currently 29 years old. She
is single and has never previously been married. Her
mother is the review
applicant and lives in Australia after being granted a Contributory Parent visa.
She has a sister who is also
resident in Australia after being granted a Partner
visa. With respect to her father, in her application the applicant stated that
he was not an Australian resident and she was not sure of his country of current
In her curriculum vitae dated 16 January, 2013 which she provided to the
department it was stated that her father was in the Go
Vap District of Ho Chi
The visa applicant was interviewed by the department on 17 June, 2013. She
provided the following information:
Her parents
divorced when she was about one and a half years old;
Her father is
currently living in the Go Vap District of Ho Chi Minh City:
The applicant
saw her father about a month previously when they went out for coffee;
applicant’s father was working with a petroleum company;
applicant’s father has re-married and has three daughters aged (at that
time) between 18 years and 14 years old;
The applicant
has met her eldest half-sister; and
applicant’s father does not provide her any financial
The delegate who considered the application noted that to meet the definition
of a remaining relative the applicant was required
to have no near relatives
other than near relatives who are usually resident in Australia. As near
relatives included the applicant’s
father and any half siblings and those
relatives live in Vietnam she did not meet the definition of a remaining
relative in reg.1.15.
Accordingly, the applicant failed to meet the criteria for
the grant of the visa in cl.115.211 and the application was refused.
The visa applicant and the review applicant were invited to appear before the
tribunal on 9 June, 2015 to provide further information
in support of the
application. The review applicant failed to attend the tribunal on that day. No
further information was provided
by the review applicant to the tribunal in
support of the application.
The tribunal has proceeded to a decision in the matter based on the information
provided to the department and set out in the department’s
decision, a
copy of which the review applicant provided to the tribunal.
The review applicant was represented in relation to the review by her
registered migration agent.
For the following reasons, the tribunal has concluded that the decision under
review should be affirmed.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
The visa application was made on the basis that the visa applicant is the
remaining relative of Thi Hoang Huynh, who the visa applicant
claims is their
Australian relative. For the purposes of this application, ‘Australian
relative’ means a ‘relative’
of the applicant who is an
Australian citizen, an Australian permanent resident or an eligible New Zealand
citizen: r.1.03. ‘Relative’
is also defined in r.1.03 and means a
‘close relative’ as defined, or a grandparent, grandchild aunt,
uncle or niece
or nephew (or their step equivalents).
In this case the sponsor is the visa applicant’s mother and has the right
to reside permanently in Australia and therefore
is an Australian relative for
these purposes.
Is the visa applicant a remaining relative of an Australian relative?
To be granted a Subclass 115 visa the visa applicant must be a ‘remaining
relative’ of an ‘Australian relative’
at time of application,
and continue to be a ‘remaining relative’ at time of decision:
cl.115.211 and cl.115.221. ‘Remaining
relative’ is defined in r.1.15
of the Regulations, which is set out in the attachment to this
No near relatives: r.1.15(1)(c)
The primary issue in this application is whether the visa applicant has any
other near relatives who do not reside in Australia.
Regulation 1.15(1)(c)
requires that the visa applicant have no ‘near relatives’ except
those that are usually resident in Australia and are
Australian citizens,
permanent residents or eligible New Zealand citizens.
‘Near relative’ for these purposes is defined in r.1.15(2) of the
Regulations and means a person who is a parent, brother,
sister, step parent
(for visa applications made prior to 1 July 2009), step-brother or step-sister
of the applicant or of their spouse
or where relevant, de facto partner. It also
includes a child, or step-child, of the applicant or their spouse or de facto
who either: has turned 18 and is not a ‘dependent child’; or
has not turned 18 and is not wholly or substantially in
the daily care and
control of the applicant or their spouse or partner.
The evidence provided to the department and contained in the department’s
decision provided to the tribunal by the review
applicant is that the visa
applicant’s parents separated when she was young. The visa
applicant’s father remains living
in Vietnam. He has remarried and has
three children of that relationship who are the half siblings of the visa
applicant. It was
indicated by the visa applicant that she had last seen her
father about a month before being interviewed by the department on 17
The evidence before the tribunal is that the visa applicant has four relatives,
being her father and three half siblings, who continue
to live in Vietnam and
therefore are not usually resident in Australia. Although it has been indicated
that the visa applicant is
not emotionally close to her father or half siblings
and her father has not provided her with any financial support, this issue is
not relevant. The simple fact that she has these relatives who do not reside in
Australia and who are not Australian citizens, permanent
residents of Australia
or eligible New Zealand citizens means that she does not meet the definition of
a remaining relative in r.1.15(1)(c).
For these reasons, the tribunal is not satisfied there are no near relatives
other than those permitted by the regulations and therefore
r.1.15(1)(c) is not
met. As the applicant does not meet this criterion, it is not necessary to
consider the other criteria in the
definition of a remaining relative.
For the reasons set out above, the tribunal is not satisfied that the visa
applicant is the remaining relative of an Australian
Relative at the time of
application and at the time of decision for the purposes of cl.115.211 and
cl.115.221.
For the reasons above, the visa applicant does not meet the criteria for a
Subclass 115 visa. In respect of the other visa subclasses
there is no material
which would permit a finding that the visa applicant meets prescribed criteria
for the visa sought.
The tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the visa applicant an Other
Family (Migrant) (Class BO) visa.
Hugh Sanderson
ATTACHMENT - Extracts from the
Migration Regulations 1994
1.15 Remaining relative
(1) An applicant for a visa is a
remaining relative
person who is an Australian citizen, an Australian permanent resident or an
eligible New Zealand citizen if the applicant
satisfies the Minister that:
(a) the other person is a parent, brother, sister, step-brother or
step-sister of the applicant; and
(b) the other person is usually resident in Australia; and
(c) the applicant, and the applicant’s spouse or de facto partner (if
any), have no near relatives other than near relatives
(i) usually resident in Australia; and
(ii) Australian citizens, Australian permanent residents or eligible New
Zealand citizens; and
(d) if the applicant is a child who:
(i) has not turned 18; and
(ii) has been adopted by an Australian citizen, an Australian permanent
resident or an eligible New Zealand citizen (the
adoptive parent
while overseas:
at the time of making the application, the adoptive parent has been residing
overseas for a period of at least 12 months.
(2) In this regulation:
near relative
, in relation to an applicant, means a person who
(a) a parent, brother, sister, step-brother or step-sister of the applicant
or of the applicant’s spouse or de facto partner
(if any); or
(b) a child (including a step-child) of the applicant or of the
applicant’s spouse or de facto partner (if any), being a child
(i) has turned 18 and is not a dependent child of the applicant or of the
applicant’s spouse or de facto partner (if any); or
(ii) has not turned 18 and is not wholly or substantially in the daily care
and control of the applicant or of the applicant’s
spouse or de facto
partner (if any).
RTF format (132 KB)
Signed PDF/A format