URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1969/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:56
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Blue Metal Industries Ltd v Dilley [1969] UKPCHCA 2; (1969) 117 CLR 651 (5 June 1969)
PRIVY COUNCIL
BLUE METAL INDUSTRIES LTD. v. DILLEY
(1969) 117 CLR 651
Privy Council
Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest(1), Lord Pearce(1), Lord Wilberforce(1),
Lord Pearson(1) and Lord Diplock(1)
Companies - Take-over offers - Power to acquire shares of dissenting
shareholders - Statutory provisions for making of offer and
acquisition of
dissenting shareholder shares - Not applicable to offer made by two companies
jointly - Companies Act, 1961-1964 (N.S.W.),
ss. 184, 185.
1969, January 20-23, 27, 28; May 5. 5:6:1969
APPEALS from the High Court of Australia.
LORD MORRIS of BORTH-Y-GEST delivered the judgment of their Lordships as
This is an appeal by special leave from a joint judgment of the High Court
of Australia (Barwick C.J., McTiernan and Taylor JJ.)
delivered on 17th
October 1967 (sub nom. Colonial Sugar Refining Co. Ltd. v. Dilley)
[1967] HCA 34
dismissing,
with costs, two
appeals and three applications for special
leave to appeal from a judgment and order of the Supreme Court
Wales in Equity
(McLelland C.J. in Eq.) dated 27th April 1967 (sub nom. Re
Ready Mixed Concrete Ltd. and The Companies
(1967) 85 WN (Pt 1) (NSW)
. (at p652)
2. The proceedings arose out of a take-over offer made by the appellant
companies, Blue Metal Industries Limited (B.M.I.) and The
Colonial Sugar
Refining Company Limited (C.S.R.) on 16th July 1964. That was a joint offer
made to the holders of the issued stock
units of Ready Mixed Concrete Limited
(R.M.C.). The offer, which was stated to be made pursuant to the provisions of
s. 184 of the
Companies Act, 1961 of the State of New South Wales was to
acquire the whole of such issued stock units. The terms of the offer were
for each 100 stock units in the capital of R.M.C. there would be (a) an
allotment of twenty-eight ordinary shares (of 5s. each
fully paid) in the
capital of B.M.I., and (b) an allotment of eight shares (of 1 pound each fully
paid) in the capital of C.S.R.
and (c) the sum of 13 pounds 2s. in cash. There
was provision to deal with cases where the number of stock units held in
not exactly divisible by 100. The offer was accepted by the holders
of more than nine-tenths in nominal value of the stock units
respondent Mr. Dilley, who was the holder of 17,142 stock units, was one of
those who did not accept the offer. (at p652)
3. By a letter dated 15th January 1965 Mr. Dilley was informed that his name
had been removed by R.M.C. from its register of members:
his former holding of
17,142 stock units had been transferred to B.M.I. and C.S.R. jointly. He was
told that that had been done in
accordance with the provisions of s. 185 (5)
of the Companies Act. On 6th April 1965 Mr. Dilley made an application to the
(pursuant to the provisions of s. 155 of the Companies Act, 1961) for
rectification of the register on the ground that his name had
sufficient cause been omitted from it. He sought an order that his name should
be restored on the register as the holder
of the 17,142 stock units. The claim
for relief was based upon the following grounds:
" (a) That s. 185 of the Companies Act only applies to a scheme
or contract involving the transfer of shares in a company
to one transferee company.
(b) That before a scheme or contract involving the transfer
of shares in a company to another company or corporation
can be subject to the operation of s. 185, that scheme
or contract must arise out of a take-over scheme or
take-over offer to which s. 184 applies, and that s. 184
only applies to take-over schemes or take-over offers
where there is a single offeror corporation and not two
or more offeror corporations.
(c) That if, contrary to the above submissions, ss. 184 and
185 do apply to take-over offers or schemes made by a
number of offeror corporations, the take-over offer made
by the appellants B.M.I. and C.S.R. infringed the
of s. 184 (2) of the said Act and of Pt A of the
Tenth Schedule to that Act, and was illegal, and that
s. 185 does not apply to any scheme or contract based
upon such an illegal offer."
companies filed a summons asking for relief under s. 366 of the Companies Act,
1961 in the event of its being held that the take-over
offer infringed the
provisions of s. 184. (at p653)
4. The Chief Judge in Equity held that the provisions of s. 185 only apply to
a scheme or contract involving the transfer of shares
in a single company to a
single transferee company or corporation and did not apply to a scheme or
contract involving the transfer
of shares in a company to two or more
transferee companies or corporations. He considered that s. 184 also
contemplated singularity,
and that the legislature did not intend that an
"offeror corporation" would or could for the purposes of s. 184 consist of
one corporation. Having come to the conclusion that s. 185 does not
apply to a scheme or contract involving the transfer of shares
in a company to
two other companies jointly he found it unnecessary to consider whether the
take-over was an illegal offer by reason
of the terms of s. 184 or what
results would flow from such illegality. In regard to the summonses of the
companies he said:
"A good deal of argument took place before me as to the
meaning and application of s. 366 of the Act, but it seems to
me quite clear that if s. 185 has no application to a scheme
or contract involving an offer by two or more companies
jointly then the purported implementation of such a scheme
or contract cannot be 'a proceeding under this Act' within
the meaning of s. 366 and that no remedy is available under
this section"
(1967) 85 WN (Pt 1) (NSW), at p 429
Accordingly he made an order restoring Mr. Dilley's name to the register of
members of R.M.C. and he dismissed the summonses of the
companies. Appeals
were taken to the High Court of Australia. Before that Court there was an
appeal by C.S.R. against Mr. Dilley
to which B.M.I. and R.M.C. were also
parties and an appeal by B.M.I. and R.M.C. against Mr. Dilley to which C.S.R.
was also a party:
also there were three applications for special leave to
appeal (one instituted by each company) to each of which applications Mr.
Dilley was a party. The High Court agreed with the conclusions of the Chief
Judge in Equity and for the reasons set out in their
judgment the appeals and
the motions for special leave were dismissed with costs. (at p654)
5. Upon petitions for special leave to appeal to Her Majesty in Council and
pursuant to special leave to appeal granted it was ordered
that the five
respective appeals should be consolidated and heard together and that there
should be one case on each side such cases
to be related only to the two
appeals above referred to, no case being lodged in respect of the other three
appeals. (at p654)
6. The terms of the take-over offer are amply referred to and described in
the very careful judgment of the Chief Judge in Equity.
So also are the
various communications and events which preceded and lead to the application
made by Mr. Dilley. Their Lordships
do not find it necessary to repeat or to
summarize the clear narrative that the judgment contains. The opening words of
offer which was made to the holders of stock units in the capital of
R.M.C. are not without interest. This is particularly so in
view of the fact
that incorporated in the offer is a statement that -
"There is an agreement or arrangement whereby stock
units acquired jointly by Blue Metal Industries Limited and
The Colonial Sugar Refining Company Limited in pursuance
of the scheme will be transferred to other persons."
The statement goes on to state that the "other persons" were B.M.I. and C.S.R.
themselves. The agreement was that one half of the
units acquired jointly
would be transferred to B.M.I. and one half to C.S.R. The opening words of the
joint offer were:
"Blue Metal Industries Limited a company duly incorporated
according to the laws of New South Wales . . . and The
Colonial Sugar Refining Company Limited a company similarly
incorporated . . . (which companies are hereinafter called the
'Offeror company') having given notice of the take-over
scheme pursuant to s. 184 of the Companies Act, 1961, hereby
offer . . . . "
In the body of the statement there are various continuing references to the
"offeror company". Though the offer was made jointly by
two companies it was
deemed appropriate to use the language of singularity (comparable to that in
s. 184) by adopting the words "offeror
company". (at p655)
7. The substantial issue in the appeal is whether the provisions of s. 185
apply to a take-over offer made by two companies jointly
or whether they only
apply in the case of such an offer when made by one company. If the provisions
apply to a take-over offer made
by two companies jointly then they would apply
to a take-over offer made by a number of companies jointly. So the problem
approached by considering whether it was the intention of the
legislature to enact that the compulsive powers given by s. 185 could
so that against the will of certain shareholders their shares may be
transferred not to one transferee company but to a number
of companies acting
jointly. The powers given by s. 185 if used may not only deprive a shareholder
of shares which he had wished
to retain but may do so on terms of which he
disapproved. If however a substantial majority of his fellow shareholders have
content with the terms of the offer made to them then pursuant to the
policy approved by the legislature his personal wishes may
(unless the court
otherwise orders) be overborne. If nine-tenths of the shareholders approve of
a plan which involves that they part
with their shares to a transferee company
then there may be advantages in providing means whereby the transferee company
can acquire
the remaining tenth. The legislature has thought it desirable to
give the transferee company such a power. But would the legislature
give such a power not to a single transferee company but to a group of
companies ? Is there a significant difference between
a situation in which one
company becomes the holder of all the shares in another company and a
situation in which a number of companies
by concerted action secure the joint
ownership of all the shares in another company ? The question that now arises
is whether the
legislature has enacted that the compulsive powers are equally
available in the two situations. (at p655)
8. The language of s. 185 is consistently phrased in the singular. It speaks
of "transferor company" and "transferee company". The
section is in Pt VII of
the Act which is dealing with "Arrangements and Reconstructions". In the same
part (vide, s. 181, sub-s.
(7) and s. 183, sub-s. (1)) there are references to
a "scheme for the reconstruction of any company or companies". But the mere
that a word in the singular is used does not in any way solve the problem
which now arises. It merely gives rise to it. It may be
thought that in an
enactment which provides a careful and detailed and precise code of the law
relating to companies there would
be found at least some indication of or some
reference to take-over offers by groups of companies or some regulatory
provsions if
such offers were to be recognized. But this reflection affords no
complete answer to the argument presented by the appellants. By
s. 21 of the
Interpretation Act, 1897 (N.S.W.) it is enacted that in all Acts, unless the
contrary intention appears, words in the
singular shall include the plural and
words in the plural shall include the singular. Such a provision is of
manifest advantage.
It assists the legislature to avoid cumbersome and
over-elaborate wording. Prima facie it can be assumed that in the processes
lead to an enactment both draughtsman and legislators have such a
provision in mind. It follows that the mere fact that the reading
of words in
a section suggests an emphasis on singularity as opposed to plurality is not
enough to exclude plurality. Words in the
singular will include the plural
unless the contrary intention appears. But in considering whether a contrary
intention appears there
need by no confinement of attention to any one
particular section of an Act. It must be appropriate to consider the section
setting in the legislation and furthermore to consider the substance
and tenor of the legislation as a whole. (See Sin Poh Amalgamated
(H.K.) Ltd.
v. Attorney-General of Hong Kong
(1965) 1 WLR 62
.) In that case a test was
indicated which often may be helpful. In
the judgment of the Board delivered
by Lord Pearce it was said:
"The Interpretation Ordinance was intended to avoid
multiplicity of verbiage and to make the plural cover the
singular except in such cases as one finds in the context of the
legislation reason to suppose that the legislature, if offered
such amendment to the bill, would have rejected it"
(1965) 1 WLR, at p 67 . (at p656)
9. It is not without significance that no case has been cited which reveals
any plan or scheme pursuant to which two companies or
several companies have
jointly claimed the right of compulsory acquisition under s. 185 (1) following
upon a joint take-over offer.
Nor was the power of acquisition new in 1961.
The present Act (Companies Act, 1961 (N.S.W.)) is part of the uniform
legislation enacted
by all the States of the Commonwealth of Australia.
Section 185 is derived from s. 209 of the United Kingdom Companies Act, 1948,
which owed its origin to s. 50 of the United Kingdom Companies Act, 1928.
Section 50 was re-enacted as s. 155 of the Companies Act,
1929. Contextually
s. 155 followed a section (s. 154) dealing with compromises or arrangements
for the reconstruction of any company
or companies and the amalgamation of any
two or more companies. Section 183 of the present N.S.W. Act is similar to s.
154. Section
209 of the U.K. Companies Act, 1948 differed in some ways from s.
155 of the 1929 Act. Amongst the differences were (a) that certain
parenthesis were introduced in s. 209 (1), (b) that the proviso to s. 209 (1)
was new, and (c) that sub-s. (2) was newly
introduced. In the Companies Act,
1936 (N.S.W.) the provisions of s. 135 corresponded to those in s. 155 of the
U.K. Act of 1929.
In the Companies Act, 1961 (N.S.W.) the provisions of s. 185
differed from the provisions of s. 135 of the Companies Act, 1936 (N.S.W.).
The differences reflected the changes which were introduced into s. 209 of the
U.K. Act of 1948. Thus in s. 185 appear the words
in parenthesis which are to
be found in s. 209. They are the words "other than shares already held at the
date of the offer by, or
by a nominee for, the transferee company or its
subsidiary". Section 185, sub-s. (2) corresponds to the proviso to s. 209 (1).
185, sub-s. (4) corresponds to s. 209 (2). Certain sub-sections of s.
185 are not to be found in s. 209. Section 184 of the Companies
(N.S.W.) was a section newly introduced in that Act. (at p657)
10. It was submitted by the appellants that the history of the changes in
wording does not involve or require that s. 185 of the
Companies Act, 1961
(N.S.W.) should be held to apply only to an offer made by one company. In s.
50 of the U.K. Act of 1928 (or s.
155 of the U.K. Act of 1929) were the words
"been approved by the holders of not less than nine-tenths in value of the
shares affected".
These are to be compared with the words in sub-s. (1) of s.
209 of the U.K. Act of 1948 which are "been approved by the holders of
less than nine-tenths in value of the shares whose transfer is involved (other
than shares already held at the date of the offer
by, or by a nominee for, the
transferee company or its subsidiary)". The substantial change resulting from
the variation of wording
was that in addition to the shares already held by
the offeror or transferee company or by a nominee for it there must be
of shares held by a subsidiary before computing the holders of
shares of whom not less than nine-tenths in value must approve before
compulsive powers of acquiring shares can be used. In their Lordships' view no
change in the law so far as regards the question
whether two or more companies
by making a joint offer could avail themselves of the powers given by s. 185
(1) was effected merely
by the introduction in 1961 in the Companies Act, 1961
(N.S.W.) of the words which are in parenthesis in s. 185 (1). Whether any
light is thrown on the problem now arising by the use of the particular words
"its subsidiary" is a different question. (at p657)
11. If regard is being had to the substance and tenor of the provisions in s.
185, sub-s. (1), their Lordships think that there
is great force in the
submission that whereas there are many policy considerations making it
appropriate that if an offer which a
company has made has proved acceptable to
nine-tenths or more of those to whom the offer was addressed the company
should be given
powers of acquisition there may not be equal policy
considerations making it appropriate to give the powers to a group of
acting jointly. It would seem unlikely that the legislature would
solely depend upon the provisions of the Interpretation Act if
there was an
intention to legislate with such important consequences as to give powers of
compulsory acquisition not to a single
acquiring company but to a group of
companies. The Interpretation Act is a drafting convenience. It is not to be
expected that it
would be used so as to change the character of legislation.
Acquisition of shares by two or more companies is not merely the plural
acquisition by one. It is quite a different kind of acquisition with different
consequences. It would presuppose a different legislative
policy. (at p658)
12. In considering what is the purpose and policy of s. 185, it appears to
their Lordships that there are two possible alternative
views. (at p658)
13. The first, and that urged by the appellants, is that the section was
designed to make obligatory upon a small minority of shareholders
acceptance of terms for the acquisition of their shares which terms have been
approved by so large a majority as ninety per cent
of all the shares in the
company or of the relevant class. The size of the majority, it is said, is
taken to show, with at least
a strong presumption, that the terms are fair :
and that this is an underlying consideration is, it is said, reinforced by the
amendments (referred to above) which have the effect of emphasizing
the requirement that the ninety per cent majority should be,
possible, independent of the offerors. (at p658)
14. The alternative view is to regard the section as essentially a structural
section, concerned with the amalgamation or merger
of companies : it should,
it is said, be regarded as complementary to s. 183. That section was designed
to facilitate the merger
of companies through the transfer of the undertaking,
or part of it, of one company to another. But since, commercially, it might
desirable that the entity of one transferring company, with its undertaking,
should be preserved intact (for example to preserve
goodwill or for reasons
connected with patents or trademarks), the provisions (now found in s. 185)
were introduced in order to provide
an alternative method of achieving a
commercially similar result, namely through the acquisition of shares. The
significance of the
ninety per cent figure is, on this view, that once a
company has become so nearly a total owner, or parent, of another company as
shareholding of ninety per cent would represent, it should not be prevented
from converting the other company into a wholly owned
subsidiary by so small a
dissenting minority as ten per cent or less but should be entitled to acquire
the holding of that minority.
15. Their Lordships are of opinion that the second of these views is to be
preferred. They consider it important to bear in mind
that the statutory
procedure provided by s. 185 and invoked in this case is one which involves
the involuntary acquisition by a private
interest of the property of another -
an exceptional interference with rights of individual ownership. They can find
nothing in the
scheme or philosophy of the companies legislation to suggest
that the legislature intended to permit this power to be exercised merely
because a majority, even an overwhelming majority, thought fit to agree to it.
It is particularly significant that the power can
not be exercised by an
individual or, even on the hypothesis that plural acquisition is possible by a
company or companies and an
individual or individuals together. This seems
strongly to support the indication that the section is a company structure
and not one of concentration of property interests. (at p659)
16. Their Lordships do not overlook that the section, as well as conferring
powers of compulsory purchase on a transferee company,
also gives shareholders
a right, in certain circumstances, to compel the company to buy their shares.
But, though valuable in some
situations, this right is of a subsidiary
character and in their Lordships' opinion does not assist in the determination
of the character
of the section as a whole. (at p659)
17. The validity of this view may (indeed must) be tested by considering its
implications. It leads, almost inevitably to the consequence
that the powers
of the section can only be invoked by a single company ; for if the objective
is to allow a ninety per cent owned
subsidiary to be converted into a one
hundred per cent subsidiary, that presupposes a single parent. As will shortly
be shown this
is not only consistent with the language, but is almost demanded
by it. (at p659)
18. Conversely, if the property conception were the acceptable one, there
would seem to be no a priori reason (assuming the language
can be adapted to
the case) why the acquiring ninety per cent majority should not be made up of
two, three or even ten separate companies,
so that an owner of ten per cent of
the capital might find himself obliged to surrender it in favour of a lesser
interest in the
company. (at p659)
19. It was argued that the structural, and so single company, approach could
easily be evaded by and would invite the adoption of
stratagems, such as the
incorporation by intending plural acquirers of a new company controlled by
them which could then operate
the section. Their Lordships are not impressed
by this type of argument. If such an arrangement were merely a device or cover
plural acquisition, the court has ample resources to ascertain its true
character and to disapprove it. That a court will not be
blind to the
realities of a situation was shown by the vigorous reaction which was provoked
by the facts In re Bugle Press Ltd.
. If, on the other hand,
the arrangement were made for bona fide commercial reasons and were not shown
to be an abuse of
the statutory
procedure, company law is flexible enough to
admit of its being used. Whatever adaptations may be possible in suitable
section may still retain the structural character which has been
described. (at p660)
20. With this view as to the purpose and policy of the section, their
Lordships now turn to consider its language. (at p660)
21. Section 185 begins with the words "Where a scheme or contract involving
the transfer of shares or any class of shares in a company
. . .". That
company is called "the transferor company". The language is admittedly not
very precise. As was said in Australian Consolidated
Press Ltd. v. Australian
Newsprint Mills Holdings Ltd.
[1960] HCA 53
(1960) 105 CLR 473
the language is commercial
rather than
juristic. Thus the
company referred to as the "transferor" company
does not transfer shares.
The "offer" which results from the "scheme
is one made to shareholders : they are invited to transfer their
It has not been suggested or contended that
the words "a
company" in
the opening words of the section could or should be pluralized.
legislature it is agreed intended that
there could
only be a single so called
"transferor" company. The circumstances that early
words in a section are
clearly not to be
does not of itself prevent later words in the
singular from including the plural.
But if early words in the singular are
intended not to include the plural it might be surprising if words in
the singular
which immediately follow were by abrupt
and with no
warning or indication of a change of approach intended to include the
Picking up again the opening words
185 they are -
"Where a scheme or contract involving the transfer of
shares or any class of shares in a company (in this section
referred to as the 'transferor company') to another company
or corporation (in this section referred to as the 'transferee
company'). . .".
Where what is contemplated is a transfer from "a" company (intended to mean a
single company) to "another" company it seems reasonable
to suppose that the
legislature intended the transfer to be to a single other company. Had there
been a different intention it would
seem to be inconceivable that the
legislature would not have expressed it. Though some words, as above noted,
are the words of commerce
the section was drafted with care. Thus though the
contemplated transfer would be of shares in a "company" it was (having regard
to the definitions in s. 5) necessary to relate the transfer as a transfer to
another "company" or "corporation". (at p661)
22. As has been noted the power of compulsory acquisition of shares in "a
company" is not given to an individual person or to individual
persons who may
have made an offer to acquire shares but only to "another company or
corporation". It is also to be remembered that
under s. 185, sub-s. (1), it is
for the "transferee company" to decide whether it wishes to give a notice to
dissenting shareholders
of a desire to acquire their shares. If two or more
companies could join in an offer in such a way as to be in a position to
compulsorily there would be difficulties if after acquiring
nine-tenths of the shares involved there were any differences of opinion
whether or not to serve the necessary notice. While no insuperable problem is
here denoted there would be no problem if the
decision is that of a single
company or corporation. (at p661)
23. In their Lordships' view there are many other indications that when the
legislature used the words "another company or corporation"
the intention was
to denote a single company or corporation. The words in parenthesis in s. 185,
sub-s. (1), are those which describe
the shares in the "transferor company"
which are to be excluded from the share-holdings by reference to which the
nine-tenths calculation
is to be made. If there is a single "transferee
company" no difficulties arise. Any shares held by the company are to be
So also shares held by "a nominee". If there were several nominees
each one would be a nominee. So also shares held by "its" subsidiary.
subsidiary would be its subsidiary. If however there could be one joint offer
by a group of companies there might be perplexities.
Thus if a group of
companies made a joint offer to the shareholders of a "transferor company" and
if the group had a joint holding
of shares in that company those shares would
clearly be covered by the words in parenthesis. But if each one of the group
had a separate
holding of shares in the transferor company a question might
possibly arise as to whether those shares would be covered by the words
parenthesis. Upon that would depend the extent of the holdings by reference to
which the nine-tenths fell to be calculated. Had
the legislature intended that
the "transferee company" could be a group of two or more companies it would
have been very surprisin
if the words in parenthesis had not been differently
worded so as to eliminate the possible uncertainties or difficulties to which
in their existing form the words might give rise. (at p662)
24. The provisions of s. 185, sub-s. (3), entitle a dissenting shareholder to
require "a transferee company" that has given him
notice that it desires to
acquire his shares to inform him in regard to other dissenting shareholders.
He can so require the transferee
company "by a demand in writing served on
that company". If several companies joined in making an offer it would be
quite unreasonable
to require a dissenting shareholder to serve his notice in
writing upon each of them and had it been the intention of the legislature
enable companies to join in making an offer it is difficult to imagine that
some provision would not have been made in regard
to the procedure to be
followed by a dissenting shareholder in giving a notice. Similar
considerations apply in regard to a notice
that under s. 185 (4) (b) a
dissenting shareholder was minded to give. (at p662)
25. The provisions of sub-s. (5) of s. 185 concern the procedure to be
adopted by a transferee company that has given a notice under
sub-s. (1) and
the duty imposed upon the transferor company. Shortly stated the amount or
other consideration representing the price
payable by the transferee company
must be paid allotted or transferred to the transferor company. If two or more
companies could
join as the transferee companies and if their joint offer
involved as part of its terms that shares in one of them would be allotted
such allotment could only be made by that one company : all that the other
companies could undertake would be to cause an allotment
to be made. The
indications are that a single transferee company was in mind. This indication
is reinforced when the duty of the
"transferor company", admittedly a single
company, is had in mind. In reference to the shares of a dissenting
shareholder which are
being acquired the positive duty is cast upon the
transferor company to "register the transferee company as the holder of those
If there were a joint offer of acquisition it might be on terms that
the acquired shares were to be divided amongst the transferee
companies in
clearly stated proportions. Yet on an application of the statutory provision
all the shares would have to be registered
jointly in the names of the
companies joining in making the offer. While doubtless there could thereafter
be transfers so as to result
in holdings in the stated proportions the
indications in the statutory language are that it was not intended to provide
offers by two or more companies. (at p663)
26. In their Lordships' view a consideration of the provisions of s. 184
reinforces the views that have been expressed in regard
to s. 185. In their
operation the two sections overlap even though they do not coincide. To a
considerable extent they are complementary.
Broadly stated the former section
is concerned with the stage of offers while the latter is concerned with the
stage of transfers.
In agreement with the High Court and with the learned
Chief Judge in Equity their Lordships consider that there are many indications
that it was never intended that the provisions of s. 184 should apply to
offers made jointly by a group of companies. By sub-s. (2)
it is laid down
that a take-over offer must not be made unless there has been compliance with
certain requirements. There must be
a statement that complies with the
requirements set out in Pt B of the Tenth Schedule. A single statement seems
clearly to be contemplated.
In defining its contents there is a consistency of
references to an offeror corporation in a measure that would be surprising if
plurality was intended. The statement must state whether or not there is any
agreement or arrangement whereby any shares acquired
by the offeror
corporation in pursuance of the scheme will or may be transfered "to any other
person" : if so "the names of the persons
who are a party to the agreement or
arrangement" must be set out and details as to the shares to be transferred
and details as to
shares in the offeree corporation held by such other
persons. If a group of companies joined in making an offer to shareholders in
an offeree corporation to acquire their shares jointly and made arrangements
as to the later or ultimate disposal of the shares amongst
themselves it would
be reasonable to require a statement in regard to these arrangements but it
would seem unnatural to refer to
them as arrangements to transfer the shares
either "to any other person" or (if those latter words are pluralized) "to any
persons". (at p663)
27. In the same statement it is necessary (see Tenth Schedule, par. 4 (c)) to
set out whether or not there has been "within the
knowledge of the offeror
corporation" any material change in the financial position of the offeree
corporation. If it had been the
intention to cover a joint offer by two or
more corporations it would have seemed natural to require the statement to
refer not only
to the knowledge possessed jointly but also to the knowledge
possessed separately by any one of the corporations : at least it would
likely that clear language to cover the situation would have been used. (at
28. By sub-s. (7) of s. 184 the provisions of ss. 46 and 47 are made
applicable (in the way directed) to the statement. If the statement
joint statement by joint offeror corporations then s. 46 (which imposes civil
liability for mis-statements) would render liable
"every person who is a
director of the corporation" at the time of the issue of the statement. It
seems hardly likely that the legislature
would have intended (using the
provisions of the Interpretation Act) to produce uncertainty of meaning that
might result if liability
were imposed upon "all persons who are directors of
the corporations at the time of the issue of the statement". Some persons
be directors of one corporation but not of others. There would surely
have been some provision imposing liability upon persons who
were directors of
any one of the corporations had it been intended that there could be joint
offeror corporations. (at p664)
29. In their Lordships' view there are many indications which reveal an
intention that just as a "transferor company" under s. 185
was to be a single
company so also the "transferee company" under s. 185 was to be a single
company or corporation. In agreement
with the learned Chief Judge in Equity
and with the High Court their Lordships consider therefore that s. 185 does
not apply to a
scheme or contract involving the transfer of shares in a
company to two other companies jointly but only applies to a scheme or
involving the transfer of shares to another company alone. Being of
this view no necessity arises to express an opinion as to whether
take-over offer that was made was an illegal offer or as to what the results
would be if it were nor is it necessary to express
any opinion in relation to
s. 366 of the Act. (at p664)
Their Lordships will humbly advise Her Majesty that the appeals be
dismissed. Mr. Dilley's costs of these appeals must be paid as
solicitor and client by Blue Metal Industries Limited and The Colonial Sugar
Refining Company Limited.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter