Tarlka Matuwa Piarku (Aboriginal Corporation) RNTBC v Odette Two Pty Ltd & Anor [2025] NNTTA 17 (26 June 2025)
NATIONAL NATIVE TITLE TRIBUNAL
Tarlka Matuwa Piarku (Aboriginal Corporation) RNTBC v Odette Two Pty
[2025] NNTTA 17
(26 June 2025)
Application No:
WO2023/0330
IN THE MATTER of the
Native Title Act 1993
IN THE MATTER of an inquiry into an expedited procedure objection
application
Tarlka Matuwa Piarku (Aboriginal Corporation) RNTBC (WCD2013/004)
(native title party)
Odette Two Pty Ltd
(grantee party)
State of Western Australia
(Government party)
DETERMINATION THAT THE ACT IS NOT AN ACT ATTRACTING THE
EXPEDITED PROCEDURE
Mr S Grant, Member
Catchwords:
Native title – future act – proposed grant of exploration
licence – expedited procedure objection application –
evidence – whether act likely to interfere with sites or areas of
particular significance – particular
significance of Dreaming track
– Aboriginal Heritage Act unlikely to prevent disturbance – the act
is not an act attracting
the expedited procedure​​.
Legislation:
Cultural Heritage Act 2021
Heritage Act 1972
(WA) ss 5, 17, 18
Heritage Legislation Amendment and Repeal Bill 2023
(WA) ss 24, 24A, 25, 57, 58, 61, 66
Regulations 1981
Title Act 1993
(Cth) ss 17, 29, 31, 32, 151, 237
in Water and Irrigation Act 1914
Andy Andrews, Jeffrey Waller & Anita Camfoo (on behalf of the
Jurrangluk (Ngarralak), Garl?mayn, Girrimbilba, Bullu, Bunno (Yurr?tmayn)
Mernemerne, Benno (Warriba), and Dakal groups); Tex Camfoo, Peter Woods, David
Daniels & Doreen Ponto (on behalf of the
Ngalakan group); Peter Woods, Tex
Camfoo and Sammy Bulabul (on behalf of the Ngalakan and Rembarrnga
Groups)/Exploration & Resource
Development Pty Ltd/Northern Territory,
Andrews v Northern Territory
& Ors on behalf of the Birriliburu Native Title
Holders/Western Australia/Murchison Metals
Ben Ward; Clarrie Smith
and Ors v Western Australia; Australian United Gold Nl; CRA Exploration Pty Ltd;
BHP Exploration Pty Ltd;
Asian Mining Nl and Sorna Pty Ltd; Wag 6002 of 1996 Fed
Ward v Western Australia
Cheinmora, Kenny Morgan & Ors/Western Australia/Striker Resources
Cheinmora v Striker Resources
& Others on behalf of the Balanggarra Native Title
Claimants/Heron Resources Ltd/Western Australia
Kevin Peter Walley and Others on behalf of the Ngoonoru
Wadjari People (WC01/179); Robin Boddington and Others on behalf of the Wajarri
Elders (Wo01/180)/Western Australia/Giralia Resources NL
Walley v Western Australia
and Others on behalf of the Martu Idja Banyjima People/Western
Australia/Iron Duyfken,
Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v
Peter Romeo Gianni
Aboriginal Corporation
Australasia Pty Ltd and Anor
Tarlka Watuwa Piarku (Aboriginal Corporation) RNTBC v
State of Western Australia
[2017] FCA 40
Top End (Default PBC/CLA)
Aboriginal Corporation v Northern Territory of Australia
Top End v Northern Territory
WF (Deceased)
on behalf of the Wiluna People v State of Western Australia
Wiluna determination
Yindjibarndi
Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v FMG Pilbara Pty Ltd and Another
Yindjibarndi v FMG
Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Vandeleur Superannuation Pty Ltd and Another
Representatives(s) of the native title party:
Sally Raine, Fremantle Law Pty Ltd
Representative(s) of the grantee party:
Shota Hitomi, Lawton MacMaster Legal
Representatives(s) of the Government party:
Mitchell Caubo, State Solicitor’s Office
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
decision is about whether the proposed grant of exploration licence E53/2239
proposed licence
Pty Ltd is an act attracting the
expedited procedure as described in s 237 of the
December 2022, the
of Western Australia
acting through the
Department of Mines, Industry Regulation and Safety (now the
egulation and
afety) gave notice under s 29 of the NTA of its intention to grant the
proposed licence to Odette Two. The ‘notification date’
in the notice was 23 December 2022.
The notice included a statement that the State considers that the grant is an
act attracting the expedited
By including this
statement, the State asserts that the grant is not likely to, in summary:
(1) interfere directly with the native title holders’ community or social
activities (s 237(a) NTA);
(2) interfere with areas or sites of particular significance, in accordance with
the native title holders’ traditions (s 237(b)
(3) involve, or create rights whose exercise is likely to involve, major
disturbance to the land and waters concerned (s 237(c) NTA).
proposed licence is located approximately 51 km easterly of Wiluna in Western
Australia and covers an area of approximately
15.33 km². The proposed
licence sits wholly within the external boundary of the
determination
. The entirety of the proposed licence lies within an area over
which it has been determined that non-exclusive native title exists.
April 2022, the
orporation) RNTBC, representing the
Wiluna native title holders,
lodged an objection application with the National Native Title
in response to the State’s assertion that the expedited procedure applies
to the grant of the proposed licence. In these circumstances,
the Tribunal is
required to determine whether the expedited procedure
[5] Following
the lodgement of the objection, under a delegation from the President of the
Tribunal, Member Kelly was appointed to
constitute the Tribunal for the purposes
of the inquiry into this matter. Member Kelly case managed the matter during its
programming
phase. On 21 March 2025, I was appointed to constitute the Tribunal
for the matter, in place of Member Kelly, to determine the matter.
determining whether or not the grant is an act attracting the expedited
procedure, I must make a predictive assessment of what
is likely to occur as a
result of the grant and decide whether there is a real chance or risk of
interference: as to s 237 NTA generally,
see the applicable legal principles
identified in
Yindjibarndi v FMG
at [15], which I adopt for the purpose
of this determination. In making this assessment I must look at what is likely
to occur as
a result of the grant and decide whether there is a real chance of
interference or major disturbance, having regard to the rights
conferred by the
grant, evidence of the grantee party’s intentions and the operation of the
applicable regulatory regime: see
Walley v Western Australia
– [9] and the cases cited therein.
determine the grant is an act attracting the expedited procedure, the proposed
licence can be granted by the State without
the parties being required to
negotiate with each other.
however I determine the grant is not an act to which the expedited procedure
applies, s 31(1) of the NTA applies as if the notice
did not include the
statement and Odette Two and the State must negotiate in good faith with a view
to reaching agreement with TMPAC
[8] For the
reasons provided below, I have determined the grant of the proposed licence is
not an act attracting the expedited procedure.
The conduct of
the inquiry
[9] A directions
hearing was held on 31 May 2023 where directions were set by Member Kelly for
the provision of evidence and contentions
by the parties and for the conduct of
the inquiry.
[10] On 28 June
2023, the State lodged the
DEMIRS initial material
Quick Appraisal
for the licence containing key
tenement information;
an Aboriginal Heritage Inquiry System search
AHIS Search
); a copy of the licence application under the
(WA), including an accompanying statement provided under
s 58 of the
detailing the proposed work plan, (
); a copy of the draft Tenement Endorsement and Conditions
Extract; and a list of previous determinations made by the Tribunal under s
32(4) of the NTA which overlap the proposed tenement (showing
there are no such
previous determinations).
[11] On 6 July
2023, TMPAC requested that the directions be extended to allow further time for
the collection of evidence. In this
request TMPAC foreshadowed it would
potentially provide gender restricted evidence. Both the State and Odette Two
supported the request
and, on 11 July 2023, the request was granted.
September 2023, following consultation with Odette Two and the State, Member
Kelly made gender restricted non-disclosure
directions at the request of TMPAC.
The non-disclosure directions applied to paragraphs [4], [7]-[8], [10]-[12] and
the map entitled
‘Jukurrpa Places in Odette Two Pty Ltd Tenement E
53/2239’ contained in the statement of Mr Paul Morgan dated 17 August
2023. Neither the State nor Odette Two objected to the making of the
non-disclosure directions. Nothing in these directions prevents
me from stating
any findings of fact on which this determination is based, however I have
refrained from disclosing the restricted
evidence wherever possible and I have
particularly avoided setting out specific details of cultural matters.
September 2023, TMPAC lodged:
(1) its contentions dated 6 September 2023 (
TMPAC contentions
(2) gender restricted statement of Mr Paul Morgan dated 17 August 2023 (
Morgan’s gender restricted statement
(3) supplementary statement of Mr Paul Morgan dated 5 September 2023 (
Morgan’s supplementary statement
September 2023, the State requested the suspension of the directions in light of
Aboriginal Heritage Legislation Amendment and
Repeal Bill
(WA) which saw the repeal of the
(WA) and the reinstatement
Aboriginal Heritage Act 1972
(WA) but with some amendments
amended AHA
). The State in turn requested the matter be adjourned to a
directions hearing following the legislation
Repeal Bill
coming into
effect. This request was ultimately granted and the matter was adjourned to a
directions hearing on 1 November 2023,
when the directions were reissued with
extended compliance dates.
November 2023, Odette Two provided its contentions (
contentions
November 2023, the State provided its contentions (
contentions
February 2024, TMPAC provided its reply contentions (
TMPAC reply
contentions
). These were accompanied by:
Attachment A
epartment of
eritage, ‘Consultation policy for section 18
applications’, dated November 2023;
Attachment B
– Section 18 Application Form, undated; and
Attachment C
– Section 18 Application Form, prior to 8
September 2021.
[18] On or by 9
February 2024, each of the parties confirmed that, pursuant to s 151 of the NTA,
they were content for the matter
to be determined on the
The proposed licence
proposed licence is an exploration licence to be granted under s 57 of the
. Under s 61 of the
, the proposed licence is
granted for a period of five years and may be extended. Section 66 of the
and regulation 20 of the
Mining Regulations
(WA) set out the rights conferred by an exploration licence.
proposed licence is overlapped by one other licence, L53/237, held by Northern
Star Resources Ltd, granted on 11 July 2022
and described in DEMIRS Mineral
Titles Online system as ‘search for
groundwater’.
There are a
further 21 dead tenements overlapping the proposed licence, 10 of which appear
to have been granted.
proposed licence is also entirely within the area of PL N050102, Pastoral Lease
Registered Aboriginal
[22] There is
one ‘Registered Aboriginal Site’ in the northern portion of the
proposed licence, named Jundee 11 and described
as ‘Artefacts /
the Jundee 11
It is noted that a
‘Registered Aboriginal Site’ is one which has been assessed as
meeting the requirements at s 5 of
the amended AHA concerning places to which
the amended AHA applies, and that the amended AHA applies to sites which meet
the definition
of s 5 regardless of whether they have been registered or
Scope of TMPAC’s objection
[23] Initially,
TMPAC objected to the State’s assertions concerning s 237(a), s 237(b) and
[24] However, in
the course of the inquiry, TMPAC did not press its objections to the
State’s assertions concerning s 237(a)
and solely directed its
evidence and contentions to the State’s assertion concerning s
[25] Accordingly,
applying the common sense approach outlined at [26] of
Ward v Western
I find there is no evidence before me to support a
conclusion that the grant of the proposed licence is likely to cause the
interference
contemplated in s 237(a) or involve the disturbance, or create
rights likely to involve the disturbance, contemplated in s 237(c).
Section 237(b): Is the grant of the proposed licence likely to
interfere with areas or sites of particular significance to TMPAC?
identified areas or sites of particular significance according to the Wiluna
native title holders’ traditions?
area or site of ‘particular significance’ is one of special or more
than ordinary significance to the native title
holders in accordance with their
traditions.
It must be known,
able to be located and its significance able to be explained to the
In the context of the
evidence and contentions in this matter, I also note the Tribunal previously has
Andrews v Northern Territory
that the identification of a
Dreaming track will not necessarily result in a finding of particular
significance; the particular significance
of the area or site associated with
the Dreaming track needs to be adequately
[27] TMPAC’s
evidence is comprised in two statements, namely, Mr Morgan’s gender
restricted statement and Mr Morgan’s
supplementary statement.
[28] Mr Morgan
identifies as a senior Wiluna native title holder, Lawman, and Elder, who has
traditional authority to talk about the
Mr Morgan’s status
and authority in these regards is not disputed by Odette
or the State, and I accept
Mr Morgan has authority according to the traditional laws and customs of the
Wiluna People to speak for
the area, the subject of the proposed licence.
[29] Through Mr
Morgan’s gender restricted statement, TMPAC identifies two non-contiguous
areas within the area of the proposed
licence which, it contends, together
comprise the area of particular significance. These areas are shaded pink on the
annexed to Mr Morgan’s gender restricted statement and
hereafter are collectively referred to as
identified area
[30] By area,
the identified area covers, in my assessment, approximately one half to two
thirds of the area of the proposed licence.
It is apparent that the identified
area contains well defined creeks and contiguous vegetation including -
according to my reading
of the evidence and contentions as a whole - trees
following the path of the creeks.
[31] In addition
to identifying the identified area, in his statements Mr Morgan sets out the
bases on which the identified area is
held to be of particular significance in
the sense of being special or of more than ordinary significance to Wiluna
native title
holders in accordance with their traditions, namely: as an area to
obtain food, water and other resources and as a camping, hunting
and teaching
place; and as an area associated with
(Dreaming).
respect to the second of these bases, in Mr Morgan’s gender restricted
statement, Mr Morgan describes the
in a number of ways,
by reference to: its songlines; its path of travel both outside
and inside the identified area; the mythological being which created
Mr Morgan names); and the relationship between the physical features of the
identified area and the spiritual dimensions
Morgan’s supplementary statement, Mr Morgan further describes the
relationship between the physical features of the
identified area and the
spiritual dimensions of the
and some of the cultural
consequences if this relationship were to be disturbed.
[34] Parts of Mr
Morgan’s gender restricted statement including the TMPAC Map are subject
to non-disclosure directions however
TMPAC’s contentions are not intended
to be similarly restricted.
contextual purposes, it is therefore convenient to recite the paragraphs of
TMPAC’s contentions directed to how the identified
area is characterised
in the evidence and why the identified area is an area of particular
significance. At [12] of the TMPAC contentions,
TMPAC contends
The pink shaded area within proposed E53/2239 on the TMPAC Map is
area of particular significance to the native title holders for two
Firstly, because it is an area where there is food, water and trees for
tools. It is a camping, hunting and teaching place for the native title
Secondly, it is an area associated with
. The shaded areas can
described as the parts of the creek covered by the proposed tenement and
vegetation growing in and adjacent to it.
At [14], [15] and [16] of the TMPAC contentions, TMPAC contends -
Paul Morgan explains how the creeks in the proposed tenement area are
that travels through them. He provides contextual
information
outside of the proposed tenement area. He explains
mythological being created the creeks. Mr Morgan also conveys the
significance of
according to a Martu worldview. He speaks
origins “when the world was soft”. He speaks to the
interconnectedness of
, describing it as “like a chain link”. And how
“You’ve got to have
all the chain there to make it”.
Paul Morgan also explains how the creeks in the proposed tenement area
important because of the resources available there. He mentions trees for
making tools, shade, water and food. He says it is a “main hunting
place”. The
existence of these resources in an area within the Wiluna determination area
itself more than ordinarily significant in the context of a desert
environment.
Of course, both aspects of these creeks – the spiritual and the
availability of
essential resources – are linked. In his supplementary statement Mr
speaks about the interconnectedness of these elements-
. Mr Morgain describes an integrated physical and
For both reasons, the association with
and its significance
to obtain food, water and other resources, the creeks within proposed
E53/2239 are more than ordinarily significant to the native title holders
accordance with their traditions.
the State acknowledges the bases on which the identified area is held by TMPAC
to be of particular significance, in the
sense of being special or of more than
ordinary significance to Wiluna native title holders in accordance with their
traditions,
the State essentially contends that TMPAC has provided insufficient
evidence to explain why the identified area is ‘any different
other areas or sites of significance that are associated with the dreaming
stories’ or ‘of special, or more
than ordinary, significance to the
Martu traditional owners’.
The State also contends that the identified area is ‘too vague to be
sufficiently identified as [an area] of particular significance’
TMPAC has provided no further evidence about the registered Aboriginal site
within the proposed licence
Odette Two also acknowledges the bases on which this area is held by TMPAC to be
of particular significance in the sense
of being special or of more than
ordinary significance to Wiluna native title holders in accordance with their
traditions, Odette
Two essentially contends that: Mr Morgan’s evidence in
relation to camping hunting and teaching is ‘unsubstantiated on
evidence and not particularised in a way that allows the NNT (sic) to determine
the likelihood of
interference’;
is not explicitly stated or explained [in Mr Morgan’s evidence] what the
significance of Jukurrpa
or ‘why it is
particularly significant to the Wiluna
description and discussions of the
are stated in ambiguous
terms’ and ‘does not assist in assessing the particular significance
of the [identified area];
‘there is no explanation regarding the mythology of the
in relation to its wider geographic context or its particular significance
to the Wiluna People’;
‘there is no explanation as to how the creeks, trees, ground and
underground water make the area particularly
significant’;
Morgan’s evidence ‘lacks sufficient specificity to meet the criteria
for the area or site to be an area or site of
significance’;
TMPAC ‘has not provided sufficient evidence in relation to are (sic) or
site to...establish the particular significance
of the site in accordance with
traditional law and custom...or...allow the NNTT to make a predictive assessment
[as] required by
[37] Having
considered the various contentions of the parties and Mr Morgan’s evidence
as a whole, I am satisfied the identified
area is an area of particular
significance according to the Wiluna native title holders’
traditions.
am not satisfied the evidence provided by Mr Morgan in relation to the
significance of the identified area as a place to obtain
food, water and other
resources, and as a camping place, ‘main hunting place’ and teaching
place, is sufficiently detailed
to allow me to be satisfied that the identified
area is an area of particular significance in the sense of being special or of
than ordinary significance to Wiluna native title holders in accordance
with their traditions. While I accept this evidence, I consider
it to be of a
more generalised nature and, as such, I do not think this evidence sufficiently
explains why the identified area is
of particular or more than ordinary
significance to Wiluna native title holders in accordance with their
traditions.
[39] However,
I am satisfied that the evidence provided by Mr Morgan in relation to the
significance of the identified area as an
area associated with
is sufficiently specific to allow me to be satisfied that the identified
area is an area of particular significance in the sense of
being special or of
more than ordinary significance to Wiluna native title holders in accordance
with their traditions.
satisfied of this in light of Mr Morgan’s gender restricted evidence, of
which I have had the benefit: locating the
identified area, being the pink
shaded area shown on the TMPAC map; specifying how the identified area is
connected to, and part
of the path of travel of, a
(named by Mr
Morgan in his gender restricted statement), which is connected to a place of
significance (named by Mr Morgan in his
gender restricted statement) outside the
area of the proposed licence but still within the Wiluna determination
(relatedly, the
Tribunal’s Native Title Vision system shows that this named place of
significance is some distance north west
of the licence area but still within
the Wiluna determination area); identifying the mythological being (named by Mr
Morgan in his
gender restricted statement) for the
created the creeks within the identified
identifying the
connectedness of, on the one hand, the songlines and path of the
falling outside of the identified area, and on the other hand, the songlines and
path of the
falling inside the identified
and, Mr Morgan’s
unrestricted evidence identifying the connectedness of the physical features of
the identified area, namely
the creeks, ground, water and trees of the
identified area and the spiritual dimensions of the
[41] Regarding
the significance of the identified area and the implications if it is disturbed,
in his unrestricted supplementary
statement Mr Morgan
disturb the
there they disturb the Jukurrpa. If they disturb the
[ground] and the
on top and underground,
they're disturbing the Jukurrpa. They all connected to the Jukurrpa. It's like a
vein, you disturb the vein
you mess it up. It wouldn't flow. The trees wouldn't
[42] Moreover,
in an unrestricted part of his gender restricted statement, Mr Morgan
Jukurrpa is
like a chain link. You’ve got to have all the chain there to make it. To
make young generation to grow up and understand.
That’s why we’re
trying to teach ‘em when we’re doing surveys and things. We learn
young generation to come
to know that country.
[43] At this
point it is convenient to address salient aspects of the parties’
respective contentions.
[44] I do not
agree with TMPAC’s characterisation that: ‘Of course, both aspects
of [the] creeks – the spiritual
and the availability of essential
resources – are linked.’ Whilst it may be argued that this
connection is implied in
the evidence, I consider the better view of the
evidence is that two separate bases are provided as to why the area is of
significance, as I have explained above.
[45] As noted at
Andrews v Northern
a decision which is referred to in the State
the Tribunal found
that the identification of a Dreaming track will not necessarily result in a
finding of particular significance;
the particular significance of the area or
site associated with the Dreaming track needs to be
Andrews v Northern Territory
, the Tribunal was not satisfied that any of
the four Dreaming sites identified by the native title party in that matter (Dup
Spring, Gunu.urra, Burrmala and Jarrmunu) were of particular significance
for various reasons, including because two of the sites
(Dup Dup Spring and
Gunu.urra) were located quite some distance from the licence
and the relevant deponent
did not disclose either their authority to speak on behalf of the relevant sites
or their particular knowledge
the location of another of
the sites (Burrmala) was unclear and it was a matter of conjecture whether the
site was located within
the boundaries of the licence area and there was a total
absence of information about the site itself other it is a dreaming
and there was no
information provided about the importance of the site or even its physical
manifestation;
significance of the last of the sites (Jarrmunu) was not explained other than
that it was a dreaming site.
accept that the location of the
identified in the present matter
is described by reference to the identified area rather than by reference to
sites within the identified
area. However, as s 237(b) makes provision for
‘areas or sites’, I consider this to be a distinction without a
difference.
Moreover, I am of the view that the evidence provided in the present
matter, including the evidence I have identified in
above, and the evidence considered in
Andrews v Northern Territory
, is distinguishable. In this matter, as
explained above, I have found that: Mr Morgan has authority to speak for the
area of the
proposed licence and has located the area of particular significance
namely the identified area; the identified area is within the
area of the
proposed licence; and Mr Morgan has explained why the area is of particular
significance to Wiluna native title holders
in accordance with their traditions
and some of the cultural implications if the area is physically disturbed.
[48] In its
contentions,
Odette Two refers,
relevantly, to three previous decisions of the Tribunal in support of its
ultimate contention that TMPAC has not
provided sufficient evidence in relation
to an area or site to establish the particular significance of the [area or]
site in accordance
with particular law and
and, to allow the
Tribunal to make the predictive assessment required by s 237(b) of the
Odette Two refers to these
decisions but does not say how the facts, findings and principles contained in
these decisions are instructive
in the circumstances of the present matter.
Notwithstanding, I have considered these decisions and consider my findings in
this matter
are not at odds with the findings in these decisions for the reasons
given above including in
furthermore, because the basis for the particular significance of the identified
area has been explained by reference to the
traditions of the Wiluna native
title holders rather than by reference to individual or personal responsibility
on the part of Mr
[49] Odette Two
also contends, relevantly, that the contention that camping, hunting and
teaching occurs within the identified area
is ‘unsubstantiated on the
evidence and not particularised in a way that allows the NNT (sic) to determine
the likelihood of
interference’
and that if
this were to be accepted this does not alone mean the identified area is an area
of ‘particular
significance’.
agree that the occurrence of these activities is entirely unsubstantiated on the
evidence, particularly in light of Mr Morgan’s
evidence that part of the
identified area is a ‘main hunting
otherwise agree with these contentions for the reasons given in
[50] I do not
agree to any extent however with Odette Two’s contentions in relation to
associated with the identified area, as summarised in
above, for the reasons given in
[51] Subject to
one qualification, I do not agree with the State contentions, as summarised in
above, for the reasons given in
above. The qualification is that I do
agree with the State’s contention that TMPAC has provided no further
evidence about the
registered Aboriginal site within the proposed licence area,
namely the Jundee 11 RAS. This is so notwithstanding that, in my assessment,
this site partially overlaps with a portion of the identified area. In any event
however, there is no requirement that TMPAC provide
further evidence about this
site, and I do not consider that TMPAC’s election not to do so changes my
overall assessment of
TMPAC’s evidence.
Is there likely to
be interference to the identified area?
Task of the Tribunal
[52] Where an
area or site of particular significance is known and able to be located, as I
have found here with respect to the identified
area, the Tribunal must proceed
to determine whether there is likely to be (in the sense of a real risk of)
interference with the
This involves a predictive
assessment as to whether other factors, including the heritage regime operating
in Western Australia,
will be sufficient to ensure that it is unlikely the
identified area will be interfered with by the activities Odette Two will be
entitled to undertake should the licence be granted.
What is the
nature of the interference apprehended by TMPAC?
[53] When Mr
Morgan’s evidence is considered as a whole, it is apparent Mr Morgan is
concerned about the impact of any physical
disturbance - for example, as a
result of digging
features of the identified area but particularly the creeks, ground, water and
trees of the identified area, resulting in
disturbance of the
inherent in those features.
What are the activities that Odette Two will be entitled to
proposed licence is an exploration licence to be granted under s 57 of the
. Under s 61 of the
, exploration licences are
granted for an initial term of five years with the opportunity for extension.
Section 66 of the
and regulation 20 of the
Regulations
prescribe the activities which may be undertaken by the holder
of an exploration licence (these are set out below). The licence will
subject to a number of endorsements and conditions.
[55] Odette Two
has provided no evidence in relation to its intended operations; rather, it has
provided contentions in this regard.
Relevantly, it contends its exploration
activities will ‘take a staged approach, starting with desktop studies,
progressing
to low impact, inexpensive surveying and sampling and, if areas of
interest are identified, gradually generating more targeted areas
of interest
through more advanced exploration
techniques’.
[56] The s 58
statement which accompanied Odette Two’s initial licence application also
provides some detail in relation to
Odette Two’s intended operations. This
program provides that the company is searching for copper, zinc, lead, silver,
and nickel,
and that the
company’s exploration program for year 1 has a total proposed expenditure
of $20,000 and
(a) literature and previous explorers’ report search acquisition and data
compilation, implementation and interpretation of
remote sensing/GSWA/GIS data;
(b) field mapping and reconnaissance;
(c) rock chip and soil geochemical sampling and assaying;
(d) drill target generation and target ranking; and
(e) geophysics, admin.
[57] During year
two, Odette Two ‘intends to implement a drill campaign (AC, RAB or RC) to
test geophysical and or structural
targets together with soil/rock-chip
geochemical anomalies identified in Year
[58] The program
of works contains no information in relation to Odette Two’s intended
operations beyond year two. Accordingly,
in the absence of this information, the
issue of likelihood in this inquiry must be assessed by reference to the
regulatory regime
in force and assuming that all legal rights given to Odette
Two under the proposed licence will be exercised to the maximum extent
[59] Section 66
and regulation 20 of the
Mining Regulations
out the activities which may be undertaken by the holder of an exploration
licence. If the proposed licence were granted, Odette
Two would, in summary, be
permitted to undertake the following activities with the area of the proposed
licence and therefore within
the identified area:
(a) to enter the land with personnel and machinery to explore for minerals;
(b) to carry out operations and works to explore for minerals, including digging
pits, trenches, holes, sinking bores and tunnels
to the extent necessary
(subject to any conditions imposed under ss 24, 24A and 25 of the
(c) to excavate, extract or remove earth, soil, stone, fluid or mineral bearing
substances not exceeding the prescribed limit of
1000 tonnes, unless approved by
the Minister and subject to any conditions imposed; and
(d) subject to the
Rights in Water and Irrigation Act
to take and divert water from any natural spring, lake, pool or stream in or
flowing through the licence area or from excavations
made and sink a well or
bore from which to take water for domestic or mineral exploration purposes.
Likelihood of interference including whether the heritage regime operating
in Western Australia makes interference unlikely
Odette Two’s contentions refer to general principles in connection with s
237(b) including the principle that there
must be a real chance or risk of
interference with the area or site, Odette Two’s contentions do not
address the question of
the likelihood of interference in the event the Tribunal
were to find, as I have, that the identified area is an area of particular
significance. Moreover, Odette Two’s contentions are silent as to Odette
Two’s willingness to enter into a heritage protection
agreement; Odette
Two simply contends that it ‘is aware of its obligations under all
legislation’.
[61] On the
other hand, in their contentions TMPAC and the State each address the question
of the likelihood of interference, including
whether the heritage regime
operating in Western Australia makes interference unlikely.
[62] TMPAC’s
essential contention is that, depending on where Odette Two intends to carry out
its exploration activities, the
potential for physical interference with the
creeks and spiritual interference with the
within the area of
the proposed licence ‘is obvious’ and that that the heritage regime
under the amended AHA is insufficient
to ensure that s 237(b) interference is
unlikely to occur.
[63] On the
question of the likelihood of interference, in the TMPAC contentions TMPAC in
summary contends that -
(a) there ‘is little material before the Tribunal from which to infer what
activities [Odette Two] will likely carry
(b) Odette Two’s program of work in year one appears to include accessing
the area of the proposed licence to take rock chip
and soil samples and in year
two the intended implementation of a drilling
(c) the Tribunal should ‘infer that [Odette Two] will carry out the full
scope of activities permitted by s 66 of the
and regulation 20
Mining Regulations’
, and that such activities include entry
into the area with machinery, digging pits, trenches and holes, sinking bores
and tunnels,
excavating and extracting and/or removing earth, soil, stone,
fluids or mineral-bearing
substances;
(d) ‘in the circumstances, depending on where [Odette Two] intends to
carry out its exploration activities, the potential for
physical interference
with the creeks and spiritual interference with the
area of the proposed licence is
the area of particular significance to the native title holders in this
matter is particularised, and it is for the State and Odette
Two to explain how
the heritage regime in Western Australia operates to lessen the likelihood of
interference with the area of the
convenient to record at this point that I agree with these contentions. Leaving
aside for a moment the question of whether
the heritage regime operating in
Western Australia makes interference unlikely, which I will address below, I
find that, because
there is no evidence before me in relation to where Odette
Two will conduct its exploration activities within the area of the proposed
licence, because it is open to me to infer that Odette Two will carry out the
full scope of activities permitted by s 66 of the
regulation 20 of the
Mining Regulations
, and because the identified area
covers by area, in my assessment, one half to two thirds of the area of the
proposed licence, there
is a likelihood, in the sense of a real risk, of
physical interference with the identified area.
State’s essential contention is that s 237(b) interference is unlikely for
two reasons. The first reason is because
the grant of the proposed licence is
not likely to cause any more interference than previous exploration licences
granted in the
area in the past. The second reason is because the heritage
regime under the amended AHA is sufficient to ensure that s 237(b) interference
is unlikely to occur.
[66] In support
of the first reason, at [31] of the State contentions, the State notes that the
area of the proposed licence has been
the subject of several other exploration
licences in the past and contends that: first, the history of mining and
exploration in
the area is a relevant circumstance that the Tribunal can take
into account; secondly, TMPAC has not pointed to any evidence showing
previous tenements resulted in any interference within the meaning of s 237(b);
and thirdly, the grant of the proposed
licence is not likely to cause any more
interference than those previous tenements.
[67] I accept
that the area of the proposed licence has been the subject of several other
exploration licences in the past. This is
apparent from the information
contained in the Quick Appraisal. However, I am unable to accept the
State’s contention that
the grant of the proposed licence is not likely to
cause any more interference than those previous tenements. This is because there
is no evidence before me as to whether any of the previous tenements involved
physical disturbance of the creeks, ground, water and
trees of the identified
area. If the previous tenements did not involve physical disturbance of this
kind but such disturbance occurs
pursuant to the proposed licence, then the
proposed licence will have caused more interference than the previous tenements.
even if there were evidence of previous interference, it does not
follow in my view that interference within the meaning of s 237(b)
necessarily, less likely in the circumstances of this matter.
[68] In support
of the second reason, the State in summary contends that:
(a) the areas identified by TMPAC as being areas of particular significance are
not registered sites under the amended AHA however
these sites may still fall
with the definition of ‘Aboriginal site’ under s 5(b) of the amended
AHA, and that this definition
has a much broader scope than that contemplated by
(b) section 17 of the amended AHA makes it an offence to excavate, destroy,
damage, conceal or in any way alter any ‘Aboriginal
site’ within the
area of the proposed licence without Ministerial consent under s 18 of the
amended AHA;
(c) the Western Australian DPLH has a policy titled ‘
Consultation
policy for section 18 applications (November 2023)
consultation
) which sets out the State's expectations for consultation with the
native title party prior to submitting a s 18
application;
(d) the consultation policy sets out seven good practice standards for
consultation;
(e) if the relevant grantee party applied for consent under s 18 of the amended
AHA, the consultation policy provides that supporting
documentation
demonstrating the level of consultation carried out should be submitted with the
application and the Minister may defer
making a decision until appropriate
consultation is carried out with the relevant native title
(f) Odette Two has confirmed it is aware of its obligations under the amended
(g) in these circumstances, the Tribunal should reach the conclusion that the
protective regime under the amended AHA is sufficient
to ensure that s 237(b)
interference is unlikely to
[69] At this
point it is convenient to record that I accept these contentions with two
exceptions. First, in my opinion, these contentions
are of a general nature in
the sense that they do not engage with the particular circumstances of this
matter, and, in some instances,
are provisional, noting the presence of the
qualifier ‘may’ in (a) and the qualifiers ‘if’,
and ‘may’ in (e). And secondly, for reasons
explained below, I do not agree with the last of these contentions.
[70] On the
question of whether the heritage regime under the amended AHA is sufficient to
ensure that s 237(b) interference is unlikely
to occur, in its reply submissions
TMPAC in summary contends that –
(a) for this inquiry the relevant amendments in the context of the amended AHA
are to s 18 and relating to the establishment of an
Aboriginal Cultural Heritage
(b) while ‘the amendments to s 18 are numerous and substantial, they are
best characterised as adding features to the s 18
process that existed before
the commencement of the’
(c) with respect to the Aboriginal Cultural Heritage Committee, substantively,
the difference between the previous and new committee
composition;
(d) the contentions of the State are general in the sense that they do not
directly engage with the scenario where the Tribunal finds
that the area
identified by Mr Morgan is a site of particular
significance;
(e) TMPAC’s main reply contention is to repeat its reliance on
[71] Additionally,
in its reply submissions, TMPAC provides the following contentions, which, in my
view, go to the heart of the engagement
of s 237(b) and the operation of the
amended AHA in the circumstances of this matter (emphasis
20. The fact
that an area of particular significance has been identified in this inquiry
means that, in practice, the Grantee Party
will have no option other than to
make a s 18 application over this area if wants to do any kind of ground
disturbing work on the
21. As explained above, s 18 remains a mechanism to obtain consent to use
land for a purpose that will damage any “Aboriginal
provisions s 18(2) and (3) and s 39 are unchanged. When a s 18 application is
made over a site or area of particular
significance a statutory process is
commenced that contemplates damage to the site or area.
In terms of making a
predictive assessment about the outcome of a s 18 process, the chance that a
site or area will not be damaged
can only be assessed as a possibility. That
conclusion follows from the procedure itself and is not affected by the
amendments to
the Act or the publication of the “Consultation policy for
section 18 applications”. It is the reason why the legislative
established by the
Aboriginal Heritage Act
does not sufficiently lessen the risk
of interference to the area of particular significance identified by Mr Paul
Morgan such that
the grant of
E53/2239 attracts the expedited procedure
22. It is necessary to reply, in connection with this contention, to the
Grantee Party’s contention about its proposed operations.
Even on its
description of planned activities it must be contemplated that ground disturbing
activities will occur on identified
areas of interest. In terms of a predictive
assessment it must also be contemplated that areas of interest will be
identified in
the area of particular significance identified by Mr Paul Morgan.
And it is in this scenario that the Grantee Party will have to
application.
contentions in extracted paragraphs 20 and 22 above are largely rhetorical
however they provide context for the contentions
in extracted paragraph 21
above, which I agree with. In
, President Dowsett
observed with respect to the operation of the pre-amendment AHA:
It is possible that
protection under the AH Act may not extend to areas or sites to which s 237(b)
applies. It is also possible
that s 237(b) may not apply to sites protected
under the AH Act. Once this difference in focus is recognised, it becomes
to identify the extent to which the AH Act might protect sites of
particular significance to traditional owners. In order to do so,
it would be
necessary that I identify a particular site, identify the various ways in which
there might be an adverse impact of the
kind contemplated by 237(b), and then
consider the extent to which the AH Act might reduce the likelihood that there
will be such
impact. No party has made any attempt to demonstrate how the AH Act
might operate in the present case.
Present Dowsett’s observations were made in the context of the AHA before
its repeal and subsequent reinstatement
with amendments, in my opinion these
comments are equally applicable to the operation of the amended AHA in the
circumstances of
this matter.
Tribunal has recently examined the heritage regime under the amended AHA: see,
for example, Member Eaton’s analysis
from [53], and
Member Cooley’s analysis in
[75] I am of the
view that the analysis contained in these matters is instructive in the present
matter where, during the course of
the inquiry: the heritage regime in Western
Australia changed, first with the ACHA coming into effect in July 2023, and then
the commencement of the substantive provisions of the
November 2023 amending the AHA and repealing the ACHA; and, the parties were
provided the opportunity to provide contentions addressing
the impact of these
changes on the heritage regime in Western Australia.
[76] Relatedly,
, Member Cooley succinctly explained the different
emphases of s 237 of the NTA and ss 17 and 18 of the amended AHA in the
As the Tribunal has discussed a number of
occasions, there is a difference in focus between the application of
section 237
Native Title Act
Aboriginal Heritage
(see, for example,
Boarder Exploration
at [44]–[56]
Marpartu v Gianni
at [44]). For instance, there may be particular
exploration activities which amount to interference within the meaning of
Native Title Act
but which do not offend
Heritage Act
and therefore do not require consent under
Additionally,
, the relevant Minister is required to have regard to the general
interest of the community, which may well give rise to different
considerations
to those 4 s 237(b), which is concerned with likely interference in accordance
with the native title holders’
traditions.
[77] Odette Two
has provided no evidence or contentions directed to where it intends to carry
out its activities within the area of
the proposed licence nor how the amended
AHA would apply in the circumstances of this matter to make s 237(b)
interference unlikely
in the event the proposed licence is granted. Moreover,
there is no evidence before me that Odette Two proposes to engage with TMPAC
any extent with respect to heritage protection, for example, by conducting
surveys under a heritage protection agreement, with
a view to making s 237(b)
interference unlikely in the event the proposed licence is granted.
[78] If the
grant is made, Odette Two will be entitled to conduct activities, including the
planned rock chip and soil geochemical
sampling and assaying in year one and the
planned drilling campaign in year two, in the area of the proposed licence
including in
the identified area and could, under
of the amended AHA, apply
for and be granted consent to physically disturb the creeks, ground, water and
trees of identified area.
[79] While I
accept the State’s generalised contentions regarding the operation of
of the amended AHA and the consultation policy, in light of the
absence of any evidence or contentions directed to the circumstances
matter explaining how compliance with the provisions of the amended AHA would
lessen the likelihood of s 237(b) interference,
including the difficulty of
predicting the outcome of any
process under the amended AHA, I cannot be
satisfied, for the purposes of s 237(b), the operation of the amended AHA will
be sufficient
to ensure the activities which will be permitted if the proposed
licence is granted will be unlikely to physically interfere with
the creeks,
ground, water and trees of identified area.
[80] In this
matter, having considered the relevant evidence and contentions of the parties,
and the relevant legislation, I am not
satisfied that the operation of the
heritage regime in Western Australia under the amended AHA will mean s 237(b)
interference is
unlikely in the circumstances of this matter.
Determination
[81] I determine
the grant of exploration licence E53/2239 to Odette Two Pty Ltd is not an act
attracting the expedited procedure.
See TMPAC’s Form 4
Objection to Inclusion in an Expedited Procedure Application dated 21 April
2023, at [1].
DEMIRS initial material,
DEMIRS initial material,
DEMIRS initial material,
See TMPAC’s Form
4 Objection to Inclusion in an Expedited Procedure Application dated 21 April
See TMPAC contentions
contentions at [7].
Cheinmora v Striker Resources
Yindjibarndi v FMG
v Northern Territory
See Mr Morgan’s
gender restricted statement at [2]-[3] and Mr Morgan’s supplementary
statement at [2]-[3].
Two contentions at [15].
TMPAC contentions at [11].
State contentions at [26].
State contentions at
contentions at [19].
Two contentions at [18].
Odette Two contentions at
Odette Two contentions
contentions at [22].
Two contentions at [23].
Odette Two contentions at
contentions at [27].
Morgan’s gender restricted statement at
See Mr Morgan’s
gender restricted statement at
See Mr Morgan’s
gender restricted statement at [9] to [12] and Mr Morgan’s supplementary
statement at [4].
Morgan’s supplementary statement at
See Mr Morgan’s
gender restricted statement at
See State Contentions
at [24] and [25].
Andrews v Northern Territory
Northern Territory
at [117] and
Northern Territory
Northern Territory
Northern Territory
Northern Territory
contentions at [10].
Odette Two contentions
contentions at [20].
Morgan’s gender restricted statement at unrestricted paragraph
Yindjibarndi v
Morgan’s gender restricted statement at [7] –
See Mr Morgan’s
supplementary statement at
Odette Two contentions
DEMIRS initial
material, 18.
DEMIRS initial
material, 18.
DEMIRS initial
material, 18.
contentions at [29].
contentions at [18].
contentions at [19].
contentions at [19].
contentions at [20].
TMPAC contentions
State contentions
State contentions
State contentions
State contentions
State contentions
State contentions
State contentions
TMPAC reply
contentions at [12].
reply contentions at [13].
TMPAC reply contentions at
TMPAC reply
contentions at [18].
reply contentions at [19].
TMPAC reply contentions at
RTF format (993 KB)
Signed PDF/A format