URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/FCAFC/2023/179.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:48:55
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd v Capic [2023] FCAFC 179 (14 November 2023)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd v Capic
In accordance with the practice of the Federal Court in cases of public
interest, importance or complexity, the following summary
has been prepared to
accompany the Orders made today. This summary is intended to assist in
understanding the outcome of this proceeding
and is not a complete statement of
the conclusions reached by the Court. The only authoritative statement of the
Court’s reasons
is that contained in the published reasons for judgment
which will be available on the internet at
www.fedcourt.gov.au
together with this
Ms Biljana Capic brought proceedings in the Federal Court as a representative
proceeding under Part IVA of the
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) on behalf of herself and the group whom she represents, against Ford
Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd (
Ford Australia
). The initial trial
of the matter took place over six weeks between 15 June 2020 and
24 July 2020. Judgment was delivered on 29
Capic v Ford
Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] FCA 715.
Answers to the common
questions were formulated:
Capic v Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd
(Revised Common Questions)
[2021] FCA 1320.
An appeal from these decisions was heard by the Full Court over six days
between 20–24 and 28 March 2023.
The case relates to various problems alleged to exist with certain vehicles
which were manufactured by Ford Motor Company between
July 2010 and
December 2016 and imported into Australia by Ford Australia and which
contained a type of transmission called the DPS6
Affected Vehicles
The Affected Vehicles were manufactured under three model lines: Focus, Fiesta
and EcoSport.
Relevantly to the appeal, Ms Capic brought a claim under s 271(1) of the
Australian Consumer Law (
) for damages under s 272(1) on the basis
that the Affected Vehicles were not of acceptable quality when supplied to
consumers contrary
to the guarantee in
of the ACL (
Quality Claim
The Acceptable Quality Claim comprised allegations that the Affected Vehicles
as supplied suffered from two sets of deficiencies:
(a) a real risk that four components of the transmission would fail (the
Component Deficiencies
(b) so-called ‘architectural’ features which created risks of
failure because they meant that the DPS6 inadequately managed
the torsional
vibrations and heat generated by the engine (the
Architecture
Deficiencies
It was alleged that the Component Deficiencies and Architecture Deficiencies
meant that the Affected Vehicles had a propensity to
exhibit a range of
undesirable behaviours including shudder, jerking, sudden deceleration and loss
of power, difficulty changing
gears and gear rattling (among others).
Ms Capic was largely successful before the primary judge in proving that the
Affected Vehicles supplied with the relevant original
components were not of
acceptable quality within the meaning of
of the ACL.
Ford Australia appealed from the decision of the primary judge, and Ms Capic
cross-appealed.
On the appeal, Ford Australia contended that the primary judge’s
findings that the Affected Vehicles failed to comply with the
guarantee were infected with errors associated with the primary judge’s
incorrect construction, and misapplication,
of the ACL. Those
aspects of its appeal failed.
In the cross-appeal, Ms Capic contended that the primary judge ought to have
found that the characteristics of firm gear shifting
and a slight shunting
sensation were a consequence of inadequate arrangements for damping of torsional
vibrations. Ms Capic also
contended that the primary judge ought to have found
that the Affected Vehicles were not of acceptable quality because they had an
unusual propensity for servicing, repair and/or replacement of the dual clutch
assembly (or components thereof); and because of the
risk of solder cracking
associated with one of the Component Deficiencies (the ATIC 106 chip). Those
aspects of the cross-appeal
However, Ms Capic succeeded in contending that the primary judge ought to
have found that the alleged Architecture Deficiencies gave
rise to a superadded
propensity for Affected Vehicles to experience troubling vehicle behaviours.
Insofar as her individual claim was concerned, Ms Capic was awarded
damages by the primary judge under s 272(1) of the ACL. On the
appeal, Ford Australia challenged the primary judge’s construction of
s 272(1). During the hearing of the appeal, a decision
of a differently
constituted Full Court was delivered which addressed the same issue of statutory
construction:
Toyota Motor Corporation v Williams
(2023) 296 FCR 514
[2023] FCAFC 50.
This Court followed the decision of
with the result that this
Court determined that:
(1) the primary judge ought to have held that subsequent events were capable of
bearing on the proper assessment of reduction in
value damages;
(2) when assessing the damages payable to Ms Capic, the primary judge ought to
have taken into account the facts known at the time
of trial (being the repairs)
and the use by Ms Capic of her vehicle up until the time of trial;
(3) evidence as to the value of the vehicle at the time of trial was relevant
information which would have enabled the primary judge
to ensure that Ms Capic
was not over-compensated.
On the appeal, Ford Australia contended that the primary judge had
misconstrued s 271(6) of the ACL because it is not engaged where
manufacturer remedies the non-compliance but does not do so within a reasonable
time. That aspect of its appeal failed.
In the cross-appeal, Ms Capic challenged the primary judge’s finding
that, for each risk which was found to have been established,
Ms Capic had a
separate cause of action under s 271 of the ACL. That challenge was
successful, with the result that the primary
judge ought to have found that,
where an Affected Vehicle was affected at the time of the relevant supply by one
or more deficiencies,
that circumstance gave rise to a single failure to comply
with the guarantee of acceptable quality in
of the ACL. That
conclusion was consistent with the reasoning of
In addition, Ms Capic ought to have been, but was not, awarded pre-judgment
interest on the damages awarded for excess amounts of
GST, stamp duty and
financing costs.
The question of Ms Capic’s damages will be remitted for
re-determination on the basis of evidence already before the primary
Justices Yates, Beach and Downes
14 November
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd v
[2023] FCAFC 179
Appeal from:
Capic v Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd
Capic v Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd (Revised Common
[2021] FCA 1320
File number:
NSD 1321 of 2021
Judgment of:
YATES, BEACH AND DOWNES JJ
Date of judgment:
14 November 2023
Catchwords:
CONSUMER LAW
– representative
proceedings – alleged defects in motor vehicles by reason of deficiencies
in transmission system –
where primary judge found affected vehicles were
not of acceptable quality when supplied to consumers contrary to the guarantee
Australian Consumer Law
– whether primary judge applied
statutory test – the meaning of acceptable quality in a propensity case
to which after supply events should be taken into account when
assessing whether guarantee has been met – whether error by
primary judge
in deciding that component posed a safety risk
whether s 271(1)
Australian Consumer Law
gives rise to separate causes of
action – whether s 271(6)
Australian Consumer Law
is engaged when
failure to repair within reasonable time – construction of s 272
Australian Consumer Law
– whether earlier decision of Full Court
which construed same statutory provision should be followed – whether
of assessment should be remitted to primary judge
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Australian Consumer Law
ss 54, 271(1), 271(2), 271(6),
Evidence Act 1995
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) s 74D
Sale of Goods Act 1893 (UK) s 14(2)
United States Code (US) Title 28 § 1782
Cases cited:
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission
v Jayco Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 1672
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Mazda Australia Pty Ltd
(2021) 158 ACSR 31
[2021] FCA 1493
Capic v Ford Motor Company (No 3)
[2017] FCA 771
Capic v Ford Motor Company of Australia Limited (No 4)
Capic v Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd
(2021) 154 ACSR
[2021] FCA 715
Capic v Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd (Revised Common
[2021] FCA 1320
Courtney v Medtel Pty Ltd
(2003) 126 FCR 219
Dwyer v Volkswagen Group Australia Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 211
Gill v Ethicon Sàrl (No 5)
[2019] FCA 1905
Hardwick Game Farm v Suffolk Agricultural Poultry Producers Association
[1968] UKHL 3
[1969] 2 AC 31
Medtel Pty Ltd v Courtney
(2003) 130 FCR 182
[2003] FCAFC 151
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs v FAK19
(2021) 287 FCR 181
[2021] FCAFC 153
Pearson v Minister for Home Affairs
(2022) 295 FCR 177
[2022] FCAFC
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
[1998] HCA 28
Tapiki v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 408 ALR 503
[2023] FCAFC 10
Toyota Motor Corporation Australia Limited v Williams
(2023) 296 FCR
[2023] FCAFC 50
v BY Winddown, Inc. (formerly Bertram Yachts)
(2018) 362 ALR 702
[2018] FCA 426
General Division
New South Wales
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
Regulator and Consumer Protection
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
20–24, 28 March 2023
Counsel for the Appellant:
Ms W Harris KC w/ Mr M Costello KC and Mr T
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr J Gleeson SC w/ Dr F Roughley and Mr P Strickland
Counsel for the Respondent:
Corrs Chambers Westgarth
NSD 1321 of 2021
FORD MOTOR COMPANY OF AUSTRALIA PTY LTD ACN 004
BILJANA CAPIC
YATES, BEACH AND DOWNES JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
14 NOVEMBER 2023
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
14 days, the parties provide to the Full Court an agreed form of orders,
including the answers to the common questions and
costs order, having regard to
the findings made.
the parties cannot agree on a form of orders and answers to the common
questions, then, by 1 December 2023, the parties provide
to the Full Court a
form of orders (other than costs), and answers to the common questions, which
they propose, to be accompanied
by written submissions not exceeding five
1 December 2023, the parties file and serve submissions regarding costs (not
exceeding three pages) if agreement cannot be reached
on the issue of
Note: Entry of orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
INTRODUCTION
The case brought
Ruling by primary judge in
relation to admission of documents
Overview of findings by the
primary judge relating to claims by Ms Capic
Overview of findings by the
primary judge relating to claims by the group
FORD’S APPEAL ON
Whether primary judge applied the
correct statutory test
The meaning of “acceptable
quality” in s 54 in a propensity case
Whether, and to what extent, after
supply events are taken
into account when assessing whether the guarantee
has been met
Ground 1 Amended Notice of
Ground 2 Amended Notice of
Ground 3 Amended Notice of
Reasons of the primary
Whether primary judge answered
irrelevant question
Whether conclusion as to safety
as part of s 54 analysis was wrong
The respondent’s Notice of
RESPONDENT’S APPEAL ON
Grounds 1 and 2 Amended Notice of
Cross-Appeal
Relevant procedural
Reasons of the primary
Whether the primary judge
Grounds 3 and 4(b) Amended Notice
of Cross-Appeal
Reasons of the primary
Whether the primary judge
Ground 5 Amended Notice of
Cross-Appeal
Whether the primary judge
Ground 6 Amended Notice of
Cross-Appeal
Grounds 10 and 11 Amended Notice
of Cross-Appeal
Reasons of the primary
Whether the primary judge
APPEAL ON DAMAGES
Section 271 Australian Consumer
Whether s 271(1) gives
rise to separate causes of action
Whether s 271(6) is
engaged when failure to repair within reasonable time
Section 272 Australian Consumer
Reasons of the primary
Whether the primary judge
APPEAL ON PRE-JUDGMENT
DISPOSITION
INTRODUCTION
is an appeal by Ford
Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd (
from orders made on 13 August 2021 and 18 November 2021, and the judgment
delivered on 29 June 2021 in
Capic v Ford Motor Company of Australia Pty Ltd
(2021) 154 ACSR 235
[2021] FCA 715
) and the further
judgment delivered on 3 November 2021 in
Capic v Ford Motor Company of
Australia Pty Ltd (Revised Common Questions)
[2021] FCA 1320
primary judge found that Ford had supplied certain vehicles that were not
compliant with the statutory guarantee of acceptable
quality in s 54 of the
Australian Consumer Law
), being Sch 2 of the
Competition
and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth), by reason of deficiencies in the transmission
system giving rise to a propensity for the vehicles to exhibit “a
range of behaviours”.
Biljana Capic, the respondent to the appeal brought by Ford, has brought a
cross-appeal on behalf of herself and the group whom
she represents.
sides have filed Notices of Contention in the other’s appeal.
referring to Ms Capic in her capacity as the group’s representative,
we will refer to her as the respondent and when referring
to her in her own
capacity, we will call her Ms Capic.
The case brought below
proceedings below concerned various problems alleged to exist with 73,451
vehicles, manufactured by Ford Motor Company (
July 2010 and December 2016, and imported into Australia by
Affected Vehicles
). The dates they were supplied new ranged
from 22 September 2010 to 29 December 2017. They each contained a
6-speed dry dual clutch
PowerShift transmission called the
”. The Affected Vehicles were manufactured under three
model lines: Focus, Fiesta and EcoSport.
Capic brought these proceedings as a representative proceeding under
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) on behalf of herself and
the group whom she represents. The group consists principally of the persons
who purchased these vehicles
new together with subsequent second-hand purchasers
between 1 January 2011 and 29 November 2018.
to this appeal and cross-appeal, Ms Capic brought a claim under s 271(1) of
the ACL seeking damages pursuant to s 272(1)
of the ACL on the basis that
the Affected Vehicles were not of acceptable quality when supplied to consumers
contrary to the guarantee
of the ACL.
the primary judge, it was alleged that the Affected Vehicles as supplied (which
included a car purchased by Ms Capic) suffered
from two sets of
deficiencies.
first set were described by the primary judge as
Component Deficiencies
It was claimed that the DPS6 posed four risks related to components within it,
(1) Input shaft seals which had a tendency to leak permitting lubricants from
the gearbox side of the transmission to enter the part
of the bell housing
containing the otherwise dry clutch and drive plates and contaminate them;
(2) Inadequate
friction material
on the faces of the clutch and drive
plates (the friction material is also referred to as the
(3) A transmission control module (
) which contained a printed circuit
) to which was affixed, amongst other things, two types of
integrated circuits or chips known as an “
” chip. These were affixed to the PCB by means
of solder. It was claimed that the coefficients of thermal expansion of the
and the ATIC 91 and ATIC 106 chips were different and that repeated heating and
cooling of the TCM (which is attached to the
transmission assembly) created a
risk of the solder cracking; and
(4) A rear main oil seal which had a tendency to leak thereby permitting
lubricants to enter the bell housing from the engine side
of the transmission
and contaminate the clutch and drive plates.
second set were said to give rise to a risk of certain symptoms (the principal,
but not only, symptom being shudder) because of
what were said to be two
architecture features of the DPS6 (described variously as the
Architecture
Deficiencies
Architectural Deficiencies
). These were (1)
inadequate heat management and (2) inadequate damping of torsional vibrations.
These problems were designated
as associated with the architecture of the DPS6
because of a contention that they could not be cured without changes to that
architecture
and that this in fact had not occurred.
Ruling by primary judge in relation to admission of
the trial, Ford objected to the respondent’s attempt to tender certain
documents on the basis that it would be procedurally
unfair for them to be
admitted. For the most part, this objection was upheld:
[924]–[955] J.
Overview of findings by the primary judge relating to claims by
following is a summary of the findings of the primary judge in relation to the
claims by Ms Capic on her own behalf and which
are relevant to the appeal and
cross-appeal.
Capic purchased a 2012 Ford Focus on 24 December 2012.
relation to the Component Deficiencies, it was Ms Capic’s case that each
of the first three risks eventuated in the case
of her vehicle and gave rise to
a range of symptoms including shudder. Her case, however, was not that her
vehicle was not of acceptable
quality because three of the risks materialised;
it was rather that it was not of acceptable quality because it was supplied with
the four risks inherent in it.
to this part of Ms Capic’s case, the primary judge decided that:
(1) Ms Capic established the existence of each of the risks except the risk said
to arise from the rear main oil seal: [5] J. We
observe that no appeal has
been brought in relation to the rear main oil seal;
(2) for each risk, Ms Capic had a separate cause of action under s 271(1)
of the ACL entitling her to claim damages from Ford under
(3) in the case of Ms Capic’s vehicle, the three accepted risks also
manifested themselves and, after they did, her vehicle
displayed a troubling
range of behaviours which caused Ms Capic to take her vehicle for servicing and
to complain about these problems:
(4) Ford did not satisfactorily resolve the problem relating to the friction
material: [8] J;
(5) the risk inherent in the input shaft seals with which Ms Capic’s
vehicle was supplied was eliminated when they were replaced
by Ford, but this
was not done within a reasonable time: [10]–[11] J;
(6) the risk posed by the TCM failing was not removed when Ford installed a
software update known as “
” which detected solder
cracking before actual symptoms became perceptible to the driver: [7] J;
(7) the risk posed by the TCM failing was removed when Ms Capic’s vehicle
received a new TCM with the revised ATIC 91 chip,
but this was not done
within a reasonable time: [7], [10]–[11] J;
(8) Ms Capic did not demonstrate the existence of the problem with the original
ATIC 106 chips: [7] J.
asserted below that it was entitled to rely upon s 271(6) of the ACL in
response to Ms Capic’s claim, but this was rejected
by the primary
judge because of the findings made above. The primary judge was therefore
satisfied that Ms Capic was entitled to
sue Ford for the reduction in value
damage which she suffered as a result of the supply to her of a vehicle with the
three inherent
risks: [11] J.
to the Architecture Deficiencies, the primary judge decided at [13] J
(1) the heat management case failed;
(2) the manner in which the DPS6 damped torsional vibrations generated a risk
that the gears in Ms Capic’s vehicle would rattle
and her vehicle would
display a slight shudder at low speeds;
(3) Ford described the gear rattling and a slight shudder at low speeds as
“normal operating characteristics” of the
DPS6 and so did not
attempt to resolve them. However, the primary judge considered that the fact
that gear rattling and a slight
shudder at low speeds were described as normal
operating characteristics did not have the consequence that they cannot
a breach of the guarantee of acceptable quality;
(4) the fact that Ms Capic’s vehicle was supplied with these two
problems inherent in it had the consequence that it was not
of acceptable
quality for the purposes of s 271(1) and she had another cause of action
against Ford in respect of them.
was awarded damages for reduction in value in the amount of $6,820.91 and other
reasonably foreseeable loss and damage under
s 272(1) of the ACL:
[14]–[15] J. Although Ms Capic made a claim for damages for
inconvenience, distress and vexation in her
pleadings, she did not pursue it in
her submissions and so the primary judge made no award for it:
Overview of findings by the primary judge relating to claims by
following is a summary of the findings by the primary judge in relation to the
claim by the group and which are relevant to the
appeal and cross-appeal.
to the Component Deficiencies, the primary judge decided that:
(1) the vehicles which were supplied with the original input shaft seals posed a
risk of failure with the consequence that all of
these vehicles were at the time
of their supply not of acceptable quality: [19] J;
(2) the vehicles which were supplied with the original clutch lining material
(known as “
”) suffered from a risk of developing
symptoms such that they did not comply with the guarantee of acceptable quality:
(3) the vehicles supplied with TCMs containing the original ATIC 91 chip were
not of acceptable quality at the time of their supply
because of the risks they
posed: [30] J;
(4) the claim based on the supply of vehicles with TCMs containing the original
ATIC 106 chip failed: [29] J;
(5) the vehicles supplied with a TCM with the revised ATIC 91 chip were not in
breach of the guarantee of acceptable quality: [29]
(6) the claim based on the supply of vehicles with an inherent risk of failure
due to the rear main oil seal failed: [33] J. We
observe that no appeal
has been brought in relation to the rear main oil seal.
to the application of s 271(6) of the ACL to the claim concerning the input
shaft seals, the primary judge decided that:
(1) in vehicles in which the original input shaft seals had not been replaced,
those group members have claims under s 271(1) for
reduction in value
damages under s 272(1)(a) and (if applicable) other reasonably foreseeable
loss and damage under s 272(1)(b) of
the ACL: [20] J;
(2) where the input shaft seals had been replaced with seals containing both the
new “FKM” elastomer and a steel outer
backing on the inner seal, the
issue of whether the repair was effected within a reasonable time had not been
tried and turned on
the individual position of each group member: [21] J.
It could not be known whether these group members have claims for reduction
value damages, although they may have claims for other reasonably foreseeable
loss and damage under s 272(1)(b) of the ACL: [22]
(3) where the input shaft seals had been replaced with seals containing only the
new FKM elastomer but not the new steel backing
on the inner seal, the extent of
the remaining risk was not established: [22], [680] J.
to the application of s 271(6) of the ACL to the claim concerning the
clutch lining, the primary judge decided that:
(1) in the case of vehicles in which the original clutch lining (the B8080) was
not replaced, those group members have claims under
s 271(1) for reduction
in value damages under s 272(1)(a) and (if applicable) other reasonably
foreseeable loss and damage under
s 272(1)(b) of the ACL: [24] J;
(2) in the case of vehicles which received replacement clutches using clutch
lining known as “
”, this replacement removed the
relevant risk. The issue of whether the repair was effected within a reasonable
time had not
been tried and turned on the individual position of each group
member. It could not be known whether these group members have claims
reduction in value damages, although they may have claims for other reasonably
foreseeable loss and damage under s 272(1)(b)
of the ACL: [25] J;
(3) in the case of vehicles which received a replacement clutch known as a
half-hybrid B8040/B8080 clutch
”, this replacement did not
remove the relevant risk. As s 271(6) does not apply, these group members
have claims for reduction
in value damages as well as for other reasonably
foreseeable loss and damage under s 272(1)(b) of the ACL:
(4) in the case of vehicles which were supplied with the half-hybrid B8040/B8080
clutch, the group members did not have a claim in
respect of the clutch lining:
(5) in the case of vehicles which were supplied with RCF1o, the group members
did not have a claim in respect of the clutch lining:
to the application of s 271(6) of the ACL to the claim concerning vehicles
supplied with TCMs containing the original ATIC 91 chip,
the primary judge
stated at [30] J that:
...The Respondent applied two fixes. First, each vehicle which was presented
for service after 27 October 2015 received a software
update known as
15B22. It did not address the physical problem of solder cracking but it
detected that problem before the symptoms
associated with it became perceptible
to the driver and disabled the vehicle in a sufficiently confronting way,
attended with warning
lights and messages, that it may be accepted that a driver
would take the vehicle in for service almost immediately and without fail.
Secondly, once new TCMs with the revised ATIC 91 chip became available
these were inserted into vehicles which showed symptoms of
TCM failure or which
had been brought in for service due to the operation of the warning system
instituted by the 15B22 software
[32] J, the primary judge found that the replacement of the original TCM
with a new TCM with the revised ATIC 91 chip was “a
successful repair
and removed the risk posed by the original TCM” but that, again, “in
the case of each such group member
it is not presently known whether the
replacement was effected within a reasonable time”. For this reason, the
primary judge
concluded that it could not be known whether these group members
have claims for reduction in value damages.
to the Architecture Deficiencies, the primary judge decided that:
(1) the claim based on the supply of vehicles with an inherent risk of failure
because of the way in which heat was managed in the
DPS6 failed: [34] J;
(2) the DPS6 did not suffer from the Architecture Deficiency constituted by
inadequate torsional damping; however, all Affected Vehicles
had a risk that
they would develop rattling gears and slight shudder at low speeds due to the
manner in which the DPS6 damps torsional
vibrations, with the consequence that
the Affected Vehicles did not comply with the guarantee of acceptable quality:
[35], [530]
group members sought damages on an aggregate basis, but the primary judge
determined that he could not be satisfied that a reasonably
accurate assessment
could be made of the total amount to which group members would be entitled, as
required by
Federal Court of Australia Act
FORD’S APPEAL ON LIABILITY
grounds 1, 2 and 3 of the Amended Notice of Appeal, Ford raises related
complaints about the manner in which the primary judge
the ACL, and approached the task of assessing whether the statutory guarantee
had been met. We turn then to consider that provision,
and the issues raised by
these grounds generally, before addressing the grounds themselves in more
of the ACL relevantly provides that, if a person supplies goods to a
consumer in trade or commerce (as was the case here), there
is a guarantee that
the goods are of acceptable quality.
(3) of the ACL provide guidance as to the meaning of
“acceptable quality” in
as follows:
(2) Goods are of
acceptable quality
if they are as:
(a) fit for all the purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly supplied;
(b) acceptable in appearance and finish; and
(c) free from defects; and
(d) safe; and
(e) durable;
as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the state and condition of the
goods (including any hidden defects of the goods),
would regard as acceptable
having regard to the matters in subsection (3).
(3) The matters for the purposes of subsection (2) are:
(a) the nature of the goods; and
(b) the price of the goods (if relevant); and
(c) any statements made about the goods on any packaging or label on the goods;
(d) any representation made about the goods by the supplier or manufacturer of
the goods; and
(e) any other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the goods.
(emphasis original.)
Ford’s appeal, there are three issues raised in connection with the proper
interpretation of
, and the approach taken by the primary judge in its
application, being:
(1) whether the primary judge applied the correct statutory test. In
particular, whether the primary judge applied
as requiring a standard
of perfection;
(2) the meaning of “acceptable quality” in
in a propensity
(3) whether, and to what extent, after supply events are taken into account when
assessing whether the guarantee in
has been met.
Whether primary judge applied the correct statutory
observed at [52]–[53] J, the respondent’s case that the
Affected Vehicles were not of acceptable quality was made on
the basis that the
vehicles had a propensity towards, or risks of, certain identified
misbehaviours. The case was therefore about
the existence of propensities (or
risks) of identified forms of vehicle misbehaviour. The method of proof
selected by the respondent
was to seek to demonstrate that the propensities or
risks existed because of particular mechanical features of the DPS6.
turn then to consider the reasons of the primary judge.
[54] J, the primary judge identified the nature of the evidence which the
respondent relied on to prove the existence of the risks
of the alleged
misbehaviours. At [55] J, the primary judge identified that a more fulsome
explanation of the respondent’s
case that the vehicles suffered from the
risks of misbehaviour identified by Dr Greiner (the respondent’s expert)
was contained
in Section XVI of the reasons. At [58] J, the primary judge
summarised the case that Ford was required to meet on the existence
alleged propensity of the vehicles to misbehave.
section VI of the reasons, the primary judge addressed the issue of the leaking
input shaft seals. Harking back to the earlier
discussion concerning the manner
in which the respondent sought to establish liability, the primary judge
observed at [221] J that:
[The] question in the case is whether the vehicles pose a risk of a particular
set of failures and are, for that reason, not of acceptable
quality under
Whether that risk proceeds from features of the input shaft seals
which have their origins in manufacturing processes or instead design
(or both) is irrelevant to that question
(emphasis added.)
VIII of the reasons addressed the “TCM Issue”. The respondent
contended that, before the introduction of the
15B22 software update, this posed
a safety issue. The primary judge considered this to be something of a side
issue. At [388] J,
the primary judge again referred to the actual question
for determination, being whether the vehicles were of acceptable quality
the meaning of
of the ACL. His Honour continued:
The safety risk the Applicant puts forward is that which arises from the
ATIC 91 chip and is limited to the symptom consisting of
a total loss of
motive power. If one makes the assumption that the Applicant succeeds in
proving that, as sold, the vehicles had
a real risk of a total loss of motive
power whilst driving then the question is whether a vehicle with that real risk
is of acceptable
quality within the meaning of
If on the other hand,
the Applicant fails to show the existence of such a real risk then the issue
does not seem to arise.
On this view of affairs, the question of whether the
real risk was also a safety risk does not seem to matter very much
(emphasis added.)
X of the reasons addressed the alleged Architecture Deficiencies. The primary
judge observed at [456] J that:
...The question of whether the damping systems for the DPS6 are adequate from an
engineering perspective is not quite the same question
as whether vehicles
fitted with a DPS6 are of acceptable quality for the purposes of ACL
example, it is often said that the Sydney Harbour Bridge is over-engineered in
the sense that it was built much stronger than
it needed, in fact, to be. In
that sense, its engineering was inadequate because excessive resources had been
devoted to achieving
a strength which was of no practical utility. The bridge
however is perfectly adequate from the perspective of all those who have
primary judge continued at [500] and [512] J:
...It is not enough to say that the damping was inadequate per se. This is
because this is a case under ACL
and the Applicant needs to show that the
vehicles were not of acceptable quality.
That question is a consumer-facing
...Assuming in the Applicant’s favour that the use of clutch slip
generated heat and that the heat management system was not
sufficient to deal
with this, the question then arises: what actual problem did this cause? By
itself a hot transmission does not
translate into a vehicle which is not of
acceptable quality within the meaning of
There must be something
of a vehicle fitted with the
(emphasis added.)
[529] and [530] J, the primary judge stated:
...To label the engineering qualities of the DPS6 with the word
‘deficiency’ or its damping system with the word
‘inadequate’
carries a particular risk that such a designation will
contaminate the assessment of the statutory question. Where that word is
in an engineering context that risk is augmented.
What is a deficiency from
an engineer’s perspective may not necessarily be unacceptable from a
consumer’s perspective.
Indeed, it is precisely the prospect of such
an outcome which underpins the Respondent’s contention that the DPS6
guarantee because shudder, harsh gear shifts,
rattle, shunting and mechanical sounds during gear shifts are but its normal
characteristics. Such an outcome is not logically excluded merely
because a transmission engineer might think the torsional damping
provided in
the DPS6 could have been better.
I therefore do not accept the Applicant’s contention that the DPS6
suffered from the Architectural Deficiency constituted by
inadequate torsional
damping. However, as I have explained I do accept that torsional vibrations
caused 2 of the 5 normal operating
characteristics which the Respondent
Rejection of this contention does not, however, tell one anything
with the guarantee of acceptable quality in
(emphasis added.)
XII of the reasons addressed the topic of acceptable quality.
identifying that the issue is governed by
of the ACL, the primary
judge quoted the provision at [603] J, and then stated at
[606]–[607] J:
... [F]or present purposes, the issue is whether the vehicles were of
‘acceptable quality’ within the meaning of
The language of
suggests that the guarantee applies at the time of supply of
vehicles. The issue is therefore whether the vehicles were of acceptable
quality at the time of supply.
‘Acceptable quality’ is defined in
, extracted above.
The relevant portions of this are the requirement that the vehicles be fit for
all purposes for which such vehicles
are commonly supplied, be free from
defects, be safe and be durable. In deciding whether the vehicles satisfied
those requirements
one is required by
to have regard ‘to the
matters in subsection (3)’, also extracted above.
next section of the primary judge’s reasons, which spans [614] to
[637] J, contains an analysis by the primary judge of
the matters listed in
of the ACL. At [614] J, the primary judge introduced this
section by stating:
It is therefore necessary to consider whether each of the inherent risks of
failure I have concluded existed were such as to mean
that the vehicles were not
of acceptable quality. However, that assessment is required by
be conducted having regard to the matters in
which are therefore
mandatory matters which the Court must assess...
primary judge then proceeded to address each of the matters in
before stating at [637] J that, having surveyed the mandatory matters in
, it was necessary to consider each of the problems which had been
identified. The primary judge then did so, and referred back to
consideration of the matters in
, without repeating them, which he
was entitled to do: see, for example, [640] and [669] J. No error is shown
by taking such an approach
as it is plain that, when making such references, the
primary judge was referring to the section of his reasons which addressed the
mandatory considerations in
at [614]–[637] J.
is a central contention by Ford on its appeal that the primary judge erred
because he applied a standard of “acceptable quality”
that demanded
perfection, or something close to perfection, which is not the standard
envisioned by the statutory phrase. When making
this submission, Ford focused
on particular sentences or paragraphs in his Honour’s reasons for
judgment, such as the final
sentence of [671] J that, “New cars
should not have a tendency to rattle, even slightly”.
having regard to the reasons as a whole, especially those extracted above, that
is not a fair characterisation of the approach
taken by the primary judge. In
particular, had the primary judge applied such a standard then (for example) he
would not have observed
at [612] J (quoted below) that not every inherent
risk of failure will have the consequence that goods are not of acceptable
or emphasised that the test of acceptable quality is gauged by
reference to a consumer’s
expectations.
related submission by Ford is that the primary judge applied the standard in
absolute terms, and not by reference to what a reasonable
consumer (with the
requisite knowledge) would regard as acceptable. This submission was advanced
on the basis that his Honour’s
reasons addressed the issue of whether the
vehicles were free from defects without mention of, or regard to, the
expectations of
the hypothetical reasonable consumer. Again, Ford focused on
particular paragraphs within the judgment to demonstrate this.
there was no error in the approach taken by the primary judge. As is evident
from the reasons which are extracted or noted
above, the primary judge
identified the basis upon which the case had been brought under
namely that the vehicles had a propensity towards, or risks of, certain
identified misbehaviours. In the course of addressing the
evidence, and making
factual findings about whether that case had been established, the primary judge
reinforced that he was addressing
the respondent’s case under
see, for example, [221], [388], [456] and [530] J. As we have noted, the
primary judge then set out the text of
and addressed the nature of the
respondent’s case within that specific framework, with express references
made in [612] and
[613] J to the consumer’s reasonable expectations.
After addressing the mandatory matters in
by reference to the facts
as found, the primary judge then addressed each of the alleged problems,
referring back to the
analysis but also through the prism of
acceptable quality which had been the subject of earlier analysis in the
reasons. That he
did so is apparent from a fair reading of the reasons as a
whole including particular paragraphs of the reasons which will be addressed
relation to specific grounds of appeal. In these circumstances, it was not
necessary for the primary judge to refer repeatedly
and expressly to the fact
that he was assessing whether the vehicles were of acceptable quality by
reference to the perception of
the reasonable consumer within the meaning of
It is plain that his Honour did so. No error has been
demonstrated.
The meaning of “acceptable quality” in
propensity case
was common ground on the appeal that a propensity case which alleges breach of
the statutory guarantee contained in
of the ACL turns on two
interrelated variables, namely the severity of the problem if it arises and the
probability of the problem
arising. It is the assessment of those variables
which informs the conclusion as to whether the goods are of acceptable quality
as required by the statutory guarantee.
much was accepted by the primary judge. We agree that is the correct
relevant aspects of the primary judge’s reasons are at
[608]–[613] J:
The Applicant’s case took as its starting point that the vehicles fitted
with the DPS6 had various risks of failure. The Applicant
contended that goods
with a risk of failure would not be of acceptable quality. She relied on this
Court’s decision in
Courtney v Medtel Pty Ltd
[2003] FCA 36
’). In that case it was found that
Mr Courtney was entitled to recover damages for the pain, suffering, loss
of enjoyment of
life and economic loss associated with having removed from his
chest cavity a particular kind of sub-optimal pacemaker. The pacemaker
utilised ‘yellow spool solder’ which is bad. The use of yellow
spool solder was generally attended by a risk
of dendritic failure which is why
Mr Courtney had the pacemaker removed. On inspection of the blighted
pacemaker following its successful
explantation from Mr Courtney it was
ascertained that it had always functioned normally and, indeed, had it not been
explanted it
would probably not have failed prematurely. The risk with the
yellow-spool solder, though real, would likely never have eventuated
Mr Courtney’s case. With hindsight one could say that the
explantation had been unnecessary. Indeed, this is precisely
manufacturer did say in resisting Mr Courtney’s claim.
The trial judge, Sackville J, understandably rejected this unattractive
submission. He concluded that the pacemaker was not of merchantable
because it had a superadded risk of failure, that is, a superadded risk that it
would be unable to fulfil the purpose of
restoring or maintaining the heart rate
of patients experiencing electrical heart-related problems:
It was not to the point that in the individual case the risk might not have
transpired. The Full Court upheld the trial judge’s
conclusions:
Medtel v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
130 FCR 182.
Branson J with
whom Jacobson J agreed observed at [78]:
In my view, having regard to the evidence before the primary judge ... no error
can be shown to have been involved in his Honour’s
conclusion that a
pacemaker that has only the ordinary or usual risk of premature failure is more
fit for the purpose of being used
as a pacemaker than a pacemaker that has, by
reason of the method of its manufacture, an appreciably higher risk of premature
In this case it was reasonable to expect, at the time of the supply to
Mr Courtney of his pacemaker, that Mr Courtney’s pacemaker
manufactured in a way which gave rise to only the ordinary or usual risk of
premature failure. However, the use of yellow
spool solder in the manufacture
of Mr Courtney’s pacemaker meant that Mr Courtney’s pacemaker had an
appreciably higher
risk of premature failure than the ordinary or usual risk of
premature failure to be expected in pacemakers.
This reasoning has been applied to other goods with an inherent risk which
renders them not of acceptable quality: eg, components
in satellite broadband
APS Satellite Pty Ltd (formerly known as “SkyMesh Pty
Ltd”) v Ipstar Australia Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWSC 1898
’) at [69]-[82] per Rein J (while the case was not on
all fours with
, his Honour recognised the reasoning in
as an authoritative approach to ‘prone to failure’ cases); high
density polyethelene containment liner in
Protec Pacific Pty Ltd v Steuler
Services GmbH & Co KG
[2014] VSCA 338
Santamaria and Kyrou JJA (although the claim failed); and, ocean going
recreational fishing vessels in
Vautin v BY Winddown, Inc. (formerly Bertram
Yachts) (No 4)
[2018] FCA 426
362 ALR 702
at [145]-[151] per Derrington J.
The Respondent submitted that
was distinguishable because a
pacemaker was a non-discretionary good upon which a consumer’s life might
depend. There was
no comparison to be made between the nature of a pacemaker
and the nature of a vehicle or between the potential for a pacemaker to
the potential for a vehicle to exhibit non-safety related issues. Further,
there was no way the pacemaker in Mr Courtney’s
chest could have been
checked for yellow spool solder; explantation was the only reasonable course
I accept that not every inherent risk of failure will have the consequence that
goods are not of acceptable quality. The conclusion
in any particular case will
be a function of the nature of the feared failure and the extent of the risk of
its occurrence, measured
against the consumer’s reasonable expectations of
how the product ought to behave. Sometimes the failure will be trivial or
risk insubstantial and in such cases the claim may fail. Further than this, at
least in principle, seems dangerous to go.
Plainly enough the risk in
was a very serious risk from
Mr Courtney’s perspective but I do not read the case as stipulating
that inherent risk claims
are confined to those where the risk is
life-threatening or of some similar ominous standard separate from the standard
in the statutory questions embodied in
itself: the
consumer’s reasonable expectations of the fitness for purpose, appearance,
lack of defects, safety and durability
of the product in question (see
at [224] per Sackville J). In
APS Satellite
the risk was that the
satellite kit was prone to leak which is hardly the stuff of drama. In
the way in which the vessel had been constructed exposed its hull
to a risk of delamination in heavy seas. These perils are not of
the genre to
which the Respondent seeks to confine the
principle. I conclude
that the principle is not so confined.
part of its appeal, and by reference to this analysis, Ford is critical of the
primary judge’s evaluation of the variables.
While Ford accepts that the
likelihood of the problems arising with the vehicles was undoubtedly higher than
was desirable, it submits
that the magnitude of the consequences of the risk
manifesting were within the parameters that a reasonable consumer would accept,
taking into account that the Affected Vehicles were purchased with a warranty
and that the consequences if the components did fail
“were, at worst,
intermittent issues that might impact the driver’s comfort”. Ford
submits that this is an important
distinction from the authorities on propensity
relied on by the primary judge.
contrasts the present case with
126 FCR 219
[2003] FCA 36
where the consequence of the risk
materialising was potentially fatal. It submits that, in such a case, the risk
of failure does
not have to be very high when the consequence of failure is
death. In relation to the other cases cited by the primary judge, Ford
to the fact that, in those cases, the product became unusable, which was not the
situation with the Affected Vehicles which
had “at worst, intermittent
issues that might impact the driver’s comfort”.
there is no textual basis for confining the statutory language of
“acceptable quality” in
of the ACL to “not
potentially fatal” or “unusable”. This is demonstrated by the
nature of the requirements
which include but are not limited to
the appearance or finish of the goods, and durability. Thus the guarantee may
be breached in
circumstances which fall short of a possible fatality or complete
uselessness.
having regard to the unchallenged factual findings of the primary judge which
are summarised above, the consequence of the
problems arising in the Affected
Vehicles cannot (in truth) be described as being “at worst, intermittent
issues that might
impact the driver’s comfort”.
error has been shown in the primary judge’s reasons on this
Whether, and to what extent, after supply events are taken into
account when assessing whether the guarantee has been met
is no dispute on this appeal that the question whether the reasonable consumer
would have regarded the quality of the goods
as acceptable is to be determined
at the time of supply, which accords with the authorities:
Competition and Consumer Commission v Mazda Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] FCA 1493
ACCC v Mazda
(O’Callaghan J); see also
Medtel Pty Ltd v Courtney
(2003) 130 FCR
[2003] FCAFC 151
Medtel (FC)
) at [57] (Branson J, with whom
Jacobson J agreed).
the parties do not dispute that
requires consideration of at least
some knowledge acquired after supply, or else it would not be possible to hold
that goods were
not of acceptable quality by reason of a latent or hidden
defect: see
Medtel (FC)
at [57]. Indeed, it is well-recognised that the
question under
is to be determined taking into account the relevant
information known at the time of the trial, including
“after-acquired”
Gill v Ethicon Sàrl (No 5)
[2019] FCA 1905
at [3540] (Katzmann J);
v BY Winddown,
Inc. (formerly Bertram Yachts) (No 4)
(2018) 362 ALR 702
[2018] FCA 426
(Derrington J);
ACCC v Mazda
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission v Jayco Corporation Pty Ltd
[2020] FCA 1672
ACCC v Jayco
) at [27] (Wheelahan J);
Medtel (FC)
issue raised in this appeal is the identification of the relevant information
known at the time of the trial which is to be taken
into account in assessing
whether the guarantee of acceptable quality has been met.
to this, Ford submits that the assessment required by
is performed
from the standpoint of “a reasonable consumer
fully acquainted with the
state and condition of the goods
” and that the emphasised words
indicate that
available information is to be considered. On that
basis, Ford submits that the analysis must therefore take account of the fact
that as problems emerged, fixes would be identified and made available, the
Affected Vehicles’ warranties would be extended,
and not every vehicle
would experience symptoms but those that did would be repaired (at no cost).
Ford submits that, if this is
accepted, then, in circumstances where the
hypothetical reasonable consumer “fully acquainted with the state and
of the goods” knew (a) that cars sometimes (indeed, almost
inevitably) develop problems, (b) that there was a risk (not a certainty)
the vehicle may develop one or more behaviours, (c) that if it did, the car
could at all times continue to be driven, and (d)
that repairs were available at
no cost to the consumer, they would regard the Affected Vehicles as being of
“acceptable quality”
and, therefore, compliant with the
guarantee when supplied as new.
relies upon the reasoning of Lord Reid and Lord Guest in
Hardwick Game Farm v
Suffolk Agricultural Poultry Producers Association
[1968] UKHL 3
[1969] 2 AC 31
of the proposition that all after-acquired knowledge is to be taken in account.
That case involved, amongst other things,
the operation of s 14(2) of the
Sale of Goods Act 1893 (UK) which provided an implied contractual condition when
goods are bought
by description that the goods should be of merchantable
quality. Lord Reid (at pp 75–76) and Lord Guest (at pp 108–109)
held, in effect, that it is not appropriate to take into account certain parts
of after-acquired knowledge, but disregard other parts.
Medtel (FC)
, the Full Court was met with a similar argument in reliance
on the same authority for the purposes of determining whether a product
merchantable quality within the meaning of s 74D of the
Trade Practices
(Cth). Branson J, with whom Jacobson J agreed, rejected the
argument, stating at [69]–[70]:
Lord Pearce, with whom in this regard Lord Wilberforce agreed, took a different
approach from that adopted by Lord Reid, Lord Guest
and, it seems, Lord Morris
of Borth‑y‑Gest. His Lordship observed (at 118–119):
‘Logic might seem to indicate that the court should bring to the task [of
estimating merchantability] all the after-acquired
knowledge which it possesses
at the date of trial. But I do not think that this is always so. For one is
trying to find what market
the goods would have if their subsequent ascertained
condition had been known. As it is a hypothetical exercise, one must create
hypothetical market. Nevertheless the hypothetical market should be one that
could have existed, not one that could
have existed at the
date of delivery. Suppose goods contained a hidden deadly poison to which there
was discovered by scientists
two years after delivery a simple, easy,
inexpensive antidote which could render the goods harmless. They would be
unmarketable
at the date of delivery if the existence of the poison was brought
to light, since no purchaser could then have known the antidote
to the poison.
Hypothesis is no reason for complete departure from possibility. One must keep
the hypothesis in touch with the
facts as far as possible.’
(Emphasis in original.)
In my view, in the context of s 74D of the Act, the approach of Lord Pearce
to the use of after‑acquired knowledge in the
Hardwick Game Farm
case is compelling. Section 74D, as is mentioned above, calls for the quality,
or fitness for purpose, of the goods to be measured
against what it was
reasonable to expect in that regard at the time of the supply of the goods to
the consumer. That measurement
must be undertaken, in my view, in the light of
information concerning the goods available at the time of trial. However, the
remains whether the goods were as fit for the relevant purpose as it was
reasonable to expect at the time of their supply to the
Lord Pearce’s approach, whilst one brings into the hypothetical construct
knowledge about the nature of the latent defect
at the time of trial (which the
respondent contends would include, in a propensity case, the problems which may
arise and knowledge
of the extent of the risk of such problems being
encountered), and one also brings into the construct the fact that at the time
supply a warranty is given, one does not also incorporate knowledge that, at
some time after supply, a remedy will be discovered
for a latent defect with
which the goods were supplied or that an extended warranty program might
eventuate. We consider that this
is the correct approach.
to the extent that Ford’s submissions contend that the warranties in place
in relation to the Affected Vehicles are
relevant to the question of whether the
goods complied with the statutory guarantee of acceptable quality, that
suggestion is rejected.
As stated by Wheelahan J in
ACCC v Jayco
[43] and cited with approval by O’Callaghan J in
ACCC v Mazda
[102], a manufacturer’s warranty should generally have no bearing on the
question of whether the goods comply with the statutory
guarantee of acceptable
quality. See also
Motor Corporation Australia Limited v
(2023) 296 FCR 514
[2023] FCAFC 50
(Moshinsky, Colvin and
Stewart JJ).
submitted by Mr Gleeson SC for the respondent, the Court can take into account
all evidence at trial which bears on the propensity
of the risk. However,
evidence as to the discovery, availability, and effectiveness of remedies for
the defects in the Affected
Vehicles which are discovered after the date of
supply is more relevant to the question of loss or damage than to the quality of
the vehicles at the time of supply. We note that such a conclusion is aligned
Medtel (FC)
at [73] and
Ground 1 Amended Notice of Appeal
this ground, Ford contends that the primary judge erred in finding that the
Affected Vehicles failed to comply with the statutory
guarantee by reason of
their tendency to display a slight vibration or shudder under light acceleration
at slow speeds or during
a coast down, as the transmission upshifts or
downshifts; and a slight audible rattle, particularly when operated within an
area such as a carpark.
the basis that the Affected Vehicles were “economical, entry-level
vehicles” fitted with the DPS6 which offered improved
fuel economy and
efficiency, it is said that these tendencies were “two very minor
behaviours”, which only manifested,
if at all, in specific circumstances.
They were also described as “normal operating characteristics” of
these vehicles.
This means that Ford accepts that the Affected Vehicles
objectively had these performance characteristics in normal operating
conditions.
submits that, having regard to the s 54(3) factors (including the nature
and price of the goods), a reasonable consumer would
not regard a tendency to
display those “slight” behaviours, which were normal operating
characteristics of the type of
vehicle being acquired, as rendering the Affected
Vehicles not of “acceptable” quality, especially as it is a matter
of common experience that all cars sometimes experience slight vibrations and
noises. Ford contends that, by holding otherwise,
the primary judge imposed a
standard approaching perfection and, in any event, higher than the statutory
standard of “acceptable
submits that the wholly disproportionate outcome of the primary judge’s
approach would be that every purchaser of an Affected
Vehicle – whether or
not they experienced the rattle or vibration – would have been entitled to
reject their vehicle
and require a refund or replacement from the supplier on
this basis alone pursuant to s 259 of the ACL. It contends that this would
create a disincentive for manufacturers and suppliers to supply economical,
low-budget goods (which necessarily involve making quality
trade-offs to achieve
a lower price).
the following reasons, this ground of appeal must fail.
have already rejected Ford’s contention that the primary judge imposed a
standard approaching perfection. Further, although
Ford is critical of the
statement by the primary judge that “[n]ew cars should not have a tendency
to rattle, even slightly”
([671] J) as demonstrating that the primary
judge applied such a standard, Ford did not grapple with the evidence of Dr
Greiner that
if a vehicle’s ordinary operation “involves vibration,
shuddering, jerking, shunting and/or rattling that is perceptible
to the driver,
this indicates that the vehicle is defective” nor did it contend that the
primary judge’s finding had
no proper basis in the evidence.
to the label given by Ford to the tendencies as being “normal operating
characteristics” of the Affected Vehicles,
the reasons of the primary
judge concerning that description included the following at [655], [658] and
Regardless of where these [tendencies] fit into the Applicant’s case, the
Respondent’s position was that these behaviours
were ‘normal
operating characteristics’ of the DPS6 and as such could not have the
consequence that the vehicles were
not of acceptable quality. This is a form of
argument by definition. Its limitations may be illustrated. A car with a
to explode in a fireball would not be of acceptable quality even if the
manufacturer successfully proved that this behaviour was
a normal operating
characteristic of the vehicle. This might suggest that proof by a manufacturer
that a characteristic is a normal
operating characteristic is not legally
responsive to a contention that the characteristic is such as to mean that the
requirements
of s 54(2) are not satisfied.
I have found it difficult to conceptualise the Respondent’s submissions in
a way which can be reconciled with the text of s
54. If a good
has a particular quality
which means that one of the integers in
s 54(2) is not satisfied it is difficult to see that it can be legally
significant that
is a normal operating characteristic of
Accepting that it is such a characteristic cannot without more lead to the
conclusion that s 54(2) is satisfied (in this case to
do so would be
inconsistent with the initial hypothesis). To avoid that inconsistency it is
therefore necessary to accommodate the
submission within the interstices of
s 54(2) itself. But when the argument is broken down and distributed
across the integers of
s 54(2) the problem merely recurs. Thus in terms of
s 54(2)(a), if
is not fit for a purpose for which goods like
are commonly supplied because of
, then it is difficult to see how
the fact that
is a normal operating characteristic of
to a different outcome. The same point may be made in relation to each of
s 54(2)(b)-(e). Perhaps the point is made most
clearly with the safety
requirement in s 54(2)(d). It cannot be to the point that a quality which
makes a good unsafe is also one
of its normal operating characteristics.
I therefore conclude that the Respondent’s factual contention that the
five characteristics of the DPS6 are its ‘normal
characteristics’ is irrelevant to any legal issue which arises from
s 54(2) ...
error has been shown in the reasons or the conclusion reached by the primary
judge. To put it another way, whether it is usual
or “normal” for
goods to have a particular characteristic does not assist in the evaluation of
whether those goods are
of acceptable quality within the meaning of s 54(2)
of the ACL. The focus is required to be on the characteristic itself through
the lens of the reasonable consumer in the circumstances outlined in the
this regard, it is relevant that the primary judge did not accept Ford’s
contention below that all dual clutch transmissions
or all dry dual clutch
transmissions have these normal operating characteristics or that these
behaviours “are found in millions
of other vehicles”: [665] J.
Ford does not appeal this finding. That is not surprising as it was supported
by the evidence
of the respondent’s expert, Dr Greiner, who said that he
was “not aware of any other example of manufacturers feeling
it necessary
to describe ‘normal operating characteristics’ to their customers in
this manner”. He said that the
“normal” for the operation of the DPS6 were “unacceptable for
a modern transmission
system” and “not issues that a consumer would
expect when purchasing a vehicle, regardless of whether the vehicle is
C-segment vehicle, regardless of whether or not the vehicle is a
‘luxury’ vehicle, and regardless of what sort
of transmission system
the vehicle has”. Dr Greiner’s views were supported by documents
prepared by senior Ford US engineers
that the presence of rattle and
“judder” (a term used within Ford US to refer to the subset of
shudder that occurs immediately
after a vehicle takes off from rest) was
unacceptable: see [485]–[491] J.
finding of the primary judge which Ford does not appeal, but which is relevant
to the s 54(2) analysis, is that the DPS6 was
marketed as “an
automatic transmission with smooth gear shifts”: [629] J. It is not
possible to reconcile this finding,
and the obvious impact of such marketing on
the reasonable consumer’s perceptions as to what would be acceptable, with
submissions in connection with this ground. It is notable that
Ford did not attempt such an exercise.
we do not accept that s 54 should be read down because it could otherwise
lead to a “disproportionate outcome”.
If the outcome is
disproportionate as claimed (which we do not accept in any event), then such a
policy consideration is a matter
for Parliament. Nor should this Court take
into account additional factors not referred to in s 54, which is the
approach pressed
these reasons, ground 1 of Ford’s Amended Notice of Appeal
Ground 2 Amended Notice of Appeal
this ground, Ford contends that the primary judge erred in finding that the
Affected Vehicles failed to comply with the statutory
guarantee by reason that
they were fitted with the original input shaft seals, the B8080 clutch lining
and the original ATIC 91 chip.
submissions concerning this ground challenge the primary judge’s findings
on the basis that the primary judge ought
to have, but did not have, regard to
all information which was available at the time of trial, which it contends is
the correct approach
required to be taken under s 54. We do not accept
those submissions, for the reasons explained above.
also observe that, even if it had been appropriate to have regard to all
information available at the time of trial, it would not
alter the outcome in
this case given that, despite spending hundreds of millions of dollars
attempting to do so, Ford did not establish
that it had developed a fix for all
issues ([13], [314], [315] J), and the warranty data (which underestimates
the scale of the problem:
[322] J) indicated that, compared with industry
standards, the needs of these vehicles for transmission-related repair even just
during the warranty period was “frequent” and the DPS6 failed at an
“extreme rate” compared to other transmission
second basis upon which Ford advances this ground is that the primary judge
failed to appreciate the important distinction between
the consequences of the
failure of the components in this case (as part of the evaluation required in a
propensity case) and the
authorities cited by him at [609]–[610] J,
namely death or the goods becoming unusable. We do not accept that submission,
for the reasons explained above.
third basis upon which Ford advances this ground of appeal is that the primary
judge otherwise did not apply the correct statutory
test. We do not agree, for
the reasons already given.
having regard to the unchallenged findings of fact of the primary judge which we
have identified above, and the additional
finding concerning safety which is
challenged by ground 3 (but which is rejected for the reasons given below), the
primary judge’s
finding that the Affected Vehicles failed to comply with
the guarantee of acceptable quality within the meaning of s 54 of the ACL
when supplied as new by reason of being fitted with the original input shaft
seals, the B8080 clutch lining, and the original ATIC
91 chip was correct.
this regard, we note that Ford accepts that, if ground 2(a) fails, then ground
2(b) (which related to the supply of second-hand
vehicles) also fails.
these reasons, ground 2 of Ford’s Amended Notice of Appeal
Ground 3 Amended Notice of Appeal
this ground, Ford contends that the primary judge erred in holding that the
original ATIC 91 chip posed a “safety risk”
and ought to have
held that Affected Vehicles fitted with the original ATIC 91 chip were as
safe as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted
with the state and condition of
the vehicles would regard as acceptable within the meaning of s 54(2)(d) of
ground raises a challenge to the primary judge’s finding at [411] J
that the old (or original) ATIC 91 chip posed a safety
risk in the vehicles
in which it was installed and poses such a risk in those vehicles in which it
remains and which have not had
the 15B22 software update.
ground also raises a challenge to the primary judge’s finding at
[647]–[648] J that, prior to installation of the
15B22 warning
software update, vehicles supplied with the original ATIC 91 chip were not as
“safe” as a reasonable consumer
fully acquainted with the goods
would regard as acceptable.
address that challenge, it is necessary to track through key findings made by
the primary judge concerning this issue.
Reasons of the primary judge
[333] J, the primary judge made the following observations:
[Where] there was failure in the ATIC 91... the TCM goes offline. The clutches
are designed so that, absent communications from
the TCM, they mechanically
place themselves into neutral by disengaging the clutch plate from the drive
plate. This is referred
to as a fail-safe mode and operates in a similar
fashion to a dead man’s switch. If the failure is very brief (in the
of milliseconds) then this process will not progress very far and the
disengagement of the clutches may not be detectable at all
or perhaps only as a
brief shudder. If the failure is longer in duration (a few seconds) then the
effect is a power loss. The full
disengagement of the clutch will mean, in that
circumstance, that the power of the engine is no longer being applied through
drivetrain to the wheels. For that reason, the failure of the ATIC 91
chip leads to potentially more significant disruptions in
the driving
experience...
the issue of solder cracking between the ATIC 91 chip and the TCM was not
in dispute ([340] J), the primary judge proceeded to
make these findings at
[342] and [343] J:
A consequence of sufficient cracking is disruption in electrical conductivity
between the PCB and the chip but this may take some
time to occur. Disruption
to the conductivity of the solder leads to interference in the communications
passing to and from the
relevant ATIC. Disruptions of this kind vary in their
severity. When a degradation in the solder first occurs it may have little
no direct result since the crack involved may be very small and may not yet
materially disrupt the flow of electricity. As the
problem worsens, however,
there may be complete although intermittent disruptions to conductivity which
may be only of very short
duration (in the order of milliseconds). As more
cracks develop the problem deepens and the disruptions may become more frequent
or of longer duration or both until, at last, there is a complete break.
The progressive symptoms which solder cracking can generate depends on where it
occurs... [D]amage to the ATIC 91 chip can generate
failures resulting from
attempts of various durations to disengage the clutch caused by the fail-safe
[344] J, the content of a Ford US 6 panel report is set out which
included an assessment by Getrag (the manufacturer) of what a
customer might
experience in a vehicle suffering from degenerative cracking in the solder
affixing an ATIC 91 chip to the PCB as
Customer experience: (Symptoms For Atic91)
of motion condition may occur while driving or stopped
to customer:
Consistently
cluster will start flashing, “D” or other position will be
be accompanied by Check Engine Light
be accompanied by various messages in cluster Message
center including: Transmission Malfunction, Transmission Overheating, Hill
not available.
coasts to side of road, engine remained
Braking & Steering assist still active.
Ÿ Experience 1: Neutral (open clutch)
Ÿ Attempt to accelerate, engine
Ÿ No Forward/No Reverse
Ÿ Steering and brakes still
Ÿ Experience 2: No throttle
Ÿ Attempt to accelerate, engine remains at
Ÿ No Forward/No Reverse
Ÿ Steering and brakes are still functional.
Ÿ If engine turned off and restart is attempted – will not crank.
Ÿ Allow vehicle to sit with key off for 5 – 10 minutes, then car
may crank and start and drive normally
Set may include:
Ÿ TCM: P0607 and/or P06B8 Control Module or NVRAM failure
Ÿ ABS/IPC: U0101 and U1013 loss of communication with TCM
Ÿ PCM/IPC: P0850 Park/Neutral Switch
primary judge then interpreted aspects of the report at [345] J and made
the following findings at [346] and [347] J:
Each of these symptoms is consistent with the point made earlier that failure of
the ATIC 91 manifests itself as attempts by the
clutches to disengage themselves
when the TCM goes offline (the consequence of the vehicle’s neutral
fail-safe mode). As I
have foreshadowed, when a power cut occurs the
mechatronic actuators in the transmission default to the open position. The
which arise from this problem depend on how long the TCM is offline.
It is easy to understand that when the TCM is offline for several
seconds then
this will be experienced by the driver as the kind of complete loss of power
which results when the vehicle puts itself
in neutral gear. When the TCM is
offline for only a matter of milliseconds then, as Dr Greiner explained,
this might be experienced
as a shudder.
Because the solder cracking problem is progressive rather than instantaneous the
course of symptoms is also progressive. At first,
the cracking will be
asymptomatic (so far as the driver is aware), then there may be symptoms such as
the shudder described by Dr
Greiner which may be followed by very brief,
but discernible, losses of driving power;
finally, there may be a loss of
driving power for a substantial period of time (in the order of many seconds).
I accept Dr Greiner’s
evidence, which is consistent with common
sense, that these final stages of the problem are dangerous. If a vehicle
overtaking another
suffers a three second power loss this generates a real risk
of an accident. Other similar examples may be imagined such as turning
of oncoming traffic.
(emphasis added.)
continuing, the significance of the acceptance by the primary judge of the
evidence of Dr Greiner, an independent expert, cannot
be overstated. No attempt
was made by Ford to challenge that acceptance, or to justify its position that
the primary judge was in
error on the issue of safety notwithstanding the
acceptance of this evidence.
[353]–[355] J, the content of a letter apparently sent by Ford US to
Getrag, which attached approximately 650 pages of material,
is set out. That
letter included this statement (with the reference to “MAM” being a
reference to the TCM):
Following significant analysis into the DPS6 mechatronic actuation module (MAM)
field issues, Ford has determined that the best course
of action for affected
vehicles is to initiate a customer satisfaction action aimed at correcting all
vehicles equipped with DPS6
transmissions built since November, 2009. This
action includes a warranty extension on 2.47M DPS6 equipped vehicles along with
potential software re-flash aimed at earlier issue detection and failure mode
mitigation for all vehicles that Ford has developed.
The initiation of these actions, along with corresponding customer notification,
is pending finalization of a robust service part
supply plan. Discussion on
this plan has been ongoing and I ask for your team's continued support as we
finalize these details.
Currently we are forecasting that these actions will cost us over $579M through
the 2024 calendar year, not including our normal
warranty coverage. There is
significant technical data that demonstrates Getrag is fully responsible for
this issue based on the
robustness of the design independent of any other
analysing this letter and other evidence relating to the ATIC 91 chip, the
primary judge stated at [366] J that:
Despite all of these uncertainties, I am prepared to infer that the use of the
original ATIC 91 chip did pose a real risk of failure.
The primary reason for
this is the engineering evidence which reveals the progressive nature of the
problem and its physical consequences.
It was a problem which was more likely
to occur the longer the vehicle was driven and it was a problem which got worse
once it manifested itself. The problem was sufficient to persuade
Ford US to embark on a program seeking to remediate the problem
by replacing the
ATIC 91 chips in new vehicles and progressively replacing them where necessary
in vehicles which were already on
the road. The claim made by Ford US against
Getrag, foreshadowed in the letter extracted above, suggested that the costs to
US were in excess of half a billion US dollars. A subsequent, and
substantial, settlement was reached between Ford US, Getrag and
Continental.
One may infer therefore that the description of the problem in the theoretical
terms proposed by Dr Greiner (and in
Ford US’ own documents) corresponded
with a real world problem, certainly a nine digit one.
[368] J, the primary judge stated:
Consequently, I find that there was a real risk of the solder cracking on the
original ATIC 91 chip. Where this risk eventuated,
it would cause, in
turn, the series of steadily worsening symptoms to which I have already
referred. Whether the most serious of
those symptoms – complete loss of
motive power for several seconds – would occur depended on how long the
vehicle continued
to be driven once the initial less serious symptoms were
manifest. Those symptoms included, as noted above, shudders and brief power
drops as well as various warning messages lighting up on the dashboard such as
flashing of the ‘D’ symbol on the gear
selector. It will be
necessary to return to this topic when assessing the Applicant’s
submission that the ATIC 91 posed a
safety risk.
primary judge’s analysis of the safety risk associated with the original
ATIC 91 chip (prior to the 15B22 software update)
included the following
findings at [388]–[399] J:
The Applicant contended that the TCM solder issue represented a safety issue
prior to the introduction of the 15B22 software update.
The first question
which arises is why this matters. The actual question for determination is
whether the vehicles were of acceptable
quality within the meaning of ACL
. The safety risk the Applicant puts forward is that which arises
from the ATIC 91 chip and is limited to the symptom consisting
loss of motive power. If one makes the assumption that the Applicant succeeds
in proving that, as sold, the vehicles
had a real risk of a total loss of motive
power whilst driving then the question is whether a vehicle with that real risk
is of acceptable
quality within the meaning of s 54. If on the other hand,
the Applicant fails to show the existence of such a real risk then the
does not seem to arise. On this view of affairs, the question of whether the
real risk was also a safety risk does not seem
to matter very much.
However, the parties were united in their view that this was something they
should debate...
Having registered my objection to the question, it is then appropriate to
consider the position of the two chips
Turning then to the position of the ATIC 91 chip, I have accepted that there was
a real risk that vehicles in the cohort might develop
solder cracking and
therefore a real risk that the vehicles equipped with an old ATIC 91 might
develop symptoms associated with that
risk. The only risk which was put as a
safety risk was the risk that there might be a loss of motive power for a period
of sustained
duration, perhaps a few seconds or more. This was a symptom which
would only appear after earlier symptoms such as shudder or a
very brief power
drop had gone unremedied. And it may also have been preceded by lights
appearing on the dashboard when the symptoms
made themselves known.
The question then is whether that risk is a safety risk. If one takes out of
the picture the antecedent symptoms including the flashing
lights on the gear
selector so that the first and only symptom of the solder cracking was a
sustained period of loss of motive power,
then I would not hesitate to describe
the risk to safety as real. On this, admittedly artificial, hypothesis there
would be a real
risk of solder cracking which would first manifest itself when
the vehicle suddenly lost power. That could happen in an overtaking
or midway through an intersection. The potential for a serious accident is
What makes the situation more complex is that, as the Respondent submits, long
before a driver experienced that power loss, there
would have been a range of
lesser symptoms of increasing severity and the display of flashing lights on the
gear selector. Here
the thinking is that these symptoms and those flashing
lights would have been likely to cause the driver of the vehicle to take it
for servicing. On this view, whilst there might be a risk of ultimate loss of
motive power this risk must be much reduced by
the practical reality that very
few vehicles are likely to be driven to the point where it materialises.
I have found this a difficult submission to assess. My initial impression of
the problem was that one needed to identify what the
risk of this particular
symptom was. Whilst I have accepted that there is a real risk of solder
cracking and hence a real risk of
the symptoms associated with solder cracking,
this statement does not permit one to deduce anything about the risk of a
symptom. Conceptualised that way, this suggests that it was one for
the Applicant to prove as the party bearing the onus of proof.
If so, then the
fact that the evidence does not permit any conclusions to be drawn entails that
the Applicant fails to show that
the risk of a total loss of motive power was a
real risk and, therefore, that it was a safety risk.
A corollary of that line of thought would be, in fact, that the Applicant fails
to prove that there is a real risk of any particular
symptom. This follows
because the same argument can be made in relation to each individual symptom.
This leads one to the curious,
although not necessarily logically indefensible
position, that there is a real risk of the set of symptoms but no real risk in
to any individual symptom.
Another way of looking at the problem, however, is this. There is a real risk
of solder cracking and hence of the symptoms it entails.
Those symptoms include
a total loss of motive power for a sustained period of time. Indeed, this was
not in dispute on the evidence.
Having accepted that that symptom was amongst
the class of symptoms of which there was a real risk, the challenge then becomes
to accommodate the fact that it is the end-stage symptom into the analysis.
Here the answer may lie in the distinction between the
legal burden of proof
(which at all times lay on the Applicant) and the evidentiary burden (which
might, depending on the circumstances,
I think this second way of looking at the problem is better than the first.
There are two reasons for this. First, I am concerned
identified in the penultimate paragraph although I accept that it is not an
incoherent outcome. Secondly,
the nature of the proposition under
consideration, on inspection, shows that it was really a defensive proposition
put forward by
the Respondent and was not something which the Applicant was
required to negative. The relevant propositions were these:
(1) there was a real risk of solder cracking;
(2) there was therefore a real risk of the symptoms associated with solder
(3) those symptoms included a complete loss of motive power for more than a
transitory period of time; but
(4) the risk of that symptom was so small as not to constitute a safety risk
because the nature of the anterior symptoms would have
caused the vehicle to be
serviced before there ever could be a complete loss of power for more than a
transitory period of time.
Framed that way, it is apparent that the fourth proposition was a matter for the
Respondent to prove and not a matter for the Applicant
to disprove. The
Applicant bore the onus of proving that there was a risk (or real risk as I have
preferred to characterise it).
She proved that there was a real risk of solder
cracking and that the symptoms which could flow from that included a
non-transitory
total loss of power. At that point the evidentiary burden
shifted to the Respondent to prove that, in fact, the symptom would never
arisen because the vehicle would have been serviced on the occurrence of the
earlier less severe symptoms.
I am not satisfied that the evidence makes good that contention. No doubt the
idea that many vehicles would be presented for service
before arriving at a
complete loss of motive power for more than a transitory period of time has an
anecdotal attractiveness. However,
I do not think that just because I can
follow the line of thought that it proves it as a fact. No doubt for many
vehicles this will
be true but I do not think I can say it is inevitably so.
Further, there is the additional problem that prior to at least mid-2014
very possibly up until a later date, if presented for service the problem would
not be fixed because the new TCM with the revised
ATIC 91 chip was not
Once that conclusion is arrived at it seems therefore that the real risk of
solder cracking carried with it a risk of a non-transitory
loss of power. As I
have said, I am satisfied that this risk was a safety risk.
(emphasis added.)
[411] J, after addressing Ford’s evidence, the primary judge
To the extent that it matters I therefore conclude that the old ATIC 91 chip
posed a safety risk in the vehicles in which it was
installed and poses such a
risk in those in which it remains which have not had the 15B22 software update.
[647]–[648] J, the primary judge made the critical findings relating
to the ATIC 91 chip:
I have concluded that vehicles which were supplied with a TCM containing an
original ATIC 91 chip had a real risk of developing solder
cracks. If the
cracks developed the consequence was a gradual reduction in the solder’s
conductive efficiency and a corresponding
propensity for interruptions in the
distribution of electrical power to the TCM. As this occurred a steadily
increasing range of
transmission faults would arise.
Where the TCM was
offline for a matter of milliseconds this might be perceptible to the driver as
a shuddering sensation; as the problem
worsened, however, the vehicle might
sustain a total loss of motive power for a period of seconds – which was
unsafe. This
was a fault which could, albeit in rare circumstances, result in a
serious accident.
Having regard to the matters set out above, I do not think that vehicles
supplied with the original ATIC 91 chip can be said to be
fit for the purpose of
being driven as a motor vehicle (s 54(2)(a)) or that they were free from
defects (s 54(2)(c)) or that they
were safe (s 54(2)(d)).
Consequently, at the time they were supplied vehicles containing the original
ATIC 91 chip were not of acceptable
(emphasis added.)
are two limbs to Ford’s arguments in relation to this ground, each of
which will be addressed in turn.
Whether primary judge answered irrelevant
submits that the primary judge addressed a freestanding question,
“untethered to any suggested legal standard”, of
whether the
original ATIC91 chip posed a “safety risk”:
[388]–[389] J. Ford complains that the primary judge did
(correctly) noting that there was a disconnect between the purported issue and
the statutory test, and registering an
“objection to the question”:
[389]–[390] J. Ford submits that the primary’s judges analysis
bore no resemblance
to the analysis required by s 54(2)(d) of the ACL, nor
to the concept of “safety defect” defined by s 9 of the ACL,
imposed an evidentiary burden on Ford to prove that a risk of loss of motive
power “would never have arisen”, which Ford
failed to discharge:
[397]–[398] J. Ford complains that the finding that a “safety
risk” existed should not have
been made in these circumstances: [399],
the following reasons, we do not accept Ford’s submissions and, to this
extent, we respectfully disagree with the observation
by the primary judge that
the issue of safety did not matter to the ultimate question of whether the
vehicles were of acceptable
quality within the meaning of s 54 of the
[6AB(e)] of the Fourth Further Amended Statement of Claim (
statement of
), it was alleged (amongst other things) that each of the Affected
Vehicles contained a transmission system of a type that caused
abnormal safety
issues, which issues included intermittent loss of power (which allegation Ford
denied). By [29] of that pleading,
it was alleged by the respondent that, by
reason of this and other defects, the Affected Vehicles were not of acceptable
within the meaning of s 54(2) of the ACL.
disputed allegations brought into play s 54(2)(d) of the ACL which
identifies that goods will be of acceptable quality if they
are as safe as a
reasonable consumer would regard as acceptable having regard to the matters in
s 54(3). Part of the pathway which
the respondent relied upon to obtain a
finding that the Affected Vehicles were not of acceptable quality was the
pleaded allegation
of fact that there were abnormal safety issues. That is the
allegation which the primary judge addressed at [388]–[411] J.
the primary judge was required to address it arose not only by reason of the
pleadings, but also by reason of the submissions
by the parties at trial. The
respondent’s closing submissions included a section entitled
“Safety” which was cross-referenced
to its pleaded case and
described this as a “safety-related claim”. These submissions
concluded with the following:
In summary, at the time Ford dealers supplied the Affected Vehicles to
consumers, they were not – contrary to the statutory
guarantee that
applied pursuant to s 54 of the ACL – as defect-free, fit for
purpose, safe or durable as a reasonable consumer
would regard as acceptable
having regard, inter alia, to the supply of these vehicles as “new”
vehicles priced and advertised
competitively with other new vehicles in that
segment of the market.
closing submissions also contained a section entitled “Safety” which
opened with the submission, “There
was no safety issue with the
DPS6”. Later, these submissions stated, “The Applicant relies on a
handful of other matters
as establishing a safety issue with the DPS6
transmission. None of them do so”, with further submissions explaining
was so. The respondent’s closing submissions in reply also
contained a section entitled “Safety”, and contained
submissions in relation to that issue.
these reasons, the primary judge did not answer an irrelevant
Whether conclusion as to safety as part of s 54
analysis was wrong
next submits that:
Much later in the judgment and without any further analysis, his Honour held
“I do not think [the] vehicles ... were safe”.
That appears to be a
component of his ultimate conclusion of non-compliance with s 54: J[648]. That
approach was also wrong...
referring to evidence adduced by it at trial, Ford then submits that:
A reasonable consumer would not regard the Affected Vehicles as non-compliant on
the basis of a risk that, if a car was not serviced
despite many months of
progressively serious driveability issues and warnings, it might ultimately
experience brief losses of motive
power. There was no breach of the guarantee
in s 54(2)(d).
the following reasons, we do not accept these submissions.
does not challenge or seek to overcome the findings made by the primary judge,
which are set out above and which provide ample
support for the ultimate
conclusions at [647]–[648] J. Its attack on these conclusions must
fail for this reason alone.
by its submissions, Ford seeks to reiterate aspects of the evidence which it led
at trial from its lay witness, Mr Cruse,
but without addressing other evidence
which was inconsistent with the evidence of Mr Cruse, including evidence which
was accepted
and relied upon by the primary judge, such as the assessment by
Getrag contained in the Ford US 6 panel report (which set out the
experiences) and the expert evidence of Dr Greiner:
[344]–[347] J.
Importantly,
Ford chose not to lead any evidence from Ford US witnesses about these matters
despite being “fully at liberty”
to call such persons and it being
obvious, including to the primary judge, that it was those persons and not Mr
Cruse who “undoubtedly
know more about the DPS6 than anyone else”:
[224], [491] J. Instead, Ford attempted to counter the argument regarding
by reference to the (then) Department of Infrastructure and Regional
Development’s (
) termination of a safety investigation into the
DPS6: [400]–[409] J. The DIRD had done so on the basis that it was
that the ATIC 91 chips did not pose a safety issue. However, the
primary judge was not satisfied on the evidence which was before
DIRD’s investigation was adequate for the purpose of assessing
safety: [409] J.
also challenges the primary judge’s findings as to safety by reference to
the 15B22 software update which was introduced,
but the fact of that software
update is irrelevant: the findings which are under challenge by this ground of
appeal concern the safety
(or otherwise) of vehicles
installation of that software and those which have not received the software
update: see [388], [411] J.
also complains that what the primary judge did was to reverse the burden of
proof at [397]–[398] J, submitting that it
was not for Ford to prove
that the Affected Vehicles were safe but it was for the respondent to prove that
they were so unsafe that
they breached s 54. However, what the primary
judge did was to recognise that the respondent bore the legal (and initially,
evidentiary) burden of proof (as occurred at [397] J) but then found
that, upon the respondent proving a real risk of solder cracking,
and that the
symptoms which could flow from that included a non-transitory total loss of
power, the evidentiary burden shifted to
Ford to prove that, in fact, the
symptoms would not have arisen because the vehicle would have been serviced on
the occurrence of
the earlier less severe symptoms (being a defensive
proposition put forward by Ford, which it maintained on this appeal). Those
statements do not constitute a “reversal” of the burden of proof and
there is no error in the primary judge’s approach.
then submits that, even if it did bear such an evidentiary burden, the primary
judge “effectively” required Ford
to show that the symptoms would
“in every single case” lead a consumer affected by them to bring
their car in for service.
However, that overstates the overall findings as set
out in [397]–[398] J.
criticism also overlooks the finding at [385] J, which was not challenged
on this appeal, that there was no direct evidence as
to the specific date that
TCMs with the new ATIC 91 chip became available in Australia. This had the
consequence that, in any event,
the primary judge could not have made a finding
that there was no safety risk on the premise that vehicles would have been
for service and the symptoms associated with solder cracking would be
averted. That is because the ATIC 91 chip would not have been
during such a service and so the safety risk would not have been removed. This
was recognised by the primary judge at [398]
these reasons, ground 3 of Ford’s Amended Notice of Appeal
The respondent’s Notice of Contention
grounds 1 to 3 of the Amended Notice of Appeal have failed, it is not necessary
to address paragraphs 1 and 2 of the respondent’s
Notice of Contention
beyond what we have held in relation to grounds 1 to 6 of the Amended Notice of
Cross-Appeal, below.
RESPONDENT’S APPEAL ON LIABILITY
Grounds 1 and 2 Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal
grounds of appeal relate to a ruling by the primary judge that certain documents
not be admitted into evidence (which are a
subset of what were described by the
primary judge as the
schedule 1 documents
). For convenience, we will
refer to the 66 documents (on our reckoning) which are the subject of these
grounds using that name,
but recognise that a longer list of documents was
sought to be tendered at trial. The respondent contends that the schedule 1
ought to have been admitted into evidence by the primary judge and
taken into account as part of the assessment under s 54 of the
paragraph 1 of its Notice of Contention in the cross-appeal, Ford asserts that
the “ultimate conclusions” of the primary
judge should be affirmed
because the schedule 1 documents are irrelevant or of insufficient weight to
affect the learned primary
judge’s conclusions.
Relevant procedural history
20 December 2017, the primary judge granted leave for the respondent to apply
under § 1782 of Title 28 of the United States
Code to the United
States District Court for the Central District of California for the production
by Ford US of several classes
of documents:
Capic v Ford Motor Company of
Australia Limited (No 4)
[2017] FCA 1575.
the schedule 1 documents which were not admitted into evidence, all but one had
been obtained from Ford US under § 1782 of
Title 28 of the United
States Code in April 2018 (
US discovery documents
a year after those documents were produced, on 18 April 2019, the solicitors for
) sent a letter to the solicitors for the respondent
), which stated (amongst other things) that:
We have assumed that your client is no longer seeking to rely on documents
obtained through US Discovery. Please let us know if
this is not the case.
6 August 2019, Corrs sent a letter to Allens, which included the following
In your letter of 18 April 2019, you stated that your client had assumed that
our client “is no longer seeking to rely on documents
obtained through US
Discovery”, and asked us to let you know if that is not the case. We are
not sure why your client drew
that assumption and advise that your client should
not assume that our client does not intend to rely upon any of the documents
through US discovery.
30 August 2019, Corrs sent a further letter to Allens, which stated as
refer to the Third Further Amended Statement of Claim filed by our client on 29
January 2019 (3FASOC).
3FASOC pleads the Affected Vehicles contained (or was part of a model line
containing) a transmission system of a type that had
(or had a propensity to
have) various defects (the “Vehicle Defects”) including quality,
performance, reliability, durability,
safety and comfort issues.
pleading also foreshadows the provision of further particulars with our expert
our expert evidence is not due until midway through November, work on it has
commenced, and we are now able to provide some
further information about the
alleged Vehicle Defects.
It remains our intention to provide further
particulars once our expert evidence has been served
, but if we are able to
provide additional particulars any earlier we will.
addition to the existing particulars of the Vehicle Defects, the Applicant gives
the following particulars:
(a) the “Powershift Transmission” system that was fitted in the
Affected Vehicles did not have a dual mass fly wheel
or alternative damping
measures adequate for a dry dual clutch design; and
(b) this problem – which was a design, or architectural, defect –
caused or contributed to some of the quality issues,
performance issues,
durability issues and comfort issues pleaded in the 3FASOC, by increasing
friction variability and reducing robustness
to vehicle noise, vibration and
suspect that the existence of this design/architectural issue is already well
known to your client, as
there are documents produced in the US discovery
which address the existence and implications of this
(original emphasis removed; emphasis added.)
30 April 2019, the primary judge made pre-trial directions which included an
order requiring the respondent to provide Ford with
a draft index of documents
to be included in the electronic court book.
6 May 2020, Corrs emailed Allens attaching its proposed court book index,
pursuant to the orders of the primary judge, which included
29 of the schedule 1
documents. This was more than five weeks before the trial was due to commence
on 15 June 2020.
8 May 2020, Allens sent an email to Corrs in response which included the
statement: “Please confirm whether it is the Applicant’s
to tender all of these documents at trial”.
confirmation was not provided in writing, but it is a reasonable, if not
obvious, inference that the inclusion of the documents
in the index was for the
purpose of tendering them, especially in light of the orders made on 30 April
2019 and what was stated in
the respondent’s opening submissions as set
out below. We ask rhetorically – what other purpose could there be?
21 May 2020, Corrs sent an email to Allens which attached an updated court book
index. A further 31 of the schedule 1 documents
were contained in that list.
As such, as at 21 May 2020 (that is, more than three weeks prior to trial), 60
of the 66 schedule 1
documents were in the court book index provided on behalf
of the respondent to Ford.
27 May 2020, more than two weeks prior to trial, the respondent served her
opening submissions on Ford. Those submissions stated
as follows at
The Applicant’s documentary tender includes
(iii) material
obtained on discovery from Ford US in proceedings in the United States District
Court Central District of California
relating to the development of the DPS6,
investigations by Ford US and its suppliers as to the root causes of Defects,
and corrective
measures approved by Ford US to be implemented to attempt to
remedy the Defects
; (iv) documents recording regulatory investigations in
relation to the safety of the Affected Vehicles and Ford’s interactions
with those regulators; (v) documents related to the settlement of claims by Ford
US against Getrag DPS6; (vi) records of settlements
initiated by Ford with
consumers; (vii) “Lessons Learned” documents which record the
mistakes Ford and/or its parent
Ford US believes were made in designing the
DPS6; (viii) forecasts of the financial impact to Ford of the DPS6; and
depositions given by Ford US personnel in US proceedings regarding the
(emphasis added.)
28 May 2020, Corrs sent an email to Allens with a further updated court book
index, which contained the same schedule 1 documents
as had been included in the
index provided on 21 May 2020.
2 June 2020, Allens sent a letter to Corrs in the following terms:
We note that the Applicant has included over 2,600 documents in its proposed
tender bundle. More than 1,600 of those documents are
documents obtained from
Ford Motor Company, a non-party to the proceeding, pursuant to the Applicant's
s1782 application. As you
know, the Respondent objects to the tender of any of
the Ford Motor Company documents otherwise than in accordance with the
Confidentiality
Please confirm whether the Applicant intends to seek to tender all of the
documents in the proposed tender bundle at trial and, if
so, please say when,
and specify the basis upon which, the Applicant proposes to tender these
The Respondent reserves its rights to object to the tendering of any of the
documents in the Applicant's proposed tender bundle.
3 June 2020, Corrs sent a letter (dated 2 June 2020, but apparently sent on 3
June 2020). That letter (relevantly) stated:
we have previously explained, we intend to tender the documents in the court
book at the conclusion of the opening submissions.
have asked us to identify the basis upon which we intend to tender those
documents. We are not sure what you mean by that, but
we have indicated to you
on several occasions that, in our view, the existing confidentiality orders do
not constrain our ability
to tender the documents in the court book designated
by your client or its parent as “Confidential Documents” or as
“Confidential Information”.
letter indicates that your client may object to the tender of those documents.
If it intends to do so, please explain the basis
for any objection your client
intends to make.
5 June 2020 (with the trial due to commence some 10 days later), Allens sent a
letter to Corrs regarding the proposed court book.
That letter read, in part,
as follows:
We understand that the Applicant intends to tender all of the over 2,600
documents in its proposed tender bundle at the conclusion
of the parties’
opening submissions.
When requesting in our letter of 1 June 2020 that the Applicant specify the
basis upon which the Applicant proposes to tender these
documents, the
Respondent was requesting that the Applicant specify the basis of that tender
from both a relevance and an admissibility
perspective. The Respondent requires
this information, identifying the issues in the proceeding each document is
stated to be relevant
to and the basis on which it is asserted to be admissible,
to inform its approach to any objections it may make to the tendering
For the avoidance of doubt, the Respondent reserves its rights to object to the
tendering of any of the documents in the Applicant's
proposed tender bundle.
8 June 2020, Corrs sent a letter to Allens informing it that the respondent did
not intend to comply with the request in the 5
June letter but that it proposed
to adopt the “usual process”, namely that: “(a) your client
object to the proposed
tender of particular documents if it wishes to, and if
there is a reasonable basis for it to do so; and (b) our client respond to
objections”.
9 June 2020, Allens sent a letter to Corrs, which read in part as
The Respondent maintains that the position set out in its letter of 5 June 2020
is the appropriate course. It is presently unclear
to the Respondent and to the
Court what the Applicant submits should be drawn from the 2,600 documents in her
proposed tender bundle.
Noting that the Applicant has advised of her intention
to tender all of these documents at the conclusion of the parties’
submissions, it was the Respondent's expectation that this question would be
addressed in the Applicant’s written outline
of her opening submissions.
It was not. The Respondent is entitled to adequate notice of the use that the
Applicant intends to
make of any or all of these documents.
As previously stated, and for the avoidance of doubt, the Respondent’s
position is that:
indiscriminate tendering of the documents in bulk at the end of opening
submissions (or indeed at any other time) will be opposed;
Ford Australia and Ford US documents in the tender bundle must be dealt with in
accordance with the existing Australian and US
confidentiality regimes; and
Respondent reserves its rights to object to the tendering of any particular
documents; we note, however, that if the Applicant
seeks to refer to each
document in the course of the trial, the trial would run well past its estimated
In particular, it is the Respondent’s position that only documents that
are referred to in the trial (in witness statements,
oral evidence or
submissions) should be tendered. The Court should not be asked to take into
account documents that are not referred
to in the trial.
11 June 2020, in a pre-trial interlocutory hearing, counsel for Ford raised the
volume of documentary evidence with the primary
judge. The relevant extracts
from that hearing are as follows:
MR SCERRI: ...Your Honour, what they’ve said to us they want to do, what
they’ve threatened to do, is to tender 1600
US documents and about 1000
Australian documents, and they’re seeking to tender those as a bundle and
in that context –
and we’ve written to them and said, “Well,
you need to tell us what you’re tendering these about,” and to
suggest that it’s practical for us to be – to get instructions and
be armed and, at some stage next week, either –
I think they’re
talking about at the end of the closings that we would then have to deal with
document by document with 2600
documents is just a ridiculous proposal, in our
submission, your Honour.
And there’s lengthy correspondence about this and they’ve constantly
said, “You’re jumping at shadows. There’s
no issue. If
they’re truly confidential, justify it.” So our two objections are
that the idea of tendering 2600 documents
as a bundle is quite inappropriate.
It’s not what should happen and that would certainly derail the trial
because it would
take us minutes to deal with each one - - -
HIS HONOUR: What do you think – I mean, it’s not unusual to have a
bundle of a couple of thousand documents in a case
like this and for it to be
MR SCERRI: As a bundle, your Honour? That’s not my experience.
HIS HONOUR: As the court book. Yes, I’ve seen that.
MR SCERRI: The practice does vary from judge to judge, but normally judges say,
“You can’t tender 2600 documents, expect
me to read them, unless you
take me to them in the course of the trial.”
HIS HONOUR: No. I agree with – I agree with that, but the practice of
having a court book with a file of documents in it,
particularly in electronic
trials, pretty common. Normally, people signal particular objections to
particular documents. That’s
one topic, I suppose - - -
MR SCERRI: Yes.
HIS HONOUR: - - - and then another topic is confidentiality, assuming relevance
is made out.
MR SCERRI: Yes. And we are very – we have raised the issue of the
relevance of the US documents, but that’s the issue.
Our principal
concern is that we don’t want this to delay the trial or to disrupt it
next week and if it does, we’ll
be seeking costs against the applicant
because the applicant has caused this. They didn’t – they
weren’t proposing
– when they applied last week for these orders,
they hadn’t given notice to Ford US about them. They wanted the orders
– they wanted the Confidentiality Act regime varied without notice to Ford
US and your Honour said you would not make those
orders without giving Ford an
opportunity – Ford US an opportunity to be heard and we say that’s
the correct thing and
I’m pleased that Mr Kidd is here.
MR SCERRI: ...I think I said we will review whether [we] want to maintain this,
it would help an awful lot if Mr Pike could say whether he really wants
to tender all of our thousand documents
, because if he doesn’t, if we
just look at the ones that he wants to tender, to date we haven’t been
able to get them
to say whether they want to tender them all or not. They just
say that’s what they’re tendering. So I wonder whether
be another step in the process, your Honour. It will save a lot of time.
HIS HONOUR: And in relation to the matter you just raised, so – Mr Pike,
so there’s 1600 of these documents. Mr Scerri
is asking whether
you’re actually going to tender them all. I take it your answer to that
is you’re tendering all of
Yes. Consistent with the orders that were made over a month ago, we
gave notice that that is what we intended to do
HIS HONOUR: So he’s not going to back off the tender of any of those.
MR SCERRI: Yes. I understand, your Honour...
(emphasis added.)
15 June 2020, the trial commenced before the primary judge.
17 June 2020, being the third day of trial, the parties discussed with the
primary judge the tendering of the court book:
MR PIKE: Yes, and there also is – at some stage in the not too distant
future I would wish to tender the court book.
MR SCERRI: Your Honour, in relation to tendering the court book, if that means
that Mr Pike is going to tender 1000 [sic] of pages
of documents that are in the
review book at the moment, we will be objecting to that.
The tender should
be selective, and we should have an opportunity to object to tenders and that
should happen, in our submission,
at the end of the evidence, so we see
what’s still relevant
HIS HONOUR: We could do it this way. What you say sounds practical. We could
start with the court book, we know what the court
book is and the documents
which are in the court book. Witnesses can be shown that. We will all know
what they are. Many of the
documents probably won’t be referred to,
hopefully, and when we get a little bit further into the trial, perhaps towards
end of the trial, there can be some indication from Mr Pike’s side as
to which parts of the court book are going to be tendered
and then we can remove
– sorry, by both sides about which parts of the court book are going to be
tendered and then parts which
aren’t going tendered by anyone can be
removed and the parts which are contested can be ruled upon .....
I do understand the issue, and I don’t really mind which way
we move forward. My only issue is, I do want to know sooner rather
if there is material that is to be objected to, what it is and what the basis of
the objection is, rather than find out
at the end of the case that there is an
HIS HONOUR: I think this might be a false issue. I mean, Mr Scerri is saying he
wants to know what you are actually tendering.
MR PIKE: We served the list on 11 May, I think it was.
HIS HONOUR: The last time we had a Mexican standoff between the two parties was
in relation to the 50 witnesses where – and
I thought that that would
eventually blow over, but I was wrong about that and they’re all coming.
So I wonder whether this
debate will end up being the same.
So if I take the
course you’re suggesting, Mr Scerri, then what will happen is at the other
end of the trial Mr Pike will say,
“I’m tendering all of
that will be a problem, your Honour...
(emphasis added.)
is important to note that it was Ford’s counsel who proposed that the
tender of the documents in the court book occur at
“the end of the
evidence”. Ford did not make any submission or apply for any direction
that the respondent be required
to tender the documents at an earlier stage in
the trial, such as following opening submissions or prior to any witnesses being
on 22 June 2020, Allens sent a letter to Corrs which noted that Ford objected to
the respondent tendering the documents “in
bulk so that she can refer to
them only in closing submissions” as that would “not give the
Respondent an adequate opportunity
to respond to submissions concerning the
documents”.
the first week of the trial, the respondent identified the issues to which the
documents were relevant by letter dated 19 June
2020. That letter attached a
spreadsheet setting out that information.
10 July 2020, Corrs sent an email to Allens attaching a list of the documents
that the respondent intended to tender, with the
relevance identified for each
document listed therein. The email noted that the list “may be subject to
change depending on
the documents discussed during evidence and while closing
submissions are prepared”, and that the list included:
3. a number of additional documents relevant to the facts in issue.
14 July 2020, Allens sent an email to Corrs which stated: “Our client does
not object to the tender of the documents in your
list relevant to items (1)
in your email” (emphasis added). The email also stated that
Ford “reserve[d] the right to submit that documents in the
list are not
probative of any issue in the proceeding and/or that little or no weight should
be given to them”.
this, a further five schedule 1 documents were notified by the respondent on 16
18 July 2020, the respondent served her closing submissions on Ford. One of the
schedule 1 documents was notified for the first
time in those
submissions.
closing submissions and its annexure made reference to all but five of the
schedule 1 documents. Relevantly, those five documents
had already been
disclosed in the court book index circulated on 21 May 2020 and, according to
the respondent, were originally included
in the annexure to the closing
submissions (prior to it being amended).
23 July 2020, counsel for Ford accepted during the trial that “the
material is all admissible” but that the issue was
what the primary judge
did “as a matter of procedural fairness”.
27 July 2020, the primary judge made timetabling orders for the filing and
service of submissions on the question of whether Ford
ought not to be permitted
to rely on any of the schedule 1 documents.
28 July 2020, Corrs sent an email to the Associate to the primary judge which
As foreshadowed by Mr Pike SC on Friday, the Applicant has undertaken an audit
of her tender list to identify where each document
included in the list was
referred to in evidence, submissions or during the hearing. Following that
audit the Applicant provided
a revised list to the Respondent, who has indicated
that it does not object to the tender of the documents contained in it.
attached tender list comprised 917 documents, and included all 66 of the
schedule 1 documents.
29 July 2020, the Associate to the primary judge emailed the parties and stated
that his Honour had “admitted these documents
into evidence”.
parties then provided written submissions to the primary judge about the tender
of the documents, culminating in the primary judge’s
decision to exclude
certain documents which included the schedule 1 documents which are the subject
of the cross-appeal.
Reasons of the primary judge
primary judge found that the respondent had run her case on the basis that she
would make her claims good by reference to Dr Greiner’s
evidence. His
Honour stated at [930]–[931] J:
However, the subscribed particulars to §6AB make no reference to the expert
evidence of Dr Greiner. It is clear nevertheless
that the Applicant ran her
case on the basis that the way in which she sought to make good the defects
allegations in §6AB was
on the basis of Dr Greiner’s evidence. This
is so for two reasons: (a)
a letter dated 30 August 2019 from the
Applicant’s solicitors to the Respondent’s solicitors explained that
the way she
would prove at least some of the alleged defects would be by means
of the expert testimony of Dr Greiner
(this is in the electronic Court Book
under ‘particulars’); and, (b) the way the trial was conducted
centred on the evidence
of Dr Greiner. In terms, the case put and met was that
the vehicles suffered from the four Component Deficiencies and the two
Architectural
Deficiencies.
As a matter of procedure, therefore, it is apparent that Dr Greiner’s
reports served the purpose both of providing the Respondent
with the particulars
of how §6AB would be proved and also the evidence to make good that proof.
Consequently, Dr Greiner’s evidence provides the metes and bounds of
the dispute between the parties
(emphasis added)
Honour went on to cite the principle that parties may jointly choose to conduct
their case on a basis other than that formally
alleged in the pleadings:
acknowledging that it was agreed between the parties that the documents were not
referred to in Dr Greiner’s report, and
that some had been provided to him
but not included in his report, the primary judge stated at [933] J:
“I do not regard the
fact that the Respondent knew some of these documents
had been provided to Dr Greiner although not relied upon by him is of any legal
significance”.
primary judge accepted that the documents were relevant to the allegations in
[6AB] of the respondent’s statement of claim:
[934] J. However, his
Honour considered that “the way in which the [respondent] conducted her
case on clutch shudder is that
she would prove its existence on the basis of Dr
Greiner’s evidence” because she had “elected to nominate Dr
evidence as the particulars to §6AB”: [935] J.
The primary judge considered that, as those documents were not in Dr
reports, it followed that they fell outside the particularised
case: [935] J.
response to the respondent’s submission that the documents tended to prove
the matters identified by Dr Greiner, the primary
judge stated at
...that submission impermissibly elides the allegations of material fact in
§6AB (which delimit and define what is relevant
in the proceeding) with the
particulars provided for that allegation by means of Dr Greiner’s reports
(which give notice to
the Respondent of how that case is to be proved). That
the parties have acquiesced in the Applicant proving the allegations in
by means of Dr Greiner’s reports does not entail that the
Applicant is therefore entitled to lead additional evidence to support
Greiner’s conclusions.
Consequently,
the primary judge accepted Ford’s submission that it was procedurally
unfair for the respondent to rely upon the
documents in question to prove the
allegations in [6AB] of her statement of claim because “[u]ntil the
delivery of her closing
written submissions the Applicant has never given the
Respondent any meaningful indication that she would seek to prove the
allegations
in §6AB by means of these documents”: [937] J.
the primary judge appeared to accept that, in advance of the trial, the
respondent had given notice of her intention to tender
some of these documents,
his Honour considered that this did not overcome the fact that she had not given
Ford “notice of an
intention to prove the allegations in §6AB other
than by means of the subscribed particulars to that allegation or by means
Greiner’s reports”: [938] J.
Honour considered that Ford had been deprived of an opportunity to consider
whether to:
... (a) tender some of the other §1782 documents perhaps to contradict the
documents upon which the Applicant now seeks to rely;
(b) ask its own witnesses
[939] J, his Honour stated:
Parties are often confined to the way in which they have run their case (often
by being tied to their particulars) and this is not
usually thought to require
evidence from the other party that they would be prejudiced if some other course
were taken. In any event,
the prejudice pointed to by the Respondent –
especially the possibility of considering whether to tender additional documents
– is to my mind reasonably obvious.
respect of the respondent’s contention that not admitting the documents
into evidence was a drastic action compared to other
steps that could be taken,
his Honour noted that it would not be in keeping with orderly trial management
to give Ford the opportunity
to reopen its case several months after the trial
had concluded just to meet a case not foreshadowed at trial:
[940]–[941]
primary judge also rejected the respondent’s submission that Ford had
consented to the use of the documents because it had
consented to the final form
of the tender list (which included the schedule 1 documents), stating at
[942]–[943] J:
... As a matter of formality, at the time the Respondent objected to the use of
Schedule 1 documents on the basis that they were
not yet formally in
evidence. They would not find their way into evidence until 10.22 am on 29 July
2020 when my Associate informed
the parties that the documents identified in
document TDL.010.006.0001 would be received into evidence. By this time, the
had been completed subject to the cleaning up of some loose ends (such as
the tender of documents).
When the Schedule 1 documents were received into evidence on 29 July 2020 it is
true that this occurred with the agreement of the
Respondent. However, that
agreement must be seen in context. On the last day of the trial, 24 July 2020,
the Respondent had indicated
that there were a number of documents in the draft
list then provided to it which were not referred to anywhere in the evidence or
in the submissions (by contrast the Schedule 1 documents were referred to in the
Applicant’s closing written submissions if
not anywhere else). It was the
Respondent’s position that these never-referred-to documents should not be
tendered. The Applicant
appears to have agreed with this and removed documents
of that kind from the final form of list. The Respondent then agreed to the
tender of the balance. However, it is quite clear that this took place against
a backdrop which included the Respondent’s
continuing objection to the
Schedule 1 documents. I do not think that its entitlement to make that
objection was thereby lost.
It continued to assert that reliance could not be
placed upon the documents. Where the Respondent makes good its objection, the
course I will take is to revoke to the extent necessary the interlocutory order
by which the documents were admitted.
primary judge concluded that it would be procedurally unfair for the respondent
to have been permitted to prove the allegations
in [6AB] by relying on those
schedule 1 documents drawn from the US discovery: [944] J.
Whether the primary judge erred
our respectful view, there was no procedural unfairness in the respondent
seeking to rely on these documents. The primary judge
erred in concluding that
considerations appear to have underpinned the primary judge’s finding.
The first consideration was his Honour’s finding
respondent’s case was run on the basis that the defects pleaded in [6AB]
of the statement of claim were both particularised
by, and to be proved by, Dr
Greiner’s reports. The second consideration was that the procedural
unfairness that would be visited
upon Ford by the receipt of the schedule 1
documents lay in denying Ford the opportunity to consider whether to: (a) tender
documents; (b) ask its own witnesses about the documents; and (c)
call other witnesses.
to the first consideration, the primary judge’s finding was influenced by
two matters: the contents of the letter of 30 August
2019 (the pertinent parts
of which we have quoted above) and the fact that the conduct of the trial
centred on Dr Greiner’s
it may be accepted that Dr Greiner’s evidence was central to the
respondent’s case, we do not think it is correct
to conclude that the
respondent manifested any intention, by the letter of 30 August 2019 or
otherwise, to limit the proof of her
case to that evidence, and to that evidence
letter of 30 August 2019 referred to the fact that the respondent’s
pleading foreshadowed the provision of further particulars
respondent’s expert evidence. It did not, however, confine the proof of
the respondent’s case to the intended
expert evidence.
letter provided the further particulars that the “Vehicle Defects”
included the fact that the “PowerShift Transmission”
system did not
have adequate damping measures, and that this architectural defect caused or
contributed to some of the quality issues,
performance issues, durability
issues, and comfort issues that had been pleaded, by increasing friction
variability and reducing
robustness to vehicle noise, vibration and harshness.
The letter specifically referred to “documents produced in the US
which addressed “the existence and implications of this
problem”. It is true that the letter did not, in terms, go further
that the respondent intended to rely on these documents, but the letter cannot
be read as saying that the respondent would
not rely on these documents, or that
her evidence would be confined to expert evidence.
the events we have summarised above show, the respondent did give notice to
Ford, well in advance of the hearing, that she intended
to rely on 60 of the 66
schedule 1 documents, and her opening submissions (which, as we have said, were
served two weeks prior to
trial) specifically referred to the fact that her
documentary tender included “material obtained on discovery from Ford US
... relating to the development of the DPS6, investigations by Ford US and its
suppliers as to the root causes of Defects, and corrective
measures approved by
Ford US to be implemented to attempt to remedy the Defects”.
is important to observe that, at this critical point, Ford’s objection was
not that the schedule 1 documents were beyond
the respondent’s
particularised case or constituted an unforeseen or impermissible mode of proof.
Rather, Ford’s objections
were threefold. Firstly, Ford said that it
objected to any tender that was not in accordance with a particular
confidentiality regime.
Secondly, Ford wanted advance notice of the basis on
which the respondent would tender each document. Thirdly, Ford objected to
“bulk” tender of documents by the respondent at the conclusion of
her opening.
is also important to note that, at the pre-trial interlocutory hearing on 11
June 2020, the respondent confirmed, unequivocally,
that she intended to tender
a large number of documents, which included the schedule 1 documents.
it was Ford’s suggestion, on the third day of the trial, that the tender
of the documents the respondent had foreshadowed
should be on a
“selective” basis “at the end of the evidence”. The
respondent was prepared to accept that
proposal provided that Ford indicated
“sooner rather than later if there is material to be objected to” so
that she was
not left in the position of “find[ing] out at the end of the
case that there is an objection”.
is apparent, therefore, that the parties acquiesced in a procedure, advanced by
Ford itself, whereby the debate about the admissibility
of the documents, whose
tender the respondent had clearly foreshadowed, would take place at the
of the evidence.
these circumstances, Ford could not legitimately complain that this course would
be procedurally unfair to it because it would
deny it the opportunity to: (a)
tender additional documents; (b) ask its own witnesses about the documents; and
(c) call other witnesses.
these reasons, Grounds 1 and 2 of the Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal should be
any procedural unfairness, one course open to Ford would have been to seek to
rely on the exercise, in its favour, of the discretion
to reject evidence under
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth). However, Ford did not take this
step at trial, and it is not open to it to take that step now.
the tender of the schedule 1 documents was rejected on the basis of procedural
unfairness, there has been no ruling on their
admissibility as evidence.
Further, no detailed submissions have been advanced in this appeal directed to
the admissibility of the
documents beyond reference to a handful of documents to
which we were taken in the course of oral submissions. It appears to us
these documents are, prima facie, relevant to the issues in the case and
admissible. However, having said that, we have already
dismissed Grounds 1, 2,
and 3 of the appeal. In these circumstances, there is no necessity for the
respondent to rely on these particular
documents and a ruling on the
admissibility of the schedule 1 documents as a whole seems to us to be a barren
light of these matters, it is not necessary for us to address paragraph 1 of
Ford’s Notice of Contention in the cross-appeal.
Grounds 3 and 4(b) Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal
The case below
trial, the respondent sought findings that the kinds of issues experienced by
Affected Vehicles as set out at [6AB(a)(i)] and [6AB(b)]–[6AB(g)]
statement of claim had, as part of their root causes, the DPS6’s system
for managing torsional vibrations and heat,
and that there was a causal
relationship between the Component Deficiencies and the Architecture
Deficiencies. That this was so
is apparent from the respondent’s closing
submissions: see, for example, [256], [284]–[288], [293(b)], [319], [321],
[325(b)], [362], [375].
only did Ford challenge that causal relationship but Ford’s case was that
vehicles fitted with a DPS6 displayed five characteristics
operating characteristics
which included
firm gear shifting
aggressive acceleration and a
slight shunting sensation
at low speeds:
see [521] J.
normal operating characteristics were referred to by Dr Greiner in his expert
report in reply.
relation to firm gear shifting, Dr Greiner stated the following:
At paragraph 95b of the Kuhn Report, Mr Kuhn states that „firm gear
shifting under aggressive acceleration“ „is
not unusual behaviour
and is a simple matter of transmission calibration and/or customer
preference“. Whilst it is true that
„sporty“ vehicles or
„Sport“ transmission profiles typically behave in this manner, this
is not the only
cause of „firm“ shifts with the DPS6. In paragraph
583 of my First Report I describe how dry clutch friction variability
DPS6 resulted in difficulties in torque transfer during shifts, such that shifts
could be very harsh if torque was too high
– shifts could also be delayed,
with engine flares, if torque was too low.
In my opinion, „firm“ or „harsh“ shifts that are the
result of unpredictability in clutch performance (e.g.,
due to friction
variability) are not what I would associate with the consistent
„firm“ shifts of a „sporty“
vehicle. In my experience
and opinion, these „firm“ or „harsh“ shifts of an
inconsistent nature are not
considered acceptable in the industry.
topic of harshness had also been addressed by Dr Greiner in his first report,
where he expressed the opinion at [306(a)] that
the “DPS6’s cardanic
clutch design contributes to...upshift and downshift
normal driving, due to essentially undamped torsional vibrations”
(emphasis original). He addressed, in general terms,
the notion of harshness
under the rubric “Comfort (Noise, Vibration and Harshness)” as part
of a subjective measurement
of how a vehicle feels from the perspective of its
driver or passengers at [118]–[120]. However, Dr Greiner’s first
report makes no overt link between the opinion expressed at [306(a)] and these
earlier paragraphs (and the report was more than 200
pages long). Nor did Dr
Greiner make any link between the topic of firm gear shifting in his reply
report and the topic of harshness
in his first report.
relation to the slight shunting sensation, Dr Greiner stated in his expert
report in reply:
At paragraph 95e of the Kuhn Report, Mr Kuhn explains the „slight shunting
sensation at very low speeds“ experienced
with the DPS6 Transmission.
„Shunting“ is an alternate way of describing the
„rocking“ motion that I described
at paragraph 117 of my First
Report, which is how a driver may perceive shudder. Whilst shudder will always
be a possibility caused
by an internal combustion engine – due to the
rotational irregularities of such engines, which I explain in section 5.2.1 of
my First Report – shudder can be effectively mitigated through the use of
adequate torsional damping. In a vehicle with adequate
torsional damping, a
driver should not experience this „shunting“ or
„rocking“ motion. It certainly shouldn’t
be considered a
normal operating characteristic of a vehicle in series production.
While I agree with each of the factors that Mr Kuhn suggests affect the
„degree to which the ,shunting‘ movement may
occur and [be] felt by
the [driver]“ – e.g., vehicle weight, engine mount tuning, engine
idle speed – I consider
these to be secondary measures. The primary
measure affecting the degree to which shudder may occur and be perceived is the
implementation
(or lack thereof) of adequate torsional damping measures.
respondent’s closing submissions stated as follows:
The Respondent says the operating characteristics of the DPS6 inherently involve
some NVH issues, and these are just “normal
characteristics” as opposed to an indicia the vehicles are not of
acceptable quality.
We understand the argument to be that the “Normal Operating
Characteristics” of the DPS6 are those which are left over
after all of
the Component Deficiencies and their attendant problems are fixed.
The Applicant’s response is threefold.
, these “Normal Operating Characteristics” are a
distraction if the Court accepts that the Component Deficiencies themselves
and/or in combination with the Architectural Deficiencies, were sufficient to
render the Affected Vehicles non-compliant with the
guarantee of acceptable
quality. They do not matter
, the “Normal Operating Characteristics” postulated
understate the kinds of durability, reliability, NVH/Comfort and performance
issues Affected Vehicles are prone to experience even after all Component
Deficiencies have been fixed. Mr Kuhn frankly acknowledged
that what is
“normal” for a vehicle is a product of its design: T1151.31-35;
T1153.12-16. The evidence is clear that
Affected Vehicles have unusual (but for
them, “normal” in the sense of typical or common) operating
characteristics by
reason of the particular design of the DPS6.
, the fact an operating characteristic is “normal” does
not make it any less defective if by reason of that particular
characteristic
(or its underlying root cause), the vehicle is not of acceptable quality. The
descriptor “normal” adds
(emphasis added.)
Reasons of the primary judge
a section of the judgment dealing with the negative consequences of torsional
vibrations, the primary judge referred to Dr Greiner’s
evidence concerning
harshness at [451] and [452] J, but decided that he did not accept that
evidence at [502] J and [506] J. At
[506] J, the primary judge
referred to [66] of Dr Greiner’s expert report in reply (which is set out
above). His Honour there
...I do not feel that I can safely conclude that harsh gear shifts resulted from
the use of inner dampers and clutch slip because
(a) that is not referred to
specifically in the documents upon which Dr Greiner relied beyond general
observations about NVH issues
and judder and more significantly (b) I do not
understand Dr Greiner’s explanation of the phenomenon. In his report in
at §66 Dr Greiner made some more comments about harsh gear shifts but
this time he linked the problem to frictional variability
in the clutch lining
material. He had explained that problem at §583 in his report in chief in
terms which I can readily follow.
However, it is not an explanation of how
harsh gear shifts can result from torsional vibrations in the absence of
variability in
the friction material...
a separate section of the judgment concerning Ford’s position, the normal
operating characteristics were listed in [521]
part of the analysis concerning those characteristics, the primary judge stated
that he was not persuaded by Dr Greiner’s
evidence about firm gear
shifting (because he did not follow his explanation) and “I am unable to
say whether the firm gear
shifts are a consequence of the transmission of
torsional vibrations through the drivetrain due to the low level of torsional
provided in the DPS6. I could not follow Dr Greiner’s explanation
and the Respondent proffered no explanation”: [523]
to the slight shunting sensation, the primary judge found at [525] J:
Neither Dr Greiner nor any other witness gave evidence to the effect that
shunting could be caused by torsional vibrations independently
of the behaviour
of the clutch lining and I am therefore left in the same position as for [firm
gear shifting]. That is I am unable
to say whether it is caused by torsional
vibrations but since the Respondent has admitted that it was a feature of the
Affected Vehicles,
I find as much.
[528] J, the primary judge reiterated that he was unable to say that firm
(or “harsh”) gear shifting and shunting were
caused by the
transmission of torsional vibrations: see also [654] J.
primary judge then made the following findings at
[672]–[673] J:
However I have pointed out above that the Applicant made no attempt to connect
the normal operating characteristics to its case alleging
that all Affected
Vehicles were defective due to the root causes of inadequate torsional damping
and inadequate heat management.
This is significant because as I explain more
fully below in Section XVI, the Applicant chose to particularise its case based
the evidence given by Dr Greiner. This choice meant that the trial of
question was conducted exclusively on the basis of the four
alleged Component Deficiencies and two alleged Architectural Deficiencies.
am not satisfied that the Applicant has connected 3 of the 5 normal operating
characteristics to its Architectural Deficiency
case (and the Applicant did not
submit they were connected to the Component Deficiencies), it would be
procedurally unfair to consider
these characteristics in assessing whether the
Respondent has complied with statutory guarantee where it was never asked to
this case at trial.
I therefore conclude that all vehicles fitted with a DPS6 were supplied in
, as they are prone to slight shudder at low speeds and
gear rattling, being the two normal operating characteristics that have been
causally linked to the case run by the Applicant on inadequate torsional
damping. No attempt has been made to fix these two characteristics,
vehicles remain afflicted by this risk.
Whether the primary judge erred
grounds 3 and 4(b) of the Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal, the respondent
contends that:
(1) the finding that the respondent had made no attempt to connect the normal
operating characteristics to the allegation that all
Affected Vehicles were
defective due to the root causes of inadequate torsional damping and inadequate
heat management, and that
it would be procedurally unfair to consider three of
the five normal operating characteristics in assessing whether Ford had complied
with the statutory guarantee, was an error in law;
(2) the primary judge ought to have found that the characteristics of firm gear
shifting and a slight shunting sensation were a consequence
of inadequate
arrangements for damping of torsional vibrations.
primary response to these grounds is that the primary judge cannot be criticised
in circumstances where the arguments
now sought to be advanced were not put
below, and it was not part of the respondent’s case.
is strong merit in this submission.
is because no such case was pleaded or opened by the respondent. It was not the
subject of cross-examination at trial and no
finding of the kind now referred to
in ground 4(b) was sought by the respondent. Indeed, the respondent branded
Ford’s case
on the normal operating characteristics as a
“distraction” if the primary judge was to accept the case that she
respondent) was advancing (as opposed to the case that Ford was
advancing).
particular, although the respondent’s closing submissions referred to firm
gear shifting and the slight shunting sensation
in the course of addressing
Ford’s case about the normal operating characteristics (as we identify
above), the respondent made
no submission that these characteristics were
by inadequate arrangements for damping of torsional vibrations.
Further, the respondent’s submissions did not link the various
in Dr Greiner’s two reports (including to the general discussion of
“Comfort (Noise, Vibration and Harshness)”
early in his first
report) and other evidence (as the respondent now seeks to do) in support of
such a conclusion.
this appeal, the respondent submits that it did advance this case before the
primary judge because of the references to [57]–[73]
of Dr Greiner’s
reply report in the opening submissions and reply submissions. However, the
opening submissions and the reply
submissions do not contain or develop any
argument that the characteristics of firm gear shifting and slight shunting
sensation were
a consequence of inadequate arrangements for damping of torsional
vibrations. References to these paragraphs of Dr Greiner’s
expert report
in reply would not be sufficient to alert the primary judge (or Ford) that the
respondent was advancing such a case.
respondent also submits that the characteristics of firm gear shifting and a
slight shunting sensation had been addressed by Dr
Greiner, and that the
problems described by him and in the Ford US documents “largely
corresponded with the types of issues
Ford labelled ‘normal operating
characteristics’ in these proceedings, but the terms employed to describe
the problems/issues
varied”. However, even if that is the case, neither
Ford nor the primary judge can be criticised for failing to appreciate
correlation if the respondent neither brought it to Ford’s and the primary
judge’s attention nor made submissions
which referenced that evidence.
That is especially the case where such a large volume of documentary evidence
was before the Court.
in these circumstances, the primary judge was correct to say, as he did, that it
would be procedurally unfair to “consider
these characteristics in
assessing whether [Ford] has complied with the statutory guarantee where it was
never asked to meet this
case at trial”.
second primary argument by Ford is that, when one examines [57]–[73] of Dr
Greiner’s second report (which was also
emphasised by the respondent on
this appeal), that evidence was insufficient to establish, on the balance of
probabilities, that
the characteristics of firm gear shifting and a slight
shunting sensation (being the two normal operating characteristics referred
in ground 4(b)) were a consequence of inadequate arrangements for damping of
torsional vibrations.
the following reasons, we accept that argument.
with each issue raised by grounds 3 and 4(b) in turn:
(1) the identified paragraphs of Dr Greiner’s report make no reference to
heat management;
(2) as to the “firm gear shifting under aggressive acceleration”, Dr
Greiner’s evidence was that “[sporty
vehicles] typically behave in
this manner” and that transmission calibration and customer preference are
not the only cause
of firm gear shifts. While Dr Greiner considered that
harsh shifting could be caused by friction variability (relevant to the clutch
lining), he did not, as the primary judge correctly stated, explain how harsh
gear shifts can result from torsional vibrations in
the absence of variability
in the friction material;
(3) as to the “slight shunting sensation at very low speeds”, Dr
Greiner’s evidence rose no higher than an opinion
that “[w]hilst
shudder will always be a possibility caused by an internal combustion
engine”, this can be “effectively
mitigated through the use of
adequate torsional dampening”. This evidence is not sufficient to prove
that the characteristic
by the alleged Architecture
Deficiency.
error has been established.
3 and 4(b) of the Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal must therefore fail. Because
of this, there is no need to address the matters
raised by paragraph 2 of
Ford’s Notice of Contention in the cross-appeal.
Ground 5 Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal
this ground of appeal, the respondent contends that:
The learned primary judge erred in law in answering common questions 2, 7 and 8
and at J[510]-[519], [501] (relating to friction
material), at J[235] (relating
to input shaft seals), at J[413]-[415] (relating to the Original ATIC 91 chips),
and at J[13], [528]-[534],
[961]-[963] and CQJ [63]-[64], [70] in failing to
(a) Affected Vehicles manufactured with the B8080 clutch lining material, had a
propensity to experience all of the issues found
to be associated with the B8080
clutch friction material,
(b) Affected Vehicles manufactured with the original input shaft seals had a
propensity to experience all of the issues found to
be associated with the
original input shaft seals,
(c) Affected Vehicles manufactured with the Original ATIC 91 chips and/or (to
the extent grounds 10 and 11 below are upheld) the
Original ATIC 106 chips, had
a propensity to experience all of the issues found to be associated with the use
of the Original ATIC
91 chips (and also the issues associated with the Original
ATIC 106 chips to the extent grounds 10 and 11 below are upheld),
(d) Affected Vehicles had an unusual propensity for servicing, repair and/or
replacement of the dual clutch assembly (or components
thereof) in Affected
Vehicles to be necessary or desirable earlier, and more often than usual or
reasonably expected,
by reason of being manufactured with inadequate arrangements for damping of
torsional vibrations and/or heat management (respectively,
the Architecture
Deficiency – Damping and Architecture Deficiency – Heat), including
in the interaction of those architectural
arrangements with the componentry.
primary judge found that:
(1) the DPS6’s approach to torsional vibrations and heat management
“had some impact on the failure of the input shaft
[235] J; see also [534] J;
(2) the DPS6’s system for torsional damping “was apt to generate a
degree of heat which led to the B8080 clutch lining
behaving eccentrically when
sufficiently heated”: [532] J; see also [501] J;
(3) torsional vibrations accelerated the solder cracking problem associated with
the ATIC chips in the TCM: [415] J; see also [533]
respondent contends that these findings ought to have led the primary judge to
also find that the alleged Architecture Deficiencies
gave rise to a
“superadded propensity for Affected Vehicles to experience troubling
vehicle behaviours, and the superadded
propensity for servicing, repair and/or
replacement of the dual clutch assembly”, associated with each of the
relevant Component
Deficiencies.
respondent also submits that the error in the primary judge’s method
arises from the unnecessary narrowing of the respondent’s
case and is
evident at [515]–[518], [235] and [531] J wherein it is suggested
that the respondent could only succeed on the
Architecture Deficiencies case to
the extent it was shown that a problem associated with them was
“irremediable” divorced
from any remedies Ford developed for the
Component Deficiencies or which even
hypothetically, have
been developed: see [516] J.
The case below
submits that the respondent’s case before the primary judge was that the
Architecture Deficiencies themselves caused “undesirable
independent of the componentry”. So much may be accepted in that the
respondent did advance such a case. We refer,
in particular, to
section 4.5
the respondent’s closing submissions which related to 2% of the class
which only had Architecture Deficiencies without any
of the Component
Deficiencies.
the respondent
advanced a case below that there was a causal
relationship between the Component Deficiencies and the Architecture
Deficiencies.
That is, the respondent’s architecture case was not merely
the residue of problems left over once all the Component Deficiencies
vehicle were fixed, but also involved the allegation that there was an
interaction between the DPS6’s architecture and
the propensity of its
componentry to fail.
part of the closing submissions, the respondent identified that this was an
issue in connection with each of the Component Deficiencies
as found by the
primary judge, and explained the relationship by reference to the evidence.
Further, the respondent did not seek
to prove (and did not submit) that the
issues to which the DPS6 system for damping torsional vibrations/heat gave rise
were irremediable
(as opposed to not remedied by Ford).
section 4.4
of its closing submissions, the respondent addressed the Component
Deficiencies that are relevant to this appeal.
relation to the input shaft seals, the respondent identified that the only real
dispute about this deficiency as being whether
it was related to the
Architecture Deficiency – Heat, or was wholly self-contained: [256]. In a
section dealing with the connection
to the Architecture Deficiencies, the
respondent also submitted at [284]–[289] that:
Ford Australia seeks to suggest the Input Shaft Seal leaks were an isolated
deficiency unrelated to the architecture issues.
The Court should not accept that claim.
As Dr Greiner explained – and it makes complete sense –
transmissions are “complex” systems and failures
never have just one
root cause. Many issues are related root causes of what the customer sees and
experiences. Even on Ford’s
case this is correct: Ford itself
acknowledges that the seals issue had many root causes including manufacturing
processes and seal
properties.
However, the fundamental architecture of the DPS6 is also a root cause of the
seals issue and consequently the problems customers
experienced and continue to
experience. Dr Greiner’s evidence is that the reason the seals failed is
because of the environment
they were put into, viz an excessively hot operating
environment with insufficient reduction in torsional vibrations
documentary evidence to support this too...
As Dr Greiner says, it is the excessive heat issue which sits
“behind” the problems with the seals
. As he asked rhetorically,
“why would [Ford] have been forced to change the [seal] material to a
higher heat resistant material
if it’s not a heat related problem?”.
There is no good answer for that question coming from Ford Australia.
In fact, Getrag contended in November 2013 that: (a) temperature and energy
levels were “much higher” on DPS6 vehicles
vs other Getrag customers
of the DCT250; (b) seals were not failing in other applications of the DCT250;
and (c) Ford was the only
customer to use a cardanic clutch system-i.e.,
“no DMF” (and consequently those customers did not need to rely, as
DPS6 does, on excessive clutch slip to try to dampen torsional vibrations
(and which generates excessive heat)). By March 2014,
Ford US had accepted
Getrag’s analysis that the original seal material was not sufficiently
robust for the temperature of the
(emphasis added; citations omitted.)
relation to the TCM, the respondent identified one issue as being whether it was
related to the Architecture Deficiency –
Damping, or was wholly
self-contained: [293(b)]. In a section dealing with the connection to the
Architecture Deficiencies, the
respondent identified that an internal report of
Ford, Getrag and Continental “also identifies vehicle vibrations as
accelerator’ of the solder cracking issue” and that
“Further detail and the testing that led to that conclusion
that vehicle
vibrations were an accelerator is contained in slide 49”: [319] and [320].
The respondent submitted that this
conclusion was “wholly consistent with
Dr Greiner’s view that issues in complex modern transmissions never have
one root cause (T1069.39-41) and that the inadequate management of vehicle
vibrations was a contributor to this issue”: [321].
relation to the friction material, the respondent identified one issue as being
whether it was related to the Architecture Deficiencies,
or was wholly
self-contained: [325(b)]. In a section dealing with the connection to the
Architecture Deficiencies, the respondent
submitted at [362]–[363]
Ford Australia seeks to isolate the friction material issue from the
architecture issues but they are inherently related.
The chain of reasoning can be simply stated: see Greiner’s powerpoint
presentation for the hot-tub, slides 5-12; see further
Greiner 1, [311]-[350];
Greiner 2, [77], [176]. In summary: without a mechanical damper solution for
torsional vibrations, Ford
and its transmission supplier Getrag were forced to
use clutch slip excessively to seek to dampen the torsional vibrations. Clutch
slip generates heat. Without an adequate heat management system, the clutch
lining material is operating in an environment with
large temperature variations
which include, in heavy traffic or aggressive drive cycles excessive heat. That
kind of operating environment
causes friction variability and wear. Heat was
particularly problematic for the B8080 material’s friction material
properties.
Wear at high temperatures is problematic for the RCF1o.
(document identifiers omitted.)
referring to the contents of various documents internal to Ford US, the
respondent submitted at [374]–[375] that:
Against the overwhelming weight of Ford’s own documentary evidence, the
Court will conclude that the shift to RCF1o and B8040
was a band-aid, not a
complete fix for the friction material issue and its propensity to cause
shudder, performance, durability,
reliability, and NVH/comfort issues in the
field. The longer-term limitations of RCF1o were well known within Ford,
including that
it has a poor [friction] characteristic and a propensity to wear
at high temperatures. That is shown in Greiner 1, Figure 41 ...
Against this background, the Court should have no doubts about the correctness
of Dr Greiner’s opinions that Ford has never
developed a completely
satisfactory fix for the friction material deficiency (see Greiner 1,
[433]-[436]; Greiner 2, [147]), and
that the Architectural Deficiencies exist
and continue to cause Affected Vehicles to have an unacceptable propensity to
fail in the
field and result in shudder, durability, performance, NVH/comfort
and reliability issues of the kind pleaded.
(document identifiers omitted.)
Whether the primary judge erred
light of the findings made by the primary judge concerning the interaction
between architecture and the propensity of componentry
to fail as referred to
above, we agree that those findings ought to have led the primary judge to find
further that the alleged Architecture
Deficiencies gave rise to a
propensity for Affected Vehicles to experience troubling
vehicle behaviours, as contended by the respondent in [5(a)]–[5(c)]
Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal. Such a finding ought to have been made based on
the evidence identified in the closing submissions
of the respondent
irrespective of whether the related Component Deficiency was capable of or was
the subject of a fix, or whether
the Architecture Deficiency was remediable
(which we accept was not the respondent’s case in any event).
is because the Architecture Deficiencies
increased the risk or propensity
of the troubling behaviours occurring. This was a propensity case, which
required an assessment of risk by the primary judge. Before
any Component
Deficiencies were rectified (if they were rectified), the propensity for the
troubling issues existed as a consequence
of a combination of the Component
Deficiencies
the Architecture Deficiencies. The latter added
to the overall risk. Such a finding ought therefore to have been made.
we are not satisfied that the primary judge erred in making a finding to the
effect contended by the respondent in [5(d)]
of the Amended Notice of
Cross-Appeal. As with grounds 3 and 4 above, there is strong merit in
Ford’s submission that no such
case was put by the respondent below.
respondent contends that the matters were established by Dr Greiner’s
evidence as to typical rates of repair as compared
with the excessive rates for
the DPS6, and the interaction of the architecture with the componentry.
on a fair reading of the material advanced below, including the
respondent’s submissions, we do not consider that the
primary judge was
directed to make a finding that the Affected Vehicles had an “unusual
propensity” for servicing, repair
and/or replacement of certain
components, nor do we consider that such a finding ought to have been made.
these reasons, ground 5 of the Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal must be upheld
(other than in the case of ground 5(d)).
Ground 6 Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal
this ground of appeal, the respondent asserted error by the primary judge in
failing to find that the supply of the Affected Vehicles
did not comply with the
guarantee of acceptable quality in
of the ACL by reason of being
manufactured with the Architecture Deficiencies, including in the interaction of
those architectural
arrangements with the componentry.
reason of the respondent’s success on grounds 5(a)–(c) of the
Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal, ground 6 should also
Grounds 10 and 11 Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal
10 and 11 of the Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal, as well as paragraph 3 of
Ford’s Notice of Contention, relate to the
primary judge’s findings
concerning the ATIC 106 chip. In essence, the respondent complains that
the primary judge ought to
have found that the Affected Vehicles failed to
comply with the guarantee of acceptable quality within the meaning of
of the ACL when supplied with the original ATIC 106 chips.
first error asserted by the respondent relates to the finding
was “no material” which allowed assessment of the existence of any
independent risk of solder cracking in respect
of the ATIC 106 chips. The
respondent submits that there was such evidence, and says that this explains why
Ford did not put this
fact in issue.
asserted error relates to the finding that “the evidence is
consistent with the ATIC 106 problem being regarded as minor but
with Ford US
deciding that since it was going to have to change the entire TCM it might as
well take the opportunity to fix a somewhat
smaller problem”. The
respondent submits that this finding was not available in circumstances where
the evidence was not consistent
with such a finding and Ford had not made a
submission to that effect.
its Notice of Contention, Ford contends that the decision of the primary judge
in relation to the ATIC 106 chips should be affirmed
because the Affected
Vehicles did not fail to comply with the guarantee of acceptable quality when
supplied as new.
Reasons of the primary judge
already observed, and as was common ground at the trial, every Affected Vehicle
had four ATIC 106 chips: [331] J. Their function
was to control the gears
and the introduction of the relevant clutch plate to the drive plate:
primary judge at [3] J summarised the respondent’s case as follows,
“Ms Capic says that the coefficients of thermal
expansion of the PCB
and the ATIC 91 and ATIC 106 chips were different and that repeated heating and
cooling of the TCM (which is
attached to the transmission assembly) created a
risk of the solder cracking”.
primary judge expanded upon the impact of the changes of temperature as follows
at [336]–[339] J:
The frequent fluctuations in temperature experienced by the transmission are
therefore shared with the TCM.
These fluctuations then bring one to the topic of the coefficient of thermal
expansion (‘CTE’). This is the rate at
which an object expands or
contracts with a given change in temperature. If two objects each with a
different CTE are bound together
then fluctuations in temperature will cause
them to expand and contract at different rates and this difference generates a
force. It is this principle, for example, which underpins the
operation of a bimetallic thermostat. In the case of a thermostat
the change in
temperature is converted into mechanical action which turns off or on a heating
What is good engineering in a thermostat, however, is not necessarily good
engineering in a PCB. In this case, the PCB had a CTE
of 18 (measured in
ppm/C˚) whilst the original ATIC 91 chips had a CTE of 6. The ratio
of these two coefficients was therefore
3:1 which is to say that the PCB
expanded three times as fast as the ATIC 91 chip.
The evidence did not
directly disclose what the CTE for the ATIC 106 chips was but it did
suggest, in a fairly unspecific way, that
the problem was similar. Although
some more detail about this might have been helpful it does not matter since the
parties both
accepted that the CTE problem afflicting the ATIC 106 was
similar to that afflicting the ATIC 91. I emphasise, however, that the
In any event, the effect of the differing CTEs in the case of the ATIC 91
chips (and what I will assume was a differing CTE in the
case of the
ATIC 106 chips) was that over time the repeated heating and cooling of the
TCM created a repeated mechanical strain on
the solder which affixed the chips
to the PCB.
(emphasis added.)
there, the respondent did not submit that there was any evidence which disclosed
the CTE for the original ATIC 106 chip.
to the consequences of failure of the ATIC 106 chip, which is relevant to
Ford’s Notice of Contention, the primary judge
found at [332] J
[F]ailure in the ATIC 106 chips is likely to result in only localised
dysfunction. For example, if the ATIC 106 controller for the
gear shifts
on clutch 1 completely failed then this would result only in an inability to
change gears to an odd numbered gear. Where
the ATIC 106 controlling the
odd numbered gears failed in a less than complete way, then varying degrees of
dysfunction in gear changes
with those gears might be observed. Intermittent
dysfunction in an ATIC 106 controlling a clutch would, on the other hand,
to result in symptoms associated with instability in that clutch
system. But these failures are localised in the particular system
controlled by
the relevant ATIC 106.
primary judge was of the view that the failure of the ATIC 106 chip may be
contrasted with the situation where there was a failure
in the ATIC 91
chip, which leads to “potentially more significant disruptions in the
driving experience”: [333] J. He
continued, “Consistently with
that observation, Mr Cruse explained that the driveability impacts of an
affected ATIC 91 chip
were more significant than those of an affected
ATIC 106 chip”. At [348]–[349] J, the primary judge
accepted the evidence
of Mr Cruse that:
If an ATIC 106 chip is affected, the transmission may not always select gears
appropriately or may sometimes ‘miss’ gears.
If one ATIC 106 chip
loses communication altogether, the transmission will not be able to select the
gears controlled by that chip.
This could influence the vehicle’s
performance – for example, if the transmission cannot select second gear,
the running
speed may increase inappropriately high (‘rev’) in first
gear before shifting into third gear, resulting in a jerking
or shuddering
a separate section of the judgment dealing with risk of failure, the primary
judge stated at [351] J that, since this is a case
it was necessary to consider the risks of those difficulties arising. His
Honour observed that the position
of the two chips is not the same. He stated
that while the respondent’s submissions “did belatedly draw a
distinction
between the consequences of failure in the ATIC 91 and
ATIC 106 chips they did not observe that distinction when dealing with the
extent of the risks posed”: [353] J.
primary judge referred to the respondent’s reliance upon a long document
which “Ford US may have sent to Getrag possibly
in February 2015”,
being a letter and approximately 650 pages of attachments. The primary
judge observed at [355] J that “the
topic of discussion [in the
document] is the ATIC 91 chip” and that the attack on Getrag
“seems to be a war about the
ATIC 91 chip and not about the ATIC 106
chip”. This was echoed at [357] J by the statement, “The
principal limitation,
however, is the one that I have referred to already,
namely, that substantially all of the document is about the ATIC 91 chip
is not about the ATIC 106 chip”.
characterisation of the document sent to Getrag is important because it was that
document, along with other evidence, which persuaded
the primary judge that
there was a real risk of failure of the original ATIC 91 chip:
[366]–[367] J. We return to this important
distinction below.
finding at [368] J that there was a “real risk of the solder cracking
on the original ATIC 91 chip [and where] this risk
eventuated, it would
cause, in turn, the series of steadily worsening symptoms to which I have
already referred”, the primary
judge stated at [369] J:
I am unable to make a similar finding about the ATIC 106 chips. There is
no material which allows me to assess the existence of
any independent risk that
they posed. As I have said, the Applicant made no submissions about the
existence of a risk of failure
arising from the ATIC 106 chips. The best
that can be said is that there was a sufficient problem for Ford US to
think it profit
maximising to replace the chips in production and, eventually,
for some vehicles on the road. However, I do not think that is sufficient
me to make any sensible assessment of the risk it posed independent of the ATIC
91 chip. The evidence is consistent with the
ATIC 106 problem being
regarded as minor but with Ford US deciding that since it was going to have to
change the entire TCM it might
as well take the opportunity to fix a somewhat
smaller problem. The situation of the ATIC 106 chips was, in a real sense,
overshadowed
by that of the ATIC 91 chips and this had the consequence that
it is not possible to make a finding about it. No doubt, there is
detailed story to be told about the ATIC 106 chips but neither party really
embarked upon it and it would be inappropriate
for me to try and guess about it.
[378] J, the primary judge stated:
The Applicant submitted that the ‘TCM Solder Crack deficiency’ was
only resolved once the second round of changes to
the ATIC 106 were
completed. No doubt this is literally true. However, in circumstances where I
am unable to assess the existence
of an independent risk posed by the
ATIC 106 chips, I am unable to say whether there was a risk in those
vehicles which had the new
ATIC 91 chips installed but which continued to
contain the old ATIC 106 chips. I am prepared to assume there was some
desirability
of having the new ATIC 106 chips otherwise Ford US would not
have bothered changing the chip. However, there is simply no way to
existence of any risk of failure where a vehicle had a new ATIC 91 chip but old
ATIC 106 chips. Since the Applicant bears
the onus of proof on establishing the
risk, I find that the risk has not been proven.
[651] J, the primary judge concluded:
For completeness, I have not drawn any independent conclusion about the ATIC 106
chip, so far as it might bear upon the question
consequence of the fact, as I explained above in Section VIII, that there was
insufficient material to support a finding
that a real risk of failure existed
in relation to the ATIC 106 chip.
Whether the primary judge erred
to the first asserted error, the respondent submits that the existence of any
independent risk of solder cracking in respect of
the ATIC 106 chips was
not put in issue by Ford at trial, and that Ford did not contend that there was
any material distinction in
failure rates between the ATIC 106 chip and the ATIC
91 chip, or any material distinction in the deficiencies in both chips or the
causes of the respective chip failures.
irrespective of the approach taken by Ford at trial, the burden of proof
remained on the respondent to adduce evidence which
demonstrated that there was
a risk of failure of the ATIC 106 chip, since this was a case about risks of
failure. As can be seen
from the reasons extracted above, the primary judge was
careful to review and evaluate the evidence which was not, in fact, directed
demonstrating a risk of failure in relation to both the ATIC 91 chip and the
ATIC 106 chip. That is, the evidence in relation
to the risks of failure of
both types of chips was not identical.
circumstances where the majority of the evidence (such as the letter and
documents sent to Getrag) was focused upon the ATIC 91
chip, and not the ATIC
106 chip at all, or where there was at least uncertainty as to whether the ATIC
106 chip was being addressed
in the evidence (such as in the graphs which appear
at [357] and [361] J), there was no error by the primary judge in
the risk concerning the ATIC 91 chip and the ATIC 106 chip
separately. Having regard to the evidence, it did not follow that the
that is appreciated, the question becomes whether there was sufficient evidence
to demonstrate an independent risk of failure
of the ATIC 106 chip.
respondent identifies various disparate paragraphs within the evidence of
witnesses, and particular pages of lengthy documents
tendered at trial, in order
to show that there was such evidence.
particular, the respondent relies upon a report dated 12 November 2014 which was
provided by Ford US to the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration. That
report, which is 426 pages long, contains two tables, one of which was entitled
“Suspected ATIC91
Key Word Search – ‘Loss of Motion’ and
‘No Start’ Analysis” and the other entitled “Suspected
ATIC91 Key Word Search (‘Loss of Motion’ and ‘No Start’)
and ATIC106 Key Word Search ‘Limp Home’”.
The tables relate
to all countries and concern the “Bivariate Weibull” model, and
contained percentages of repair probability
over different time periods and
distances. Similar tables appear on two later pages of the report, including a
table which is described
as “Suspected ATIC106 Key Word Search –
‘Limp Home’ Analysis”.
witness was taken to these pages during cross-examination at the trial, and no
witness gave any evidence about them.
Dr Greiner referred to other pages of this report in his first expert report at
footnotes 249, 250 and 251, the pages which
contain these tables were not
referred to by him, and his reports did not contain any analysis of the tables
of the kind which is
advanced by the respondent on this appeal (particularly at
footnote 9 of the respondent’s outline of submissions). Further,
regard to the pages of the report to which we were taken, we are not satisfied
that the tables contained in this report can
be interpreted in the way in which
the respondent contends that they should be interpreted. We do not accept that
the primary judge
erred in failing to discern that these pages of the report, to
which he was not taken in submissions and about which there was no
were sufficient such that his Honour ought to have found that there was an
independent risk of failure of the ATIC 106
were also taken to other evidence by the respondent which was said to
demonstrate an independent risk of failure of the ATIC 106
chip. While we
accept that there was some evidence concerning the risk of failure of the ATIC
106 chip, we do not agree with the
respondent’s submission that there was
sufficient material before the primary judge which allowed the existence of any
independent
risk of solder cracking in respect of the ATIC 106 chips to be
is because:
(1) the particular paragraphs of the first report of Dr Greiner either addressed
both the ATIC 91 chip and the ATIC 106 chip, or
related to the revised ATIC
(2) the particular paragraphs of the affidavit of Mr Kwasniewicz addressed the
general issues around the solder crack issues, investigations
and the solutions;
(3) the extracts of the Task Force Report either relate to the ATIC 91 chip or
do not provide any cogent evidence concerning the
existence of the risk of
solder cracking in respect of the ATIC 106 chips.
these reasons, the respondent has not established the first asserted error.
to the second asserted error, being the observation by the primary judge that
“the evidence is consistent with the ATIC 106
problem being regarded as
minor but with Ford US deciding that since it was going to have to change the
entire TCM it might as well
take the opportunity to fix a somewhat smaller
problem”, we agree with Ford’s submission that this observation was
material to the ultimate findings of the primary judge, being to the effect
that the respondent had failed to discharge its burden
of proof in relation to
the risk of failure of the ATIC 106 chip.
follows that grounds 10 and 11 of the Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal must
these grounds have failed, it is not necessary to determine the issue raised by
paragraph 3 of Ford’s Notice of Contention
in the cross-appeal. However,
it is relevant to note that, as the evidence concerning the ATIC 106 chips was
insufficient (which
Ford endorses), we cannot, as Ford presses us to do, assess
the likelihood of the risk manifesting as part of the analysis of whether
has been compliance with the statutory guarantee. As a result, paragraph 3 of
Ford’s Notice of Contention fails for
the same reasons that grounds 10 and
11 of the Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal fails.
APPEAL ON DAMAGES
Section 271 Australian Consumer Law
271(1) of the ACL provides that:
271 Action for damages against manufacturer of goods
(a) the guarantee under
applies to a supply of goods to a consumer;
(b) the guarantee is not complied with;
an affected person in relation to the goods may, by action against the
manufacturer of the goods, recover damages from the manufacturer.
271(6) of the ACL
provides that:
(6) If an affected person in relation to goods has, in accordance with an
express warranty given or made by the manufacturer of the
goods, required the
manufacturer to remedy a failure to comply with a guarantee referred to in
subsection (1), (3) or (5):
(a) by repairing the goods; or
(b) by replacing the goods with goods of an identical type;
then, despite that subsection, the affected person is not entitled to commence
an action under that subsection to recover damages
of a kind referred to in
section 272(1)(a) unless the manufacturer has refused or failed to remedy
the failure, or has failed to
remedy the failure within a reasonable time.
primary judge’s interpretation and application of these provisions was the
subject of attack by both Ford and the respondent.
Whether s 271(1) gives rise to separate causes of
issue arises pursuant to grounds 8 and 9 of the Amended Notice of
Cross-Appeal.
[5] J, the primary judge observed that, for each risk which was found to
have been established, Ms Capic had “a separate
cause of action under ACL
s 271(1) entitling her to claim damages from [Ford] under
s 272”. This finding as to the construction
of s 271(1) of the
ACL is repeated with associated reasons at [745]–[752] J as
...[There is a] question of whether s 271(1) confers a separate cause of action
for each problem sufficient to constitute non-compliance
with the guarantee (for
convenience each such problem is described below as a ‘fault’). For
example, if a particular
vehicle suffers from the two normal operating
characteristics and a TCM with a real risk of developing solder cracks (in this
a ‘faulty TCM’), does the group member have one cause of
action under s 271(1) or does he or she have two?
This question is of significance because of the defence afforded by s 271(6).
If there is but one cause of action regardless of
the number of faults then the
repair defence under s 271(6) becomes conceptually problematic. To stay
with the example of the vehicle
which suffered on supply (the relevant time
these questions are to be addressed) from the two normal operating
characteristics and
a faulty TCM: what happens if the TCM is replaced within a
reasonable time but the two normal operating characteristics remain
unremediated?
If there is but one cause of action for a failure to comply with the guarantee
then at the time of supply when the cause of action accrued the vehicle
suffered from two faults: the two normal operating characteristics
faulty TCM. On the basis of that single cause of action, damages would be
available for reduction in value under s 272(1)(a)
and other damages under s
272(1)(b). In effect, the single cause of action gives rise to two separate
heads of damages.
On this view, the fact that a faulty TCM was subsequently replaced within a
reasonable time would not give rise to a defence under
s 271(6). This
would be because the act of repair did not result in the vehicle being of
acceptable quality. Even after the replacement
of the faulty TCM it would
remain blighted by the two normal operating characteristics.
On the other hand, if each fault gives rise to a separate cause of action then a
different result follows. In that situation, the
group member has an
entitlement to sue for reduction in value damages under s 272(1)(a) and
other damages under s 272(1)(b) in relation
to the two normal operating
characteristics. However, he or she has a separate cause of action for the same
heads of damages arising
from the faulty TCM. However, where the TCM has been
replaced by the manufacturer within a reasonable time, then s 271(6) will
to provide the manufacturer with a defence to a claim for reduction in
value damages under s 272(1)(a) in relation to the TCM.
These then are the two competing interpretations of Division 2 of
vying for the field. I prefer the second reading. I read
establishing a single norm. That norm may be breached in more than one way. A
vehicle may have several things wrong with it
each of which is sufficient to
mean that it is not of acceptable quality.
Each time the norm is breached
s 271(1) confers a separate cause of action. In terms of s 271(1)
this is because each time the norm
is breached ‘the guarantee is not
complied with’.
That expression is neutral on how many factual
matters underpin the failure, that is to say, it is consistent with either of
interpretations I have outlined.
However, I prefer the second interpretation for two reasons. First, it avoids
the anomalous availability of reduction in value damages
in relation to a fault
that has been repaired within a reasonable time in a case where another fault
exists and has not been. Secondly,
s 271(6) refers to the failure of the
manufacturer ‘to remedy
failure to comply with the
guarantee’ (my emphasis) and therefore appears to recognise that there may
be more than one such
Consequently, I conclude that each fault constitutes a failure to comply with
the statutory guarantee and gives rise to a separate
cause of action.
means that the issues which arise under s 271(6) are live in relation to the
input shaft seals, clutch lining and TCM even
though all of the Affected
Vehicles also fail to comply with the statutory guarantee because of the two
normal operating characteristics.
(emphasis added.)
noted by the primary judge at [745] J, this issue was not addressed by the
parties before him.
grounds 8 and 9 of the Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal, the respondent challenges
the primary judge’s finding that each deficiency
(or “fault”
as described in [745] J) – namely the input shaft seal, B8080 clutch
lining, ATIC 91 chip and inadequate
torsional damping – was sufficient on
its own to constitute non-compliance with the statutory guarantee and a separate
of action under s 271(1) of the ACL.
respondent submits that this was an error because in circumstances where
multiple reasons give rise to
non-compliance, and those reasons
interrelate with each other, share commonalities in their consequences for
consumers, and are related
to a functionally distinct or self-contained part of
the vehicle, the primary judge should have treated each fault as giving rise
the same, single failure to comply with the statutory guarantee.
the following reasons, we accept that the primary judge’s construction of
s 271(1) of the ACL, and the finding challenged
by these grounds of the
Amended Notice of Cross-Appeal, were erroneous. We therefore uphold grounds 8
and 9 of the Amended Notice
of Cross-Appeal.
in our respectful view, the primary judge’s approach misconstrued
s 271(1) by treating instances of the guarantee of
acceptable quality being
“not complied with” as comprising merely the underlying fault (or
root cause). However,
requires “acceptable quality” to
be assessed from the perspective of a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with
state and condition of the goods.
this case, the state and condition of the vehicle with which the reasonable
consumer is to be acquainted for the purposes of
included not only
the underlying mechanical issues (such as the faulty clutch lining), but the
adverse consequences that these faults
had a propensity to cause. It was the
risk of adverse consequences such as shudder or rattling noises or loss of power
in the vehicles
that had these underlying faults that a reasonable consumer
would regard as not meeting the standard of acceptable quality.
fact that these underlying faults all affected a functionally distinct
self-contained part of the vehicle – the DPS6 transmission
gave rise to the same, or overlapping, risks of adverse consequences meant that,
from a reasonable consumer’s perspective,
there was in substance only one
failure to comply with the guarantee.
to Ford’s submissions, it did not matter that the various consequences had
more than one root cause. If two root causes
have a propensity for the same or
overlapping consequences for consumers, the reasonable consumer is likely to
view this as one failure
to comply with the statutory guarantee. Likewise, if
there are two faults that cause the gearbox to malfunction in interrelated
overlapping ways, there is one failure from the reasonable consumer’s
perspective: a faulty gearbox. Fixing only one of
those faults under warranty
does not change this perception.
treating faults that are interrelated, overlapping in consequences, or that
relate to a self-contained part of the vehicle
as a single failure avoids
absurdity. This is because if “faults” like those which arose in
this case are treated as
separate failures and separate causes of action, each
would give rise to a separate, claimable reduction in value under
s 272(1)(a).
Such a construction is unlikely to be the intention of
Parliament because it invites double recovery. Such a construction would
be unduly complicated – an incongruous result for legislation which is
designed to protect the rights of consumers.
treating interrelated faults as a single failure does not entail the anomalous
concern identified by the primary judge at
[751] J that reduction in value
damages could be available for unrelated faults in cases when one fault has been
repaired and another
fault exists.
is because, if a vehicle has two unrelated faults, being ones which each give
rise to entirely separate unrelated adverse consequences,
there would be two
failures to comply with the guarantee. So much may be accepted. That there may
be more than one fault is recognised
by the terms of s 271(6) itself in
that it refers to a failure “to remedy
failure to comply with a
guarantee” (emphasis added). Repairing such a distinct fault within a
reasonable time would engage
s 271(6) and preclude reduction in value
damages resulting from that fault.
contrast, when the faults are interrelated, have overlapping consequences, or
relate to a self-contained part of a vehicle (as
in this case), the repair of
one fault but the failure to repair other faults does not preclude recovery of
reduction in value damages.
The vehicle is still not of acceptable
does not lead to an unjust outcome, as Ford submits, because the legislative
intention of s 271(6) is to prevent the recovery
of reduction in value
damages only when a complete repair is provided within a reasonable time, not
when the problem is only partially
fixed. Treating interrelated or overlapping
faults as separate failures would defeat this intention, because it would allow
repairs to remove part of the consumer’s entitlement to
conclusion is consistent with the reasoning of the Full Court in the recent
decision of
. That case was also a representative proceeding and
concerned the supply between 1 October 2015 and 23 April 2020 of 264,170
motor vehicles to consumers in Australia with a defective diesel exhaust
after-treatment system (
). One of the claims made in that case
was that the relevant vehicles as supplied were not of “acceptable
quality” and
therefore failed to comply with the consumer guarantee in
of the ACL. The DPF system was found to have a design defect which
“comprised both mechanical defects and defective control
associated software calibrations” and which caused the vehicle to have a
propensity to suffer one or more of a number
of consequences. The Court
observed at [57] that:
...complex goods such as motor vehicles are manufactured from innumerable
components. It is conceptually flawed, and would render
essentially
inoperative in respect of most consumer goods, if a failure of a component could
not as a matter of construction be regarded
as a defect in the vehicle. The
question has to be approached by asking whether the defect is such as to cause
the relevant goods
to be of an unacceptable quality within the meaning of
It cannot be directed at the level of individual components which
were not supplied separately or individually but rather form an
inherent part of
the goods as a whole.
submits that the primary judge’s construction avoids the risk of the
limitation period in s 273 working an injustice.
It submits that, on Ms
Capic’s construction, time would start running on the day that the
consumer first became aware of the
first problem and that, if the consumer took
no action within the three year period (because, for example, the symptoms were
that serious), but another more serious problem with
“overlapping” symptoms later arose, the consumer would be barred
from obtaining relief in respect of either.
the limitation period in s 273 does not run from when an affected person is
first aware of “the first problem”
(i.e. the symptoms). It runs
from when the person is aware, or ought reasonably to have been aware, that the
statutory guarantee
has not been complied with. If the symptoms noticed
initially are “not that serious”, the affected person probably would
not be aware of non-compliance with
, and so time would not start to
run. By contrast, if the symptoms were “serious”, time would start
running. This is
reasonable and does not work an injustice, because the
consumer should be aware that the statutory guarantee has not been complied
at that point in time.
Ford complains that what Ms Capic seeks to do by these grounds is re-enliven a
“symptomology” case that the primary
judge had ruled was not
available on her pleading:
Capic v Ford Motor Company (No 3)
Ford contends that, by these grounds, Ms Capic now submits that compliance
with the guarantee in this proceeding is to be analysed
by reference to
symptomology which amounts to an attempt to re-frame her case on a basis
rejected by the primary judge.
do not accept this complaint. Ms Capic’s claim is not based on symptoms
actually exhibited, but rather the deficiencies
in the DPS6 transmission that
had a propensity to cause a range of overlapping consequences for consumers.
The point which Ms Capic
makes is that whether or not these matters amount to a
failure to comply with
must be assessed at the level of the reasonable
consumer’s informed perception at the point of supply and that, when
at that level, the various deficiencies constitute a single failure,
because this is the way it would be viewed by the reasonable
consumer. For
these reasons, we do not agree that Ms Capic has sought to re-enliven a
“symptomology” case or re-frame
her case on a basis expressly
rejected by the primary judge.
follows, in our respectful view, that the primary judge ought to have found
that, where an Affected Vehicle was affected at the
time of the relevant supply
by one or more of the deficiencies as found by the primary judge in answer to
question 2(a), that circumstance
gave rise to a single failure to comply with
the guarantee of acceptable quality in
of the ACL and a single
cause of action in respect of that failure pursuant to s 271(1) of the
therefore uphold grounds 8 and 9 of the Amended Notice of
Cross-Appeal.
Whether s 271(6) is engaged when failure to repair
within reasonable time
issue arises pursuant to ground 4 of the Amended Notice of Appeal.
[697] J, the primary judge identified that one of the issues between the
parties was “whether delay in effecting repairs
prevents s 271(6)
operating”. At [724], [730] and [734] J, the primary judge answered
the question in this way:
[T]he provision does not say anything about late repairs or replacements.
Rather, it removes a consumer’s cause of action
if, having required the
manufacturer under its express warranty to make the goods of acceptable quality,
the manufacturer does so
within a reasonable time. The Respondent referred to
this timing requirement as a species of constructive failure to repair which
think is a sound description of its operation. If a manufacturer who has been
required to remedy non-compliance with the guarantee
of acceptable quality,
fails to do so within a reasonable time then it is treated as if it had not done
so at all: s 271(6) will
not be engaged. In that circumstance, the use of
the concept of a lately performed repair is not especially helpful and runs the
risk of obscuring the statutory question.
...What is said [in s 271(6)] is that ‘the manufacturer has refused
or failed to remedy the failure or has failed to remedy
the failure within a
reasonable time’. What this means in English is that ‘the
manufacturer has not remedied the failure
within a reasonable time’.
In effect, the whole of the section after the word ‘unless’ just
means ‘unless the manufacturer has failed to remedy
the non-compliance
with the guarantee of acceptable quality within a reasonable time’.
contends that this construction was erroneous because the primary judge
disregarded most of the words “unless the manufacturer
has refused or
failed to remedy the failure, or has failed to remedy the failure within a
reasonable time” as “otiose”,
and held that s 271(6) was not
engaged where the manufacturer remedied the non-compliance but had not done so
within a reasonable
submits that the phrase is not otiose; it refers to three separate scenarios:
(i) refusal to remedy (where the manufacturer refuses
to offer a repair or
replacement); (ii) failure to remedy (where the manufacturer attempts to effect
a repair, but fails to do so);
and (iii) failure to remedy within a reasonable
time (where a reasonable time has elapsed, but the manufacturer has still failed
to effectively repair or provide a replacement). That is, Ford construes the
third situation
“has failed to remedy the failure within a
reasonable time” as merely defining how long an affected person must wait
a repair before bringing a s 272(1)(a) claim when none has been
provided, but submits that a consumer cannot bring a claim for damages
repair has, in fact, been effected.
the plain words of s 271(6) indicate that the bar to bringing a
s 272(1)(a) claim after making a request for a remedy is
lifted in three
distinct situations. Firstly, if the manufacturer says it will not remedy the
non-compliance (i.e. “refused”).
Secondly, if the manufacturer has
not remedied the non-compliance, or tried and failed (i.e.
“failed”). Thirdly, if
a remedy was provided, but not within a
reasonable time (i.e. “failed to remedy the failure within a reasonable
a claim can be made even if a repair has been effected, but the repair has not
been undertaken within a reasonable time. To
construe the provision otherwise
would be to equate, at the time an action is commenced, a failure to repair
within a reasonable
time with a failure to repair simpliciter, and thus leave
the words “or has failed to remedy the failure within a reasonable
time” with no work to do. The task of a court construing a statutory
provision is to strive to give meaning to every word
of the provision:
Project Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR
[1998] HCA 28
(McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Hayne JJ).
these reasons, ground 4 of the Amended Notice of Appeal fails.
Section 272 Australian Consumer Law
aspect of the appeal concerns an attack by Ford upon the primary judge’s
assessment of damages payable to Ms Capic through
grounds 5, 6, 7 and 8 of the
Amended Notice of Appeal.
assessment was made by the primary judge by reference to s 272 of the ACL,
which relevantly provides that:
272 Damages that may be recovered by action against manufacturers of
(1) In an action for damages under this Division, an affected person in relation
to goods is entitled to recover damages for:
(a) any reduction in the value of the goods, resulting from the failure to
comply with the guarantee to which the action relates,
below whichever of the
following prices is lower:
(i) the price paid or payable by the consumer for the goods;
(ii) the average retail price of the goods at the time of supply; and
(b) any loss or damage suffered by the affected person because of the failure to
comply with the guarantee to which the action relates
if it was reasonably
foreseeable that the affected person would suffer such loss or damage as a
result of such a failure.
complains about the primary judge’s construction of s 272 (by ground
5) and the consequent errors by the primary judge
through the application of
s 272 so construed when assessing the quantum of Ms Capic’s loss and
damage (by ground 8). The
essence of these complaints concerns the failure by
the primary judge to find that events subsequent to the supply of the vehicle
were capable of bearing on the proper assessment of reduction in value for the
purposes of assessing damages under s 272(1)(a) and
that, in the case of Ms
Capic’s vehicle, the primary judge failed to take into account the fact of
particular repairs to Ms
Capic’s vehicle which had been effected at no
cost to her, the value of Ms Capic’s vehicle at the time of trial, and
use of the vehicle up to the time of trial.
grounds 6 and 7, Ford contends that the primary judge erred in finding that Ms
Capic had established the fact of loss or damage,
and in holding that her
vehicle was worth 30% less than its fair market value at the time of purchase,
despite having found there
was “no useful evidence” as to that
five hearing days of this appeal had occurred, the decision of the Full Court in
was delivered on 27 March 2023. We heard oral submissions from
the parties about the impact of that decision on these grounds of
appeal on 28
March 2023.
Reasons of the primary judge
primary judge stated the following in relation to Ms Capic’s vehicle at
...In light of the conclusions above it follows that Ms Capic’s
vehicle was supplied to her in breach of
for four reasons. It
contains a DPS6 the normal operating characteristics of which made it prone to a
slight shudder and rattling,
it contained the original input shaft seals, it
contained a B8080 clutch and it contained a TCM fitted with an original ATIC 91
As Mr Pike SC for the Applicant put it, it was a lemon.
identifying the purchase price of Ms Capic’s vehicle at [877] J (of
$22,736.36, about which there is no challenge), rejecting
the valuation evidence
adduced by the parties as it was based on assumptions which had not been
established or which “[did]
not match the facts” (amongst other
reasons), and expressing the view that there was no useful valuation evidence as
a consequence,
the primary judge stated at [883]–[890] J:
Be that as it may, I am quite satisfied that Ms Capic’s vehicle was
worth less at the time of its acquisition than she paid
Mr Vasilakis gave evidence to this effect which was not contradicted but in
any event it is to my mind obvious. How should
the reduction in value damages
be assessed? It is trite that ‘mere difficulty in estimating damages does
not relieve a court
from the responsibility of estimating them’ and
‘[w]here precise evidence is not available the court must do the best
Commonwealth v Amann Aviation Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 54
(1991) 174 CLR 64
per Mason CJ and Dawson J, citing
Fink v Fink
[1946] HCA 54
(1946) 74 CLR 127
per Dixon and McTiernan JJ;
McRae v Commonwealth Disposals Commission
[1951] HCA 79
(1951) 84 CLR 377
at 411-412 per Dixon and Fullagar JJ;
[1911] UKLawRpKQB 104
[1911] 2 KB 786
at 792 per Vaughan Williams LJ;
[1971] HCA 52
(1971) 124 CLR 303
at 308 per Menzies J.
The process of assessing what the value of a chattel was 9 years in the past
when the defects it suffered from are risks not actualities
is inherently
impressionistic. That the risks came to pass is, so it seems to me, not to the
point. If it were otherwise the value
at the date of acquisition would be
conceptually tied to contingent future events and hence theoretically
unknowable. The fact that
the vehicle’s input shaft seals did fail does
not, therefore, matter. But for the same reason, the fact that the Respondent
replaced them does not matter either for neither bears upon the risk of failure
which existed at the date of the acquisition. The
risks of the three proven
component failures Ms Capic faced on 24 December 2012 were not altered in
their extent when they came to
pass just as a person who wins the lottery cannot
be said to have had a 100% chance of winning. They had the same chance as
else: the outcome of a probabilistic event does not affect the original
probability.
Identical remarks may be made about the TCM. In the case of the clutch lining
the same analysis flows albeit with a slight twist.
That the risk came off that
the clutch lining would behave erratically is irrelevant to the value at the
time of its acquisition
for the reasons just given. It is thus also irrelevant
that it was
successfully repaired (whereas in the case of the TCM and
input shafts seals what is irrelevant is that they
In a sense, the Applicant makes this very submission on behalf of group members
when she submits that group members with vehicles
which have never displayed any
symptoms are equally entitled to recover. The Applicant’s position on
this issue is an inevitable
corollary of running the case on the basis of a risk
of symptoms rather than actual symptoms.
Ms Capic’s vehicle came with a real risk that:
(a) the input shaft seals would fail resulting in oil contamination of the
clutch plate surface in turn causing wet clutch shudder;
(b) the solder connecting the ATIC 91 chip to the PCB in the TCM would
progressively crack giving rise to an increasing array of
problems starting with
loss of power for a few milliseconds (which might be imperceptible or
experienced as a brief shuddering sensation)
and ending with a total loss of
motive power for a period of seconds;
(c) the clutch lining material would exhibit negative damping causing it to
behave unpredictably resulting in self-excited shudder
and geometric
misalignment in the clutch components would cause forced-excited shudder; and
(d) torsional vibrations would be transmitted from the crankshaft through the
drivetrain resulting in gear rattling and a slight
shudder at low speeds.
I assess the risk of (d) as high since the Respondent described it as a normal
operating characteristic but I would also describe
the occurrence of the risk as
not as dramatic as (a) to (c).
I disregard the offer made by Jefferson Ford on 10 February 2016 to purchase the
vehicle for $10,000. Whilst it appears that Ms
Capic told the dealer the
problems she had with the vehicle, again, this invites the wrong question which
is about the value of a
chattel attended by risks of failure at the date of
purchase rather than the value of the chattel given the occurrence of the risks
or some of them.
Taking these matters into account, I have concluded that Ms Capic’s
vehicle was worth 30% less than its fair market value without
any defect on the
day that she purchased it. I accept that its fair market value on
24 December 2012 without defects was the amount
she paid for it,
$22,736.36 and I assess her reduction in value damages at $6,820.91. This is
the amount which, if tendered to her
on 24 December 2012, would have put her in
the position she would have been in if the guarantee of acceptable quality had
been complied
with at least in a balance sheet sense (ie expectation damages).
I will order pursuant to s 51A(1)(a) of the FCA Act that there
be interest
up to judgment on that sum from 24 December 2012 at 4% above the
official cash rate published by the Reserve Bank of
Australia, calculated
monthly but without compounding.
Whether the primary judge erred
the following reasons, and contrary to the submissions of Ford, grounds 6 and 7
, the Full Court observed at [306]–[307]:
In the present case there was detailed evidence in the form of the report from
the referee as to the nature of the defect and its
consequences. Further, the
consequences were likely to arise in relatively common driving conditions.
Therefore, the defect was
one which was likely to manifest for many buyers.
These aspects of the findings by the primary judge were not in issue on the
Further, the nature of a motor vehicle and its utility to a consumer
are matters of ordinary everyday understanding. It is not necessary
Court to receive evidence as to the nature of the use to which vehicles of the
kind the subject of the present claims might
be put by a consumer. On the basis
of the findings as to the defect and its consequences, the Court can form a view
as to an appropriate
percentage reduction in utility as viewed by a reasonable
As we noted at the outset of these reasons, the primary judge made detailed
findings concerning the defect and its consequences.
Some of those were more
technical in nature. Others concerned the practical consequences for the owner
of the vehicle.
In our view, it is appropriate to have regard to the way the
matters the subject of those findings would be viewed by a reasonable
of a motor vehicle in order to form a view as to the extent of the effect upon
the utility of the vehicle over its useful
(emphasis added.)
[311], the Full Court continued:
Accordingly, even in the absence of expert evidence, the Court is able to reach
a view as to the extent of the reduction in value
based upon a close
consideration of the evidence as to the nature of the defect. In effect, this
is substantially what was done
by the primary judge...
observations are apposite to this case. We will adopt the same approach when
analysing the approach taken by the primary judge.
Accordingly,
notwithstanding that the expert evidence adduced by the parties was not accepted
by the primary judge as being of assistance
to the valuation of Ms Capic’s
vehicle, we consider that his Honour remained able to make a finding that Ms
Capic had established
of loss or damage by reason of the
findings made by him concerning her vehicle (particularly that it was a
“lemon”) coupled
with his earlier detailed analysis and conclusions
primary judge was able to reach a view as to the extent of the reduction in
value based upon his findings as to the nature of the
defects in her vehicle.
Thus, no error has been shown and grounds 6 and 7 must fail.
regard to this conclusion, it is not necessary to address paragraph 3(b) of Ms
Capic’s Notice of Contention.
turn then to grounds 5 and 8 of the Amended Notice of Appeal.
decision of
made several critical findings concerning the proper
interpretation of s 272 of the ACL which are pertinent to (and answer the
raised by) these remaining grounds of appeal. Contrary to the
submissions advanced by Ms Capic, these findings pertain to the manner
s 272 should be construed irrespective of the facts which were before the
Full Court in
and the extent to which those facts might differ
from the facts of this case.
to this appeal, the reasoning of the Full Court was as follows:
(1) the text and structure of s 272(1)(a) indicate that, at least
generally, the point in time for assessing damages for any reduction
value of the goods is the time of supply: [98];
(2) however, the statutory language should not be seen as requiring an
assessment as at the time of purchase irrespective of the
circumstances (though in most cases that will be the appropriate approach):
(3) the assessment of whether or not an applicant has suffered loss or damage
resulting from a failure to comply with the consumer
guarantee may require,
depending on the circumstances of the case, a departure from the time of supply
or an adjustment to avoid
over-compensation: [99];
(4) the overarching consideration is that the amount of compensation for any
reduction in value be appropriate: [99];
(5) in the case of a claim against a manufacturer, assessment of reduction in
value damages may still be undertaken by reference
to the price paid (or the
average retail price) at the time of supply, but taking into account subsequent
events if considered appropriate:
(6) it is necessary to ensure that there is no over-compensation given the
circumstances known at the time of trial: [131];
(7) the statutory guarantee is applied to what may be described as consumer
goods which, in most instances, will be goods that are
acquired to be utilised
or consumed. Therefore, in most instances, the intrinsic value of consumer
goods to a retail buyer will
lie in their utility over their useful life rather
than the price at which they may be on-sold: [110]–[111], [127];
(8) to assess the quantum of any damages, it will usually be necessary to focus
upon the price that would have been paid if the consumer
had known of the defect
when purchasing the goods, which requires identification of the component of the
price actually paid that
could be said to be attributable to the loss in utility
arising from the defect: [118], [127].
to the last point, the Full Court considered that such an assessment requires
consideration of:
(1) the availability of replacement or repair as a means of remedying the defect
and restoring the value of the consumer goods in
the hands of the buyer:
(2) where repair is not possible (or the cost of any repair means that, as a
matter of commercial reality, there is no repair), the
nature of the defect and
the magnitude or significance of its effect upon the utility of the goods in the
hands of the consumer:
[148]–[150];
(3) where the repair was not available at the time of trial, reasonable
expectations of the consumer as to the availability and timing
of any such
repair; that is, an assessment as at the time of purchase as to the period of
time for which the defect was expected
to affect the vehicle (before a repair
could be found and carried out on the vehicle), whether the repair would be at
the consumer, and any use to which the goods may be put despite the
defect (though compromised by the consequences of the defects):
[122], [123],
[127] and [128]. In factoring in the possibility of the availability of a fix,
two types of uncertainty that existed
at the time of purchase should be taken
into account: firstly, uncertainty as to whether there would be a fix; and,
secondly, even
if a fix became available, uncertainty as to how long it might
take for the fix to be designed, tested, and made available: [128];
(4) where the repair was available at the time of trial, or the uncertainties
referred to above had been resolved, the known information
availability, cost and timing of a fix at the time of trial: [127],
[129]–[130]. In reaching a conclusion as to
the reduction in value, the
court should also have regard to any use to which the goods were put despite the
defect: [127]. As to
(a) where the repair would wholly reinstate the utility of the goods, the cost
of repair may be a measure of the reduction in the
value of the goods that
resulted from the defect. This is because it is a measure of what is required
in order to restore the utility
of the goods: [146];
(b) if the repair will only partially reinstate utility, then it may be
necessary to allow an amount for repair costs and, in addition,
residual reduction in value associated with the ongoing diminished utility:
that subsequent events may be relevant to the measure of
damages – is consistent with the recent decision of
Dwyer v Volkswagen
Group Australia Pty Ltd
[2023] NSWCA 211 (Gleeson
JA, with whom Leeming and
White JJA agreed), where the New South Wales Court of Appeal held such events
may “illuminate or
indicate or reflect the true value at the time of
supply”: see [230], [234].
Gleeson SC who appeared for Ms Capic submitted that the reasoning in
should not be followed by this Full Court. However, for the
reasons which follow, we are not persuaded that we should refrain from
a decision of another Full Court, notwithstanding the timing of delivery of the
decision in
Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural
(2021) 287 FCR 181
[2021] FCAFC 153
, Allsop CJ (with
whom Kerr and Mortimer JJ agreed) observed at [18] that:
The caution that the Court should exercise before departing from earlier Full
Court authority should be reflected in how parties
approach the task of
appellate advocacy and in how Full Courts approach calls and attempts to
re-agitate questions of law (especially
statutory construction), decided by
earlier Full Courts. This is so especially in the exercise of migration
with cases, replete with the same or similar provisions
being applied in case after case, and with one litigant in one Ministerial
or another in every case.
Parties should expect that a Full Court will
demand submissions on matters such as why it should be
in the earlier decision, why it should exercise the power to depart when that
power should be exercised cautiously, sparingly
and with great care, why
consistency and predictability of principle should give way, and why, if the
matter is one of statutory
construction, the error is clear or patent
not merely a difference of view as to meaning, or why it has produced
unintended and perhaps irrational consequences
(emphasis added; citations omitted.)
was applied in
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship
and Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 408 ALR 503
[2023] FCAFC 10
–[12] (Perry, Derrington and Thawley JJ). In
Court was required to construe a particular provision of the
Migration Act
(Cth). The hearing took place on 16 August 2022 and judgment was
reserved. On 25 November 2022, a differently constituted Full
Court heard an
appeal which involved the same question of statutory construction. That Full
Court delivered its decision in
Pearson v Minister for Home Affairs
(2022) 295 FCR 177
[2022] FCAFC 203
on 22 December 2022, being prior to
delivery of the decision in
. The Full Court in
considered itself required to follow the decision in
regardless of the timing of delivery of
, by reference to the
observations of Allsop CJ in
consider that it is appropriate to adopt the same approach in this appeal.
is because the findings in
which are relevant to this appeal
concern statutory construction. The errors asserted to exist in the reasons of
are not clear or patent, and nor are we convinced that the
construction adopted by the Full Court in
is erroneous. In this
regard, we are mindful that any decision to depart from the decision of another
Full Court should be exercised
cautiously, sparingly and with great care.
the construction adopted in
to this case, it follows
(1) ground 5 should be upheld, as the primary judge ought to have held that
subsequent events were capable of bearing on the proper
assessment of reduction
in value damages;
(2) grounds 8(a) and 8(c) should be upheld because, when assessing the damages
payable to Ms Capic, the primary judge did not take
into account the facts known
at the time of trial (being the repairs) and the use by Ms Capic of her vehicle
up until the time of
(3) ground 8(b) should be upheld because (applying the reasoning in
), evidence as to the value of the vehicle at the time of trial was
relevant information which would have enabled the primary judge
to ensure that
Ms Capic was not over-compensated.
question then becomes, what order should be made as a consequence? In our view,
the appropriate order is to remit the question
of Ms Capic’s damages for
re-determination by the primary judge on the basis of the evidence already
before his Honour. We
appreciate that this might leave the primary judge with
some imponderables. However, we do not think that it would be conducive
just and efficient determination of Ms Capic’s claim to damages to permit
the parties to effectively re-litigate that
question at this stage of the
proceeding.
we have noted, in this case, unlike the position in
, the primary
judge did not embark upon an assessment of damages under
s 272(1)(a)
ACL on an aggregate basis. Indeed, the primary judge made that plain at
[36] and [849] J and at [6] CQJ. It follows that
there can be no
question of a remitter in connection with the assessment of damages in relation
to the group.
APPEAL ON PRE-JUDGMENT INTEREST
was a complaint by Ms Capic about the failure by the primary judge to award
pre-judgment interest on the damages awards for excess
amounts of GST, stamp
duty and financing costs (grounds 14 and 15 of the Amended Notice of
Cross-Appeal).
accepted that Ms Capic was entitled to pre-judgment interest on these amounts.
We agree. However, the amount of such interest
is a matter that can be
determined by the primary judge, and awarded, on remittal following the
assessment of the damages payable
to Ms Capic under
DISPOSITION
will allow the appeal brought by Ford in relation to grounds 5 and 8 of the
Amended Notice of Appeal.
will allow the cross-appeal brought by the respondent in relation to grounds 1,
2, 5(a) to (c), 6, 8, 9, 14 and 15 of the Amended
Notice of Cross-Appeal.
will invite the parties to provide an agreed form of orders within 14 days,
including a draft of agreed answers to the common questions,
having regard to
the findings made. We will also invite the parties to reach agreement on the
appropriate costs order.
the absence of agreement, the parties will be directed to provide to the Full
Court with a form of orders (other than costs), and
answers to the common
questions, which they propose, to be accompanied by written submissions not
exceeding five pages.
to the question of costs, the parties will be directed to provide written
submissions on the question of costs (not exceeding three
pages) if agreement
cannot be reached.
I certify that the preceding three hundred and
twenty-four (324) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Judgment of
the Honourable Justices Yates, Beach and
Dated: 14 November 2023
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.51 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter