Construction, Forestry and Maritime Employees Union v Wagstaff Piling Pty Ltd [2025] FWC 3397 (12 November 2025)
[2025] FWC 3397
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application for a protected action ballot order
Construction,
Forestry and Maritime Employees Union
Wagstaff Piling Pty
(B2025/1701)
COMMISSIONER WALKADEN
SYDNEY, 12 NOVEMBER 2025
Proposed protected action ballot of employees – employer objection
on basis that change in bargaining position meant that the
applicant was not
genuinely trying to reach agreement – employer objection on basis that
applicant was seeking non-permitted
matters – employer objection on basis
that proposed questions lacked specificity – employer objections dismissed
This is an application by the Construction,
Forestry and Maritime Employees Union through its Construction and General
) made under
) for a protected action ballot order (
) in relation to certain employees of Wagstaff Piling Pty Ltd
The application was
filed with the Fair Work Commission by the CFMEU at approximately 3:10 p.m. on
Monday 10 November 2025. Commission
staff were advised that Wagstaff objected to
the application, which was then allocated to my Chambers on Tuesday 11 November
That afternoon, the application was listed for hearing at 10:00 a.m. on
Wednesday 12 November 2025 and Wagstaff were directed to
file and serve an
outline of its objections by 9:00 a.m. on Wednesday 12 November 2025.
The hearing commenced at 10:00 a.m. on Wednesday 12 November
2025 before me. Wagstaff had earlier filed and served a
nine page outline of objections as directed
Wagstaff’s Outline
). Mr Dane Syron (Legal / Industrial Officer,
CFMEU) appeared for the CFMEU. Mr Hamish Harrington (Senior Industrial Officer,
Builders Association) appeared for Wagstaff. At the commencement of the
hearing, Mr Harrington confirmed that Wagstaff’s objections
application were confined to the three objections set out in Wagstaff’s
Outline. In support of the application, the
CFMEU called evidence from Mr Rebel
Hanlon. Mr Hanlon is an Organiser with the CFMEU. Mr Harrington was given the
opportunity to
cross-examine Mr Hanlon. Mr Harrington elected not to
cross-examine Mr Hanlon. Mr Harrington was also given the opportunity to call
witness evidence. Mr Harrington elected not to call any
witnesses, but rather relied upon Wagstaff’s
Outline and five documents, which were tendered and received into evidence.
This decision determines the three objections raised by
Wagstaff. I am conscious that section 441 of the FW Act requires that the
Commission must, as far as practicable, determine the application within two
working days after the application was made. In light
of that requirement, my
reasons are relatively brief. I have conducted the hearing and published this
decision within approximately
24 hours of the matter being allocated to my
First objection: late shift in CFMEU bargaining position
means that CFMEU is not genuinely trying to reach
Section 443 of the FW Act provides that the
Commission must make a protected action ballot order if the requirements are
such requirement is section 443(1)(b). The effect of that requirement
is that the Commission must be satisfied that the CFMEU has
been, and is,
genuinely trying to reach an agreement with Wagstaff. An order cannot be made in
the absence of such a state of satisfaction
(section 443(2)).
Wagstaff’s first objection was that the CFMEU has not
been, and is not, genuinely trying to reach an agreement with it. The
this argument was that Wagstaff contended that the CFMEU had fundamentally
changed its position on wages after what was
said to be an extended period of
bargaining. Wagstaff’s described this as a ‘
dramatic shift
’. For the reasons explained below, I
reject this objection.
I am not satisfied on the evidence
before me that the CFMEU has changed its position on wages. A declaration from
Mr Hanlon was filed
and served with the application. In his declaration, Mr
Hanlon explained that it was his understanding that bargaining for a new
enterprise agreement had been ongoing for some time before he became involved in
those negotiations.
became involved in the negotiations with Wagstaff on or around 1 September
Prior to Mr Hanlon’s
involvement, it appears that the CFMEU had been represented at the bargaining
table by CFMEU officials
that have ceased employment with the
Oral evidence was adduced
from Mr Hanlon by the CFMEU at the hearing. In giving such evidence, Mr Hanlon
explained that Wagstaff
had not informed him in writing that a deal or
principle agreement had been reached with the
CFMEU on wages. Mr Harrington elected not to cross-examine Mr Hanlon on that
or lead any evidence of his own challenging that evidence.
In making this objection, Wagstaff sought to rely upon
documents that it tendered. This included an email from Mr Anthony Burke (former
official with the CFMEU) dated 12 May
Attached to Mr Burke’s
email was a document entitled ‘
Draft Piling Sector 2024-2027 –
with audit clause – amendments at 7.5.25 - clean copy
Agreement 7.5.25
from Mr Burke’s email that the CFMEU’s position as an annual wage
increase, at that time, was a 7% increase
followed by a 5% increase in the
second year of the agreement followed by a 5% increase in the third year.
However, in the Draft
Agreement 7.5.25, it would appear from Annexure B that the
CFMEU’s position as an annual wage increase, at that time, was a
increase followed by a 5% increase in the second year of the agreement (i.e. 1
July 2025) followed by a 5% increase in the third
year (i.e. 1 July 2026)
followed by a 5% increase in the fourth year (i.e. 1 July 2027) and a 3%
increase for each year thereafter that the agreement remained
in operation
I presume that Mr Burke made a mistake in his email by omitting the wage
increase in the fourth year and then subsequent years.
I highlight this point
not to criticise Mr Burke or the CFMEU. Typos happen. I make this point to
illustrate the difficulty that
the Respondent faces in advancing this objection
based upon a sample of documents only and without calling any evidence of its
which may have provided a reliable evidentiary basis to find that the CFMEU
had changed its position on wages.
Wagstaff sought to compare
the wage increases in Mr Burke’s email and the Draft Agreement 7.5.25 to
another document that it
tendered, which was given the file name
Annexure D – Draft Piling Sector 2024-2027 – with audit
clause – amendments at 14.8.25 clean copy
Draft Agreement
The wage rates in
Annexure B of the Draft Agreement 14.8.25 are higher than the wage rates in
Annexure B of the Draft Agreement
7.5.25 in the second year, third year and
fourth year. However, the author or contributors to the Draft Agreement 14.8.25
identified at the hearing nor was there any evidentiary basis to ground
a finding that the wages rates in Annexure B of the Draft
Agreement 14.8.25
could be said to evidence the position of the CFMEU.
persuaded on the evidence before me that the CFMEU has changed its position on
wages during bargaining. Put simply, the
objection should have been underpinned
by a proper evidentiary basis, such as calling witness evidence. The making of a
action ballot order is a step towards employees and their unions
taking protected industrial action in support of their claims during
bargaining.
The taking of protected industrial action is an important right conferred by the
FW Act upon employees to advance their
claims. I am not prepared to make a
finding that the CFMEU has not been, and is not, genuinely trying to reach
agreement based upon
submissions from the virtual bar table and a sample of
documents, some of which fail to evidence the position of the CFMEU.
A Full Bench of the Commission in
Australia Pty Ltd
“Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering,
Printing and Kindred Industries Union” known as the Australian
Manufacturing Workers”
Whether an applicant ‘has been, and is,
genuinely trying to reach an
agreement’ is a question of fact to
be decided having regard to
of the facts and
circumstances of the particular
Wagstaff did not argue that a change in bargaining
position would always be inconsistent with the requirements of section
Clearly, any such argument would be at odds with Full Bench authority
and would be rejected. Wagstaff’s argument was specific
to the facts of
this application. It is fatal to Wagstaff’s first objection that the facts
simply do not support the objection.
I reject Wagstaff’s first
Second objection: inclusion of non-permitted matters
Wagstaff’s second objection was that the CFMEU were
pursuing three claims that were said to be non-permitted matters. It was
that these claims meant that the Commission could not be satisfied that the
CFMEU has been, and is, genuinely trying to reach
The first clause was referred to as clause
24.1(c). It is reproduced below:
The use of sham subcontracting arrangements is a breach of this Agreement.
The Company who engages subcontractors is responsible
for ensuring the
employees of subcontractors are entitled to wages, allowances and conditions
equal to or better than Commercial
Building Industry Rates covering the type of
work performed by the subcontractor and its employees on the Company’s
This obligation extends to liability for all outstanding wages
conditions and entitlements under this agreement.
second clause was referred to as clause 24.3. It is reproduced
a) The Company must ensure that no person that is not an
Australian citizen, or
Australian permanent resident (within the
meaning of the
Migration Act 1958
unrestricted work rights, is
employed to undertake building work unless:
(i) the position is first advertised in Australia; and
(ii) the advertising was targeted in such a way that a significant
proportion of
suitably qualified Australian citizens and Australian
permanent residents
would be likely to be informed about the position;
(iii) any skills or experience requirements set out in the advertising
appropriate to the position; and
(iv) the Company demonstrates that no Australian citizen or Australian
permanent resident is suitable for the job.
The Company will ensure all Employees are lawfully entitled to
work in Australia performing work under the Agreement.
The Company will maintain Human Resource systems (including
utilising the Visa Entitlement Verification Online (VEVO) system on an
basis) to ensure that temporary foreign Employees are at all times employed in
accordance with the conditions of their visas.
clause was referred to as clause 25.1(b)(iv). It is reproduced
Any use of sham contracting, including the use of individual
workers paid on an ABN
system doing work covered by this Agreement, is a
breach of this Agreemen
The Full Bench in
considered the same argument
made by Wagstaff. The Full Bench held:
[59] There is no legislative warrant for the adoption of a decision rule
such that if an applicant is, or has been, pursuing a substantive
claim which
is not about a permitted matter it is not genuinely trying to reach an
agreement within the meaning of s.443(1)(b).
The fact that an applicant is, or
has been, pursuing a claim about a non-permitted matter is relevant to whether
the test posited
by s.443(1)(b) has been met, but it is not determinative of
the issue. A range of factual considerations may potentially be relevant
that context, including but not limited to the subject matter of the claim, the
timing of the advancement of the claim, the basis
upon which the claim is
advanced, the significance of the claim in the course of the negotiations, the
claimant’s belief as
to whether the claim is about a non-permitted matter
or not, where there is legal clarity about the permitted status of the claim,
whether the other party has placed in contest whether the claim is about a
permitted matter, and whether such a claim has been
withdrawn and, if so, when
and in what circumstances. The diversity of the factual circumstances and
nuances which will be found
in different cases means that it is not possible to
say that any particular factor or consideration will always be determinative
of the result...
[64] The adoption of a construction of s.443(1)(b) which would require the
Commission to scrutinise each of the claims advanced by
the applicant to
determine whether they are about permitted matters is inconsistent with the
object of Division 8 of Part 3-3 and
the scheme of the
In considering the second objection, I have applied the
principles explained by the Full Bench in
In particular, I do not intend to scrutinise each of
the three claims and determine whether they are about the permitted matters.
explained by the Full Bench in
at [64], I am not required to engage
in such an exercise – which as the Full Bench pointed out at [63] in
does not reflect the legislative intent that applications for a
protected action ballot order are to be determined and heard quickly.
am required to approach the question posed by section 443(1)(b) by considering
all of the facts and circumstances relevant to this
application.
The Full Bench in
at [59] set out
some factual considerations that may be relevant in this context. It appears
that bargaining has been ongoing for
many months, if not
In the few months that Mr
Hanlon has been involved in bargaining, there have been seven bargaining
Throughout the many
months of bargaining, Wagstaff did not put the CFMEU on notice that it
considered that these three claims were
conceded by Mr Harrington at the hearing. It appears the first time the CFMEU
became aware
that Wagstaff considered these three claims to be non-permitted
matters was after filing the application for a protected action ballot
also note the uncontested evidence of Mr
which establishes the
CFMEU’s belief that it was not pursuing any unlawful or non-permitted
matters. In those circumstances,
I do not think it can be said that the CFMEU
has not been, and is not, genuinely trying to reach agreement if the employer
even identified these issues during bargaining and the CFMEU’s
belief expressed through its official is that it was not pursuing
unlawful or
non-permitted matters. Those factual considerations along with the balance of
material put before me led me to reject
the second objection.
I have considered the first objection and the second
objection separately and in combination, and with the totality of the material
that was put before me. Based on that material, I am satisfied that the CFMEU
has been, and is, genuinely trying to reach an agreement
Third objection: question lacks
specificity
The legislative requirements in relation to
the question/s are found at section 437(3)(b) & 443(3)(d) of the FW Act. It
requirement that the
application and any order
must specify ‘
the question or questions to be put to the employees who
are to be balloted, including the nature of the protected industrial
The question included in the application
and sought in the order is reproduced below:
In support of reaching
an enterprise agreement with your employer, do you endorse
the taking of
protected industrial action by CFMEU members against your employer,
which may involve taking separately, concurrently and/or consecutively
any or all of
the actions set out below:
unlimited number of stoppages on the performance of work between 30 minutes and
up to and including 24 hours?
Yes [ ] No [ ]
unlimited number of indefinite strikes?
Yes [ ] No [ ]
unlimited number of indefinite or periodic bans on overtime?
Yes [ ] No [ ]
unlimited number of indefinite or periodic partial work bans?
Yes [ ] No [ ]
Wagstaff’s third objection only concerned questions 2,
3 & 4. It was argued that those questions lacked any clear indication
duration. On that basis, it was argued that those questions lacked the
specificity required by section 437(3)(b) & 443(3)(d)
A Full Bench of the Commission in
National Tertiary
Education Union
considered the
legislative requirements in relation to the question or questions to be put to
the employees in the ballot and held:
[53] In summary, therefore, an application for a protected action ballot
order will comply with the requirement in 437(3)(b), and
thus will have been
“made under section 437” for the purpose of s 443(1)(a), if it
specifies a question or questions,
capable of being answered “yes”
or “no” by the employees participating in the ballot, which
action of an identified character, kind or sort capable of
constituting industrial action within the meaning of s 19(1). A question
meets these requirements can be expressed and understood in ordinary industrial
English, and there is no requirement for
legalism, technicality or pedantry in
the drafting or analysis of such questions. In our view, the proposition that,
beyond these
requirements, the questions must be interrogated to identify
ambiguity in aid of enabling “informed consent” goes beyond
of the provision and constitutes a gloss on the statute. The concept of
“informed consent” is inapposite to
a protected action ballot since,
unlike a vote to approve an enterprise agreement, there is no requirement for
genuine agreement43
and those voting are not bound by the result (in the sense
there is no requirement for any employee to actually take industrial action
which has been authorised by a ballot and for which a s 414(1) notice has been
issued). We therefore affirm that paragraph [19] of
the decision in John Holland
states the correct approach to the construction and application of s437(3)(b).
The statements of principle
in FreshExchange are not consistent with that
approach and should not be followed.
[54] As earlier stated, s 443(1) imposes a duty on the Commission to make
a protected action ballot order if the requirements of
paragraphs (a) and (b)
of the subsection are met. The mandatory nature of s 443(1) is the most
important factor governing the
construction of s 443 as a whole.45 It should
not therefore be considered that, in respect of a valid application for a
action ballot order, the Commission is at large as to the terms of
the order to be made subject to satisfaction of the content requirements
section. The inference to be drawn from the mandatory nature of s 443(1) is that
the order required to be made is one which
gives effect to an application
validly made under s 437. Thus, in respect of s 443(3)(d), we do not consider
that the Commission
has a general discretion to determine the questions which
will be included in the order, or to simply exclude valid questions, independent
of what has been applied for.
In considering the third
objection, I have applied those principles. I am satisfied that the questions
contained in the application
and proposed to be included in the order specifies
questions that are capable of being answered ‘yes’ or
by the employees participating in the ballot. The action
proposed is clearly action that
is capable of
constituting industrial action within the meaning of section 19(1) of the FW
Act. The questions are expressed and can
be understood in ordinary industrial
English. As explained by the Full Bench, that is the extent of the consideration
required. I
reject the third objection.
There was no contest that the other requirements
specified in the FW Act have been satisfied. On the basis of the material before
me, I am satisfied those requirements have been met.
ballot is to be conducted by Democratic Outcomes Pty Ltd (
). CiVS has
been approved as an eligible protected action ballot agent under s.468A of the
Act and consequently is authorised to conduct
The date by which voting is to close is 26
November 2025, which is ten working days from the date of the order. This also
establishes
the ballot period for the purpose of s.448A(2) of the
An Order has been separately issued in
Member of the Commission will conduct the s.448A compulsory conciliation
conference. An Order will be issued requiring the attendance
of all bargaining
representatives for the proposed enterprise agreement at the conference. It is
likely that Directions will also
be issued to ensure that the parties attend the
conference ready to conduct meaningful negotiations.
COMMISSIONER
Appearances
for the Applicant
H. Harrington
, for the Respondent
Hearing details:
Sydney by Video using Microsoft
12 November
Paragraphs 1 – 6 of the
Form F34B – Declaration in support of an application for a protected
action ballot order completed
by Rebel Hanlon dated 10 November 2025 (
Declaration
Paragraph 4 of the Hanlon
Declaration.
Paragraph 5 of the Hanlon
Declaration.
Exhibit R2.
Exhibit R3.
Exhibit R4.
Paragraph 6 of the Hanlon
Declaration.
Paragraph 7 of the Hanlon
Declaration.
Paragraph 9 of the Hanlon
Declaration.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government
RTF format (1.34 MB)
Signed PDF/A format