Frigger v Banning (Application for Review of Taxation) [2025] FCA 1395 (12 November 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Frigger v Banning (Application for Review
of Taxation)
[2025] FCA 1395
File number:
WAD 607 of 2015
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
- application for
review of taxation - where review of taxation stayed pending provision of
security for costs - where applicants
have not provided security for costs -
application dismissed
Cases cited:
Frigger v Banning (Application for Security
for Costs on Review of Taxation)
[2024] FCA 1207
Frigger v Banning (No 13)
[2023] FCA 923
Frigger v Banning (No 14)
[2024] FCA 66
General Division
Western Australia
National Practice Area:
Commercial and Corporations
Corporations and Corporate Insolvency
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Determined on the papers
Counsel for the Applicants:
The applicants appeared in person
Solicitor for the Respondents:
Eastwood Law
WAD 607 of 2015
ANGELA CECILIA THERESA FRIGGER
HARTMUT HUBERT JOSEF FRIGGER
Second Applicant
SANDRA MAY BANNING
ANN MARION CAMPBELL-SMITH IN HER CAPACITY AS EXECUTOR OF
THE ESTATE OF DONALD CAMPBELL‑SMITH
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES OF AUSTRALIA PTY LTD (ACN 082 879
Third Respondent
BANNING HOLDINGS PTY LTD (ACN 009 006
Fourth Respondent
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
application for review of taxation dated 3 July 2024 is dismissed.
applicants pay the respondents' costs of the review to be assessed on a lump sum
basis by a registrar acting as referee after
receiving written submissions and
any affidavits from the parties in accordance with a timetable set by the
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
and Mr Frigger have applied to review a taxation of costs where their liability
for costs pursuant to court orders was taxed at
$160,098.41. They challenge
every item of the relevant bill of costs. They also seek to advance arguments
to the effect that the
lawyers involved were not entitled to indemnity in
respect of their costs.
18 October 2024, orders were made requiring Mrs and Mr Frigger to provide
security for costs of their review application in the
amount of $10,000:
Frigger v Banning (Application for Security for Costs on Review of
[2024] FCA 1207.
Since then, the review proceedings have been
stayed pending provision of that security.
regard to the failure to provide security, the respondents now seek orders to
the following effect:
(1) The review application is dismissed.
(2) Mrs and Mr Frigger do pay the costs of the review application to be assessed
on a lump sum basis.
(3) An amount of $60,000 provided pursuant to an order for security for costs
made in the proceedings, be paid out to the solicitors
for the respondents.
(4) Until further order, Mrs and Mr Frigger be required to obtain the leave of a
judge before filing any further applications in
the proceedings.
were made for the parties to file submissions as to whether the orders should be
made. Submissions have been filed by all
parties. As there are no factual
issues and the matters to be determined concern the application of established
principles concerning
the exercise of the discretion as to costs which have been
addressed by written submissions, the determination of the matter would
significantly aided by an oral hearing. Accordingly, I deal with the issue of
costs on the papers.
written submissions from Mrs and Mr Frigger are in the following
The Applicants are not asking for the court to make a final decision about
liability of the cost claimant to pay legal cost (Indemnity
Principle).
The costs claimant rely for security for cost on the same evidence and
arrangement that they relied on for the original bill of costs.
When the court ordered the Friggers' security for costs, the court had
effectively already decided the main ground for review, that
arrangements do not contravene the indemnity principle.
In those circumstances, it is a pointless exercise to pay security for costs for
a review that has already been decided against the
Applicants.
The only right available to the Applicants is an appeal against the dismissal of
the review application.
and Mr Frigger offer no explanation for their delay in providing security. They
also make no submission as to why the amount
of $60,000 which was paid as
security for the costs of the respondents in the proceedings should not now be
released to the solicitors
for the respondents in circumstances where the
respondents' costs pursuant to orders in the proceedings have been taxed in an
that substantially exceeds the amount of $60,000. The relevant order was
made on 13 April 2016 as varied by orders dated 24 June
Mrs and Mr Frigger submit that their 'main ground for review' concerning whether
the indemnity principle has been met, has
effectively already been decided by
the Court. I do not understand the basis for that contention. In previous
decisions in the
proceedings I determined that, in this Court, a registrar
acting as a taxing officer had authority to determine whether the indemnity
principle was satisfied:
Frigger v Banning (No 13)
[2023] FCA 923.
also refused a subsequent application for orders setting aside orders made by
the registrar as to the conduct of the taxation:
Frigger v Banning (No
[2024] FCA 66.
There are grounds raised in the application now brought
to review the taxation which concern whether the indemnity principle has
met. They have not been determined. I observe that the taxation of costs is
not a rehearing and issues arise as to the extent
to which grounds can be
advanced on the review of a taxation in the form in which they have been
expressed by Mrs and Mr Frigger.
However, it is not the case that the matters
raised have been adjudicated. All that has been determined is that security
be provided before the review of the taxation proceeds.
the circumstances, no proper basis is raised by Mrs and Mr Frigger as to why the
orders sought by the respondents should not be
made. There will be orders
accordingly. As to the procedure for assessing the lump sum costs of the review
of taxation, I will
provide for a report by a registrar acting as a referee.
Any ongoing issue as to whether the application of the indemnity principle
that there are no costs that can be recovered will be determined at the adoption
hearing in respect of the referee report.
order made on 4 September 2024 that '[u]ntil further order and save as provided
in [those] orders no further documents shall be
filed and served in these
proceedings unless leave of the case managing judge has first been sought and
obtained' will remain in
I certify that the preceding nine (9) numbered
paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 12 November 2025
RTF format (294 KB)
Signed PDF/A format