National Tertiary Education Industry Union [2024] FWCD 1051 (26 September 2024)
[2024] FWCD 1051
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
—Alteration of other rules of organisation
National Tertiary
Education Industry Union
CHRIS ENRIGHT
MELBOURNE, 26 SEPTEMBER 2024
Alteration of other rules of organisation.
On 6 June 2024 the National Tertiary Education Industry Union (the
NTEU) lodged with the Fair Work Commission (the Commission) a notice
declaration setting out particulars of alterations to its rules. Further
information in support of the alterations was lodged
on 25 September 2024.
The NTEU seeks certification of the alterations under
section 159
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
The particulars set out alterations to:
– National Executive; and
insert a new
Schedule 7 – Delegates.
On the information contained in the notice and declaration, I am
satisfied the alterations have been made under the rules of the
organisation.
The alterations to
empower the National Executive to
establish, administer, and amend the Workplace Delegates policy provided for in
Schedule 7.
Proposed Schedule 7 sets out provisions relating to the establishment
of policy and procedures regarding the appointment of workplace
delegates and
their functions.
of this Schedule states that the purpose of the Schedule
is to provide for the appointment of delegates to exercise functions and
conferred by relevant legislation.
Provisions for delegates appear under many forms of legislation,
regulations and industrial instruments, including in new provisions
workplace delegates in
sections 350A
Fair Work Act
(Cth) (FW Act). The alterations to the NTEU rules were made in the
context of these new provisions and it appears that they are designed
predominantly address that context.
Among other things, I am required to consider whether the alterations
comply with and are not contrary to the FW
Consequently,
the discussion that follows considers the alterations in the context of the new
workplace delegates provisions in the
That said, I am also required to consider whether the alterations are
not otherwise contrary to
Irrespective of
which statutory scheme applies to a particular NTEU delegate, the principle that
the rules cannot undermine the relevant
statutory scheme equally applies. The
meaning and application of the proposed rules regarding delegates must be
confined to the relevant
statutory scheme.
The Federal Statutory Scheme Regarding Workplace
The FW Act provides for rights and protections for workplace
delegates (sections 350A, 350B and 350C). Subsection 350C(1) provides
workplace delegate
is a person appointed or
elected, in accordance with the rules of an employee organisation, to be a
delegate or representative (however
described) for either or both of the
(a) members of the organisation who work in a particular enterprise;
(b) members of the organisation who perform work for, or that has been arranged
or facilitated by, a particular regulated business.”
Subsections 350C(2) and (3) of the FW Act provide that workplace
delegates are entitled to certain rights, such as representation
communication with members and other persons entitled to be members, and access
to workplace
facilities.
In two recent decisions I have considered rules regarding workplace
delegates and the relevant provisions in the FW
decisions, I determined that:
• the word “delegate” in a rulebook can have a different
meaning to workplace delegate as defined in the FW Act,
depending on the context
of the rule;
• a workplace delegate, as defined in the FW Act, must be interpreted as a
person who works in the enterprise or regulated
• rules regarding workplace delegates must not undermine the statutory
scheme as set out in the FW
• rules must not purport to extend workplace delegate rights or
obligations to persons who would not be so entitled under the
• rights endowed by a union on workplace delegates can only be rights
regulating their relationship with the union, and cannot
extend to parties
external to the
While keeping these principles in mind, I turn to the proposed
alterations.
The proposed alterations
As stated above, the alterations to Rule 18.2 empower the National
Executive to establish, administer, and amend the workplace delegates
outlined in proposed Schedule 7.
Proposed Schedule 7 provides for the establishment of policy and
procedures regarding appointment of workplace delegates (the Delegates
and the powers of the National Executive to establish and amend the Delegates
Policy. The provisions in Schedule 7:
establish that
the purpose of Schedule 7 is to provide for the appointment of delegates to
exercise the functions and rights conferred
through relevant legislation (rule 1
of Schedule 7);
National Executive powers to establish and amend procedures contained in the
Delegates Policy (rule 2 of Schedule 7);
establish that
the Delegates Policy must include the manner in which a member becomes a
delegate, the functions of delegates, and
the manner an employer is advised of
the identity and function of a delegate (rules 2 and 3 of Schedule 7);
clarify that a
delegate is not an officer (rule 4 of Schedule 7);
• enable the Delegates Policy to provide for the appointment of delegates
or for procedures for democratic selection of
of Schedule 7);
Delegates Policy to include a provision that certain officers of the Union are
delegates by reason of their holding office
(subrule 5(d) of Schedule 7);
outline the
limitations of the Delegates Policy and clarify that a technical failure to
comply with Delegates Policy does not affect
the validity of the policy or
appointment of a delegate (rules 6, 7, and 8 of Schedule 7).
Does proposed subrule 2(b) of Schedule 7 operate to create
delegates who do not work at the enterprise or regulated business?
concluded that the proper interpretation of section 350C of the FW Act is that
workplace delegates are confined to persons who
work at the enterprise or
regulated business. The purpose of proposed Schedule 7 is to provide for
delegates who are entitled to
the functions and rights conferred through
relevant legislation, including the FW Act (rule 1 of Schedule 7). Therefore, if
the proposed
rules were to extend the definition of workplace delegates beyond
what is provided in the FW Act, the rules would be contrary to
because they would confer rights on persons not so
Proposed subrule 2(b) of Schedule 7 provides that:
“The National Executive must establish, and may amend,
procedures (the Delegates Policy) about:
functions of delegates, which may include the work area or type of members, or
the subject-matter, to which those functions relate;”
On its face, this subrule could be interpreted as enabling the
National Executive to establish functions that include work areas,
members or subject-matters beyond the scope of an enterprise or regulated
business. In other words, the subrule could be
interpreted as providing for
delegates who do not work at the same enterprise or regulated business as the
members that they represent.
However, as I concluded in
National Executive can only act within the framework of the FW Act. In my view,
this means they cannot establish functions that
would enable section 350C
workplace delegates to represent members outside their enterprise or regulated
business. Therefore subrule
2(b) of Schedule 7 must be interpreted as entitling
the National Executive to establish functions only within the relevant
or regulated business for section 350C workplace delegates. For
example, work areas within the enterprise at which the delegate works,
members within their enterprise and subject-matters pertinent to their
enterprise.
In my view subrule 2(b) of Schedule 7 does not enable section 350C
workplace delegates to represent members who work outside their
enterprise or
regulated business. It is on that basis, that I conclude that the subrule is
consistent with the statutory scheme in
the FW Act regarding workplace
Does proposed subrule 5(d) of Schedule 7 operate to create
delegates who do not work at the enterprise or regulated business?
The proposed subrule (5)(d) of Schedule 7 states:
“The Delegates Policy:
include a provision that certain officers of the Union are delegates by reason
of their holding office;”
The word “officer” is broad and has the potential to
include officers who represent areas wider than an enterprise or
As noted above, the National Executive can only act within the
framework of the FW Act, that is they can only appoint a person who
works within
the relevant enterprise or regulated business as a workplace delegate.
Consequently, in my view, any officers that are
delegates by reason of their
holding office must be officers who work within an enterprise or regulated
business and who, in their
role as a workplace delegate, only represent members
within that enterprise or regulated business.
The NTEU is comprised of Divisions, which are state based, and
branches covering particular institutions or sectors, for example a
or the TAFE sector (rule 3.1). Institutional-based branches are comprised of
members employed, usually employed or otherwise
engaged by the institution (rule
30). Branches are governed by officers elected by and from members of the Branch
(rule 2.1 of Schedule
4) and who exercise the powers of the NTEU as contained in
the rules with respect to the relevant institution or sector (rules 27.8
This structure provides for officers who work in an enterprise or
regulated business and who represent members at the enterprise or
business at which they work (for example officers of institution-based
branches), as well as officers who represent members
across a range of
institutions and sections (for example Divisional officers).
In such a structure it is therefore possible to identify officers
who, by reason of their holding office, work within an enterprise
or regulated
business and represent members at that enterprise or regulated business.
Consequently, it is possible for the NTEU’s
Delegates Policy to include
provisions that certain officers of the Union are delegates by reason of their
holding office.
In my view, subrule 5(d) of Schedule 7 does not enable section 350C
workplace delegates to represent members who work outside their
enterprise or
regulated business and I am satisfied that the subrule is consistent with the
statutory scheme in the FW Act regarding
workplace delegates.
Does proposed subrule 3(b) of Schedule 7 entitle workplace
delegates to rights outside the scope of the FW Act?
As noted above, the rights of section 350C workplace delegates are
prescribed in subsections 350C(2) and (3) of the FW Act, and include
representation of and communication with members and other persons entitled to
be members, and access to workplace
facilities.
Proposed subrule 3(b) of Schedule 7 states:
“The functions of a delegate include:
promotion of the Union and its policies to members and to persons eligible for
membership; for or in relation to members of the
Union who work in a particular
enterprise.”
A question arises as to whether this subrule can be interpreted as
providing the National Executive with the power to endow section
350C workplace
delegates with rights and duties outside the scope of the FW Act statutory
It is important to note that the rights of section 350C workplace
delegates afforded by the FW Act go to their rights at the workplace,
their right to represent and communicate with members and potential members at
the workplace, as well as the right to access
facilities at the workplace.
Subrule 3(b) does not go to such rights. Subrule 3(b) concerns duties that
regulate the relationship
of delegates with the NTEU. As such, they are not
duties that fall within the FW Act statutory scheme regarding section 350C
delegates, they are separate to and independent of this statutory
Subject to the restrictions imposed by the Act, the rules of an
organisation are a matter for the
organisation.
other words, an organisation is entitled to regulate its internal affairs as it
sees fit, including the duties and obligations
required of their delegates.
Consequently, the NTEU is entitled to impose duties on its delegates regarding
the promotion of the
In my view, subrule 3(b) provides for additional duties for
delegates that go to the internal affairs of the NTEU and is not inconsistent
with the FW Act.
Lack of clarity regarding subrule 5(c) of Schedule 7
Proposed Schedule 7 includes subrule 5(c) which states:
“The Delegates Policy...
include procedures by which any two members in a group of members that are or
proposed to be represented by a delegate, may require
that an appropriate test
of opinion among those members, such as a vote, be taken.”
The meaning of this subrule is not entirely clear; in particular, it
is unclear whether “an appropriate test of opinion”
is open-ended or
limited in its scope. The NTEU advise that the sub-rule is intended to allow two
members to test the confidence
that a group of members has in their
Irrespective of whether the “test of opinion” is
open-ended or limited in scope, the subrule, in my view, is not contrary
workplace delegate provisions of the FW Act. Further, in my view, the ability
for members to test opinions at their workplace
provides an opportunity for
members to participate in the affairs of the NTEU and consequently is consistent
with the standards of
Nonetheless,
I recommend that the NTEU consider clarifying the meaning and intent of this
subrule when it next makes rule alterations.
For the reasons outlined in paragraph [9] above, the alterations are
not contrary to other laws regarding delegates, as the proposed
rules regarding
delegates must be read as confined to the relevant statutory scheme.
In my opinion, the alterations comply with and are not contrary to
the Act, the FW Act, modern awards and enterprise agreements, are
not otherwise
contrary to law and were made under the rules of the organisation. I certify
accordingly under subsection 159(1) of
DELEGATE OF THE GENERAL MANAGER
Subsection 159(1)
of the Act provides that:
(1) An alteration of the rules (other than the eligibility rules) of an
organisation does not take effect unless particulars of the
alteration have been
lodged with the FWC and the General Manager has certified that, in his or her
opinion, the alteration:
(a) complies with, and is not contrary to, this Act, the
Fair Work Act
modern awards and enterprise agreements; and
(b) is not otherwise contrary to law; and
(c) has been made under the rules of the organisation.
See endnote 1
Subsections 350C(2) and (3) of the FW Act provide as follows:
(2) The workplace delegate is entitled to represent the industrial interests
of those members, and any other persons eligible to be
such members, including
in disputes with the employer or regulated business concerned.
section does not create any obligation on a person to be represented by a
workplace delegate.
(3) The workplace delegate is entitled to:
(a) reasonable communication with those members, and any other persons
eligible to be such members, in relation to their industrial
interests; and
(b) for the purpose of representing those interests:
(i) in relation to employees—reasonable access to the workplace and
workplace facilities where the enterprise concerned is being
carried on; and
(ii) in relation to regulated workers—reasonable access to the
workplace facilities provided by the regulated business concerned;
(iii) if the workplace delegate is an employee—reasonable access to
paid time, during normal working hours, for the purposes
of related training,
unless the workplace delegate is employed by a small business employer.
Re Independent
Education Union of Australia
Re Australian Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and
Services Union
Re Australian
Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
Independent Education Union of Australia
Re Australian
Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
“democratic selection” is used in proposed subrule 5(b) of Schedule
7. It is unclear what type of selection
process would be democratic, but that is
a matter for the NTEU to determine.
Independent Education Union of Australia
Independent Education Union of Australia
Re Minister for Workplace Relations and Small Business
[1998] AIRC 1770
, Print Q6814.
Op. Cit., at
See endnote 3
[1981] FCA 151
(1981) 54 FLR 129
5(3) of the Act provides:
(Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
standards set out in this Act:
(a) ensure that employer and employee
organisations registered under this Act are representative of and accountable to
their members,
and are able to operate effectively; and
(b) encourage members to participate in the affairs of organisations to which
they belong; and
(c) encourage the efficient management of organisations and high standards of
accountability of organisations to their members; and
(d) provide for the democratic functioning and control of organisations;
(e) facilitate the registration of a diverse range of employer and employee
organisations.
RTF format (605 KB)
Signed PDF/A format