Alan Baker v Boom Logistics Ltd - re Termination of employment - misconduct [2009] AIRC 932; (18 December 2009)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Termination of employment
Boom Logistics Ltd
(U2009/2851)
COMMISSIONER LARKIN
SYDNEY, 18 DECEMBER 2009
Termination of employment - misconduct.
This matter concerns an application by Mr Baker (the applicant) pursuant to paragraph (a) of
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(the WR Act) in relation to his termination of employment by Boom Logistics Ltd (the respondent) on 13 March 2009.
The matter was not resolved at conciliation and a Certificate was issued on 19 May 2009. The applicant elected to proceed to arbitration
on the ground that his termination of employment was harsh, unjust or unreasonable. The matter was listed for hearing on 20 to 22
July 2009. The hearing dates were vacated upon request. The matter was heard on 14 and 15 September 2009. At the hearing the applicant
was represented by Ms R. Raju of the Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union (CFMEU). Mr Swain, National IR Consultant and
solicitor, by leave represented the respondent. The following witnesses gave both oral and written evidence in the matter.
For the applicant
the applicant
Mr Whitehead
State Occupational Health and Safety Coordinator/Organiser with the CFMEU
For the respondent
Hunter Valley Manager
Safety, Training & Quality Manager, NSW
Workshop Maintenance Manager Hunter Valley
Mr Robert Merrick
Heavy Haulage Consultant to the respondent
Operations Manager Heavy Haulage NSW
Newcastle Branch Manager
The applicant commenced employment with the respondent on 21 January 2006 as a Transport Operator. The applicant’s employment
was terminated on 13 March 2009.
An incident occurred on Monday 9 March 2009 involving a dolly and float becoming disconnected from its prime mover, which the applicant
was driving at the time. On the day of the incident, the applicant was suspended on full pay and advised that an investigation would
take place. On 11 March 2009 an ICAM (Incident Cause Analysis Method) meeting took place to discuss the incident. The applicant attended
this meeting with his union delegate.
At a meeting on 13 March 2009 the applicant was advised that an investigation conducted by the respondent concluded that he had failed
to check that the prime mover’s turntable and the dolly’s king pin had been securely locked. The respondent further alleged
that the applicant failed to stop to check the vehicle when he had felt a substantial jolt prior to the dolly and float becoming
disconnected from the prime mover. Approximately 2 kilometres later the dolly and float separated from the prime mover and came to
rest on the side of the road.
The letter of termination, dated 13 March 2009, stated:
“This letter is to confirm the termination of your employment by Boom Logistics Limited with effect from today’s date.
As discussed during the meeting held today with you, Peter Goninan, Rod Mason-Cox and I, your inability to carry out the fundamental
task of safely connecting a dolly to its prime mover after 3 years employment with this company and the subsequent events that took
place when the dolly, trailer and load parted company with your prime mover constitutes behaviour that is inconsistent with the continuation
of your employment and with the direction this company is heading.
Accordingly, Boom Logistics Limited will pay all amounts due to you, up to the time of the termination of your employment, in accordance
with your contract of employment. This payment will include an amount of 2 weeks pay (based on your ordinary hours of work) in lieu
Please acknowledge your receipt of this letter by signing your name in the position marked below.
Yours faithfully,
Steve Hodgson”
In his affidavit, the applicant stated that prior to his employment with the respondent he had performed work driving a B-Double vehicle
delivering coal and also operated vehicles in the transportation of steel products to underground mines. He stated that he had provided
to Mr Forrest his resume during his interview for the position of driver with the respondent company. He stated that Mr Forrest,
in looking at his resume, had noted that he had limited experience with floats and no experience with removable pins. He stated that
Mr Forrest asked him to list the vehicles he had driven and advised him that
“I’m only interested in floats”.
The applicant stated that he said he had limited experience on floats and Mr Forrest had replied
“that’s fine…because we have an in-house trainer who will train you up on all the bits of equipment…You have
The applicant stated that in his first week of employment with the respondent he had a conversation with Mr Robert Merrick where he
told Mr Merrick that he had never used removable pins and never used widening floats. The applicant stated that the respondent provided
to him limited training in relation to the use of floats.
In relation to the incident in question, the applicant stated:
“The procedure as I understood it for hooking up the loads is that the driver backs the truck up to the dolly. The dolly is
a separate piece of equipment which, when coupled with the float, allows more weight to be carried.
Once the truck is backed up as far as possible, the king pin of the trailer triggers an automatic locking mechanism which comes across
and locks in. To determine that the mechanism has locked, the driver performs the ‘tug test’ – this involves attempting
to drive forward, to ensure that the load is being drawn by the vehicle. The driver then gets out of the vehicle to do a visual check
to ensure that the locking mechanism is correctly in place.
On the turntable of the vehicle which I drove, there is a second fail safe pin which the driver manually inserts.
On 9 March 2009, I followed the usual procedure. I backed the truck up to the dolly and performed the tug test. I got out of the vehicle
to check the locking mechanism. I also manually inserted a pin with a plate so the locking system was secure.
The process after that is to hook up the air lines and the electrical, lights and tyres and I did this.”
The applicant stated that on the day in question he was driving in a convoy with three other drivers with escorts. He was driving
the last of the four vehicles. The weight of the load he was carrying was approximately 90 tonne. He stated that he reached the village
of Jerry’s Plains and was travelling 40 kilometres per hour. There were sharp turns and on one of the turns he lightly put
his foot on the break to ease the vehicle and felt something push forward. He stated that as he was in the middle of the corner and
the vehicle was taking up the entire road he did not stop. He stated that he had looked in both mirrors and saw that the load and
the trailer were still intact. The applicant stated:
“As I was driving around these turns I was checking the mirrors to see if anything was abnormal with the float. I then said
to one of the escorts Trevor whose last name I cannot recall;
Alan Baker ‘
Jesus Trevor, I put on the break and something pushed, Everything looks normal, maybe the dump truck chassie fuel tank is half full
and maybe the fuel is sloshing around and pushed the load.
After approx 2 kilometres I heard a loud noise. I immediately looked behind and saw that the dolly and the float had become detached
and were travelling to the left. They then came to rest in dirt off the road.”
On 11 March 2009 the applicant, with his union delegate, attended an ICAM meeting. Also in attendance was Mr Bower, Ms Barlow from
administration, Mr Goninan, Mr Lawton, Mr Hodgson and Mr Scott Merrick. The applicant stated that the following then occurred:
“Steve Lawton: “
As you backed up to the dolly to hook up, you were not square on, the pin has rubbed up the lead of the turn table. It pushed the
pin up. I think the pin was sitting on top of the locking mechanism, not in the jaws
Alan Baker “
I gave it the tug test. What triggers the locking mechanism
Steve Lawton: “
I don’t know.
Alan Baker: “
I did everything that you people trained me to do in hooking and unhooking trailors
Steve Lawton: “
Is that right?
Alan Baker “
We have never been formally trained in the use of removable pins
Scott Merrick, who was the trainer said “
We haven’t had time to put a training process in to
place but we will from now on
Daniel Bower: “
When we went from one turn table manufacturer to another, we found that when you back up to hook up, because there is nothing to hold
the pin in place, the turntables are pushing the pins up
Alan Baker “
No-one had ever communicated this problem to me. I had worked for you for approx 3 years
Steve Lawton: “
We have welded a little keeper plate on top to hold it in and stop it from pushing up. The pin was 60 ml
Alan Baker “
If the pin was 60mm too hight
then the locking mechanism could not have been triggered and when I did the tug test it would of
shot out. Couldn’t the keeper plate have held the pin up if it went past that locking mechanism? Couldn’t the pin have
hit the chasse of the truck and held it up there?
Steve Lawton: “
I believe it was pushed up when you hooked it up. There is evidence that the pin was sitting on top of the drawers
The applicant stated that he attended a meeting, with his union delegate, on 13 March 2009 with Mr Goninan and Mr Hodgson. He stated
that at the meeting he was shown a section of an RTA handbook in relation to the driver’s responsibility for the king pin and
was advised that he was terminated and given his letter of termination.
In his evidence, the applicant disputed Mr Merrick’s evidence that there were written procedures in relation to the locking
of the king pin into the truck’s turntable. He further disputed that any procedures were given to him. The applicant disputed
that he was trained on king pin connection when he progressed to the level 2 classification after his qualifying period of employment.
The applicant stated that he had not received an RTA handbook from the respondent.
The applicant acknowledged in cross examination that he was a professional heavy vehicle driver holding a multi combination licence,
which allows him to drive all types of heavy vehicles. The applicant has held a multi combination licence for approximately 12 years.
The applicant stated that at the time he got his licence there was not a requirement to be experienced in removable pins and that
“[a]ll multi combination licences are done on flat bed trailers which have fixed pins”.
Mr Swain put questions to the applicant in relation to his affidavit evidence concerning his interview with Mr Forrest. It was put
to the applicant that, on the basis of Mr Forrest’s affidavit, there had not been a discussion in relation to king pins. The
applicant replied
“I’m sure he did because he said that, ‘We get dollies and floats and they have different sized pins and you will
be trained up on it and I would be…issued with a dolly and float”.
The applicant was adamant that the issue of king pins was discussed in his interview with Mr Forrest.
The applicant acknowledged that at the time of the incident he had been trained up to a level 3 Driver. The applicant stated that
he was trained up by the senior drivers and not the driver/trainer. In cross examination the applicant’s evidence was:
“And at the time of this incident you were carrying a dump truck chassis on the float, weren’t you?
With a kingpin attached to it, a removable kingpin?
So what are you saying here today, that you weren’t trained to use that at all, yet you were driving it out on the road?
No, I’m not saying that at all…Not once did a driver/trainer ever go out to a mine site and show us how to load a dump
truck chassis.”
In relation to the training received by the applicant during the course of his employment with the respondent, Mr Swain put a number
of questions to the applicant.
Those questions centred on the affidavits of Mr Hodgson and Mr Robert Merrick. The applicant acknowledged that he had been trained
in the use of removable pins but
“never actual pin – see where it was positioned…Well, there was never any training on that aspect of the pins…I
don’t know why they never trained – I can’t say why they never trained me up on what you’re trying to refer
In cross examination, the applicant stated: “
If you take a 3 inch pin out and put a 2 inch pin in, it’s got a locking mechanism. You lock it then you back under and hook
it up and make sure the bar is across. Uncle
(Mr Robert Merrick)
said if the bar is across it’s in the locked position
Mr Swain put the affidavit evidence of Mr Robert Merrick and Mr Bower to the applicant on this point. That evidence was:
“The tug test can pass if you don’t back under square. The King Pin will lift and the locking bar will go part-way across
and jam. The hooking-up would pass the tug test but is not secure. Depending on how jammed the locking bar was you could drive away
for some distance before the connection failed.”
And, Mr Bower:
“Also, the locking bar can go across and the pin not be positively connected. I have done that more than once, but because I
visually checked the pin the problem was remedied.”
The applicant’s evidence in reply was that on the particular day he “
backed under it, did the visual check. The locking bar was…all the way across, then I put the little locking tab in.
he day of the incident the locking bar was all the way across…I checked, done a visual check…It’s all I was ever
trained to do…I was never trained
Mr Swain put to the applicant the following affidavit evidence of Mr Robert Merrick:
“At paragraph 44 Mr Baker states that, ‘
I was not provided with any ongoing supervisor or practical training relating to the vehicles that I was operating especially training
outlining the proper procedure for hooking up turn tables and pins.
’ That is not correct. I trained and assessed him as competent on turntable and pins as shown in the attached assessment sheets.
He commenced training on removable King Pins when he moved from standard trailers with fixed pins to floats at Level 2.”
In cross examination the following exchange occurred:
“But I’m not asking you about that. I’m asking you about attaching the trailer to the prime mover?
I’ve told you exactly before how he trained me up.
If you weren’t competent to do that, then you would never have been appointed to level 3, would you?
They determined me to be a competent level 3 driver to move the dozers.”
Mr Swain put to the applicant that, in his meetings with the respondent’s management, he had not raised the issue of a conversation
with the escort person or any safety concerns in stopping his vehicle, until his affidavit was filed. The applicant’s evidence
on this point was that
“Boom called the I.C.A.M. meeting, they knew the escorts were there. They put a team of people in place and if they thought
it was relevant why didn’t they call the – they never asked me”.
In cross examination, Mr Swain took the applicant to the ICAM report at section 8, table of causal factors, and section 9, conclusions
The applicant stated that while he was part of the ICAM meeting there had been no conclusions drawn while he was there. The cross
examination continued:
“Well, Boom says that they told you they’d checked the mechanism, and it was found to be operational?
That’s when I asked Steve Lawton if the pin was 50 to 60 millimetres too high what would trigger the locking mechanism.
And it was certainly discussed with you during the course of the I.C.A.M that you hadn’t visually checked the kingpin, wasn’t
And I said I had.
No, you said you checked the locking mechanism, but you’ve never said?
Yes, I checked the locking mechanism, but never trained in to check the pins.
So your evidence is that you didn’t check the kingpin isn’t it?
I was never trained to check it.”
In cross examination in relation to the meeting on 13 March 2009 when the applicant’s employment was terminated, the applicant
stated that he could not remember too much about the meeting. The applicant did acknowledge that there was a break in that meeting
and that he was given the letter of termination after that break.
Mr Hodgson is the Hunter Valley Manager responsible for the Singleton, Muswellbrook and Mount Thorley depots. In his affidavit Mr
Hodgson stated that he was appraised of the incident by Mr Goninan and Mr Bower and that
“[t]hey also stated how lucky Alan Baker was that this load didn’t come through the back of the cabin as he would be dead,
and that if there had have been a school bus or cars around it would have been a tragedy”.
Mr Hodgson was part of the ICAM process. In his affidavit, Mr Hodgson stated:
“The iCAM meeting was held on 11 March, and I was in attendance. During the meeting I was concerned by Alan Baker’s demeanour.
At no time did he show any remorse, or any acknowledgement of how serious the incident could have been. Instead he was all about,
‘I have done everything right’, and that he believed he needed to do. Considering what the consequences could have been,
such as the chance of flattening a school bus that could have moved to the side of the road to allow him to pass, I would have expected
him to be more remorseful.
I recall Alan Baker talking about the unusual ‘jolt’. He was quizzed about this jolt several times as it was generally
apparent that this was the point where the pin, which had obviously just been hanging on and keeping the float connected, finally
came adrift as he was going slightly downhill and was braking. I asked,
‘Why didn’t you stop?’
His response was to the effect that, it was a bigger jolt than usual, but with these combinations you do get movement, it was a big
load, but he didn’t think too much of the jolt. In my view he was uncaring as to the potential consequences.”
Mr Hodgson’s evidence was that at no time during the discussion in relation to the
did the applicant mention any conversation with the escort driver, Trevor.
In his affidavit Mr Hodgson stated:
“The key outcome of the iCAM investigation was that the pin was not properly located. Of particular concern to me was that,
as an experienced and professional heavy vehicle driver, he ignored a jolt that was clearly out of the ordinary. This should have
resulted in him stopping to check what had happened, but Alan Baker chose to continue driving down the highway with a 100 ton plus
load behind him.”
Mr Hodgson stated that he was provided with the applicant’s training records and that “[a]
lthough there was not a specific item dealing with the visual check of the king pin I was advised that this was certainly a component
of the training
In relation to the meeting on 13 March 2009, Mr Hodgson stated:
“The meeting commenced with Peter Goninan, Rod Mason Cox (Alan’s witness and union representative) Alan and me. I went
through the findings of the iCAM investigation. This investigation found that the cause of the incident was the fact that the kingpin
had not been properly located and therefore the combination was not properly connected to the Prime Mover. After some lengthy discussion
over this I then showed him the RTA handbook and said,
‘Are you familiar with this?’
and he said something like,
‘What is that?’
I replied that, ‘
this is the RTA Heavy Vehicle Drivers Handbook. I am not sure why you say that you are not familiar with it as it would be like the
‘bible’ for professional drivers.
’ I showed Baker the section in the handbook which highlighted his requirements as a professional heavy vehicle driver in relation
to the correct hooking up and checking process with removable pin operation.
He said he had had no formal training. I recall saying words to the effect that, “
I believe that he had had training but apart from that there is a fundamental requirement under the heavy haulage guidelines by the
RTA that he needs to know how to locate this kingpin and to check it properly.
I asked him if there was any reason he could give why I shouldn’t terminate him. He reiterated that he had done nothing wrong.
He said that he had hooked up the trailer correctly. He could not suggest how the combination could have come apart.
There was still no remorse from Alan Baker. I asked Alan to give me 10 minutes to call Melbourne and discuss this with them, as it
is obviously an important decision. He went outside with his witness Rod Mason Cox.
I phoned Sue Baker in Melbourne, this call lasted for about 15 – 20 minutes while we discussed whether we would terminate. I
was advised that the COO had given the authorisation to terminate provided both Sue and I were comfortable. Sue Baker and I then
finalised a letter of termination and I printed it out and signed it.”
In cross examination, Ms Raju took Mr Hodgson to paragraph 16 of his affidavit and annexure A, which were copies of the applicant’s
training records, and asked him where in those records was the requirement to visually check the kingpin and turntable to see if
the king pin was secure. Mr Hodgson acknowledged that it was not there.
Mr Raju also put to Mr Hodgson a bundle of documents, which comprised the job safety analysis for March 2009,
and asked him to identify any step, etc., in relation to visually inspecting a king pin and a turntable connection. Mr Hodgson replied
“It won’t be on there…Because I was going to say before, if we put every single step into these documents there’d
be, it would be like a War and Peace document. We can’t have every single step by step process in a procedure”.
Ms Raju put to Mr Hodgson the fairness of the termination based on the ICAM report and that the applicant had not sighted that report.
Mr Hodgson responded as follows:
“We terminated, we terminated Mr Baker based on, it was the I.C.A.M. investigation which highlighted the root cause of the incident,
there was the RTA driver’s handbook that reinforced the knowledge that the driver should have. There was the training that
we know Mr Baker has undertaken. As a professional driver Mr Baker knew what he had to do, so it was a culmination of many things,
not just the I.C.A.M investigation….The I.C.A.M investigation, I’m not sure if there’s a belief that that I.C.A.M
investigation comes out minutes after the investigation occurs, because it doesn’t. It’s got to be, it’s got to
be pulled together and typed up. Is it fair that, I mean Mr Baker was part of the I.C.A.M investigation, he had a representative
there. I never saw the I.C.A.M report for some time myself. But he was part of the process, he, what we discussed and what we agreed
in that I.C.A.M was no, Mr Baker was fully aware of. There was nothing discussed or agreed to that Mr Baker wasn’t aware of.
Or there was nothing in the report that he wouldn’t have been aware of. The I.C.A.M report process is a very open process.”
Mr Hodgson was asked a number of questions in cross examination relating to his email to senior management in Melbourne on 11 March
and 12 March 2009.
Mr Hodgson’s evidence was that he was not the decision maker to terminate the applicant’s employment. He had made the
recommendation to do so on 11 March 2009.
Mr Hardy is the Safety, Training & Quality Manager, New South Wales. In his affidavit he outlined his previous experience and
qualifications and that of his three direct reports. He stated that Mr Hodgson had asked him to facilitate an ICAM investigation
due to the seriousness of the situation. He stated that at the beginning of the meeting he explained the process and received acknowledgement
from the participants of their understanding of that process. Mr Hardy, in his affidavit, outlined the specific areas considered
in an ICAM investigation. He stated:
“I wrote comments on the whiteboard which had been divided to replicate the 4 headings above. A flexible approach was taken
which allowed us to move back and forth between headings. The items above were raised and if it was felt that these items were not
a contributing factor they were not included on the whiteboard.”
Mr Hardy stated that the applicant had said he felt a jolt at Jerry’s Plains and that he had checked his rear vision mirror.
Mr Hardy stated that he could not recall the applicant making any further comments. Mr Hardy stated that if the applicant had raised
a conversation with the escort driver then, as part of the investigation, contact would have been made with that escort driver. Mr
Hardy stated that from his background he would have
“expected a driver to have been very concerned that the load had shifted if they felt such a jolt. However, he did not stop”.
Mr Hardy stated that during the investigation the applicant had confirmed that he was aware of procedure and that it was later in
the investigation that the applicant had mentioned that he had not been trained in the process. Mr Hardy stated that he had asked
all present at the meeting if they were happy with the notations on the board and they then agreed on a Corrective Action Plan.
In cross examination, Mr Hardy acknowledged that there was nothing specific in relation to coupling of the king pin and the dolly
on the Pre-Start Checks document.
Mr Lawton is the Workshop Maintenance Manager, Hunter Valley. Mr Lawton has been in this position since April 1989. In his affidavit,
Mr Lawton outlined what he said occurred when he attended the site of the incident on 9 March 2009 with Mr Goninan. He stated:
“I climbed onto the back of the truck and looked at the top of the fifth wheel. I could see the jaw and locking bar and noticed
slithers of steel and rub marks on the top of the jaw, you could see where the king pin had been sitting on top of the jaw. I noticed
the jaw and locking bar of the fifth wheel was in the locked position with the safety catch in place. I pointed this out to Peter
With the king pin correctly in the jaw, and locked it cannot come undone.
I went down into the table drain and looked at the dolly and the king pin and noticed that the pin was sitting up between 50 and 60
mm, it had been forced up and had bent the king pin boss tag. This would have happened at hitch up. This allowed the pin to be held
up in that position. The shiny marks were also on the base of the king pin. I also noticed that the king pin in the dolly was the
correct one, it was a 90 mm pin.”
Mr Lawton stated that, in his opinion, the pin had been sitting on top of the jaw and not in the jaw. He stated that this was not
a mechanical failure. Mr Lawton took part in the ICAM investigation. In reply to the applicant’s affidavit in relation to the
conversation that took place during that meeting, Mr Lawton stated that it was not correct or had been misinterpreted. He stated
that the applicant did not state that he informed the escorts. Mr Lawton stated that if the applicant
“had done the visual check it would have been very clear that the king pin was sitting up on top of the jaw, not in the jaw
where it belongs”.
In his evidence in chief Mr Lawton explained the process as follows:
“When the prime mover and the trailer, dolly, is coupled together the pin on the dolly actually triggers a mechanism so as the
vehicle, is, the prime mover, is backed on to the trailer the jaw wraps around the pin, the locking bar goes across the back of the
pin and then once you put your safety locks into place then you would visually see that the pin was where it is supposed to be with
the jaw wrapped around it. You can do that either by looking in underneath the unit and having a look in behind in that V there.
You can see up in there and you would see that the pin was actually in place or easier than that you could look over the top of the
skid plate on the trailer or the dolly and you could actually see whether the pin was protruding off the top of the boss or whether
it was in place. So there is two ways of determining whether the thing was hooked up right and all pretty simple. It is only observation.”
In his affidavit, Mr Robert Merrick outlined his employment history with the respondent and his qualifications as follows:
“I started with Bowers Heavy Haulage and Crane Service in January 1991 as a Heavy Haulage Driver and then became a Heavy Vehicle
Trainer & Assessor and a Heavy Vehicle Driving Instructor. The business was sold to Boom Logistics Limited in October 2004 and
I remained employed by them until 23 October 2007. I then worked part time as Heavy Haulage Consultant to the Respondent until October
I hold the following certificates:
(a) Certificate IV in Assessment and Workplace Training (including Train Small Groups, Plan Assessment, Conduct Assessment, Review
Assessment, Plan and Promote a Training Program, Plan a Series of Training Sessions, Deliver Training Sessions and Review Training);
(b) Certificate III in Transport & Distribution (Road Transport);
(c) Workcover NSW Course in OH&S Consultation;
(d) Heavy Vehicle Driving Instruction; and
(e) RTA Driving Instructor’s Licence for Cars, Light Rigid, Heavy Rigid and Heavy Combination vehicles.”
In relation to the applicant’s training, Mr Merrick stated:
“I recall doing ongoing training with Alan Baker. I did training with all Operators on Scania prime movers, floats, hook up,
and widen the float, steering, to show that the Operator was competent to operate the floats on the road, to make sure that they
could handle it. The King Pin training is conducted at Level 2, once you go into floats, as there are 2 different sized removable
king pins. I did this training with all of the Operators, including Alan Baker. No one would have been passed out (to drive) unless
assessed and passed by me.
For the initial training, when a driver was assessed as competent, I filled in the assessment sheet which had all the different criteria,
which included hooking up; this might cover 4 or 5 different things. If a person passed all these components I would sign the assessment
sheet, give a hard copy to Chantelle Howlett who put it onto the skills register. The skills register was developed by Michael Forrest
as a ‘ready reckoner’ that showed whether the Operators had reached that skill level and assessed for competency. If
they had not been trained and assessed for a particular job they were instructed that they should knock the job back. This register
allowed the Supervisors to see who was trained and competent. I kept a copy of the assessment sheets, as I had my own filing cabinet,
however, my assistant trainer decided to throw out the information in the file when I retired. A true copy of an assessment sheet
for Alan Baker dated 31 July 2006 is attached and marked “B”. This assessment took Alan Baker up to Level 2.
The form headed Transport Training/Assessment Booking dated 11 April 2006, was for training covering all aspects of the Scania Prime
Mover, which included the King Pin operation. The due date is shown as 13.11.07 with a reassessment on 6/8/08. Assessment sheets
were completed for both these bookings and when the training was completed it was filled in on the skills register. A true copy of
the Transport Training/Assessment Booking form dated 11/04/06, copies of Truck and Combination Assessment forms dated 13.11.07 and
6.8.08 for Alan Baker are attached and marked “C”. The King Pin operation is covered by the section headed “Connect
When training on a King Pin, this is the process I would follow. We would walk out to the truck, we did a 103 (pre-start). We would
start the Prime Mover up, and back it up to the float or dolly in a straight line. King Pins come in two sizes, 2 inches or 3 inches,
depending on the turntable size you needed to have the right sized pin, you needed to check the size of the pin and make sure the
right pin was in the goose neck. If this did not happen then it would not connect. Then the truck was backed underneath in a straight
line, the turntable has a wide “V” opening and if you are not square on, part of the turntable will pop up the pin. Then
we complete the tug test whilst still in the truck’s cabin.
Next you get out of the truck and visually check the locking bar, as it has to slam home and lock into position. There is a little
wedge which has a clip and that is located in there. The second check is you walk around and go underneath the goose neck (bend over
or squat down) and visually look up and make sure that the King Pin has dropped right down into its normal position with the locking
pin in its correct position. When you do it in the daylight you can see that the King Pin is fully located with the locking bar behind
it. This is the process that I used for all Operators including Alan Baker.”
Attachment A to Mr Merrick’s affidavit is the procedures for connecting and disconnecting prime movers to Drake floats. In cross
examination, Mr Merrick stated that these procedures were provided to all employees and discussed in tool box talks.
Ms Raju took Mr Merrick to attachment A to the affidavit of Mr Hodgson, which comprised a number of assessment sheets relevant to
the applicant’s training. Mr Merrick stated that he was familiar with the documents as he had drafted them. Mr Merrick acknowledged
that the assessment sheet did not state that a visual sight test needed to be performed, however, he stated:
“And part of the connecting to trailer, you do your 103 check on the truck, you back it up to the float or dolly or trailer,
you reverse underneath, you do a tug test, then you get out and have a look to make sure the pins – the locking bar has gone
right through. If it’s got an extra pin, lock and pin, you put it in and then you visually go around and have a look. You visually
check the whole lot.”
In re-examination, Mr Merrick stated that the procedures in relation to the connecting of prime movers to Drake floats was actually
a Drake document, which he had copied and at paragraph 4 of that document it stated:
“Visually check and ensure that the pin has locked into the turntable, fit the safety pin into it’s location”.
Mr Swain put the following to Mr Merrick:
“You use this document as part of your training?
And you used that document as part of your training of Alan Baker?
So, when you did that assessment in the yard regarding the – what you were just asked about by Ms Raju, that would have been
part of the assessment that you ticked off on, would that be correct?
Yes, my word.
Under the heading of Connecting the trailer?
Mr Bower’s position with the respondent is that of Operations Manager, Heavy Haulage NSW. Mr Bower was in attendance at the
site of the incident after it had occurred on 9 March 2009 and was also in attendance at the ICAM investigation. In relation to that
investigation and the applicant’s affidavit evidence, Mr Bower stated:
“I attended the ICAM meeting on 11 March 2009 (referred to in Alan Baker’s affidavit at paragraph 28). Alan stated that
he felt a jolt or a substantial movement. At the time he said that it was when he was turning the corner. He was very matter of fact
almost blas� about the jolt, and I didn’t feel that he was overly concerned by this jolt. There was no mention by Alan Baker
of any conversation with the pilot. At that same meeting I don’t recall Scott Merrick making any comment that there was not
a training process in place.
From reading Alan’s affidavit it would appear that the jolt happened before the turns. From my experience, he should have stopped
immediately. It would have been no more difficult to stop there than elsewhere. The chassis was less than 6 metres and had 3 pilots.
He would have had to stop in the middle of the road, but he had the escort vehicles to warn traffic plus hazard lights on his vehicle.
If a jolt occurs, you always stop to check if anything happens out of the ordinary. It is always safest to stop and check. I have
stopped in similar situations like that and there is minimal risk when you are under escort. Even to stop and hold up traffic for
5 minutes is better than the consequences if something is not right.”
In reply to the applicant’s affidavit, Mr Bower stated:
“f) In regard to paragraph 49 there is a statement that, ‘
…I reversed square on into the dolly and that’s why the locking mechanism was triggered.’
This suggests that the prime mover needs to be perfectly square for the locking pin to trigger. However, that is not correct. If the
prime mover isn’t perfectly square, it can still trigger the locking mechanism. Also, if Alan Baker had completed the visual
check, it would have been easy to see that the King Pin was sitting up, because it is a very different look to when it has been connected
correctly. When I saw the King Pin on the dolly at the incident, I noticed that the King Pin was raised approximately 50 millimetres
out of the ‘boss’ rather than sitting flush on the ‘boss’.”
Mr Bower stated that Mr Robert Merrick trained him in hooking and unhooking loads and had told him to visually check the King Pin
every time to ensure
“that the head of the pin is on the top of the ‘boss’ and to make sure the King Pin has not risen”
. Mr Bower, in his affidavit evidence, referred to the RTA handbook and stated that these handbooks have been and are present at the
respondent’s site. He stated that the applicant’s statement that he had never seen the handbook was unusual as:
“In my view all professional drivers should be aware of this Handbook”.
Mr Bower referred to a section of the RTA handbook related to turntable jaws and king pins.
Mr Forrest was the respondent’s manager who interviewed the applicant for employment. In his affidavit Mr Forrest stated that
during that interview he did not discuss with the applicant the use of removable turntable pins as he
“was unaware of much of the detailed configuration of our heavy haulage fleet at that time.”
Mr Forrest stated that questions were directed to skills and prior experience. He stated that the applicant was an employee of average
skill level. In relation to safety performance, Mr Forrest stated that the applicant was, at times, viewed as complacent. In his
affidavit Mr Forrest outlined several reported incidents and near misses associated with the applicant. In relation to the training
provided to the applicant, Mr Forrest stated:
“In regard to paragraph 44 of Alan Baker’s affidavit he states that he was not given practical training relating to the
vehicles especially outlining proper procedures. This statement is not correct. Prior to assessing an employee’s competency
to operate a piece of equipment, the employee would receive training from the trainer in the use of the equipment. This would comprise
a combination of documented procedures and in field instruction. An employee would be expected to demonstrate their ability to set
up and operate a piece of heavy haulage equipment without the need to reference to an operating procedure. An employee would not
be authorised to operate a piece of equipment he had not been assessed as competent to operate it.”
Attached to Mr Forrest’s affidavit, at attachment A, was a skills spreadsheet, which Mr Forrest stated provided a quick reference
tool for supervisors in the allocation of work. Mr Forrest stated the skills register was continually updated by training staff and
used to review training and plan for training priorities. Mr Forrest stated that he reclassified the applicant to Level 3 in April
2007 upon confirmation from the trainer that he had achieved the required skill level. Mr Forrest stated:
“I am familiar with the incident which occurred on 9 March and am aware that Alan claims that a lack of training contributed
to the incident. However, from my own knowledge, if Alan was not properly competent to connect up heavy haulage equipment, he would
not have been authorised by the company to operate the low loader-dolly combination and presumably, have had numerous serious incidents
similar to this one, previously.”
In cross examination, Mr Forrest stated that he could not recall the applicant providing to him a resume. In reply to Ms Raju’s
question in relation to the applicant’s evidence on his employment interview, Mr Forrest stated:
“I can never recall having a conversation with any potential candidate that I engaged within my role at Boon
Logistics over the last five years about removable king pins. Removable king pins are a fairly highly technical level of detail with
the operation of heavy haulage transport. I don’t have that background….Our company has engaged people with that technical
background to provide that training to candidates to develop new skills and reassess competencies in skills, so I have absolutely
no recollection of having that level of discussion with any candidate. The level of discussion is essentially limited to have you
operated heavy haulage equipment, have you operated it where the ramps widen and contract, which gives me an indication of their
background as to what level of heavy haulage they’ve done. That’s about it. After that the process is then passed over
to our trainers with an expectation that that will take them through a competency based development program to their limits.”
In re-examination, Mr Forrest stated that to his knowledge the applicant was competent in the operation of a multi-combination heavy
vehicle, including the hooking up of floats and dollies. Mr Forrest stated that the applicant
“would have been assessed as competent by our internal trainers and would have been then given duties consistent with that skill
SUBMISSIONS
Ms Raju submitted that the termination of the applicant’s employment by the respondent was harsh, unjust and unreasonable in
the circumstances. Those circumstances were that the applicant lacked experience in the use of king pins and the respondent had not
provided to the applicant the necessary training in the use of king pins. Therefore, unawareness of a procedure is not deliberate
or wilful misconduct. It was submitted that the applicant did one visual check. However, the visual test of checking that the king
pin sat inside the turntable was not done. It was submitted that prior to his employment with the respondent, the applicant did not
have experience operating vehicles that used removable king pins. It was argued that the respondent was aware of this fact and had
promised training.
It was submitted that the applicant was not provided with a copy of the internal report that the respondent relied upon for the dismissal
and not given an opportunity to respond to that report. A full and extensive investigation of the alleged misconduct was not carried
out by the respondent prior to the dismissal.
It was submitted that the applicant was 59 years of age and given his age and location would experience difficulty in obtaining alternative
employment. The applicant sought reinstatement.
Mr Swain submitted:
“Commissioner, the company’s position remains as set out in its outline of submissions that have been filed in this claim,
and that is that Mr Baker's employment was terminated as a result and a consequence of the incident that took place on the Goulburn
Highway near Jerry's Plains on Monday 9 March, and he was in fact terminated for failing to safely connect a dolly and float combination
to its prime mover that as we have heard from the evidence resulted in the dolly and float that had a combined load of 100 tonnes
coming free from the prime mover and running off the road out of control with potentially fatal consequences.
The key point in all the evidence, Commissioner, in my submission and the company's submission, is that Mr Baker failed to visually
check that the prime mover's turn table jaws had closed correctly and locked onto the king pin when he hooked up and we say there
was never any adequate explanation provided by Mr Baker other than his assertion about not being trained on that specific aspect
of it. He agreed that he was trained on every other aspect of it and it just seems inherently improbable that if he was trained in
every other aspect of king pin operation that he would not have been trained in the requirement to visually check that the jaws of
the king pin had locked around it.
We say that this failure is a fundamental component of his occupation as a professional heavy haulage driver, and it's also a fundamental
component of the training, the extensive training as the evidence indicated, that was provided to Mr Baker throughout his employment
with Boom Logistics. Mr Merrick gave evidence as to the extent of that training, plus he produced a copy of the procedure manual
that he relied upon and used in his training and he was not challenged on that in any meaningful sense. We say that this requirement
to visually check the king pin is not something that just happens to be a sort of a nicety, it is clearly a recognised paragraph
of the hooking up procedure and has been in the Road Transport Industry for some considerable time.”
It was submitted that the applicant was part of the ICAM investigation and had been taken through the findings of the ICAM. The ICAM,
it was submitted, was only one of the factors taken into account by the respondent in deciding whether or not to terminate the applicant’s
employment. It was submitted that the applicant’s prior record involving eight incidents of carelessness and operator error
over his three years of employment with the respondent was considered. It was submitted that there was evidence of the training provided
to the applicant
“in properly connecting trailers with removable king pins and that was set out as attachment A to Mr Hodgson’s affidavit”.
CONSIDERATIONS
Subsection 652(3) provides:
“(3) In determining, for the purposes of the arbitration, whether a termination was harsh, unjust or unreasonable, the Commission
must have regard to:
(a) whether there was a valid reason for the termination related to the employee’s capacity or conduct (including its effect
on the safety and welfare of other employees); and
(b) whether the employee was notified of that reason; and
(c) whether the employee was given an opportunity to respond to any reason related to the capacity or conduct of the employee; and
(d) if the termination related to unsatisfactory performance by the employee—whether the employee had been warned about that
unsatisfactory performance before the termination; and
(e) the degree to which the size of the employer’s undertaking, establishment or service would be likely to impact on the procedures
followed in effecting the termination; and
(f) the degree to which the absence of dedicated human resource management specialists or expertise in the undertaking, establishment
or service would be likely to impact on the procedures followed in effecting the termination; and
(g) any other matters that the Commission considers relevant.”
In a determination of the matter before me I am required to have regard to the above paragraphs of ss.652(3), where relevant to the
issue. I am required also to be cognisant that a
“fair go all round”
is afforded to the employee and employer in the matter. In arriving at a decision in the matter I will not address and/or refer to
all the material before me. I have, however, had regard to that material where relevant to the issue I must determine.
The nature of the actual incident, which occurred approximately 8.30am on Monday 9 March 2009 near the town of Jerry’s Plains,
New South Wales, is not in dispute. A description of the incident is outlined in the ICAM Investigation Report at point 2, as follows:
“On Friday 6/3/09 operator (Alan Baker) loaded a 785 dump truck chassis onto prime mover / dolly / float combination 286 / 277
/ 225 at Wambo mine. He unhooked the prime mover from the dolly and float that afternoon and returned in the prime mover to the Singleton
depot leaving the float / dolly combination and their load on site at Wambo. The following Monday (9/3/09 0600), the same operator
travelled out to Wambo (approx 0700) to take the load to Bogabri for EDI Downer Mining along with three other vehicle combinations
transporting another chassis and two dump truck bodies.
The operator hooked up the dolly and float to the prime mover as per his normal procedure, checking the jaw locking bar was in place
on the turntable, then putting the safety clip and plate in place to ensure the jaws remained closed and locked.
The operator then proceeded to travel over the Haul Rd, and stop at a T intersection with the main public road to pick up the escorts
prior to commencing the trip. The operator moved off again and turned left, stopped at the RTA pads at the back of Hunter Valley
mine on the Golden Highway when another operator in the group of four combinations had a flat tyre.
The operator then proceeded down the hill into Jerry’s Plains (approx 15km). Following a right hand bend, the operator touched
the brakes and felt a jolt from behind and continued around a left hand bend and kept driving out of Jerry’s Plains.
that the dolly and float had come free from the prime mover. At this point the operator sped up to avoid any chance of a collision
between the prime mover and the detached combination.
When the operator was clear of the dolly and float, he parked up and called his supervisor, Peter Goninan about the incident.
The site was attended by Peter Goninan, Daniel Bower and Steve Lawton to assess the situation. The load was found to be fully restrained
and the trailer was assessed as being fully roadworthy. The combination was retrieved from the paddock and transported to a safe
parking area in Jerry’s Plains.”
The conclusions of the ICAM investigation stated:
“The investigation team believes that the incident occurred when the jaw mechanism was triggered when the operator reversed
onto the dolly at an inappropriate angle. This allowed the trigger pin to engage the jaws when the pin was not in place. The situation
compounded when during the placement of the locking pin and plate on the turntable handle the operator did not visually check at
that time to see if the pin was correctly engaged in the jaws.
The operator failed to notice the pin was not locked into the jaws of the turntable during the 103 (prestart checks) and on two other
occasions when the vehicle was stopped for various reasons.
Whilst coupling of equipment is key competency for gaining a RTA HC or MC licence Boom Logistics did not have in place formal procedures
nor proof of training undertaken by operators.
Following inspection of the turntable operation it was determined that the jaw mechanism was fully operational and that the safety
locking pin and plate were still in the correct position, indicating there was no mechanism failure.”
It was not disputed that the incident occurred as outlined in the ICAM investigation report. Further, it was not disputed that the
cause of the incident, as outlined in the ICAM investigation report was:
“Operator failed to notice dolly connecting pin was not engaged”
“Operator failed to act when an unexpected jolt was felt 1km prior to the combination dis-engaging”.
Also included in this section of the ICAM investigation report was:
“Jaw mechanism locked when the operator reversed at an angle that allowed the jaws to trigger whilst the pin was not in place”.
The applicant stated that he
“did back on to it square, did trigger locking mechanism and I did a visual check”.
Regardless of whether or not the applicant reversed on an angle or square on, the fact remains that he failed to notice that the dolly
connecting pin was not engaged and he failed to act when he felt an unexpected jolt prior to the combination disengaging. These facts
are not disputed.
The applicant stated and, it was submitted, he did one visual check. The applicant acknowledged in his evidence in cross examination
that he did not check the king pin. He stated that he was never trained to check a king pin. I do not accept the applicant’s
evidence on this point, regardless of whether or not formal procedures are in place.
On the evidence, the applicant holds the highest level of licence for heavy vehicles, a multi-combination licence, and has held that
licence for 12 years. He has been employed and performed work for the respondent for approximately three years. During those three
years the applicant has received extensive training and progressed through the classification structure from level 1 to level 3.
I find it inconceivable that the issue of a visual inspection of the correct placement of the king pin was never discussed or taught
to the applicant. Mr Merrick is a qualified driver, trainer and instructor. I accept his evidence in relation to the instruction
and training received by the applicant.
Considering the evidence before me, I am persuaded that the applicant did reverse at an angle and not square on as he stated in his
evidence. This had the affect of triggering the locking mechanism when the pin was not in place. If the applicant had performed a
visual check, which I am persuaded was part of his training, he would have realised that the pin was not correctly engaged in the
jaws. The applicant did not perform the necessary visual sight test for reasons only known to him.
Furthermore, the applicant did not stop the vehicle when he felt a jolt, which was possibly the point that the pin
“finally came adrift as he was going slightly downhill and was braking”.
The applicant’s reason for not stopping the vehicle and investigating when he felt the unexpected jolt was that:
“If I was to stop immediately and investigate I would have blocked the highway. Because of the nature of the road
and because it was unsafe to stop I did not stop”.
In my view, the applicant’s attitude and behaviour in not immediately stopping the vehicle is inexcusable. The weight of the
load he was carrying was approximately 90 tonne. He had the benefit of escorts and in the circumstances, considering the potential
consequences, it would have been safer to stop and investigate. He did not do so.
I am not persuaded by the applicant’s evidence of a conversation he stated he had with the escort person. The applicant did
not raise this conversation with the respondent during the ICAM investigation or at any other time. The applicant attempted to place
blame on the respondent’s managers for not contacting the escort person during the ICAM investigation. Two things can be said
shows, if management had been aware of any conversation with the operator and the escort then the escort would have been contacted.
Secondly, it appears to me that the applicant was reticent to accept his own error and sought to blame others.
In his affidavit, the applicant had stated that during his employment interview with Mr Forrest he had provided a copy of his resume
and that Mr Forrest
“noted that I had limited experience with floats and no experience with removable pins”.
Mr Forrest in his evidence disputed that this conversation occurred in relation to removable pins. In his evidence in cross examination,
the applicant said
“I don’t know. I’m pretty sure he did”
and then further in examination the applicant became adamant that Mr Forrest had discussed king pins with him in that employment
interview. On balance, I prefer the evidence given by Mr Forrest on this point.
I have had regard to the evidence of Mr Whitehead. That evidence, however, is of little assistance to me. Mr Whitehead does not hold
a multi-combination licence, he is not qualified in the operation of the type of combination involved in the incident nor is he a
qualified mechanic. Mr Whitehead was not at the scene of the incident on 9 March 2009 nor was he involved in the ICAM meeting and
investigation on 11 March 2009. Mr Whitehead did not inspect the equipment after the incident. Where there is a conflict between
Mr Whitehead’s evidence and that of the respondent’s witnesses, I prefer the evidence of the respondent’s witnesses.
I am satisfied on the material before me that the respondent conducted a thorough investigation of the incident. The applicant, with
his union representative, attended the ICAM meeting. During the ICAM meeting all issues associated with the incident were discussed
in what I would view to be a transparent and open process. The applicant participated in that process. There was a conflict in the
applicant’s evidence of what was said during the ICAM meeting to that of the respondent’s witnesses. The evidence given
by the respondent’s witnesses on this point, in my view, was more consistent to that of the applicant. Therefore, on balance,
I prefer the evidence given by the respondent’s witnesses.
In the meeting on 13 March 2009 the findings of the ICAM meeting was put to the applicant for his response. After the applicant had
responded to the allegations put to him by Mr Hodgson the meeting was adjourned for a period of approximately 20 to 30 minutes. Mr
Hodgson returned to the meeting and provided to the applicant the letter of termination. I accept Mr Hodgson’s evidence of
the discussion during this meeting. In his affidavit the applicant outlines a different version of the discussion and duration of
that meeting. In cross examination the applicant recalled very little of the discussion and stated that at the time he was not thinking
straight. The applicant did, however, acknowledge that there was a break in the meeting prior to his termination of employment and
that the termination letter was not given to him at the commencement of the meeting. I am satisfied that the applicant had every
opportunity during the meeting on 13 March 2009 to provide to the respondent his response to the allegations put to him. Further,
the applicant’s union representative attended the meeting with him.
In conclusion, for the reasons stated above, I am satisfied that there was a valid reason for the termination of the applicant’s
employment on the basis of his conduct, which was the cause of the incident on 9 March 2009. I am satisfied that the applicant was
notified of the reason for his termination and provided with an opportunity to respond to those reasons. Paragraphs (d) to (f) of
ss.652(3) of
are not relevant to the matter before me. I have also had regard to Ms Raju’s submission in relation to the applicant’s
age and difficulties in obtaining alternative employment. Those factors, however, do not persuade me that the applicant’s termination
was harsh, unjust or unreasonable in the circumstances of the case.
I am satisfied and so determine that the termination of the applicant’s employment on 13 March 2009 by the respondent was not
harsh, unjust or unreasonable. The applicant’s application is dismissed. An order reflecting this decision will issue separately.
BY THE COMMISSION:
COMMISSIONER
Appearances
, Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union, for the applicant.
, National IR Consultant, for the respondent.
Hearing details:
September, 14 and 15.
Attachment to Form R27.
Exhibit A1 at paragraph 40.
Exhibit A1 at paragraphs 10 to 14.
Ibid. at paragraphs 19 and 20.
Applicant’s affidavit at paragraph 28.
PN200; PN201.
PN225 to PN228.
PN229 to PN353.
PN350; PN353.
Mr Robert Merrick, Exhibit R 5 at paragraph 14.
Mr Bower, Exhibit R6 at paragraph 24.
PN365; PN366.
PN373 to PN376.
Exhibit R5 at paragraph 15(d).
PN970; N971.
Exhibit R3 at Attachment B, pages 10 and 11.
PN708 to PN711.
Exhibit R2 at paragraph 4.
Exhibit R2 at paragraphs 9 and 10.
Ibid. at paragraph 12.
Ibid. at paragraph 16.
Ibid. at paragraphs 21 to 24.
Exhibit A3.
PN1470; PN1472.
PN1460; PN1461.
Exhibit A4.
Exhibit R3 at paragraph 12.
Ibid. at paragraph 14.
Ibid. at Annexure A.
Exhibit R4 at paragraphs 7 to 9.
Ibid. at paragraph 23 (a).
PN1729; PN1731.
Exhibit R5 at paragraphs 1 and 2.
Ibid. at paragraphs 6 to 10.
PN2025 to PN2028.
Exhibit R6 at paragraphs 12 to 14.
Ibid. at paragraph 15 (f).
Ibid. at paragraph 18.
Exhibit R7 at paragraph 4.
Ibid. at paragraph 7.
Ibid. at paragraph 10.
PN2406 to PN2410.
Exhibit A1 at Annexure C at page 3 of 23.
Ibid at page 1 1of 23
Ibid at page 10 of 23.
PN710 to PN712.
Exhibit R2 at paragraph 10.
Exhibit A1 at paragraph 18.
Exhibit A1 at paragraph 5.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR990962>
No downloadable files available