Borambola Wines Pty Ltd v The DOTT Developments Pty Ltd [2025] ATMO 218 (24 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by Borambola
Wines Pty Ltd to registration of trade mark application numbers 2385194
ON THE TUCKERBOX
and 2385250
DOG ON THE TUCKERBOX and Dog on a tuckerbox
both in classes 16, 18, 25, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 35 and 43 and both in
the name of The DOTT Developments Pty Ltd
Anne Makrigiorgos
REPRESENTATION:
Self represented
Ed Heerey of Kings Counsel and Joe Petry of Counsel
instructed by Moulis Legal
2025 ATMO 218
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) – oppositions under
pursued – no ground of
opposition established – trade marks to proceed to registration.
is a decision in respect of oppositions under
Trade Marks Act
by Borambola Wines
’) to registration of the following trade
mark applications (‘
Applications
’) filed on 31 August 2023
Relevant Date
’) in the name of The DOTT Developments Pty
Specification
DOG ON THE TUCKERBOX
: Publicity leaflets (flyers); Brochures; Artists' sketch
books; Books for celebrating important events; Books for colouring purposes;
Visitors' books; Magazines (periodicals); Cardboard articles for pets; Cards;
Coloring books; Coloring pictures; Gift boxes; Gift
cards of paper; Newsletters;
Printed materials for advertising purposes; Printed matter relating to pet
animals; Travel guide books;
Travel guides in the form of printed matter
: Bags; Bags made of imitation leather; Bags made of
leather; Coats for animals; Coats for dogs; Collars for dogs; Coverings for
Covers for animals; Collars for animals; Costumes for animals; Fancy
dress costumes for animals; Harness fittings; Harness for animals;
Harness made
from imitation leather; Harness made from leather; Harness straps; Belt pouches;
Pack frames including straps, pads
and belts; Leather belts (shoulder); Leather
shoulder belts; Shoulder belts; Shoulder belts (straps), of leather; Wallets for
to belts; Webbed belts (harnesses); Dog waste bag dispensers adapted
for use with leashes; Non-electronic training aids for animals
harnesses, leashes, muzzles); Leashes for animals; Leather leashes; Clothes for
animals; Clothing for canine animals; Articles
of clothing for animals; Rugs for
animals (clothing); Leg pads being protective clothing for animals; Faeces
collection bags for
dogs and horses (animal clothing); Travel baggage; Travel
: Apparel (clothing, footwear, headgear); Articles of
clothing made from wool; Articles of clothing made of fur; Articles of clothing
made of hides; Articles of clothing made of imitation leather; Articles of
clothing made of leather; Articles of clothing made of
plush; Clothing; Clothing
for babies; Girls' clothing; Gloves (clothing); Golf clothing (other than
gloves); Sports clothing (other
than golf gloves); Halters (clothing); Headbands
(clothing); Hoods (clothing); Infants' clothing; Interlinings for clothing;
(clothing); Jerseys (clothing); Kerchiefs (clothing); Knitted clothing;
Knitwear (clothing); Ladies clothing; Latex clothing
: Cheese; Cheese products; Cheese based products containing
fruit puree; Cheese in the form of dips; Cheese spreads; Fruit jelly spreads;
Fruit spread; Nut-based spreads; Fruit jams; Jams; Fruit based snack food; Fruit
chips; Fruit compote; Fruit concentrates; Fruit
conserves; Fruit contained in
syrup; Fruit creams; Fruit marmalade; Canned fruits; Fruit, preserved; Preserved
fruits; Fruit, processed;
Fruits (processed)
: Bakery products; Chocolate; Chocolate bars; Chocolate
based products; Chocolate beverages; Chocolate beverages with milk; Chocolate
biscuits; Chocolate cake; Chocolate candy with fillings; Frozen lollipops; Ice
lollies; Iced lollies; Bakery confectionery being
chilled; Bakery confectionery
being frozen; Lollipops (confectionery); Confectionery; Confectionery bars;
Confectionery chocolate
products; Flavoured sugar confectionery; Flour
confectionery; Fruit confectionery; Lozenges (confectionery); Honey; Honeys;
spreads (honey); Natural honey
: Aromatic sand (litter) for pets; Beverages for pets; Pet
animals; Pelleted pet food; Pet food; Sand for pet toilets; Sanded paper
(litter) for pets; Bones for dogs; Chewing bones for dogs; Dog biscuits; Canned
foods for dogs; Dog food; Dry processed food for
dogs; Food for dogs; Fresh meat
for dogs; Processed meat for dogs
: Beer; Alcohol-free beer; Beer hampers; Ginger beer
(alcoholic); Ginger beer; Fruit beers; Beer-based cocktails; Colas; Energy
Fruit based drinks; Carbonated non-alcoholic drinks; Ginger beer
(non-alcoholic); Non-alcoholic beer; Non-alcoholic beers; Non-alcoholic
Soft drinks; Sorbets (beverages); Stout; Carbonated water; Waters (beverages);
Non-alcoholic beverages (except non-alcoholic
beer); Non-alcoholic beverages;
Non-alcoholic beer-based cocktails; Non-alcoholic cocktails; Cocktails,
non-alcoholic
: Alcohol for drinking; Alcoholic beverages containing
fruit; Alcoholic beverages, except beer; Distilled alcoholic beverages; Fruit
based alcoholic beverages; Liquors (alcoholic beverages); Pre-mixed alcoholic
beverages, other than beer-based; Carbonated beverages
(alcoholic, except
beers); Alcoholic cocktails; Low alcohol cocktails; Blended whisky; Bourbon
whisky; Malt whisky; Whisky; Brandy;
Gin; Rum; Vodka; Alcoholic beverages
containing wine; Blended wine; Wine; Wine-based beverages; Wine hampers; Low
alcohol spirits;
Spirit based cocktails (spirits predominating); Spirits
(beverages); Still spirits; Brandy based liqueurs; Liqueurs
: Arranging business shows; Arranging exhibitions for
advertising purposes; Arranging exhibitions for business purposes; Arranging
exhibitions for commercial purposes; Arranging exhibitions for trade purposes;
Promotion of goods through influencers; Influencer
marketing; Marketing; Outdoor
advertising; Outdoor advertising services; Promotional marketing; Provision of
advertising space; Rental
of advertising space; Online retail services; Retail
services provided in online virtual environments; Retail services; Retail
relating to bakery products; Retail services provided by convenience
stores; Retail services for goods (by any means); Retail services
for works of
art provided by art galleries; The bringing together, for the benefit of others,
a variety of goods (excluding the transport
thereof), enabling customers to
conveniently view and purchase the goods; Wholesaling of goods (by any
: Accommodation finding services for tourists; Accommodation
reservation services; Arranging for the provision of drink; Arranging
provision of food; Arranging for the provision of meals; Arranging holiday
accommodation; Arranging of temporary accommodation;
Arranging temporary
lodgings; Arranging of wedding receptions (food and drink); Arranging of wedding
receptions (venues); Bar services;
Coffee bar and coffee house services
(provision of food and drink); Wine bar services; Bistro services; Boarding for
animals; Cafe
services; Cafes; Cafeteria services; Cafeterias; Caravan parks;
Provision of caravan park facilities; Coffee shop services; Arranging
accommodation; Hotel accommodation services; Hotels; Ice cream parlour services;
Boarding kennel services; Kennel boarding
services for pets; Motel services;
Providing temporary accommodation
Applicant’s Goods and Services
Device Mark
Applicant’s Goods and Services
Applications were examined and advertised as accepted for possible registration
on 1 February 2024.
27 March 2024, the Opponent filed Notices of Intention to Oppose and on 26 April
2024, filed identical Statements of Grounds and
Particulars
’). The Applicant filed Notices of Intention to Defend
on 6 May 2024.
Opponent and the Applicant filed identical evidence in respect of both
oppositions. The Opponent’s Evidence in Support (‘
was filed on 9 August 2024. The Applicant’s Evidence in Answer
’) was filed on 15 November 2024. The Opponent’s
Evidence in Reply (‘
’) was filed on 24 March 2025.
parties were given the opportunity to either request an oral hearing or to file
written submissions. The parties requested an
oral hearing by video conference.
The Opponent filed written submissions on the 914 Mark on 19 September 2025
prepared by Timothy
McMullen of the Opponent. No written submission were filed
by the Opponent on the 250 Mark. The Applicant filed written submissions
Applications prepared by Ed Heerey of Kings Counsel and Joe Petry of Counsel on
26 September 2025. At the hearing Timothy
McMullen appeared on behalf of the
Opponent and Ed Heerey and Joe Petry instructed by Shaun Creighton and Kumudu
Ramasundara of Moulis
Legal (observed by Brendan Price of the Applicant)
appeared on the Applicant’s behalf. I have decided these matters based on
the particulars set out in the SGPs, the evidence of the parties and the written
and oral submissions of the parties.
Grounds and onus
SGPs nominate grounds of opposition under
The Opponent carries the burden of establishing one or more of the grounds of
on the balance of
probabilities.
The date at which
the rights of the parties are to be determined is the Relevant Date, which is
also the priority date for the purposes
parties filed the following evidence in this matter:
Declarant and Position
Annexures or Exhibits
Tim McMullen, Director, co-owner and co-founder of the Opponent
1 to 35 including Confidential 13, 14 and 35
Brendan Price, Director of the Applicant (‘
BP-1 to BP-17
Tim McMullen (‘
Summary of EIS
provides a history of the Opponent’s business. In 1995, Mr McMullen, in
partnership with his wife, established a vineyard
at Borambola Homestead in the
Gundagai region of New South Wales to produce locally grown wine. In 2011 the
Opponent was incorporated
to run the business.
claims the Opponent manufactures and sells wine, beer and cider
Opponent’s Goods
’) in Australia and internationally
in China, other parts of Asia and Scandinavia.
states that the Opponent’s wines and business have received numerous
awards at various regional shows, exhibiting a
list of thirty awards for wines
from 2001 to 2012 and ten for the Opponent’s business from 2016 to
provides information regarding Gundagai and the Dog on the Tuckerbox statue,
exhibiting a Wikipedia page dated 17 July 2024.
I note the page states that the
Dog on the Tuckerbox is ‘an Australian historical monument and tourist
attraction’ erected
in 1926, located at Snake Gully, five miles (eight
kilometers) from Gundagai.
Adoption and use of Tuckerbox
attests that the Opponent adopted the sister brand Tuckerbox & Co., for a
range of beers in 2012, craft ciders in 2014
and wines in 2015, to capitalise on
the connection between the Dog on the Tuckerbox and Gundagai and to communicate
the source of
ingredients used for the production of the Opponent’s Goods.
Below are examples of the Opponent’s wine labels:
beer labels:
and cider labels:
The first cider label references the domain tuckerboxbeer.com.au.
provides details of the Opponent’s trade mark registrations
Registrations
’), which appear
Priority Date
Tuckerbox Word Mark
Class 33: Wine
Tuckerbox Beer
Tuckerbox Beer Mark
Class 32: Beer
Class 33: Alcoholic beverages (except beer)
explains that in 2014, the Opponent obtained an assignment of registration
991395 from Yarraman Estate Pty Limited (‘
claims that Yarraman had used the Tuckerbox Word Mark from 2004 for wine.
McMullen provides no evidence of use by Yarraman.
initially defines the TUCKERBOX trade mark as the ‘TUCKERBOX
but later in the
declaration defines the Tuckerbox Word Mark, the Tuckerbox Beer Mark and the
following trade marks:
‘TUCKERBOX Brand’.
this decision, I shall refer to these four trade marks as the
Tuckerbox Marks
claims that the Opponent has continuously used the Tuckerbox Marks in Australia
and overseas since 2012 in connection with
the Opponent’s Goods.
declares that the Tuckerbox Marks have been used on the Opponent’s Goods,
packaging of the Opponent’s Goods,
displays, invoices, receipts and
marketing collateral. McMullen exhibits examples of invoices, receipts and
purchase orders issued
between 2014 to 2024. I note that the majority of the
invoices, receipts and purchase orders are for beer and cider rather than wine
and a number of receipts and purchase orders are dated after the Relevant Date.
I also note that none of the invoices, receipts and
purchase orders make any
reference to the Tuckerbox Beer Mark or the Dog Device Marks.
attests that the Opponent’s Goods are available from:
Australian retail stores and restaurants Australia wide with stockists including
major retail chains such as Dan Murphys,
BWS, IGA and Bottlemart. There is no
indication of the location of any of these major retail chains nor whether all
or only some
of these major retail chains stock any or all of the
Opponent’s Goods;
seventy-six
establishments that offer alcoholic beverages. I note that the location for
these establishments (ascertained from the
name of the establishments as
locations are not provided) all appear to be rural;
Opponent’s website at https://borambola.com (‘
Borambola Wines
Cellar Door located in the Borombola Homestead. No indication of the numbers of
consumers which visit the Borambola
Wines Cellar Door are
Sales and advertising expenditure
provides approximate confidential annual numbers of sales of beer and cider
cartons (containing 24 items) from 2013 to 2024
and wine boxes (containing 12
items) from 2014 to 2024 and the approximate revenue for all sales from 2013 to
2024. McMullen also
provides approximate confidential advertising and
promotional expenditure from 2013 to 2024. Given that the Opponent’s Goods
are sold in Australia and internationally, the sales, revenue and advertising
figures do not provide any indication of the percentage
of sales, revenue and
advertising attributable to Australia.
Advertising and promotion
provides examples of advertising and promotion of the Opponent’s Goods as
Morning Show
weather segment on 3 March 2022 and Channel 7
weather segment on 30 April 2021 exhibiting a photograph claimed to
be from 3 March 2022 (which photograph refers to
Weekend Sunrise
photograph dated 30 April 2021. Both photographs show the Opponent’s Goods
but only cider and beer is branded with any
of the Tuckerbox Marks. No
indication of viewer numbers for these segments are provided;
Website exhibiting screenshots of the website including Wayback Machine
screenshots dated between 2014 and 2017.
Notably none of the screenshots show
any wines branded with any of the Tuckerbox Marks. Further, no metrics such as
visitor numbers
or page views are provided;
third party
websites exhibiting screenshots or photographs dated after the Relevant Date
from the websites of Dan Murphy, BWS and
Knights Riverina (where I note
reference to beer and cider branded with the Tuckerbox Marks excluding the
Tuckerbox Beer Mark) and
Wine Culture, Vivino, Your Wines and Tony’s
Cellars (where I note reference to wines branded with the Tuckerbox Marks again
excluding the Tuckerbox Beer Mark);
articles dated 2015 and 2016 appearing in
The Daily Advertiser
indication of readership is provided;
pricelists,
receipts, banners, posters, flyers, flags and labels exhibiting mostly undated
examples of these materials. The dated
materials consist of proofs of Tuckerbox
labels for cider and beer dated 2021 and 2022. I note reference to the domain
tuckerboxbeer.com.au
on beer and cider labels and banners;
Facebook and
Instagram posts exhibiting posts from 2014 to 2020 and a number of posts dated
after the Relevant Date. No follower numbers
are provided;
photographs of displays in Dan Murphys and BWS of the Opponent’s Goods
branded with the Tuckerbox Marks excluding the
Tuckerbox Beer Mark;
photographs taken at the Gears & Beers festival where beer and cider branded
with the Tuckerbox Marks excluding the Tuckerbox
Beer Mark were available on
exhibiting photographs dated 2022 from two unnamed markets selling beer and
cider branded with the Tuckerbox Marks excluding
the Tuckerbox Beer
Summary of EIA
to Mr Price, in 2019, the Applicant became Cootamundra Gundagai Regional
Council’s (‘
’) preferred redeveloper of a site
in which The Dog on the Tuckerbox statue is located (‘
also exercising an option to purchase the Site from the Council subject to a
number of conditions including preservation
and enhancement of The Dog on the
Tuckerbox statue in September 2021.
states that from the time the Applicant secured the option to purchase the Site,
the intention was that the Applicant uses the
Word Mark and a Dog on the
Tuckerbox logo in connection with:
redevelopment of the Site;
developing,
marketing and selling food and other consumer goods; and
tourism-related services.
attests that a masterplan was completed by the Applicant and approved by the
Council in May 2021. Price describes further steps
taken by the Applicant with
Council and other relevant parties concerning the redevelopment of the Site.
Price states that in August 2021, he and the Applicant’s Assistant
Executive Manager Nicole Ciaccia conducted searches of
the Register of Trade
Marks for any pre-existing trade marks which could be deemed substantially
identical or deceptively similar
to the words The Dog on the Tuckerbox. Mr Price
claims that these searches did not identify any registered trade marks
a Dog on the Tuckerbox. The only trade marks identified in the search
were two trade mark applications for a DOG ON THE TUCKERBOX
GUNDAGAI & dog
device which lapsed in 1987.
exhibits a copy of a letter from Tim McMullen dated 20 September 2022 given to
Mr Price, pledging his support for the proposed
redevelopment of the Dog on the
Tuckerbox site.
states that in early 2023, the Applicant engaged Foundry and Co to design a Dog
on the Tuckerbox logo. Price exhibits a copy
of a branding deck dated July 2023
and visual identity manual dated August 2023 produced by the Foundry Co. Price
also claims that
as part of the branding strategy, the Applicant created or
obtained a number of social media accounts.
attests that the Applicant was aware of the of the Opponent’s business,
the Tuckerbox Word Mark and the Dog Device trade
marks at the time of applying
for registration of the Trade Marks. However, Mr Price considered the Trade
Marks sufficiently different
to these marks such that the marks could co-exist
without confusion.
filing the Applications, Price claims the Applicant has provided the branding
deck to design companies, companies that may develop
Dog on the Tuckerbox
branded packaging and labelling, parties interested in leasing space at the
redeveloped complex, and companies
that may build and provide accommodation at
the redeveloped complex.
Summary of EIR
2 states that while the Opponent supports the redevelopment of the Site, the
Opponent does not agree to the use by the Applicant
of the Trade Marks or marks
similar to the Tuckerbox Marks in respect of class 32 and 33 goods.
2 declares that the Opponent has no issue with the Applicant’s intended
use of the Trade Marks on dog food.
Discussion and Reasons
relevantly provides (some notes omitted):
Identical etc. trade
(1) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), an application for the
registration of a trade mark (
applicant’s trade mark
respect of goods (
applicant’s goods
) must be rejected
(a) the applicant’s trade mark is substantially identical with, or
deceptively similar to:
(i) a trade mark registered by another person in respect of similar goods or
closely related services; or
(ii) a trade mark whose registration in respect of similar goods or closely
related services is being sought by another person; and
(b) the priority date for the registration of the applicant’s trade
mark in respect of the applicant’s goods is not earlier
than the priority
date for the registration of the other trade mark in respect of the similar
goods or closely related services.
Note 1: For
deceptively similar
section 10.
Note 2: For
similar goods
subsection 14(1).
(2) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), an application for the
registration of a trade mark (
applicant’s trade mark
respect of services (
applicant’s services
) must be rejected
(a) it is substantially identical with, or deceptively similar to:
(i) a trade mark registered by another person in respect of similar services
or closely related goods; or
(ii) a trade mark whose registration in respect of similar services or
closely related goods is being sought by another person; and
(b) the priority date for the registration of the applicant’s trade
mark in respect of the applicant’s services is not
earlier than the
priority date for the registration of the other trade mark in respect of the
similar services or closely related
Note 1: For
deceptively similar
section 10.
Note 2: For
similar services
subsection 14(2).
SGPs nominate the Registrations under this ground. However, in the
Opponent’s written submissions Mr McMullen stated that
the Opponent wished
to formally oppose the registration of the Tuckerbox Word Mark in relation to
wine, beer and cider. Given this,
the objection under the
ground and the
other grounds, need only be considered in respect of the Applicant’s Goods
‘wine, beer and cider’.
successfully oppose the Application pursuant to
, the Opponent must
establish each of the following requirements:
one or more of
the Registrations have a priority date which is earlier than the Relevant Date
and are held in a name other than that
of the Applicant (‘
requirement
the Trade Marks
are substantially identical with or deceptively similar to one of more of the
Registrations (‘
second requirement
Applicant’s claim to wine, beer and cider are similar or closely related
to the goods of one or more of the Registrations
requirement
am satisfied that the priority date of both Registrations are earlier than the
Relevant Date and that the Registrations are in a
name other than the Applicant.
I am also satisfied that the goods wine, beer and cider are the same or closely
related to the goods
of the Opponent’s Registrations, noting that the
Tuckerbox Word Mark claims wine and the Tuckerbox Beer Mark claims beer and
non-alcoholic beverages, which would include non alcoholic cider. Therefore, the
first and third requirements are satisfied.
move then to consider whether the Trade Marks are substantially identical with
or deceptively similar to either of the Registrations.
Opponent’s written and oral submissions only refer to the Tuckerbox Word
Mark being deceptively similar, the SGPs
claim that both Registrations are
earlier similar trade marks and therefore I will consider both substantial
identity and deceptive
similarity.
is convenient to confine my discussion to a comparison of the Tuckerbox Word
Mark and the Word Mark, the rationale being that if
I find that the Word Mark is
not substantially identical with or deceptively similar to the Tuckerbox Word
Mark, logic dictates that
the same conclusion will apply to a comparison of
Tuckerbox Beer
Mark and the Word Mark;
Tuckerbox Word
Mark and the Device Mark; and
Tuckerbox Beer
Mark and the Device Mark;
given that the Tuckerbox Beer
Mark and the Device Mark have additional points of dissimilarity.
starting point of an analysis as to whether trade marks are substantially
identical is the well-known dicta of Windeyer J in
Shell Co of Australia Ltd
v Esso Standard Oil (Australia) Ltd
’), where his
Honour stated:
In considering whether marks are substantially
identical they should, I think, be compared side by side, their similarities and
differences
noted and the importance of these assessed having regard to the
essential features of the registered mark and the total impression
resemblance or dissimilarity that emerges from the
comparison.
if a total impression of similarity emerges from a comparison between the two
marks, the marks are ‘substantially identical’.
Whether there is
substantial identity is a question of
table below shows the comparison of the
Tuckerbox Word Mark
Dog on the Tuckerbox
Applicant submits that comparing these marks side by side, having regard to
their similarities and differences, a total impression
of similarity does not
emerge. I agree with the Applicant. Therefore, I do not consider the Word Mark
to be substantially identical
with the Tuckerbox Word Mark.
move to consider whether the Word Mark is deceptively similar to the Tuckerbox
provides a definition of deceptively similar being that
‘a trade mark is taken to be deceptively similar to another trade mark
it so nearly resembles that other trade mark that it is likely to deceive or
cause confusion’.
Windeyer outlined the following approach for the assessment of deceptive
similarity in
On the question of deceptive similarity
a different comparison must be made from that which is necessary when
substantial identity
is in question. The marks are not now to be looked at side
by side. The issue is not abstract similarity, but deceptive similarity.
Therefore the comparison is the familiar one of trade mark law. It is between,
on the one hand, the impression based on recollection
of the plaintiff's mark
that persons of ordinary intelligence and memory would have; and, on the other
hand, the impressions that
such persons would get from the defendant's
respective trade marks must be compared as
having regard to
essential or distinguishing
and considering the
marks visually and aurally, and in the context of the relevant surrounding
circumstances.
What must be
considered is the overall impression that the notional buyer, being a person of
ordinary intelligence and memory, would
likely have of the Word Mark and the
Tuckerbox Word Mark, having regard to the look, sound, and ideas conveyed by the
marks, and allowing for imperfect
recollection.
Southern Cross Refrigerating Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty Ltd
noted the following regarding the risk of deception or
While a mere possibility of confusion is not enough - for
there must be a real, tangible danger of its occurring - it is sufficient
result of the user of the mark will be that a number of persons will be caused
to wonder whether it might not be the case
that the two products come from the
same source. It is enough if the ordinary person entertains a reasonable
implies the creation of an incorrect belief or mental impression; ‘causing
confusion’ may merely involve ‘perplexing
or mixing up the
minds’ of potential
presence of a common element is not conclusive to a finding of deceptive
similarity.
In relation to the
comparison of marks, the Full Court said in
Starr Partners Pty Ltd v Dev Prem
The first step in the analysis is to identify the
impression produced by the registered mark considered in its entirety.
is not based on only part of the registered mark. On the other hand,
when one decides upon the impression produced by that mark it
is not improper to
give more or less weight to particular features of it, provided the ultimate
conclusion is based on a consideration
of the mark in its entirety. This
approach does no more than recognise that one word or feature of a mark can be
more striking and
memorable than
commonality of idea is part of the process of determining whether the marks look
or sound alike. In
Cooper Engineering Co Pty Ltd v Sigmund Pumps Ltd
High Court observed:
[t]he fact that two marks convey the same idea
is not sufficient in itself to create a deceptive resemblance between them,
this fact could be taken into account in deciding whether two marks
which really looked alike or sounded alike were likely to
French expressed the view in
Registrar of Trade Marks v
that the determination of whether,
and to what degree, an applicant’s goods or services are similar to, or
closely related to,
the relevant goods or services of the earlier trade mark
owner is ‘logically antecedent to’ assessing the similarity
parties’ trade marks. In particular, French J explicitly approved the
observation in Wilcox J’s first instance
decision in
that, ‘[t]he closer the relationship between the services and
particular goods, the more likely any similarity in marks will
deceptive’.
light of the authorities, I must decide whether there is a real, tangible danger
of deception or confusion by reason of the use
of the Word Mark, having regard
to the imperfect recollection of the notional consumer. That is not to be judged
by a side by side
comparison of the Word Mark and the Tuckerbox Word Mark. I
must compare the marks as wholes, visually and aurally considering all
elements with regard to essential or distinguishing features, in the context of
the relevant surrounding circumstances. Of
importance is the effect and meaning
of the trade marks, particularly their effect or impression produced on the mind
of ordinary
Opponent’s written submission state that the Tuckerbox Word Mark covers
‘wine, beer and cider’ and has been
used both locally and nationally
in Australia. The Opponent submits that the Word Mark is deceptively similar to
the Tuckerbox Word
Mark particularly given that both brands reference the word
Tuckerbox and the dog iconography. Consumers are likely to believe that
marketed under the Word Mark originate from, are associated with, or are
endorsed by the Opponent, creating a strong risk of
marketplace confusion.
Opponent also submits that the Tuckerbox Word Mark is strongly associated with
the historic tourist site at Gundagai. The signage
at the site itself references
both the Word Mark and the Tuckerbox Word Mark and many visitors colloquially
refer to the site as
The Dog. Thus, the use of Word Mark for alcoholic beverages
would be perceived as related to the Tuckerbox Word Mark.
Applicant submits that the Opponent’s use of its wider brands such as the
word TUCKERBOX with dogs or dog iconography are
irrelevant to the
The Tuckerbox Word Mark and the Tuckerbox Beer Mark, on their face, have nothing
to do with dogs or dog iconography. The
notional buyer, equipped with no
knowledge of the Applicant’s brand, would not draw an association between
those marks and
dogs and nor does the Applicant lead any evidence to suggest
otherwise. Further, the Opponent relies on a purported association between
word Tuckerbox and the Dog on the Tuckerbox historic tourist site. The Opponent
leads no evidence to support these contentions.
The Applicant submits that there
is nothing to suggest that the Tuckerbox Word Mark would cause the notional
buyer to think of the
Dog on the Tuckerbox memorial or Gundagai. Again, the
Opponent’s brand and any reputation residing in it are irrelevant to
High Court in
Self Care IP Holdings Pty Ltd v Allergan Australia Pty
conveniently
stated the relevant principles of deceptive similarity, which were summarised in
The Agency Group Australia Limited v H.A.S. Real Estate Pty
One such principle is
that the notional buyer is a person with no knowledge about any actual use of
the registered mark, the actual
business of the owner of the registered mark,
the goods the owner produces, any acquired distinctiveness from the use of the
prior to filing, or any reputation associated with the registered
Thus I agree with the
Applicant that the Opponent’s submissions regarding the Opponent’s
use of the Tuckerbox Word Mark,
the parties’ brands referencing the word
Tuckerbox and the dog iconography and the strong association of the Tuckerbox
Mark with the historic tourist site at Gundagai are not relevant for the
purposes of assessing deceptive similarity. These are matters
extraneous to the
Tuckerbox Word Mark. The correct approach is to compare the impression (allowing
for imperfect recollection) that
the notional buyer would have of the Tuckerbox
Word Mark (as notionally used on Opponent’s Goods), with the impression
the notional buyer would have of notional and normal fair use of the Word
Mark anywhere in Australia.
Opponent submits that the word Tuckerbox is the dominant and distinctive feature
of the Trade Marks and the words ‘Dog on
the’ ‘do not do
much’. In particular, these words do not mitigate risk, rather they
enhance the risk because of
the famous Dog on the Tuckerbox statue. The word
Tuckerbox is wholly incorporated in the Trade Marks and is the core invented
likely to be remembered.
Applicant submits that the word Tuckerbox is the essential feature and the only
element of the Tuckerbox Word Mark: it is the
idea which the mark will naturally
suggest to the mind of one who sees it. Tuckerbox evokes an image of a box for
carrying food.
One cannot import a reference to a dog at all from the word
Tuckerbox. By contrast, the phrase Dog on the Tuckerbox in the Trade
creates a distinct ‘look, length and sound’, unique to those marks.
None of these essential features of the Trade
Marks are present in the Tuckerbox
Word Mark. Further, the words ‘Dog on the’, being the first and
primary words in the
Trade Marks totally change how the marks sound, and the
meaning they convey, when spoken.
my view, the Word Mark is not deceptively similar to the Tuckerbox Word Mark.
Visually and aurally, I consider the respective marks
compared as a whole are
significantly different. The Word Mark consists of four words and the Tuckerbox
Word Mark of one. The Word
Mark contains, at the beginning of the mark, the
three words – DOG, ON and THE. These three words at the beginning of the
Mark cannot be ignored and neither would a notional consumer ignore these
words and focus solely on the terminating word of the Word
sole word in the Tuckerbox Word Mark is the word Tuckerbox. As the
Applicant’s submissions state, the word Tuckerbox is
defined as ‘any
box used to hold food’.
The impression retained by a notional consumer is simply that solitary word with
a well known meaning. When viewed as a whole, the
ideas and impressions formed
by the two trade marks differ, visually, aurally and conceptually. While there
is a degree of visual
and aural similarity in that both marks contain the word
Tuckerbox, this alone is not enough to establish that the Word Mark is
deceptively
similar to the Tuckerbox Word Mark. The fact that one trade mark is
incorporated in another is by itself not sufficient to make the
trade marks
deceptively similar. In some cases, such as this, a trade mark conveys an
overall conceptual meaning sufficiently different
from another trade mark which
is contained within it, such that the trade marks are not deceptively similar.
There are a number of
factors that are relevant to this consideration, including
most importantly, whether the additional element changes the idea and
of the mark as a whole. Here the additional elements – ‘Dog on
the’ clearly do.
question is whether there is a real tangible risk that the result of the use of
the Word Mark will be that a reasonable person
will be caused to wonder whether
it might not be the case that goods and services bearing the Word Mark are from
the same source
as the Opponent’s Goods bearing the Tuckerbox Word Mark.
This consideration is not concerned with the mere possibility of deception
confusion between trade marks but a real, tangible danger of it occurring.
consideration of the differences in the respective marks, taken together, and
even allowing for imperfect recollection, as a
matter of impression and common
sense they generate an overall visual, aural and conceptual impression of
difference. A consumer
would not confuse the Tuckerbox Word Mark with the Word
Mark. I find that there does not exist a real, tangible danger of deception
confusion between the two and the
ground is therefore not
established.
provisions of
are reproduced below:
Trade mark similar to
trade mark that has acquired a reputation in Australia
The registration of a trade mark in respect of particular goods or services
may be opposed on the ground that:
(a) another trade mark had, before the priority date for the registration of the
first‑mentioned trade mark in respect of those
goods or services, acquired
a reputation in Australia; and
(b) because of the reputation of that other trade mark, the use of the
first‑mentioned trade mark would be likely to deceive
or cause confusion.
priority date
section 12.
establish this ground, the Opponent must demonstrate the existence of another
trade mark(s) which had acquired a reputation in
Australia before the Relevant
Date. The Opponent must then establish that because of this reputation, use of
the Trade Marks would
be likely to deceive or cause confusion.
SGPs repeat much of the evidence of use of the Opponent’s trade marks
stated in McMullen. In summary and relevantly, the
SGPs state that the Tuckerbox
Marks have acquired a substantial reputation in respect of the Opponent’s
Goods and based on
this reputation, use of the Trade Marks, which are
substantially identical with or deceptively similar to the Tuckerbox Marks, on
the Opponent’s Goods, would cause deception and confusion.
meaning of reputation was considered by Kenny J in
McCormick & Co Inc v
’) as referring to ‘the
recognition of the [trade mark] by the public
generally’.
Kenny J stated in
In practice, it is
commonplace to infer reputation from a high volume of sales, together with
substantial advertising expenditures
and other promotions, without any direct
evidence of consumer appreciation of the mark, as opposed to the product ...
public awareness
of and regard for a mark tends to correlate with appreciation
of the products with which that mark is associated, as evidenced by
volume, amongst other things.
reputation in the other trade mark must be amongst a ‘significant or
substantial’ number of Australian consumers but
this is tempered by the
nature of the relevant market.
Here the relevant market for wine, beer and cider is very broad and as such, is
likely to include most Australian households. Meanwhile,
the ‘existence
and extent of reputation’ must be established as a matter of fact by the
Rodney Jane Racing Pty Ltd v Monster Energy Company
’), it was observed that:
reputation of a trade mark has quantitative and qualitative dimensions. The
quantitative dimension concerns the breadth of the
public that are likely to be
aware of the mark, which can be evidenced by the quantum of sales, advertising
and promotion of goods
or services to which the mark is applied. The qualitative
dimension concerns the image and values projected by the trade mark, which
affects the esteem or favour in which the mark is held by the public
the Opponent bases the
ground on the Tuckerbox Marks, notably, each is
considered a separate trade mark for the purposes of
Opponent submits that the expression The Dog on the Tuckerbox is a cultural and
regional symbol synonymous with Gundagai and its
heritage. Granting a monopoly
over this expression for wine, beer and cider risks restricting other local
businesses from promoting
their products and the Gundagai region through fair
descriptive reference to this icon. Such an outcome would be contrary to the
interests of local industry and the public, effectively privatising a community
and cultural landmark for commercial advantage. These
submissions, however, are
not relevant to the
ground. The confusion and deception contemplated by
must arise as a consequence of the reputation in a trade mark. The
submissions provided by the Opponent have nought to do with any
reputation in
any trade mark.
the Opponent’s oral submissions, the Opponent stated that the
Opponent’s reputation is strong and use of the Trade
Marks will cause
confusion as the Applicant’s wine, beer and cider may be seen as a brand
extension of the Opponent or associated
with the Opponent.
Applicant submits that its use of the Trade Marks is not likely to deceive or
cause confusion as:
the Trade Marks
are not deceptively similar to the Tuckerbox Marks;
the totality of
evidence of the Opponent’s use of the Tuckerbox Marks does not support a
conclusion that any one of those marks
has acquired a reputation in Australia
such that the Applicant’s use of its Trade Marks is likely to deceive or
confuse because
of that reputation; and
Opponent’s evidence is insufficient to prove that the Tuckerbox Marks have
acquired the requisite reputation for the purposes
In particular, the
evidence fails to distinguish between each of the Tuckerbox
are many deficiencies in the Opponent’s evidence and while my summary of
McMullen highlights these deficiencies, the notable
deficiencies are: undated
photographs and evidence dated after the Relevant Date, which are both of
limited value in establishing
a reputation within Australia; unsupported claims
that the Opponent’s Goods are sold in over 3,000 Australian retail stores
and restaurants Australia wide; unsupported claims that Yarraman used the
Tuckerbox Word Mark; no social media or website metrics;
no viewer numbers for
TV segments; no readership numbers for newspaper articles (which are over seven
years old); invoices which
only refer to the Tuckerbox Word Mark and are mainly
for beer and cider; no indication of cellar door numbers; and importantly, no
domestic and international breakdown of sales, revenue and advertising
am aware from my own knowledge that the wine and beer markets in Australia, and
to a lesser degree the cider markets in Australia,
have many different producers
and a very large number of products that are available for sale in the
Australian market. The market
for the Opponent’s Goods is huge. With this
in mind, even if the Opponent’s sales, revenue and advertising costs
solely to Australia, in the massive Australian beer, wine and cider
market, I find that these sales and revenue figures are minimal.
Furthermore,
the Opponent’s advertising costs are also minimal.
respect of the Tuckerbox Beer Mark, I also add that the Opponent’s
evidence only shows use of the words Tuckerbox Beer as
part of the domain name
www.tuckerboxbeer.com.au, which appears on the Opponent’s cider
and on proofs of the
Opponent’s beer and cider labels and
Registration of a
domain name, per se, is not use of a trade mark. In
Sports Warehouse, Inc v
Fry Consulting Pty Ltd
, Kenny J stated:
It is not suggested that
mere registration of a domain name can amount to use of the mark. More must be
shown. Plainly enough, not
all domain names will be used as a sign to
distinguish the goods or services of one trader in the course of trade from the
or services of another trader. Sports Warehouse is correct in its
submission that that whether or not a domain name is used as a
trade mark will
depend on the context in which the domain name is used. In this case, the domain
name is more than an address for
a website, the domain name is also a sign for
the applicant’s online retaining service available at the website. In the
of online services, the public is likely to understand a domain name
consisting of the trade mark (or something very like it) as
a sign for the
online services identified by the trade mark as available at the webpage to
which it carries the internet
Opponent has not provided any evidence that there is an active website at the
domain tuckerboxbeer.com.au. Therefore, for this
additional reason, I do not
find that the Tuckerbox Beer Mark had the necessary reputation at the Relevant
observed by O’Bryan J in
the reputation of
a trade mark has quantitative and qualitative dimensions. In my view, the
Opponent’s evidence of both quantitative
and qualitative dimensions is
lacking. There is insufficient evidence which concerns the image and values
projected by each of the
Tuckerbox Marks and therefore the esteem or favour in
which each of the Tuckerbox Marks are held by the public generally. As a
consequence,
the evidence does not support a conclusion of any reputation in any
of the Tuckerbox Marks, let alone a reputation sufficient to
the market for the Opponent’s Goods includes most, if not all, Australian
households, having considered the totality of
the Opponent’s evidence, I
am not satisfied there is a reputation in any of the Tuckerbox Marks in relation
to the Opponent’s
Goods amongst a ‘significant or substantial’
number of Australian consumers. The Opponent has accordingly not established
ground of opposition under
move then to consider the remaining grounds of opposition in the SGPs, namely
. At the oral hearing, the Opponent did not abandon any
of these grounds. However, the Opponent has also not provided any written
oral submissions for any of these grounds. On the basis that the Opponent has
failed to provide any written or oral submissions,
the Applicant submits that it
is unnecessary for me, as the Registrar’s delegate, to deal with these
grounds in substance.
Rather I should determine that because of the failure to
make submissions the Opponent has failed to meet its onus of persuading
Registrar to uphold the ground. Further, the Applicant submits that the bases of
the remaining grounds in the SGPs are unclear.
In my view, even though the
Opponent has failed to address these grounds in the written or oral submissions,
I find there is sufficiently
clear information in the particulars of the SGPs to
have these grounds considered.
Section 42(b)
provides that a trade mark must be rejected if its use would be contrary
its SGPs, the Opponent simply lists the ‘
Competition and Consumer Act
’) and ‘tort of passing
off.’ The Opponent has not indicated how the Applicant’s use of the
Trade Mark would
contravene any section of the CCA or be considered passing off.
the Opponent intended the
ground to relate to misleading and deceptive
conduct or representations under
and/or 29 of the Australian Consumer Law
(contained in Schedule 2 of the CCA) (‘
’), I consider that
ground would not be established.
Sections 18
of the ACL have
stricter requirements than
which can be established if use is likely to
cause confusion or wonderment. I have already held that the reputation in the
Marks was insufficient to trigger
Where a ground of opposition
is unsuccessful, reputation-based claims under
and/or 29 of the
ACL will also fail.
where use of a trade mark does not contravene
of the ACL neither will it
amount to the tort of passing
am not satisfied that use of the Trade Marks by the Applicant would be contrary
to law. Therefore, the Opponent has not established
the ground of opposition
Applicant not owner of trade mark
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground that the
applicant is not the owner of the trade mark.
right to registration under the Act depends upon ownership of the trade mark and
not ownership by registration
and this requirement must be satisfied at the filing date of the
application.
. Ownership of a
trade mark may be established ‘either by reason of authorship and prior
use or by reason of authorship, filing
the application and an intention to
Authorship in this
context is not predicated on being the first to coin the trade mark, instead it
refers to the first to adopt the
trade mark with an intention of using it in
Australia in respect of the claimed goods and/or
default position under the Act is that the Applicant is prima facie considered
to be the owner of the Trade Marks. Consequently,
it is the Opponent who bears
the evidential onus of establishing otherwise. To succeed under this ground, the
Opponent must establish:
trade mark(s) relied upon by the Opponent is at least substantially identical to
the Trade Mark;
Applicant’s Goods and Services are the ‘same kind of thing’ as
the Opponent’s Goods for which the trade
mark relied upon by the Opponent
have been used;
person other than the Applicant has the earlier claim to ownership based on use
of the trade mark(s) relied upon by the Opponent
prior to whichever is the
earlier of: (a) the application to register or (b) any actual use of the Trade
SGPs provide:
my view, regardless of which of the Tuckerbox Marks the Opponent claims to have
used on the Opponent’s Goods before any use
or filing of the Trade Marks,
given I have already found a lack of substantial identity of the Word Mark with
the Tuckerbox Word
Mark under the
ground, I am satisfied that the Trade
Marks are not substantially identical with any of the Tuckerbox Marks.
Therefore, the Opponent
has not established the ground of opposition under s
relevantly provides (some notes omitted):
Trade mark not
distinguishing applicant’s goods or services
(1) An application for the registration of a trade mark must be rejected if
the trade mark is not capable of distinguishing the applicant’s
services in respect of which the trade mark is sought to be registered (the
designated goods or services
) from the goods or services of other
(2) A trade mark is taken not to be capable of distinguishing the designated
goods or services from the goods or services of other
persons only if either
subsection (3) or (4) applies to the trade mark.
(3) This subsection applies to a trade mark if:
(a) the trade mark is not to any extent inherently adapted to distinguish the
designated goods or services from the goods or services
of other persons;
(b) the applicant has not used the trade mark before the filing date in
respect of the application to such an extent that the trade
mark does in fact
distinguish the designated goods or services as being those of the
(4) This subsection applies to a trade mark if:
(a) the trade mark is, to some extent, but not sufficiently, inherently
adapted to distinguish the designated goods or services from
the goods or
services of other persons; and
(b) the trade mark does not and will not distinguish the designated goods or
services as being those of the applicant having regard
to the combined effect of
the following:
(i) the extent to which the trade mark is inherently adapted to distinguish
the goods or services from the goods or services of other
(ii) the use, or intended use, of the trade mark by the applicant;
(iii) any other circumstances.
Note 1: Trade marks that are not inherently adapted to distinguish goods or
services are mostly trade marks that consist wholly of
a sign that is ordinarily
used to indicate the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, value,
geographical origin, or some other
characteristic, of goods or services
test to determine whether a trade mark is inherently adapted to distinguish was
set out by Justice Kitto in
Clark Equipment Co v
Registrar of Trade Marks
[The] ultimate question must not be
misunderstood. It is not whether the mark will be adapted to distinguish the
registered owner’s
goods if it be registered and other persons
consequently find themselves precluded from using it. The question is whether
considered quite apart from the effects of registration, is such that
by its use the applicant is likely to attain his object of
distinguishing his goods from the goods of others ... the question whether a
mark is adapted to distinguish [is to] be tested
by reference to the likelihood
that other persons, trading in goods of the relevant kind and being actuated
only by proper motives
– in the exercise, that is to say, of the common
right of the public to make honest use of words forming part of the common
heritage, for the sake of the signification which they ordinarily possess
– will think of the word and want to use it in connexion
with similar
goods in any manner which would infringe a registered trade mark granted in
respect of it.
Accor Australia & New Zealand Hospitality Pty Ltd v Liv Pty Ltd
Full Court conveniently summarised the principles in respect of
(1) In deciding whether or not a trade mark is capable of
distinguishing the designated services from the service of others, the first
question is the extent to which the trade mark is inherently adapted to
distinguish the designated services from those of others:
(2) In determining whether a trade mark is inherently adapted to distinguish
the services of a trader, the answer largely depends
upon whether other traders
are likely, in the ordinary course of their businesses and without any improper
motive, to desire to use
the same mark, or some mark nearly resembling it, upon
or in connection with their goods:
Clark Equipment Co v Registrar of Trade
Clark Equipment
[1964] HCA 55
(1964) 111 CLR
per Kitto J at 514.
(3) The question of whether a trade mark is adapted to distinguish the
services of the applicant is to be tested by reference to the
likelihood that
other persons, trading in goods of the relevant kind and being actuated only by
proper motives (in the exercise of
the common right of the public to make honest
use of words forming part of the common heritage for the sake of the
signification
which the words ordinarily possess) will think of the word and
want to use it in connection with similar goods in any manner which
infringe the trade mark once registered:
Clark Equipment
(4) Directly descriptive words, like geographical names, are not prima facie
suitable for the grant of a monopoly conferred by registration
of a trade mark
because use of them, as trade marks, will “rarely eclipse” their
“primary” (that is, their
ordinary) signification. Such words (or a
word) are unlikely to be inherently, that is to say, “in [their] own
adapted to distinguish the applicant’s goods. Traders may
legitimately want to use such words in connection with their goods
or services
“because of the reference they are ‘inherently adapted to
make’ to those goods”:
Cantarella Bros Pty Limited v Modena
Trading Pty Limited
[2014] HCA 48
254 CLR 337
per French CJ, Hayne, Crennan and Kiefel JJ.
(5) The principles derived from the observations of Kitto J in
apply with as much force to directly descriptive words as they do
to words which are, according to their ordinary signification,
geographical
(6) In determining whether a word is (or words are) inherently adapted to
distinguish the goods or services of an applicant, the question
examined from the point of view of the “possible impairment” of the
rights of “honest traders” and
from the “point of view of the
(7) In determining whether a word contains (or words contain) a “direct
reference” to the relevant goods or services (and
thus prima facie not
registrable as a trade mark) or whether the word (or words) makes a
“covert and skilful allusion”
to the relevant goods or services (and
thus prima facie registrable as a trade mark), the “ordinary
signification” of
the word or words to persons who will purchase, consume
or trade in the goods or services, must be considered:
(8) Where the question is whether there are other traders who may
legitimately want to use or apply a word or words in connection
with their goods
or services (other than a geographical name or a surname), the test refers to
the “legitimate desire of other
traders to use a word which is directly
descriptive in respect of the same or similar goods”:
(9) Consistent with the proposition at (7), the test described at (8) does
not encompass the desire of other traders to use a word
or words which in
relation to the goods or services are “allusive or metaphorical”:
(10) In determining whether a trade mark is inherently adapted to distinguish
the designated goods or services for the purposes of
, the ordinary
signification of the word or words are to be considered from the perspective of
“any person in Australia concerned
with the goods or services to which the
trade mark is to be applied”:
(11) Consideration of the “ordinary signification” of any word or
words said to constitute a trade mark is “crucial”:
at [71]. That is so whether the word (or words) is said not to
be registrable because: it is not an invented word and has direct
reference to
the character or quality of the goods or services; or, the word is laudatory;
or, the word is a geographical name; or,
the word has either lost its
distinctiveness or it never had the requisite distinctiveness from the outset:
(12) The process of reasoning in addressing
of the Act involves first
identifying the “ordinary signification” of the word in question and
then undertaking an enquiry
into whether other traders might legitimately need
to use the word in respect of their goods:
at [71]. If a word
contains an allusive reference to goods or services it is, prima facie,
qualified for the grant of a monopoly
as a trade mark under the Act. If, on the
other hand, the word is understood, by the target audience, as having a directly
descriptive
meaning in relation to relevant goods or services then, prima facie,
the proprietor is not entitled to a monopoly in respect of the
general proposition, a word or words which are prima facie entitled to a
monopoly secured by registration as a trade mark
under the Act, according to
this method, are inherently adapted to distinguish:
SGPs relevantly claim as follows:
Applicant submits that the SGPs are inadequate as they fail to specify whether
the opposition is brought under
or (4), and therefore whether the
Opponent alleges the Trade Marks are not ‘to any extent inherently adapted
to distinguish’
or are ‘to some extent, but not sufficiently,
inherently adapted to distinguish’. Accordingly, the SGPs fall foul of
Regulations
and the ground should be dismissed.
the SGPs were filed by the Opponent they were assessed at that time by the
Registrar and considered adequate under reg 5.8. Given
there was no objection by
the Applicant at the time of receiving the SGPs, at this stage of proceedings, I
accept the adequacy of
the SGPs. Further, in my view, I find there is sufficient
information in the SGPs to consider the
Applicant submits that the Opponent has not led evidence to establish the
signification of the Trade Marks to ordinary members
of the public and has
therefore failed to meet its evidential onus and I agree. There is no evidence
before me to support the Opponent’s
claim that the Dog on the Tuckerbox is
an extremely well known statue and tourist attraction or that the Trade Marks
indicate the
Opponent’s Goods concern or relate to the statue. Further
there is no evidence that the Trade Marks are descriptive of the
Opponent’s Goods nor descriptive of the place in which these goods could
be provided (they would clearly not be provided on
a statue) or that other
traders would desire to use the Trade Marks in respect of the Opponent’s
Goods or similar goods. As
the Opponent’s evidence is insufficient to
substantiate this ground, I am not satisfied that the
ground has been
established.
Trade mark likely to deceive or cause
An application for the registration of a trade mark in respect of particular
goods or services must be rejected if, because of some
connotation that the
trade mark or a sign contained in the trade mark has, the use of the trade mark
in relation to those goods or
services would be likely to deceive or cause
establish this ground, the Opponent must show that there is a connotation within
the Trade Marks and, because of this connotation,
the use of the Trade Marks
would be likely to deceive or cause confusion.
SGPs state:
particulars set out in the SGPs suggest that the Trade Marks connote the
geographical origin of Gundagai. I do not agree. Firstly,
Dog on a Tuckerbox is
a statue and not a geographical placename. Secondly, the words Dog on the
Tuckerbox, even to those who aware
of the statue, do not connote Gundagai.
According to the Opponent’s own evidence, the statue is not in Gundagai,
it is in Snake
evidence does not establish that the Trade Marks contain a connotation that is
likely to deceive or cause confusion. Consequently,
opposition is not established.
Section 62A
62A provides:
Application made in bad faith
The registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the ground that the
application was made in bad faith
Federal Court has substantively considered the issue of bad faith in
Consulting Pty Ltd v Sports Warehouse Inc (No
DC Comics v
Cheqout Pty Ltd.
following propositions emerge from these decisions which are relevant to the
present opposition:
Bad faith for
the purposes of s 62A must be [as at the Relevant Date] and must relate to the
making of the subject of that
application.
Bad faith is a
serious allegation that ‘impugns the character of an individual or
collective character of a business’
and requires correspondingly cogent
evidence. The standard of proof is the balance of probabilities, rather than
that of beyond reasonable
Conduct that
falls short of the standards of acceptable commercial behaviour observed by
reasonable and experienced persons in the
particular area is sufficient. Bad
faith does not require
dishonesty.
As stated by
Dodds-Streeton J in
Fry Consulting
Further, in my view, mere
negligence, incompetence or a lack of prudence to reasonable and experienced
standards would not, in themselves,
suffice, as the concept of bad faith imports
conduct which, irrespective of the form it takes, is of an unscrupulous,
underhand or
unconscientious
The registration
of a trade mark is designed to enable bona fide proprietors to protect their
proprietary rights without having to
prove unfair
circumstances surrounding the application to register the mark are
A prior business
connection with and knowledge of the opponent by the applicant such that a
person standing in the shoes of the applicant
should have known that he should
not have applied for a trade mark deceptively similar to that used by the
opponent is sufficient
for a finding of bad
or mere knowledge before the Relevant Date of another person’s trade mark,
without more, does not in itself constitute
a basis for a finding of bad
Opponent bears the onus of establishing that the filing of the Application was
in bad faith and it will not be easily established
given the serious nature of
the allegation.
summary, the SGPs provide that at the Relevant Date, the Opponent was the owner
of the Tuckerbox Marks which had acquired a substantial
reputation. The
Applicant knew or should have known it was not the owner of the Trade Marks. The
Applicant is using or intends to
use the Opponent’s reputation in the
Tuckerbox Marks to sell wine, beer and cider. This conduct falls short of
acceptable commercial
Applicant submits that the Applicant has filed no evidence that suggests the
Applications were made in bad faith. Further, there
is no evidence to support
the contentions in the SGPs that the Applicant knew it was not the owner of the
Trade Marks or that the
Applicant knew or ought to have known that it had no
entitlement to the Trade Marks.
agree with the Applicant that there is no evidence to suggest that the
Applications were made in bad faith or evidence to support
the Opponent’s
contentions in the SGPs. While the Applicant was aware of the Opponent’s
business and the Tuckerbox Marks
at the Relevant
this awareness alone,
without more, does not provide a sufficient basis to conclude that the
Applications were made in bad faith.
Opponent has not shown that circumstances existed at the Relevant Date which
were such that the decision to apply for the Trade
Marks at the Relevant Date
would be regarded as in bad faith by persons adopting the proper
The s 62A ground of
opposition fails.
find that the Opponent has failed to establish any of the grounds of opposition
it nominated in the SGPs. Accordingly, registration
of the Applications may
proceed not less than one month from the date of this decision.
the Registrar is served with a notice of appeal, I direct that registration
shall not occur until either the appeal is withdrawn
or discontinued. Otherwise,
the disposition of the Applications should be in accordance with the
Court’s order or direction.
parties have sought costs. It is usual for costs to follow the event, and I see
no reason to depart from that principle here.
In respect of trade mark number
2385194, I award costs against the Opponent under s 221 in the relevant amounts
under Schedule 8
of the Regulations. In respect of trade mark number 2385250, I
award reduced costs against the Opponent in the same manner as indicated
Hume Industries (Malaysia) Berhad v James Hardie & Coy Pty
Makrigiorgos
Hearing Officer
Delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks
Unless otherwise stated, each
reference to a section is a reference to a section of the
Trade Marks Act
and each reference
to a regulation is a reference to a regulation in the
Trade Marks
Regulations 1995
Regulations
The Word Mark and Device Mark
will be collectively referred to as the ‘
Trade Marks
Food Channel Network Pty Ltd
v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
, [32] (Keane CJ, Stone and
Telstra Corporation Limited
v Phone Directories Company Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot
and Edelman JJ).
Southern Cross Refrigerating
Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 82
, [4] (Kitto J)
Southern Cross
McMullen [20].
These two device marks will be
collectively referred to as the ‘
Dog Device Marks
McMullen [26].
[1963] HCA 66
Registrar of Trade Marks
v Woolworths Ltd
[1999] FCA 1020
Torpedoes Sportswear Pty Limited v Thorpedo Enterprises Pty Limited
[2003] FCA 901
, [78] (Bennett J).
Crazy Ron’s
Communications v Mobileworld Communications
[2004] FCAFC 196
, [77]-[88]
(Moore, Sackville and Emmett JJ).
New South Wales Dairy
Corporation v Murray Goulburn Co-operative Co Ltd
[1989] FCA 124
Jockey International Inc
v Darren Wilkinson
[2010] ATMO 22 (Hearing
Officer Spence).
Southern Cross
Coca-Cola Company v
All-Fect Distributors Ltd
[1999] FCA 1721
, [39] (Black CJ, Sundberg and
Finkelstein JJ) quoting
Pioneer Hi-Bred Corn Co v Hy-Line Chicks Pty Ltd
[1978] 2 NZLR 50
, 62 (Richardson J).
Conde Nast Publications
Pty Ltd v Virginia Taylor
[1998] FCA 864 (Burchett
PDP Capital Pty
Ltd v Grasshopper Ventures Pty Ltd
[2021] FCAFC 128 (Jagot
, Nicholas and
Burley JJ).
[2007] FCAFC 42
(Lindgren, Emmett and Finkelstein JJ).
[1952] HCA 15
(1952) 86 CLR
, 539 (Dixon CJ, Williams, McTiernan, Webb and Kitto JJ).
[1998] FCA 1268
[2023] HCA 8 (Kiefel
Gageler, Gordon, Edelman and Gleeson JJ).
[2023] FCA 482
(Jackman J).
C A Henschke & Co v
Rosemount Estates Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 1539
, [43] (Ryan, Branson and Lehane
Macquarie Dictionary
(online at 6 October 2025) ‘tuckerbox’.
[2000] FCA 1335
Renaud Cointreau
& Cie v Cordon Bleu International Ltee
[2001] FCA 1170
, [75] (Moore,
Tamberlin and Goldberg JJ).
ConAgra Inc v McCain
Foods (Aust) Pty Ltd
[1992] FCA 159
[2019] FCA 923
(O’Bryan J).
McMullen Exhibit 4.
Ibid Exhibit 18.
[2010] FCA 664
Access Pty Ltd v Westpac Banking Corporation
[1989] FCA 506
Accor Australia & New
Zealand Hospitality Pty Ltd v Liv Pty Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 56
, [170] (Greenwood,
Besanko and Katzmann JJ) (‘
’). See also
PB Foods Ltd
v Malanda Dairy Foods Ltd
[1999] FCA 1602
, [78]-[80] (Carr J).
Pham Global Pty Ltd v
Insight Clinical Imaging Pty Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 83
, [29] (Greenwood, Jagot and
Beach JJ) (‘
Pham Global’
Anchorage Capital
Partners Pty Limited v ACPA Pty Ltd
[2018] FCAFC 6
, [48] (Nicholas, Yates
and Beach JJ).
Carnival Cruise Lines Inc
v Sitmar Cruises Limited
[1994] FCA 936
, [62] (Gummow J).
[1897] VicLawRp 118
(1897) 22 VLR 636
, 640 (Holroyd J).
Settef SpA v Riv-Oland
Marble Co (Vic) Pty Ltd
(1987) 10 IPR 402
, 413 (McGarvie J).
[1964] HCA 55
[1964] HCA 55
111 CLR 511
[2017] FCAFC 56
Reg. 9.10 refers to a
statement of ground and particular in a removal opposition. The correct
regulation is 5.8.
McMullen Exhibit 3.
[2012] FCA 81
(Dodds-Streeton
Fry Consulting
[2013] FCA 478 (Bennett
Fry Consulting
48), [145].
Ibid [147]-[148] and
Ibid [166].
Fry Consulting
48), [156].
1872 Holdings VOF v
Havana Club Holding SA
[2017] ATMO 12
, [64] (Hearing Officer Thompson).
Hard Coffee Pty Ltd v
Hard Coffee Main Beach Pty Ltd
[2009] ATMO 26
, [12] (Hearing Officer
Nancarrow).
Price [28].
Fry Consulting
[2001] ATMO 78 (Hearing
Officer Williams).
RTF format (18.3 MB)
Signed PDF/A format