Saso & Saso (No 4) [2025] FedCFamC1A 200 (6 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1) APPELLATE
Saso & Saso (No 4)
[2025] FedCFamC1A
Appeal from:
Saso & Saso (No 6)
[2025] FedCFamC2F 717
Appeal number(s):
NAA 300 of 2025
File number(s):
BRC 881 of 2021
Judgment of:
RIETHMULLER J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL - Appellant
seeking spousal and adult child maintenance – Appellant alleged lack of
procedural fairness - Failure
to make full and frank disclosure –
Apprehended bias - Appeal dismissed with costs.
Legislation:
Law Act 1975
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) r 12.18
Cases cited:
Bensons Property Group Pty Ltd v Key
Infrastructure Australia Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2021] VSCA 116
Dr Leo Shanahan v Jatese Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2018] NSWSC 1306
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
(2000) 205 CLR 337
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Jones & Anor v Millward & Anor
[2005] QCA 76
[2005] 1 Qd R 498
Saso & Saso (No 3)
[2024] FedCFamC2F 145
Weir & Weir
(1993) FLC 92-338
[1992] FamCA 69
Weiss v Barker Gosling
(1993) FLC 92-399
[1993] FamCA 58
Zha & Wun (No 2)
(2025) FLC 94-258;
[2025] FedCFamC1A 101
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Appellant:
The Appellant appeared in person
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent
BRC 881 of 2021
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
DIVISION 1 APPELLATE JURISDICTION
RIETHMULLER J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
NAA 300 of 2025 be dismissed.
appellant pay the respondent’s costs of the appeal fixed in the sum of
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the
Saso & Saso
has been approved pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
RIETHMULLER J:
appellant appeals against a judgment of the primary judge on 30 May 2025,
dismissing her application for spousal maintenance and
adult child maintenance
for her child.
proceedings have been long and protracted, originally culminating in a trial
before Judge Spelleken where her Honour made property
settlement orders on 8
February 2024. The lengthy and complex history of the proceedings prior to the
property settlement orders
are set out in Judge Spelleken’s judgment in
Saso & Saso (No 3)
[2024] FedCFamC2F 145.
It is unclear why the
spousal maintenance application was not brought at the same time as the property
settlement proceedings.
primary judge set out in her reasons a summary of the evidence of the applicant,
the respondent and the adult child. None of the
witnesses were required for
cross examination by the respondent.
applicant was unable to cross examine the respondent as a result of an order
pursuant to
preventing the parties from cross examining each other
personally, obtained by the appellant earlier in the proceedings. The appellant
did not seek the discharge of that order so as to be able to cross examine the
respondent personally.
primary judge identified the relevant law at [46] to [49]. No issue is taken
with respect to her Honour’s summary of the
legal principles. Her Honour
considered the financial circumstances of the appellant, concluding that she was
satisfied that the
appellant was presently unable to support herself (at [50]).
Her Honour then turned to consider the capacity of the respondent to
maintenance but was not satisfied that he had the capacity to pay maintenance at
that time (at [54]).
primary judge considered the law relating to adult child maintenance,
summarising it at [55] to [58], before turning to the evidence
concerning the
adult child maintenance application. Her Honour concluded:
am not satisfied the evidence as presented suggests currently there is medical
or other corroborative evidence to support the proposition
Ms [Saso] has a
disability such that it is necessary for provision to be made for her
maintenance in accordance with relevant provisions
of the Act.
only evidence relating to education appears to be an offer for Ms [Saso] to
attend upon the [Tertiary Institute J] which would
have involved her undertaking
a course from 27 January to 19 December 2021. Whilst Ms [Saso] says that she now
has a debt in relation
to this course, she does not produce evidence that she in
fact undertook the course or in fact she has this current debt. There is
information before me that would indicate she has any current educational needs
for which she would require maintenance so that
she can complete such a
Honour then noted that even if she were in error concerning the adult
child’s need for maintenance, that she had previously
found that the
respondent does not have a capacity to meet a maintenance order in any
a result, the maintenance applications were dismissed.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
appellant appeals from a discretionary judgment and as such the appeal must be
determined in accordance with the principles in
House v The King
, which relevantly provided:
The manner in which an appeal against an exercise of discretion should be
determined is governed by established principles. It is
not enough that the
judges composing the appellate court consider that, if they had been in the
position of the primary judge, they
would have taken a different course. It must
appear that some error has been made in exercising the discretion. If the judge
upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or irrelevant matters to
guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does
not take into account
some material consideration, then his determination should be reviewed and the
appellate court may exercise
its own discretion in substitution for his if it
has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how the primary judge has
the result embodied in his order, but, if upon the facts it is
unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that
in some way
there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which the law
reposes in the court of first instance. In
such a case, although the nature of
the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is reviewed on
the ground that
a substantial wrong has in fact occurred.
appellant relies on three grounds of appeal.
directions to file a summary of argument, the appellant merely provided a one
page table identifying the judgment the subject
of appeal, repeating the first
ground of appeal, identifying the affidavit evidence she relied upon before the
primary judge, and
then referred to pp.47 to 130 of the Transcript 4 November
2024, broadly stating that she had “pointed out evidence where the
respondent had deliberately committed perjury and fraud to hide his
summary of argument filed by the appellant provided no real assistance in
identifying what she alleged were the errors of the
primary judge.
the appellant’s failure to file an appropriate outline, I permitted the
appellant to make oral submissions concerning
the grounds of appeal.
primary Judge failed to afford the appellant procedural fairness before making
the relevant Orders, by ignoring physical evidence
proving the respondent has
committed perjury and fraud.
appellant was unable to identify anything that happened at the hearing that
would form the basis of a claim that she was not afforded
procedural fairness.
primary judge permitted the appellant to appear by video link for the purpose of
the hearing.
is apparent from the transcript that the primary judge carefully navigated the
many difficulties the appellant presented at the
hearing. For example, at the
commencement of the hearing lawyers who had been engaged to represent the
appellant, pursuant to a grant
of assistance as a result of the
order, appeared before the court and sought leave to withdraw on the basis that
their retainer had been terminated by the appellant.
The appellant did not
dispute that their retainer had been terminated but sought to advise the primary
judge of the reason for terminating
the retainer.
primary judge attempted to dissuade the appellant from waiving legal
professional privilege as to the advice the lawyers had given
her with respect
to her prospects of success. Nonetheless the appellant set out that her lawyers
had wanted her to abandon her case
as it lacked merit. The primary judge was
then faced with an application for summary dismissal of the matter by the
respondent. The
primary judge, no doubt wishing to proceed cautiously in light
of the events that unfolded, dissuaded counsel for the respondent
from pursuing
a summary dismissal application and proceeded to hear the matter on the
the course of the hearing her Honour ensured that the appellant was provided
with copies of the relevant sections of the legislation.
determination of the primary judgement was made on the unchallenged affidavit
material that had been filed.
the extent that this ground refers to claims of a lack of procedural fairness it
has no merit and must be dismissed.
ground also alleges that the primary judge ignored “physical evidence
proving the respondent has committed perjury and fraud”.
appellant was convinced that the respondent had committed such wrongs, it was
difficult for her to identify the evidence
that formed the basis for such
allegations.
appellant had identified transactions in bank statements of the respondent, from
some years ago, where withdrawals or payments
from one account were described as
rent, and deposits in another of his accounts appeared to correlate with those
withdrawals or
payments. These transactions occurred in 2021 and 2022; many
years before the maintenance application was being heard by the primary
The primary judge engaged with the argument in this respect, specifically
seeking submissions from the counsel for the respondent
on the issue (Transcript
4 November 2024, p.53 line 29 et seq). Her Honour refers to this material at
[16] of her judgment. It is
difficult to see how this evidence, even if it
represents some misleading transactions as alleged by the appellant, goes
than affecting the credit of the respondent, given that it happened some
years prior to the period subject to the maintenance application.
similar difficulty arises with respect to a second item of evidence the
appellant pointed to, a number of transactions with respect
to a Westpac account
in US currency, the statements of which appear in the Appeal Book at pp.391-402.
This account is in the name
of a company, Company E. The account statements were
obtained when the appellant subpoenaed Westpac Bank to produce account
for all accounts that had any connection with the respondent. These
statements show that in 2022 some $2 million was transferred
into the account
from an entity described in the statement as “Company F”, and
thereafter payments were made to a variety
of different people or entities, many
prefaced by the initials “INTL”, which appears to refer to an
international transfer,
and with descriptions such as “Technology
Service”, “Fee”, “Trade payment”, or
payment”. There is no evidence that any of the persons
receiving the money from this account appears to have any connection
respondent. The primary judge considered this at [17]-[20] of her judgment,
noting that the respondent had ceased to be a
director of this corporate entity
on 8 September 2021, well before the relevant transactions.
matters relied upon by the appellant do not bear directly upon the capacity of
the respondent to pay maintenance at the time that
the application was heard
before the primary judge. Nor does it appear that the evidence could lead to an
inference that the respondent
presently has greater funds available to him than
he has set out in his financial statement, and as determined by Judge Spelleken
in the property settlement judgment between the parties.
arguments made with respect to this ground are without merit. Ground one must be
primary Judge failed to properly consider all of the appellant’s evidence
before making the relevant Orders.
support of ground two, the appellant argued that in 2015, the respondent had
borrowed money against a home loan and transferred
the monies to one of the
corporate entities that he operates (see the bank statements in the Appeal Book
at pp.332 to 334). She alleged
that this money was then used for an investment.
These events all occurred long before the property settlement proceedings, which
have been determined by Judge Spelleken. It is difficult to understand how this
issue relates to the respondent’s current capacity
to pay spousal
maintenance.
appellant also complained that monies may have been deposited with a
stockbroker, Stockbroker H, and not disclosed. No subpoena
appears to have been
issued to Stockbroker H. There is no evidence of monies being transferred to
Stockbroker H by the respondent.
appellant again relied upon the transactions with respect to the US currency
account, however for the reasons already given, these
do not appear to lead to
any direct evidence or inference that the respondent has greater resources
available to him at present.
appellant also raised the rent transactions claim relied upon under the previous
appellant made many complaints concerning disclosure, and complaints that the
respondent’s current employer had not responded
to a subpoena. It does not
appear that an application had been made to enforce the subpoena, nor that an
adjournment of the trial
had been sought or specific discovery pursued in
interlocutory proceedings.
issues relating to disclosure have been long standing and were dealt with by
Judge Spelleken in her Honour’s judgment at
[39]-[47]. The possible
consequences for failing to make adequate disclosure were expressed in
[1992] FamCA 69
(1993) FLC 92-338
where the court said that “once it has
been established that there has been a deliberate non-disclosure the Court
be unduly cautious about making findings in favour of the innocent
party” (at p.79,593). However, even if non-disclosure had
established, it goes no further than allowing a primary judge great confidence
to draw adverse inferences against the person
who has failed to make disclosure
based upon the evidence that is before the court. As the Full Court in
& Wun (No 2)
(2025) FLC 94-258 at [80] said:
It must be remembered that a finding that one spouse has not made full and frank
financial disclosure allows a more robust approach
to fact finding but it does
not and cannot fill evidentiary lacunae, nor does it dictate the pathway or
pathways which will be appropriate
in any given fact scenario.
it is not every case of non-disclosure that will lead to adverse inferences,
particularly where the non-disclosure relates to
documents that are unlikely to
make a difference to the outcome of the proceedings (for example for a long term
pension recipient
that fails to make full and frank disclosure of their bank
account statements in circumstances where there is no basis for considering
they may have resources other than the pension).
concerns about non-disclosure were identified by the primary judge in [13], [16]
and [17] of her Honour’s judgment. The
primary judge also found that the
respondent’s affidavit and financial statement showed that his expenses
exceed his income
and, importantly, that his evidence in this regard was not
challenged (at [51]). The respondent set out that he was earning an income
of around $180,000 per annum (see p.425 of the Appeal Book) as an accountant in
his financial statement. It is not a case where his
alleged income appeared
unreasonably low for the type of employment in which he was engaged. The
evidence of the appellant did not
demonstrate any basis for rejecting the
respondent’s financial statement or affidavit evidence, particularly in
the absence
of cross examination of the respondent.
primary judge listed a variety of debt that the respondent is meeting, including
$335,000 payable to his employer, $466,000 payable
to the ATO (related to a
company of which he had formerly been a director), $17,038 in personal tax
liability to the ATO, and $301
per week on a mortgage (the sum having been
reduced on hardship grounds). Her Honour noted that because the appellant had
not complied
with Judge Spelleken’s property settlement orders, the
respondent was continuing to meet mortgage payments pending the enforcement
the property settlement orders, diminishing his capacity to make any maintenance
payments as sought by the appellant. The primary
judge accepted that the
respondent had a shortfall of income compared to expenses of around $188 per
week (at [44]) in circumstances
where he has liabilities of $929,857 but assets
of only $541,475.
was no recent evidence that suggested that the respondent had a greater
financial capacity or property interests than he had
disclosed. The appellant
has not established that the primary judge erred in her approach to the
allegations of failure to make full
and frank disclosure.
appellant also argued that the primary judge prevented her from calling her
daughter to give evidence with respect to the adult
child maintenance issues.
She relied upon two affidavits of her daughter that had been filed in the
proceedings, however her daughter
was not required for cross examination. It
does not appear that the appellant had sought leave to have her daughter give
oral evidence in the proceedings (which ought to have been in her
affidavit). Rather it appears that the complaint arises from an
beginning at p.9 of the Transcript 4 November 2024 where, prior to being advised
that the appellant’s daughter was
not required for cross examination, the
primary judge took care to ensure that a potential witness in the proceedings
was not present
in the video linked room prior to giving evidence. There is no
basis for concluding that the primary judge erred in this regard.
appellant complained that there was medical evidence before the court concerning
the medical condition of her daughter, described
as Triple X Syndrome. There was
no opinion from a doctor as to the correct diagnosis of her daughter with this
syndrome (only references
in medical notes to a diagnosis having previously been
made). Indeed, there was no affidavit evidence from a doctor. There were
reports annexed to her affidavits, which were not reports
directed to the court (some of which were directed to “To Whom it
Concern”). These reports were clearly hearsay and not admissible. Counsel
for the respondent did not approach the matter
on a technical basis, instead
making the submission that the appellant had been put on notice that the reports
would be opposed unless
the authors were made available for cross examination.
The authors of the medical reports or notes were not made available for cross
examination in the proceedings. The primary judge nonetheless considered the
recounting:
is an invoice dated 5 May 2023 which relates to medical expenses treatment by Dr
[G] in May 2023 for endometriosis or salpingectomy.
note the questionnaire competed by Dr [G] on 17 July 2024 – Exhibit 2
– indicates Ms [Saso]’s health issue at
that time has a full
recovery timeframe of 6 weeks and promotes a staged return to work plan
resulting in normal shifts by week 3.
am not satisfied the evidence as presented suggests currently there is medical
or other corroborative evidence to support the proposition
Ms [Saso] has a
disability such that it is necessary for provision to be made for her
maintenance in accordance with relevant provisions
of the Act.
appellant has shown no error on the part of the primary judge when considering
the material that was before her Honour.
the appellant has not been able to identify any evidence before the primary
judge that was not considered and which could realistically
have made a
difference to the outcome of the case, this ground must be dismissed.
Ground Three
primary Judge displayed strong bias against the appellant, throughout the
the strong terms of this ground, the appellant’s submissions went no
further than alleging that the primary judge did
not wish her to tell the
primary judge why she had terminated the retainer of her lawyers and take into
account the reasons for terminating
their retainer. The reasons themselves did
not appear to be relevant to the decision the primary judge had to make. As set
it was appropriate that the primary judge warn an unrepresented
litigant that such material may not be appropriate to be placed before
for the obvious reason that it could make the appellant’s case seem less
compelling if the primary judge were told
that the appellant’s own lawyers
had thought she could not succeed. As matters transpired, she told the primary
judge of this
in any event.
was absolutely no evidence of bias on the part of the primary judge. It appears
that effectively the appellant sought to put
a case of reasonable apprehension
of bias. The relevant test for apprehended bias was set out by the High Court in
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
... a judge is disqualified if a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably
apprehend that the judge might not bring an impartial
mind to the resolution of
the question the judge is required to decide.
a person chooses to inform a judge of matters that could, in other
circumstances, give rise to concerns of apprehended bias,
it is not open to them
to rely upon their own conduct to then seek to have the judge disqualified
(although no application for the
judge to disqualify herself was made during the
course of the proceedings).
the appellant’s submissions progressed, it appeared that in substance her
real concern was that she felt the primary judge’s
interactions with her
were, to use my understanding of her argument, brusque. This is not a basis for
concluding that the primary
judge was biased or even a basis for considering
that “a fair-minded lay observer might reasonably apprehend that the judge
might not bring an impartial mind to the resolution of the question the judge is
required to decide”.
is a common experience of litigants that interactions with trial judges seem
brusque as a result of the keen focus of trial judges
upon identifying the
issues between the parties, determining what is the relevant evidence, and the
difficulties of ensuring a fair
trial in accordance with the rules of procedural
fairness, all in the context of knowing there is a significant number of other
awaiting judicial time.
appellant has not established any basis for concluding that the primary judge
displayed any indications of bias nor even an arguable
basis for a claim that
there was a reasonable apprehension of bias on the part of the primary
the circumstances this ground of appeal must be dismissed.
the appellant has not established any of the grounds of appeal, the appeal must
be dismissed.
respondent sought costs in the event that the respondent succeeded and has
annexed two schedules of fees setting out the estimated
fees calculated on the
party-party scale, and the estimated fees calculated on an indemnity basis,
which are listed in the respondent’s
Amended Schedule of Costs at totals
of $10,842.14 and $19,910 respectively. However, the columns were not correctly
totalled and
in fact come to $20,486.27 and $36,088.80 respectively.
appellant argued that there should not be a costs order if she was unsuccessful,
but in the event that there is a costs order,
it should be limited to $500.
respondent also points out that correspondence was sent by the
respondent’s solicitor to the appellant early in the appeal
process in an
attempt to avoid unnecessary costs. The first letter was sent on 7 July 2025
advising the appellant that her Notice
of Appeal will likely be summarily
dismissed or otherwise unsuccessful and encouraging her to obtain independent
legal advice. Further
correspondence was emailed on 29 August 2025 requesting
the appellant withdraw her appeal and warning that should she fail to do
respondent would seek a costs order against her on an indemnity basis and again
urging the appellant to obtain independent
legal advice. The relevant letters
were provided at the hearing of the appeal without objection by the appellant,
who confirmed that
she had received them. However, those letters did not offer
to settle the appeal, such as forgoing all or part of the costs incurred
appeal was abandoned at that point. The correspondence was not a genuine offer
of compromise, but merely a threat to seek
indemnity costs if the appeal was not
discontinued: see, for example,
Jones & Anor v Millward & Anor
[2005] QCA 76
[2005] 1 Qd R 498
Dr Leo Shanahan v Jatese Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2018] NSWSC
Bensons Property Group Pty Ltd v Key Infrastructure Australia Pty Ltd
[2021] VSCA 116
in family law matters are to be determined in accordance with
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) which provides that the ordinary starting point
is that “each party to proceedings ... is to bear the party’s own
provides for the court to make a costs order if “there are
circumstances that justify it in doing so”, subject to considering
matters listed in
s 114UB(3).
The parties had already received a detailed
judgment by the primary judge dismissing the appellant’s claim. Both
parties have
limited financial resources, although the appellant is in a far
worse financial position as the respondent has a significant income.
At no point
in the appeal process did the appellant articulate with precision the facts and
circumstances which she relied upon in
the appeal to support her grounds of
appeal. The respondent’s claim that the appeal had no prospects of success
in the respondent
solicitor’s letters were not an offer to compromise,
however they did alert the appellant to the reality that she would be
to articulate an argument on the appeal.
the nature of the way in which the appeal was presented it must have been
apparent to the appellant that there were no real
grounds for the appeal that
she was able to articulate, well before the appeal coming on for hearing. Whilst
the appellant’s
position was without merit, I did not form the view her
conduct was merely to cause costs to the respondent or was reckless as to
prospects, rather she was genuine in her beliefs.
am not satisfied that the conduct of the appellant was such as to justify costs
beyond party and party costs on this occasion.
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) include a scale of costs in Schedule 3 setting out the scale costs as set
out in the rules after advice from the Joint Costs
Advisory Committee (a
successor of the Federal Costs Advisory Committee: see generally
Barker Gosling
(1993) FLC 92-399
at 80,073). The scale costs rates (where
there is an appropriate item) are the “maximum amount of party and party
costs a person
may recover” (save for some limited exceptions): see
respondent’s schedule of costs setting out the scale fees incurred until
23 September 2025 lists items totalling $3,846.65
which I accept as an accurate
assessment of party and party costs for the work done up to this point. However,
the estimated fees
sought thereafter do not withstand scrutiny, for example,
$1,801.86 for “Quantifying costs pursuant to scale” (when the
schedule contained only 88 items), $2,402.48 for eight hours of preparation for
the appeal hearing by the instructing solicitor (when
counsel had been briefed
to draw the Summary of Argument and argue the appeal), $1,201 for four hours of
conferencing with counsel
when the appeal turned entirely on the filed documents
with which counsel would have been briefed, and $2,402.48 for eight hours
attend by video for an appeal that took less than half a day to hear. I am not
persuaded that party and party fees for counsel
ought to include both a full day
for drawing the Summary of Argument and a further full day to prepare for this
appeal given its
limited compass, both at the highest end of the scale (rather
than the mid-point which appears more appropriate given the nature
regard to the circumstances of this case and the costs estimates, I am persuaded
that it is appropriate to make a lump sum
costs order in the sum of $10,500 in
favour of the respondent.
I certify that the preceding fifty-seven (57)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Riethmuller
Dated: 6 November 2025
RTF format (473 KB)
Signed PDF/A format