Department of Immigration and Citizenship: Own motion investigation (FOI) report [2012] AICmrCN 6 (26 September 2012)
Processing of non-routine FOI requests by the Department of Immigration and
Citizenship
26 September
Prof. John McMillan, Australian Information Commissioner
Report No OM12/00001
Executive summary
2010–11 the Department of Immigration and Citizenship (DIAC) received 8057
document requests under the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
– the largest number received by any Australian Government agency. Over 96
per cent of those requests were for personal
information, and DIAC complied with
the time limits specified in the FOI Act in processing 88 per cent of those
personal information
DIAC’s record of compliance with FOI time limits has not been as high
in managing non-routine requests, particularly complex
requests for non-personal
information. This point is brought out by the findings of this own motion
investigation into DIAC’s
handling of 27 FOI requests from 10 individual
requesters. Each of the 27 requests had given rise either to a complaint to the
of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) or to an application
for Information Commissioner review (IC review). In total,
there were six
complaints and nine IC review applications.
Seven of the requesters were journalists, one was a member of Parliament and
one was made on behalf of a community organisation. They
had made FOI requests
for information that related to matters of public interest as to which there was
some policy sensitivity –
the development and operation of immigration
detention centres, conditions of detention, the health and reported deaths of
in immigration detention centres and the Government’s policies
on multiculturalism and offshore processing of asylum claims.
One of the requesters was an individual applicant who sought access to
documents relating to the handling of a claim against DIAC.
Processing of the
request was complex and involved a large number of documents.
The 27 FOI requests in this study were managed by DIAC’s Central Office
team located in Canberra. The great majority of FOI
requests to DIAC that are
routine in nature are handled in DIAC’s state offices. This includes
requests for personal information
and requests to amend or annotate personal
records. The DIAC Central Office processes the more complex or sensitive
non-personal
information FOI requests.
Each of the 27 complaints and IC review applications has been treated
separately by the OAIC. In some cases the FOI request has already
been finalised
by DIAC, but not so in other cases. All the IC review applications concerned
deemed refusal decisions by DIAC after
it failed to meet the processing
timeframes in the FOI Act. One of the recommendations made at the end of this
report (Recommendation
1) is that DIAC should provide further information to the
OAIC concerning the estimated time for finalising those cases on which
decision has not yet been made and the steps required to achieve that
While the individual resolution of each FOI request is a primary
consideration for the OAIC, the Australian Information Commissioner
undertake an own motion investigation into processing delays that may be common
to all 27 cases. The OAIC had formed the
impression that DIAC’s Central
Office was encountering considerable difficulty in managing complex and
sensitive FOI requests
in a timely manner.
Unwarranted delay in FOI processing runs counter to the objectives of the FOI
Act and to the reforms that commenced in November 2010.
A declared object of the
FOI Act is ‘to facilitate and promote public access to information,
promptly and at the lowest reasonable
cost’ (s 3(4)). The 2010 reforms
introduced new procedures to constrain delay: agencies are to notify the OAIC of
an applicant’s
written agreement to an extension of time (s 15AA);
extensions to deal with complex and voluminous requests require OAIC approval
15AB); and an agency cannot impose a charge for providing access if the access
decision is made beyond the permitted timeframes
Another objective that lay behind the reforms in 2010 was to make it easier
for the community generally – including journalists
and members of
Parliament – to make requests for non-personal information. This is
recognised in a new statement in the FOI
Act objects clause which declares the
Parliament’s intention to promote Australia’s representative
democracy by increasing
public scrutiny, discussion, comment and review of the
Government’s activities (s 3(2)).
This report concludes that DIAC must address a number of matters that appear
to have caused the significant delays that affected the
processing of the 27 FOI
requests studied in this investigation. The matters that require further
consideration are listed in Recommendation
2, and include the resources
allocated to the DIAC Central Office team, the performance of that team, the
governance arrangements
to ensure FOI compliance across DIAC, procedures for
consultation with third parties, arrangements for retrieving documents from
contractors, consultation with the Minister’s office, the use of FOI
extension of time options and liaison with the OAIC.
It is ultimately for DIAC at a management level to decide what improvements
can be implemented that will best address the FOI processing
problems discussed
in this report. DIAC is required by Recommendation 2 of this report to provide a
report to the Information Commissioner,
three months from the date of
publication of this report, on its consideration of the issues listed in
Recommendation 2 and measures
implemented to reduce FOI processing delay. This
present report contains DIAC’s interim response to the report.
The Information Commissioner is mindful that DIAC receives a high volume of
FOI requests, that it has many other program functions
to discharge, that
immigration program pressures can be urgent and unpredictable, and that
government funding restraints applying
to all agencies can make it difficult to
meet all program benchmarks (including FOI processing timeframes). It is also
DIAC had itself taken steps in 2011 to review its FOI backlog and
delays by commissioning a report on FOI processing by Ernst and
Young. DIAC was
also in the process of appointing more staff to undertake FOI processing while
this investigation was underway.
It is clear that change is required on how the DIAC Central Office handles
complex and sensitive FOI requests, in addition to the
appointment of extra
staff. This report describes delays that have occurred in processing 27 FOI
requests that point to a broader
problem of delay. At 1 July 2012 the DIAC
Central Office had 143 cases on hand, of which 114 were outside the statutory
for processing. That is, only 20 per cent of applications being
handled in the Central Office were being managed within the statutory
DIAC’s response to report
response by the Acting Secretary of DIAC to the Information Commissioner’s
report is included at the end of this report.
The response advises that both
recommendations in the report are accepted, and acknowledges the unacceptable
delays in FOI processing
within DIAC’s National Office team. DIAC provided
up to date figures which showed some improvement. Twenty-one of the 27 FOI
requests discussed in the draft report had since been finalised; and the number
of matters being handled by the National Office team
that were outside the FOI
statutory timeframe had reduced from 114 to 70 between 1 July and 21
September 2012.
DIAC’s response also advises that an independent review of FOI
processing in DIAC was commissioned following the commencement
of this own
motion investigation. The review by Robert Cornall AO made 12 recommendations
that are being implemented by DIAC. The
recommendations are relevant to FOI
processing in other Australian Government agencies, and can be generalised to
the following four
principles:
Effective FOI
processing requires cooperation and support between the business line areas of
an agency and the section responsible
for FOI processing.
The culture of
an agency must be attuned to effective FOI administration. Two ways of
instilling that culture are for the chief executive
officer of the agency to
issue an instruction to all staff directing that FOI compliance is a
responsibility of the entire agency,
and to include FOI compliance as a key
performance indicator in the performance agreements of senior officers.
Agency processes
and practices that support effective FOI processing are internal training and
learning strategies, escalation of
unresolved matters to senior officers,
regular monitoring and review of FOI performance, and high quality records
management.
Agencies should
benchmark their FOI performance against the practice and performance of other
agencies that have a demonstrated record
in effective FOI implementation and
compliance.
Background to investigation
Under s 69 of the FOI Act
the Information Commissioner may conduct an own motion investigation into
actions taken by an agency in
the performance of functions, or the exercise of
powers, under the FOI Act. On 29 March 2012, the OAIC notified DIAC that it was
commencing an own motion investigation into DIAC’s handling and processing
of non-routine FOI requests. An issues paper was
prepared and sent to DIAC
outlining 10 cases that raised four main areas of concern, which were
to comply with statutory timeframes
inefficient
management of complex and sensitive FOI requests
communication with FOI applicants about delay in processing their requests
engagement with the OAIC in resolving complaints and IC reviews concerning
deemed refusal decisions.
The issues paper asked a series of
questions on each of those areas of investigation. DIAC provided a response on
26 April 2012.
At the conclusion of an investigation the Information Commissioner is
required under s 86 of the FOI Act to provide a report –
‘notice on completion’ – to the respondent agency. The report
is to contain the Commissioner’s investigation
results and
recommendations. The investigation results are the matters the Information
Commissioner has investigated and the Commissioner’s
opinions, conclusions
and suggestions on those matters (s 87). The report may include formal
recommendations that the Commissioner
believes an agency ought to implement (s
If the Information Commissioner is not satisfied with an agency’s
response to the investigation recommendations in a report,
'implementation notice' may be issued, requiring an agency to explain the action
it will take to implement the Commissioner’s
recommendations (s 89(2)). An
agency must comply with the implementation notice within the time specified in
it (s 89(3)). If not
satisfied that an agency has taken adequate and appropriate
action to implement the recommendations, the Information Commissioner
subsequently report to both the minister responsible for the agency and the
Minister responsible for the FOI Act (ss 89A, 89B).
The Commissioner’s
report is to be tabled in the Parliament.
Two formal investigation
recommendations arising from this investigation are made at the end of this
Previous external reviews of DIAC’s FOI processing
This own motion
investigation follows two earlier external reviews of DIAC’s FOI
processing that are referred to in this report.
The first was by the Commonwealth Ombudsman in 2008, and arose from
complaints to the Ombudsman about delays in FOI decision making
The report identified
numerous causes of delay that remain relevant to the present investigation,
including the high volume of requests
received by DIAC, the complexity of
requests, the number of locations at which documents were held, the diffusion of
data across
electronic and hard copy files, poor communication with FOI
applicants, the centralisation of FOI processing, and document requests
processed under the FOI Act that could be dealt with administratively.
The Ombudsman later reported that action taken by DIAC in response to the
investigation led to a substantial decrease in FOI delays
and in document
requests handled under the FOI Act. This experience showed, the Ombudsman
commented, that ‘difficulties in
administering the FOI Act can be
substantially reduced when there is a concerted and high level response from the
agency. FOI must
be treated as a core business activity that receives
appropriate resourcing and managerial
attention.’
More recently, from June to August 2011, Ernst and Young conducted a
management-initiated review of FOI processes within DIAC. This
conducted in DIAC’s Central, Parramatta and Melbourne offices. The review
contained three objectives:
determine how the number of FOI requests in DIAC could be reduced
improve the efficiency of processing FOI requests
identify what was required to move DIAC to a ‘culture of
disclosure’.
DIAC is to be commended for initiating this
review soon after the impact of the 2010 FOI Act reforms became apparent. The
Young report acknowledged that the DIAC FOI teams were under
significant and increasing pressure as a result of an increase in the
FOI requests generally, as well as an increase in more complex types of FOI
(the type managed by the
DIAC Central Office). Among the recommendations in the report were that DIAC
should publish frequently requested
information through the FOI Act Information
Publication Scheme, address poor records management across the department and
integrate FOI responsibilities with other DIAC business lines.
The report proposed that DIAC promote a pro-disclosure culture through:
allocating more
resources and implementing a more coordinated and integrated approach to the
delivery of FOI functions
provide better
leadership support for the FOI reform agenda to address a ‘fear of
releasing information’ culture
improve records
management practices.
Investigation results
The remainder of this
report contains an analysis of the 27 cases by reference to the four areas of
concern outlined in the OAIC issues
paper provided to DIAC. The appendixes to
this report contain more detail about each of the cases. Specifically:
contains some illustrative case studies
Appendix B lists
the date on which each FOI request was received and finalised by DIAC
Appendix C notes
the delay in allocating some of the requests to a DIAC decision maker
compares average processing times in DIAC with those in nine other agencies that
received a large number of FOI requests
in 2010–11.
point emerging in this investigation is that DIAC’s FOI processing is not
as timely or trouble-free as that of many
other large agencies. This adverse
comparison cannot be explained or excused by reference only to the complexity or
sensitivity of
the FOI requests DIAC receives. While DIAC receives more FOI
requests than any other agency, some other agencies with a high number
non-routine requests deal with them more expeditiously. This is partly shown in
Appendix D, which lists the 10 agencies that received
the highest number of
non-personal requests in 2010–11. At the beginning of the 2010–11
reporting year DIAC had 303 open
non-personal requests; it received a further
274 non-personal requests that year (3.4 per cent of its total number of 8057
Of that combined total
of 577 open requests, it finalised 219 during 2010–11, or 38 per cent. The
other nine agencies listed
in Appendix D finalised between 72 and 88 per cent of
the non-personal requests on hand during the year.
The Acting Secretary of DIAC, in responding to the issues paper that
commenced this investigation, commented that DIAC took its FOI
obligations
seriously and was very conscious of its FOI backlog. The OAIC’s findings
on the following four investigation issues
point to the measures that can be
implemented by DIAC to improve its processing of non-routine FOI requests that
are complex or sensitive.
Issue 1: Failure to comply with statutory timeframes
DIAC failed to make a
decision within the statutory timeframe in each of the 27 FOI requests examined
in this investigation. The initial
FOI Act processing period is 30 days
(s 15(5)). That period can be extended by up to 30 days by agreement with
the applicant (s 15AA),
for 30 days to facilitate consultation with a third
party (s 15(6)), or for a period approved by the Information Commissioner for
complex or voluminous requests (s 15AB).
The quickest decision was made by DIAC within 83 days of receiving the
request. The slowest decisions for finalised cases were made
after 507 days in
one case, and after 521 days for one request to be merged with another under s
24(2) of the FOI Act.
As at 21 September 2012, 21 of the 27 requests had been finalised by DIAC and
six were outstanding. The requests that were finalised
took an average of 296
days to finalise from receipt. The requests that were outstanding had been with
DIAC for an average of 471
days. The oldest outstanding request has been with
DIAC for 556 days.
On the basis of the information provided by DIAC, the delays in those cases
cannot be isolated to any particular step in FOI processing,
and the cause of
delay can be different in each case. In some cases, for example, there was delay
in allocating an FOI request to
a decision maker; in other cases there was delay
after allocation; and in a number of cases there was delay in third party
consultation.
Four factors that appear to contribute to the delays are examined
a. Delay in allocating requests to decision makers
The procedure that has
applied in the DIAC Central Office can be summarised as
An Executive Level 1
officer receives and assesses the FOI request and is responsible for the
‘call out’. This involves
an email being sent to the relevant
business line informing them of the request, the scope of the request and
alerting them to a
timeframe in which to identify, collate and provide the DIAC
Central Office team with the documents that are the subject of the FOI
Issues regarding the scope of the request are handled by the DIAC Central Office
team in liaising between the FOI applicant
and the business line area.
Once the documents are returned to the Central Office team the matter is
allocated to a decision maker. In the majority of non-routine
and complex cases
the decision maker is located within the Central Office team. In rare instances
where the FOI request is particularly
complex and sensitive, a decision maker
outside the team may be appointed. The decision maker is responsible for
assessing the documents
and preparing the decision and making any redactions to
documents that are required.
The longest delays appear to have occurred in initially allocating requests
to FOI decision makers. In nine of the 27 requests it
took on average 250 days
after receipt to allocate the request to a decision maker. Some other requests
took far longer: one was
allocated 512 days after receipt, while another
remained unallocated after 433 days: see Case study 1 in Appendix A. DIAC
that delays arose because existing staff in the Central Office team
were at capacity and there was a shortage of resources and a
lack of FOI
decision-makers within that team. In all but two of the 27 cases the allocated
decision maker was located in the team.
The DIAC Central Office team has other functions in addition to processing
FOI requests. It is also responsible for providing policy
advice about FOI and
investigating privacy complaints.
DIAC advised that at 1 July 2012 the Central Office team was processing 143
FOI requests, of which 114 (79.7 per cent) were outside
the statutory timeframe.
This is significantly higher than DIAC’s overall figure of 12 per cent of
requests resolved outside
the statutory
DIAC advised the OAIC that it was conscious of this backlog and was
undertaking recruitment to reduce it. At 31 December 2011 there
were 11 staff in
the DIAC Central Office who were all authorised decision makers; six staff
undertook only FOI processing and five
staff processed requests in addition to
other duties. A further five staff were recruited to the Central Office team
between January
and July 2012, bringing the total staff complement to 16, of
whom nine worked solely on FOI processing. DIAC informed the OAIC that
to recruit a further five decision makers for the Central Office team.
b. Delay in conducting internal consultations
Internal consultation on
FOI requests is a regular feature of FOI processing in many agencies. It has,
however, given rise to significant
delay in some of the DIAC cases studied in
this investigation. In one case, for example, the internal consultation had been
for over 12 months without resolution of the request: see Case study 2
in Appendix A. In another case the internal consultation was
continuing after
The DIAC procedures on internal consultation are set out in three guidelines
provided to FOI decision makers that were made available
to the OAIC: the
Significant Case Register (SCR) Protocol
, which outlines the timeline and
procedure for sensitive or significant FOI cases; an
FOI Checklist
lists activities a decision maker may undertake in processing an FOI request;
Consultation Protocol for Sensitive FOI Cases
, which contains
largely the same information as the FOI SCR Protocol.
The SCR Protocol states that the FOI decision-maker, the DIAC Executive and
the Minister’s office expect that documents covered
by an FOI request will
be ‘considered by officers of at least Band 1 level who can provide
informed advice’ and that
‘Branch Heads and Division Heads are fully
aware of the material proposed to be released’. This process is intended
ensure that the authorised decision maker consults with relevant officers
within DIAC regarding the proposed release of documents
and information.
FOI Guidelines issued by the Australian Information Commissioner under
Freedom of Information Act 1982
acknowledge that internal
agency consultation can be undertaken, but not to the detriment of complying
with FOI Act requirements.
Specifically, paragraph 8.10 of the Guidelines
advises agencies to ensure that a sufficient number of officers are authorised
appropriately senior levels to make both original and internal review
decisions. Authorised decision makers may obtain assistance
from other officers,
and take advice and recommendations into account, but they are nevertheless
responsible for reaching an independent
decision and exercising any
discretion.
This issue was also raised in the Ernst and Young report. It observed that
‘FOI staff report that many DIAC staff are not comfortable
with the new
disclosure environment where there is a widespread fear of releasing information
and a failure to recognise that FOI
is everyone’s
responsibility’.
‘there is a lack of consistent leadership support for the FOI reform
agenda, particularly at the operational level’.
Ernst and Young
recommended that DIAC take a program management approach to address weak
governance arrangements including the appointment
of a program manager to
coordinate and oversee the delivery of an ‘FOI’ program.
DIAC could address these concerns by ensuring that its internal governance
arrangements do not permit unacceptable delays arising
through internal
consultation. For example, existing DIAC processes do not require that cases
either in breach of statutory timeframes
or at risk of serious non-compliance
are brought to the attention of a senior DIAC officer in the relevant business
line or the SES
officer responsible for FOI administration. This is an essential
measure for regulating the processing of complex and sensitive FOI
c. Delay from internal clearance procedures
The DIAC procedures for
internal consultation appear to go a step further and require that senior
officers either clear or at least
acknowledge the FOI release of documents. The
FOI SCR Protocol states that, following consultation by the FOI decision maker
the business area (a step that should be completed by day 23),
‘positive acknowledgement of the material proposed for release
provided by the relevant Branch and Division heads’.
At one level this requirement is understandable. The business area may better
understand the contents of a document and whether release
under the FOI Act is
appropriate. Nevertheless, there is a high risk that this requirement will add
delay to FOI processing, given
the workload and various other demands on Branch
and Division heads. It is not apparent from the information provided by DIAC to
the OAIC that measures are in place to prevent delay at this stage of the
process. If the FOI decision-maker is an APS 6 level officer,
it would be
reasonable to assume they may be inhibited about negotiating timeframes with
senior staff of the department or the Minister’s
Another requirement that applies before a final decision is implemented is
that a hard copy of any documents to be released is provided
Minister’s office. DIAC advise that this is a ‘heads up’
process so that the Minister’s office can
understand the nature of the
documents intended to be released and comment can be given. Again, there is
nothing untoward in principle
in a department advising a minister’s office
of documents that it will be releasing publicly under the FOI Act. However, all
involved must clearly understand that the decision to release documents is being
made by the decision maker authorised under s 23
of the FOI Act, that the
Minister’s office cannot override that decision, and accordingly that
release will not necessarily
be deferred until there is a response from the
Minister’s office.
It is not apparent to the OAIC that the DIAC procedures are sufficiently
explanatory on this point. Moreover, it appears that this
process has the potential to cause delay.
The Ernst and Young report noted ‘the majority of FOI requests result
in the disclosure of fairly routine issues and material
that has been processed
through a heavily controlled legal framework’. The OAIC questions whether
these clearance layers are
necessary and whether DIAC has considered a more
efficient and streamlined clearance process with greater active involvement or
handling by a Senior Executive officer with discrete and clear
responsibility for FOI.
officer would bring to the role the authority to assess risk, manage the
relevant stakeholders and address delays by making
use of the extension of time
provisions and practical refusal grounds in the FOI Act.
d. Delay in conducting external consultations
Consultation with third
parties was undertaken in a majority of the 27 FOI requests examined in this
investigation. The third parties
consulted included contract immigration
detention service providers, individuals and other Australian Government
agencies. This consultation
was undertaken pursuant to provisions in the FOI Act
that require an agency to consider consulting a third party before releasing
personal or business information about that third party or information obtained
from a State or Territory government (ss 26A, 26AA,
27 or 27A). The FOI
processing time can be extended by 30 days to facilitate that consultation (s
In two of the FOI requests where DIAC undertook s 27 consultations with a
third party, the average time taken to finalise both these
FOI requests was 214
days. In the case of another FOI request by a member of Parliament in relation
to the Inverbrackie detention
centre, DIAC advised that ss 27 and 27A
consultations were required, however 15 months after the request was received by
steps had been taken to commence external consultation with the third
parties. This FOI request was finalised on 14 September 2012,
498 days after
receipt, without any consultations occurring.
The Information Commissioner’s FOI Guidelines
encourage agencies
and ministers to build into their FOI process an early and quick assessment of
whether consultation may be
The Guidelines further
advise that a third party who is consulted should be advised that if a response
is not received within the
specified timeframe the agency or minister will
assume the person does not object to release of the
It appears that DIAC
is not complying with this guidance and that FOI requests have been delayed in
the consultation stage with no
effective oversight or intervention.
The Ernst and Young report also commented on a related third party liaison
issue. It found that difficulties DIAC experienced in accessing
information held
by contractors ran counter to the FOI environment of increased
disclosure.
This information
could be required, for example, so that DIAC could better understand whether a
requested document would qualify
for exemption. This has also been apparent to
the OAIC in this investigation.
Issue 2: Inefficient management of FOI requests
a. Extension of time and practical refusal provisions
Non-routine
FOI requests that are complex or sensitive can be expected to require more
careful consideration in an agency and potentially
take longer to process. The
FOI Act facilitates added work by allowing for the 30 day timeframe to be
extended. An agency can apply
to the Information Commissioner under s 15AB of
the FOI Act for extra time ‘to deal adequately with a request because the
is complex or voluminous’.
Another relevant mechanism is the ‘practical refusal’ mechanism
in ss 24, 24AA and 24AB. If an agency considers that ‘the
work involved in
processing [a] request ... would substantially and unreasonably divert the
resources of the agency from its other
operations’, the agency can
commence a ‘request consultation process’ requiring an applicant to
revise a request
or it will be refused.
If an agency fails to notify a decision on a request to the FOI applicant
within the statutory timeframe (including any extension
either agreed to by the
applicant, granted by the Information Commissioner or allowed for third party
consultation) the agency is
deemed to have made a decision refusing the request
(s 15AC(3)). However, the agency can apply to the Information Commissioner for
further time to deal with the request (s 15AC(4)). If an extension is
granted and the agency makes a decision within that period,
the deemed refusal
is taken never to have occurred (s 15AC(7)).
It is important that agencies heed those mechanisms for regulating FOI
processing. Once there is a deemed refusal the FOI applicant
is entitled to
apply for IC review of the agency’s decision (ss 15AC(3), 53A, 54L).
Further, the agency cannot charge for providing
and thereby loses
another mechanism that may assist in regulating the scope of a request.
In the 27 cases in this investigation, DIAC obtained the FOI
applicant’s agreement to an extension of time under s 15AA in a
cases. It has made less use of other extension of time mechanisms. DIAC
requested an extension of time from the OAIC under
s 15AB for complex and
voluminous requests in only two cases. In none of the 27 cases did it seek an
extension of time from the OAIC
under s 15AC, which applies when an agency is
already outside the statutory timeframe. In six of the 27 cases the OAIC
with DIAC the option of seeking a s 15AC extension of time, but DIAC
declined to do so because of its reluctance to ‘commit
timeframe’. DIAC’s reluctance to use these mechanisms probably
explains why there are proportionately more applications
for IC review of deemed
refusals of its decisions than for other agencies.
Another shortcoming is that DIAC does not appear to have any guidelines for
staff in relation to when it is appropriate to consider
refusal of an FOI
request on practical refusal grounds. The OAIC has discussed this issue with
DIAC and pointed out that DIAC takes
a more conservative view of the mechanism
than some other agencies. DIAC has advised that it will reconsider its approach
to practical
refusal, but that until now its ‘capacity to develop a
framework to handle voluminous or vague requests in a consistent manner
negatively impacted by a need for FOI officers in the Canberra office to work on
processing FOI requests’.
b. Poor record keeping practices and arrangements
Problems locating and
accessing information on its databases were raised by DIAC to explain FOI
delays. The Ernst and Young report
identified that poor record keeping practices
and an increasing trend in requests for electronic information were impacting on
efficient handling of requests and compliance with timeframes. In one
request examined by the OAIC, DIAC advised 11 months after
the request was
lodged that the information sought by the applicant had been located after DIAC
performed ‘a data cleanse which
has filtered information from a heritage
The OAIC notes the recent findings of the Australian National Audit Office
(ANAO) in a report,
Records Management in the Australian Public Service
which assessed the records management practices of DIAC and two other
departments. The ANAO found that across the three departments:
... information and records access was impeded by existing information and
records management arrangements. For example, information
and records for a
business activity were often held in a variety of locations and electronic
business systems. Staff did not have
access to all locations and systems, and
generally had limited understanding of information holdings that fell outside of
their day‐to‐day
responsibilities. Staff often stored information in
a variety of places, but did not have consistent rules about the records that
needed to be created and where they would be captured. This means information is
captured, managed and accessible on a silo basis.
The agencies did not have a
widespread culture of consistently using approved records management systems,
including the EDRMS and
electronic business systems, to support efficient and
comprehensive searches for
information
issue requires ongoing attention within DIAC. If left unaddressed it will
continue to undermine efforts to improve the timely
management of non-routine
FOI requests that are complex or sensitive. However, no specific recommendation
is made in this report,
as DIAC has advised that it is responding to the ANAO
report and using the audit’s findings, observations and recommendations
ensure improved records management.
Issue 3: Inadequate communication with FOI applicants about delay in processing
their requests
The 10 FOI applicants in
this investigation each expressed frustration that DIAC did not keep them
updated about the progress of their
FOI request. They complained that more often
than not they had to initiate contact with DIAC to obtain progress reports. The
explanation
given by DIAC to the OAIC in one case was that ‘any further
FOI applicant]
has obtained through her regular contact’. The same complaint about
inadequate communication has been made to
the OAIC in other cases not included
in this investigation.
DIAC has also been unwilling to provide applicants or the OAIC with a
definite timeframe for a decision, even in some cases when several
months have
passed since the due date. The explanation given to the applicant in one case in
this investigation was that ‘it
is difficult to predict how much time a
given request will take’. Another example is given in Case study 4 in
Appendix A. This
runs counter to the scheme of the FOI Act since the 2010
amendments, which impose specific time periods for all stages of FOI processing
and enable agencies to request an extension for a specific period.
The OAIC looked in this investigation at DIAC’s procedures and
guidelines for staff regarding FOI processing and communication
applicants about delays and expected timeframes. DIAC has issued a number of
procedural documents and template emails for
communication with applicants, but
there are gaps. For example, there is no guidance on keeping an applicant
informed when it is
apparent that their FOI request may take longer than usual
to process. This is an important step if it is likely that consultation
third party will delay a decision on a request.
Effective communication with applicants can make it easier to manage
expectations and to gain an applicant’s cooperation in
refining or
managing a request. It is also good administrative practice to remind decision
makers in writing that they are accountable
for their decisions and any delays
in the process.
The Commonwealth Ombudsman report in
made a similar observation
applicants. Following that report,
DIAC advised that it had implemented a new
processing model whereby requests were acknowledged within 24 hours and if
documents were
not received from the business unit by day 21 of the processing
period the case officer would contact the applicant and negotiate
timeframe. At least in respect of the 27 more complex requests examined in this
investigation, this practice has not been followed.
Issue 4: Poor engagement with the OAIC in resolving complaints and
IC reviews concerning deemed access refusal decisions
a. Cooperative approach to resolving complaints and IC reviews
IC review process is underpinned by several key principles: that it should be as
informal as possible, non-adversarial and
The FOI Act requires
agencies to use their best endeavours to assist the Information Commissioner to
make the correct or preferable
decision in a case (s 55DA). The Information
Commissioner also encourages agencies to work with applicants to explore ways of
issues without the need for formal IC review decisions.
The issues paper for this investigation drew DIAC’s attention to
approaches that might lead to more timely resolution of non-routine
noting that other large agencies successfully used these approaches. This
included facilitating release of documents outside
the FOI Act, negotiating the
scope of requests with applicants, providing alternative forms of information to
applicants and educating
applicants about the type of information they can
expect DIAC to hold and to release. These approaches can require greater
and negotiation with applicants, but can be effective.
DIAC has not provided a specific response to the OAIC on these suggested
alternative approaches to handling non-routine FOI requests.
b. Inadequate responses to requests for information
The OAIC has not always
obtained prompt and explanatory responses from DIAC’s Central Office team
in relation to the 27 cases
in this investigation. This has impeded the
OAIC’s ability to finalise the complaint investigations and IC reviews
more efficiently.
OAIC requests for status updates sometimes require multiple emails and phone
calls. In one case, for example, the OAIC sought information
handling of a particular FOI request on 20 February, 29 February and 13
March 2012, and on 14 March 2012 received
a one line response, ‘a
draft decision has been made and the decision maker is undertaking consultation
with internal business
areas’. In another case the FOI Commissioner issued
DIAC with formal notices to produce both a statement of reasons (s 55E)
documents (s 55R) after DIAC had failed to meet earlier requests for
information: see Case study 5 in Appendix A.
Similarly, when the OAIC requested more up to date information on the
progress of 12 outstanding requests in this investigation,
DIAC responded
briefly that ‘11 requests remain outstanding’ and ‘four of the
12 are expected to be finalised in
May 2012, with remainder yet to be
allocated’. Details of the finalised requests were not provided, although
some of the requests
have since been finalised, as shown in Appendix B. The OAIC
was also disappointed that DIAC did not elaborate on its disagreement
of the observations in the issues paper that commenced this investigation,
noting only that ‘recollections and understanding
of FOI staff in the
Central Office team do not match the content of the assertions of applicants
relayed in the issues paper, nor
the context in which our staff have been
DIAC has not engaged strongly with the OAIC in exploring options for
processing non-routine FOI requests more efficiently, including
by informal
resolution of FOI disagreements. This concern is taken up in Recommendation 2,
requiring DIAC to report in three months
on its consideration of the issues
listed in that recommendation.
Information Commissioner’s recommendations
Recommendation 1:
DIAC should provide the OAIC with the following information about each FOI
request covered by this investigation that has not been
stage DIAC has reached in processing the FOI request
estimated date of finalising the FOI request
of any external consultation that will be required to finalise the FOI request,
and the projected timeframe for that consultation
estimated number of documents or folios within the scope of the FOI request
explanation as to why the FOI request could not have been finalised at an
earlier date.
Recommendation 2
DIAC should consider the following matters, that are discussed in this report
as possible factors that have caused unnecessary delay
in DIAC’s Central
Office team in processing non-routine FOI requests that are complex or
sensitive, and provide a report to
the Information Commissioner within three
months of the date of publication of this report dealing with each of the
resources allocated to processing non-routine FOI requests in the DIAC Central
Office team
in allocating non-routine FOI requests to DIAC decision
in initiating and concluding internal consultation on non-routine FOI
internal governance arrangements for controlling delays in processing
non-routine FOI requests and for ensuring senior
executive supervision of those
internal clearance procedures for access grant decisions
in obtaining documents from DIAC contractors when required for FOI processing
in initiating or concluding third party consultations
to consider applying to the OAIC for extensions of time to process requests
under FOI Act s 15AB or s 15AC
staff guidance on practical refusal procedures under FOI Act s 24
processing being impeded by poor record keeping
communication with FOI applicants about progress in finalising
Unsatisfactory
engagement with the OAIC during the conduct of IC reviews and investigation of
FOI complaints.
Response to the Information Commissioner’s report by the Secretary,
Department of Immigration and Citizenship
[Text of response from
Acting Secretary of the Department of Immigration and Citizenship]
Professor John McMillan
Australian Information
Commissioner
GPO Box 2999
Canberra ACT 2601
Dear Professor McMillan
Re Own Motion Investigation - OM12/00001
I refer to your letter to the Department of Immigration and Citizenship
(DIAC) of 4 September 2012 in which you advised that you had
completed your
investigation of a number of issues relating to DIAC's handling of non-routine
requests received under the Freedom
of Information Act 1982 (FOI Act) that are
complex or sensitive.
As you are aware, and have acknowledged, DIAC has been making changes over
time, and particularly since receipt of your issues paper
in April 2012, to our
FOI staffing and processes in an attempt to improve timeliness in the processing
of non-personal requests.
I note that, as at 16 September 2012, the number of
non-personal requests on hand in the National Office team had reduced to 108,
which 70 were outside the statutory timeframe for processing. This is an
improvement from 1 July 2012 when there were 143 requests
on hand and 114 were
outside the statutory timeframe for processing.
You acknowledge DIAC's Management Initiated Review conducted by Ernst and
Young in 2011 as a positive step to address delays in processing
of non-personal
requests. However, in response to the announcement of your Own Motion
investigation, DIAC also commissioned a Review
of DIAC's FOI procedures. The
Terms of Reference included the requirement to identify comparative best FOI
practices in other agencies
which could be adopted by the FOI team in National
Office as well as to consider the appropriate levels of decision makers in DIAC.
The Review was conducted by Mr Robert Cornall between May and July 2012.
The Review concluded that the FOI team's established processes and procedures
are not the principal, nor even a significant, cause
of the department's poor
FOI performance. It concluded that the major contributing factor is the lack of
a whole of department approach
to effective FOI management.
To assist in improving the department's compliance with the FOI Act, the
Review made a number of recommendations. These focus on a
greater profile for
FOI, the need for a Secretary's instruction to all DIAC staff highlighting the
whole-of-department responsibility
for responding to FOI requests, improved
escalation procedures to minimise delays and strategies to increase staff
awareness of their
FOI obligations. A copy of the Review's recommendations are
at Attachment A.
These recommendations were endorsed by DIAC's Executive Committee on 17
September 2012. A report on the status of the implementation
recommendations has been requested for the Executive Committee by the end of
In your letter of 4 September you requested responses to two recommendations.
The response to Recommendation 1, that is an update
on some unfinalised FOI
requests, can be found at Attachment B.
You have requested a response to Recommendation 2 within the next three
months and a more detailed response will be provided. As a
general response to
Recommendation 2 however, I note that the unacceptable delays in FOI processing
within DIAC's National Office
team arose from a combination of factors,
primarily insufficient staff allocated to the process requests at the time of a
major increase
in the workload as well as a lack of engagement by key areas of
the department. Based on your recommendations and those of the aforementioned
reviews, we are working to improve our processes and timeliness. We will provide
a more comprehensive report by mid December.
I agree to the inclusion of my response in your published report and look
forward to working with you and your staff to improve DIAC's
performance.
Yours sincerely
Martin Bowles, PSM
Attachment A to Secretary’s response
— Recommendations made by Robert Cornall following review of DIAC’s
FOI procedures
between May–July 2012
Recommendation 1
That the department acknowledge that successful management of its FOI
function requires DIAC’s business areas to accept their
share of the
responsibility for meeting the department’s obligations under the Freedom
of Information Act.
Recommendation 2
That the Secretary issue a Secretary’s Instruction directing that
compliance with the requirements of the Freedom of Information
Act is a whole of
department responsibility and every area is required to play its part in
responding to FOI requests in a timely
and cooperative manner.
Recommendation 3
That the Secretary include freedom of information compliance as a key
performance indicator in senior officers’ performance
agreements.
Recommendation 4
That DIAC develop a chart comparable to the Department of Defence’s
Freedom of Information Standard 30-Day Timeline
chart and display it on
all of the department’s notice boards.
Recommendation 5
That the Freedom of Information and Privacy Policy Section establish a
constructive and mutually supportive working relationship with
department’s business areas and nominate one of its staff as Business Area
Liaison Officer.
Recommendation 6
That each business area nominate one of its officers as an FOI Liaison
Officer as a point of first contact for the Business Area Liaison
Officer and
the Freedom of Information and Privacy Policy Section.
Recommendation 7
That the escalation of an FOI request to higher levels of authority should be
initiated quite quickly if there is a delay in a business
area’s response
to the request and that delay is not promptly rectified.
Recommendation 8
That the Freedom of Information and Privacy Policy Section, in conjunction
with the department’s Human Resources section, prepare
and implement an
annual training plan for all FOI officers and the business area FOI Liaison
Recommendation 9
That the department develop a mandatory FOI e-learning package specifically
for business area officers whose files could be subject
to an FOI request.
Recommendation 10
That the department improve its file and records management to better support
its freedom of information function, including in particular
in understanding
national security and non-national security classifications and the more
effective and consistent use of the Client
of Interest field in the
Department’s Integrated Client Service Environment.
Recommendation 11
That the department’s Chief Lawyer, Assistant Secretary responsible for
FOI and Director of the Freedom of Information and Privacy
Policy Section
establish a direct relationship with their counterparts in the freedom of
information areas in the Departments of
Human Services and Defence to discuss
and share ideas about the development and improvement of DIAC’s FOI
function on a continuing
Recommendation 12
That the department:
monitor the implementation of the recommendations made in this report
its progress in implementing the recommendations in March 2013, and
part of that review (if not earlier), consider doing away with DIAC’s
additional sign off processes involving a Deputy Secretary
Minister’s office and, instead, moving to the briefing procedure adopted
by the Department of Defence.
Appendix A — Case studies
Case study 1: Delay
in third party consultation (Request 27)
The FOI applicant, a member of Parliament, made a request to DIAC on 5 May
2011 for all records of contact between Serco, DIAC’s
service provider at
the Inverbrackie detention facility, and four third parties. On 22 June 2011 the
applicant complained to the
OAIC about DIAC’s delay in handling this
DIAC took five months to identify and locate the documents relevant to the
request and then determine that consultation with third
parties was required. On
11 July 2012 – 433 days after the request was received –
DIAC advised the OAIC that the request
had not been allocated to a decision
maker and DIAC did not have an expected timeframe for finalising the request.
The request was finalised on 14 September 2012 – 498 days after receipt
– after the request was deemed to be withdrawn
under s 24AB(7) of the FOI
Act, as the applicant had not responded to DIAC’s notice of intent to make
a practical refusal decision
within the consultation period.
Case study 2: Delay in conducting internal consultation (Request
The FOI applicant, a journalist, made a request to DIAC on 5 April 2011 for
all audits of the Movement Alert List and International
Movement Records since
1 January 2008. On 1 August 2011 DIAC advised the OAIC that a decision
had been drafted and consultation with
the relevant business areas within DIAC
was ongoing. On 2 December 2011, 18 January 2012, 5 May 2012 and 11 July
2012 DIAC advised
that consultations with internal business areas were still
ongoing. The request was finalised on 24 August 2012, 507 days after it
Case study 3: Delay in conducting external consultation (Request
The FOI applicant, a journalist, made a request to DIAC on 16 May 2011 for
information received by DIAC from Serco, a detention service
provider, about
overcrowding in detention centres. The FOI applicant complained five months
later to the OAIC about the delay in
processing this request and four
Consultation with Serco was not commenced until four months after the request
was received. The consultation was further extended
as not all documents
relevant to the request had been assembled. The request was not finalised until
February 2012, nine months after
it was received.
Case study 4: Inadequate communication with FOI applicant (Request
The FOI applicant, a journalist, made a request to DIAC on 20 May 2011 for
documents analysing the number of unlawful visitors or
‘overstayers’
in Australia. The applicant agreed to a 30 day extension to process the request
on 11 June 2011. DIAC advised
the OAIC in January 2012 that it had not
communicated with the FOI applicant since June 2011 because the ‘only
information
we could have advised [the applicant] was ‘still
consulting’’.
Case study 5: Inadequate response to the OAIC (Request 1)
The FOI applicant made an FOI request to DIAC on 4 January 2011 for his own
case records. After not receiving a decision, he applied
on 9 March 2011
for IC review of DIAC’s deemed access refusal decision. DIAC advised the
OAIC that ‘[d]ue to the large
amount of work involved, actioning [his]
request is not currently a priority for DIAC’.
On 29 June 2011 the Freedom of Information Commissioner sent DIAC a formal
notice under s 55E of the FOI Act to produce a statement
of reasons by 27 July
2011. DIAC did not respond until 12 August 2011, when it sought refuse the FOI
request under s 24 of the FOI
Act for the reason that processing the request
would result in a substantial and unreasonable diversion of the
department’s
resources. The FOI Commissioner then issued a formal notice
under s 55R of the FOI Act requiring DIAC to produce documents relevant
Appendix B — Dates of receipt and finalisation of requests
Request number
Date request received
Date request finalised
Time taken to finalise
Request finalised by practical refusal decision
Decision made in ten stages
Request finalised
Request finalised
Request finalised
Request finalised
Request finalised
Request finalised
Request finalised
Request finalised
Request finalised
Request finalised
Request finalised
Request withdrawn
Request not finalised
Request finalised
Request finalised
Request not finalised
Request not finalised
Request merged with request 20 under s 24(2)
Request not finalised
Request not finalised
Request finalised
Request finalised
Part 1 of decision
Part 2 of decision not finalised
Request finalised
Request withdrawn
Request deemed withdrawn under s 24AB(7)
Average time taken:
Finalised and
unfinalised requests 334 days
requests 296 days
Unfinalised
requests 471 days
Appendix C – Time taken to allocate requests to decision makers
Request number
Date request received
Date request allocated to decision maker
Time from receipt to allocation
Date request finalised
Time from allocation to
finalisation
Average time taken
Appendix D — Finalisation of non-personal requests by 10 agencies
Open non-personal requests in
Non-personal requests finalised in
% of open requests in 2010–11 finalised
Freedom of Information
(Charges) Regulations 1982
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Department of Immigration and Citizenship: Timeliness of decision making
Freedom of Information Act 1982
, Report No 06/2008.
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
E-bulletin No 2
, July 2008.
Ernst and Young,
Initiated Review of Freedom of Information
, report to the Department of
Immigration and Citizenship (2011) at p 14.
See Appendix A of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Annual Report 2010–11.
This summary is taken from
FOI Significant Case Register (SCR) Protocol
, which outlines
the timeline and procedure for sensitive or significant FOI cases.
Specifically, between 1
November 2010 and 30 June 2011, 581 requests of a total of 4946 were processed
outside the statutory timeframe:
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Annual Report 2010–11
Appendix C.
Ernst and Young report, see
footnote 4 above, at p 21.
The OAIC understands that the
Assistant Secretary, Governance and Audit Branch, has responsibility for FOI;
this Branch sits in
the Governance and Legal Division which reports to the
Deputy Secretary, Business Services Group.
Guidelines issued by the
Australian Information Commissioner under s 93A of the FOI Act
FOI Guidelines
Ernst and Young report, see
footnote 4 above, at p 20.
Freedom of Information
(Charges) Regulations 1982
Australian National Audit
Records Management in the Australian Public Service
, ANAO Audit
Report No 53 2011-12.
Commonwealth Ombudsman, see
above footnote 2, at p 24.
FOI Guidelines
para 10.11.
For requests not
finalised, this time is calculated as at 21 September 2012.
For requests not
finalised, this is the status of the request advised by DIAC to the OAIC on
21 September 2012.
For unfinalised requests,
time is calculated to 21 September 2012.
This figure combines the
number of non-personal requests the agency had on hand at 1 July 2010 and the
number of non-personal requests
received in 2010–11.
RTF format (526 KB)
Signed PDF/A format