1409059 [2015] MRTA 793 (11 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 793
(11 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
Rana & Khan Property Group Pty
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE(S):
BCC2014/652650
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Richard Derewlany
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to approve the
nomination.
Statement made on 11 June 2015 at 2:47pm
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration on 2 May 2014 to refuse to approve
the applicant’s
nomination under
Migration Act 1958
(the Act) and r.2.72
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations).
applicant applied for approval on 29 November 2013. A nomination of an
occupation for a Subclass 457 visa is made under s.140GB
of the Act and r.2.73
of the Regulations.
Regulations 2.72(3)
to (12) prescribe the criteria that must
be satisfied for the Minister to approve a nomination by a person. These
criteria are extracted
in the attachment to this decision. For visa applications
made from 23 November 2013, additional criteria are specified in s.140GBA.
delegate decided not to approve the nomination on the basis that the applicant
did not satisfy r.2.72(10)(f) because the delegate
was not satisfied that the
position associated with the nominated occupation of property manager was
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 26 May 2015 to give evidence and
present arguments. Mr Iftikhar Ahmad Rana, the director
of the applicant
business, appeared for the applicant.
applicant was represented in relation to the review by its registered migration
the following reasons, the Tribunal has decided to affirm the decision under
review to refuse the nomination.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
issue in the present case is whether the applicant meets the criteria for
approval of the nomination. The Tribunal must approve
the nomination if the
applicable requirements in r.2.72 and, for nomination applications made from 23
November 2013, s.140GBA have
been met: s.140GB(2).
applicant operates a real estate sales and property management business
(residential and commercial), trading as Century 21 Western
Real Estate, in
Parramatta NSW 2150. The applicant has nominated the occupation of Property
Manager (ANZSCO 612112).
applicant has identified the nominee for the occupation as Mr Rana Mukhtar
Ahmad, a proposed applicant for a Subclass 457 visa,
and the brother of the
director of the applicant business. The nominee is currently performing the
nominated position on a part-time
basis, at approximately 20-21 hours per week.
Terms and conditions of employment
2.72(10)(c)
requires that the terms and conditions of employment of the nominee
will be no less favourable than those that are, or would be,
provided to an
Australian citizen or permanent resident performing equivalent work at the same
set of terms and conditions of employment is less favourable than another set if
the earnings provided for in the first set are
less than those in the other set
and there is no substantial contrary evidence that the first set is not less
favourable than the
other set: r.2.57(3A). ‘Earnings’ is defined in
r.2.57A and includes the person’s wages; amounts applied or dealt
any way on the person’s behalf or as the person directs; and the agreed
money value of non-monetary benefits. Non-monetary
benefits are benefits other
than an entitlement to a payment of money to which the employee is entitled in
return for the performance
of work and for which a reasonable money value has
been agreed by the employee and the employer. Reimbursements are specifically
excluded, as are payments the amount of which cannot be determined in advance,
and certain contributions to a superannuation fund.
circumstances where there are no Australian citizens or permanent residents
performing equivalent work at the same location, the
person must determine the
terms and conditions of employment that would otherwise be provided by a method
specified in instrument
IMMI 09/113: r.2.72(10AA).
requirements do not apply if the annual earnings of the nominee are equal to or
greater than those specified in the written
instrument IMMI 15/050:
r.2.72(10)(AB).
the hearing, the applicant gave further evidence regarding the number of persons
employed in the business, indicating that there
were 5 full-time employees in
addition to the director of the business: 1 property management and sales
manager, 1 trust accountant,
2 sales executives, and 1 office receptionist. It
also employed a number of staff on a part-time basis: 2 part-time property
1 property officer, 1 administration assistant, and 3 sales staff.
Tribunal stated that in contrast to earlier material given to the Department and
also to the Tribunal, the evidence indicated
that there was at least another
Australian citizen or permanent resident performing the role of property manager
in the office. The
applicant confirmed this was the case. The Tribunal explained
that the consideration of r.2.72(10)(c) would thus focus on the terms
conditions of the person performing equivalent work, rather than the labour
market data previously provided. Mr Rana stated,
in relation to the issue of
terms and conditions of employment, that there were different options for paying
salary, namely a lower
base salary and higher commission, or a higher base
salary and lower or no commission. He stated that one person undertook a
sales and property management role, and was paid a little over $40,000
per annum base salary with commission as extra. He stated
that the part-time
property manager worked around 25-30 hours per week, and earned approximately
$40-42,000 for those hours. In the
nominee’s case, a higher salary is paid
because no commission is offered. The person doing the combined sales and
management role split their time in each role on a 50%-50% basis, or at
most 40% sales and 60% property management. Mr Rana stated
that the employees
might also receive a car allowance based on the size of car they used.
relation to the broader issue of market salary rates, Mr Rana stated that if he
hired someone with more experience he would have
to pay them at least around
$60,000. He indicated that the level of $55,000 for the nominee reflected the
market rate for someone
like the nominee with a lower level of experience.
applicant has provided to the Tribunal a copy of its employment agreement with
the nominee, which specifies that the base salary
is $55,000 per annum, based on
a 38 hour week. This equates to $27.8 per hour. The employment agreement does
not include a pre-determined
motor vehicle allowance, but does include a set
mobile telephone allowance of $62 per month ($744 per annum).
the hearing, the applicant provided evidence of a contract agreement with Mr
Vidhan Verma, identified as a Sales Executive/Property
Manager; and an
employment agreement with Mr Baz Yosufi, who is identified as a Sales
Executive/Property Consultant (or Officer).
Evidence has been provided that Mr
Yosufi is paid a base rate of $27 per hour. The contract agreement for Mr Verma
stipulates that
he is paid at the base rate of $30 per hour to provide property
management services at 14.5 hours per week, and that his remuneration
executive services are calculated on the basis of a ‘credit and debit
structure’.
applicant’s representative has submitted that the rates of payment for Mr
Yosufi and Mr Verma are consistent with the proposed
base salary of $55,000 per
annum for the nominee, plus mobile phone allowance of $62 per month.
Tribunal finds that there is at least one other person who is an Australian
citizen or permanent resident, Mr Verma, who is performing
equivalent work of a
property manager as the nominee, at the same location, that is, in the
applicant’s business at Parramatta
NSW 2150. Although the applicant has
not given full details of all the persons undertaking property management work
for the applicant
business, the Tribunal is satisfied that Mr Verma is doing so,
even though he also undertakes property sales work as well. The Tribunal
the view that it is appropriate to consider the terms and conditions relating to
Mr Verma for undertaking this work, in its
assessment of r.2.72(10)(c).
details have also been given of the terms and conditions of employment of Mr
Yosufi, the Tribunal is not satisfied that he
performs equivalent work of a
property manager at the same location. He is clearly identified in the material
given to the Tribunal
as a property officer or consultant, not a property
manager. The Tribunal therefore will not consider his terms and conditions in
its assessment.
Mr Verma’s arrangement with the applicant is a contract agreement, whereby
he is contracted by the applicant to provide
certain services to the applicant,
the Tribunal is satisfied that the agreement sets out the terms and conditions,
including remuneration,
for providing those services. The agreement clearly
specifies that Mr Verma is remunerated for the provision of property management
services at the rate of $30 per hour. Although it was submitted in a covering
email that Mr Verma is paid a car allowance of $110
per week, that information
appears to relate to the terms and conditions for Mr Yosufi. There is no
provision in Mr Verma’s
agreement of a car allowance or any other set or
pre-determined allowance.
Tribunal thus finds that an Australian citizen, Mr Vidhan Verma, is performing
equivalent work to that of the nominee at the same
location. The Tribunal finds
that the earnings provided for in the terms and conditions of that Australian
citizen for performing
the equivalent work are at the rate of $30 per hour. The
Tribunal discounts the different provisions relating to remuneration for
property sales services, as they do not relate to equivalent work to that of the
nominee. Having regard to the definition of
earnings in r.2.57A, the Tribunal is
not satisfied that there are any other payments or non-monetary benefits that
should be included
in Mr Verma’s earnings.
the Tribunal finds that the terms and conditions that are provided to an
Australian citizen performing equivalent work include
earnings of $30 per hour,
equating to $59,280 on a 38 hour week basis.
Tribunal finds that the nominee’s terms and conditions comprise a base
salary of $55,000 based on 38 hours per week, equivalent
to $27.8 per hour. The
Tribunal accepts that the fixed mobile phone allowance of $744 per annum can be
included in the nominee’s
earnings. Having regard to the definition of
earnings in r.2.57A, the Tribunal is not satisfied that there are any other
or non-monetary benefits that should be included in the nominee’s
earnings. The Tribunal thus finds that the terms and conditions
of employment of
the nominee include earnings at the level of $55,744 per annum. The Tribunal
finds that the earnings of the nominee
are less favourable than those of the
Australian citizen performing equivalent work.
Tribunal therefore finds that the terms and conditions of employment of the
nominee are less favourable than the terms and conditions
that are provided to
an Australian citizen performing equivalent work at the same location. Having
considered the material before
it, the Tribunal is satisfied there is no
substantial contrary evidence that the set of terms and conditions of the
nominee is not
less favourable than those of the Australian citizen performing
equivalent work at the same location.
Accordingly,
the Tribunal is not satisfied that the terms and conditions of employment of the
nominee will be no less favourable than
the terms and conditions that are
provided to an Australian citizen for performing equivalent work at the same
location. The Tribunal
finds that the requirements of r.2.72(10)(c) are not
Tribunal finds on the basis of the nominee’s employment agreement that the
nominee’s base annual salary is $55,000.
The Tribunal accepts that the set
mobile phone allowance of $744 per annum can be included in the nominee’s
annual earnings.
The Tribunal is not satisfied that any other amount can be
included in the annual earnings. The Tribunal thus finds that the
annual earnings are $55,744. As the annual earnings are not
equal to or greater than those specified in IMMI 15/050 ($180,000), the
is satisfied that r.2.72(10(c) does apply in this case.
the reasons given above, the Tribunal is not satisfied that the applicant meets
the all applicable criteria for the nomination
to be approved. Accordingly, the
decision under review must be affirmed.
Tribunal affirms the decision not to approve the nomination.
Richard Derewlany
ATTACHMENT - EXTRACTS FROM THE
MIGRATION REGULATIONS 1994
2.72 Criteria for approval of nomination — Subclass 457...
(1) This regulation applies
to a person who is:
(a) a standard business sponsor; or
(b) a party to a work agreement (other than a Minister);
who, under paragraph 140GB (1) (b) of the Act, has nominated an
occupation in relation to a holder of, or an applicant or a proposed
for, a [Subclass 457 visa].
(2) For subsection 140GB (2) of the Act, the criteria that must be
satisfied for the Minister to approve a nomination by a person
are set out in
subregulations (3) to (12).
(3) The Minister is satisfied that the person has made the nomination in
accordance with the process set out in
regulation 2.73.
(4) The Minister is satisfied that the person is:
(a) a standard business sponsor; or
(b) a party to a work agreement (other than a Minister).
(5) The Minister is satisfied that the person has identified in the
nomination the visa holder, or the applicant or proposed applicant
for the visa,
who will work in the nominated occupation.
(6) If the person identifies a holder of a [Subclass 457 visa] (the
visa holder
) for subregulation (5), the Minister is satisfied
that the person:
(a) has listed on the nomination each other holder of a visa of that kind who
was granted the visa on the basis of having the necessary
relationship with the
visa holder as mentioned in clause 457.321 of Schedule 2; and
(b) if the Minister requires the visa holder to demonstrate that he or she
has the skills necessary to perform the occupation —
the visa holder
demonstrates that he or she has those skills in the manner specified by the
(7) For paragraph (6) (a), the Minister may disregard the fact that
1 or more persons required to be listed on the nomination are
not listed,
if the Minister is satisfied it is reasonable in the circumstances to do so.
(7A) In addition to subregulation (6):
(i) the person identifies a holder of a [Subclass 457 visa] (the
) for subregulation (5); and
(ii) the [Subclass 457 visa] was granted after the Minister had waived the
requirements of paragraph 4006A (1) (c) of Schedule 4 on
the basis of a written
undertaking made by the current sponsor of the visa holder (as set out in
subclause 4006A (2) of that Schedule);
the Minister is satisfied that the person has provided, in writing, an
undertaking that is equivalent to the undertaking made by the
current sponsor of
the visa holder; and
(i) the person identifies a holder of a [Subclass 457 visa] (the
) for subregulation (5); and
(ii) the person has listed on the nomination a person described in paragraph
(6) (a); and
(iii) the [Subclass 457 visa] was granted to the person described in
paragraph (6) (a) after the Minister had waived the requirements
paragraph 4006A (1) (c) of Schedule 4 on the basis of a written
undertaking made by the current sponsor of the visa holder (as
subclause 4006A (2) of that Schedule);
the Minister is satisfied that the person has provided, in writing, an
undertaking that is equivalent to the undertaking made by the
current sponsor of
the visa holder.
(8) If the nomination was made before 1 July 2010 — the Minister is
satisfied that the person has provided the following information
as part of the
nomination:
(a) if there is a 6-digit ASCO code for the nominated occupation —
the 6-digit ASCO code;
(b) if there is no 6-digit ASCO code for the occupation, and the person is a
standard business sponsor — the name of the occupation
as it appears in
the instrument in writing made for the purposes of paragraph (10) (a);
(c) if there is no 6-digit ASCO code for the occupation and the person is a
party to a work agreement — the name of the occupation
as it appears
in the work agreement;
(d) the location or locations at which the nominated occupation is to be
carried out.
(8A) If the nomination is made on or after 1 July 2010 – the Minister
is satisfied that the person has provided the following
information as part of
the nomination:
(a) if there is a 6-digit ANZSCO code for the nominated occupation - the name
of the occupation and the corresponding 6-digit ANZSCO
(i) there is no 6-digit ANZSCO code for the nominated occupation; and
(ii) the person is a standard business sponsor;
the name of the occupation and the corresponding 6-digit code as they are
specified in the instrument in writing made for paragraph
(i) there is no 6-digit ANZSCO code for the nominated occupation; and
(ii) the person is a party to a work agreement;
the name of the occupation and the corresponding 6-digit code (if any) as
they are specified in the work agreement;
(d) the location or locations at which the nominated occupation is to be
carried out.
(9) The Minister is satisfied that either:
(a) there is no adverse information known to Immigration about the person or
a person associated with the person; or
(b) it is reasonable to disregard any adverse information known to
Immigration about the person or a person associated with the person.
The meanings of
information
associated with
are explained in
subregulations 2.57 (2) and (3).
(10) If the person is a standard business sponsor — the Minister
is satisfied that:
(a) if the nomination was made before 1 July 2010 - the nominated occupation
corresponds to an occupation specified by the Minister
in an instrument in
writing for this paragraph; and
(aa) if the nomination is made on or after 1 July 2010 – the nominated
occupation and its corresponding 6-digit code correspond
to an occupation and
its corresponding 6-digit code specified by the Minister in an instrument in
writing for this paragraph; and
(b) if required by the instrument mentioned in paragraph (a) or
(aa) — the nomination of an occupation mentioned in the instrument
supported, in writing to the Minister, by an organisation specified by the
Minister in an instrument in writing for this paragraph;
(c) the terms and conditions of employment of the person identified in the
nomination will be no less favourable than the terms and
conditions that:
(i) are provided; or
(ii) would be provided;
to an Australian citizen or an Australian permanent resident for performing
equivalent work at the same location; and
(cc) the base rate of pay, under the terms and conditions of employment
mentioned in paragraph (c), that:
(i) are provided; or
(ii) would be provided;
to an Australian citizen or an Australian permanent resident, will be greater
than the temporary skilled migration income threshold
specified by the Minister
in an instrument in writing for this paragraph; and
(d) if the nomination was made before 1 July 2010 - the person has certified
as part of the nomination, in writing, that:
(i) the tasks of the position include a significant majority of the tasks
(A) the nominated occupation listed in the ASCO; or
(B) the nominated occupation specified in an instrument in writing for
paragraph (a); and
(ii) if the person is lawfully operating a business outside Australia but
does not lawfully operate a business in Australia:
(A) the nominated occupation is a position in the business of the standard
business sponsor; or
(B) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in an
instrument in writing for this sub-paragraph; and
(iii) if the person lawfully operates a business in Australia:
(A) the nominated occupation is a position with a business, or an associated
entity, of the person; or
(B) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in an
instrument in writing for this sub-paragraph; and
(iv) the qualifications and experience of the visa holder, or the applicant
or proposed applicant for the visa, identified in relation
to the nominated
occupation are commensurate with the qualifications and experience
(A) for the occupation in the ASCO; or
(B) if there is no ASCO code for the nominated occupation — for
the occupation in the instrument in writing made for the purpose
of paragraph
(e) if the nomination is made on or after 1 July 2010 – the person has
certified as part of the nomination, in writing, that:
(i) the tasks of the position include a significant majority of the tasks
(A) the nominated occupation listed in the ANZSCO; or
(B) the nominated occupation specified in an instrument in writing for
paragraph (aa); and
(ii) if the person is lawfully operating a business outside Australia but
does not lawfully operate a business in Australia:
(A) the nominated occupation is a position in the business of the standard
business sponsor; or
(B) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in an
instrument in writing for this sub-subparagraph; and
(iii) if the person lawfully operates a business in Australia:
(A) the nominated occupation is a position with a business, or an associated
entity, of the person; or
(B) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in an
instrument in writing for this sub-subparagraph; and
(iv) the qualifications and experience of the visa holder, or the applicant
or proposed applicant for the visa, identified in relation
to the nominated
occupation are commensurate with the qualifications and experience
(A) for the occupation in the ANZSCO; or
(B) if there is no ANZSCO code for the nominated occupation - for the
occupation in the instrument in writing made for paragraph (aa).
(f) the position associated with the nominated occupation is genuine; and
(g) if the person has identified in the nomination the holder of a Subclass
457 (Temporary Work (Skilled)) visa in relation to whom
the requirements in
subclause 457.223(6) of Schedule 2 were met—one of the following
(i) the requirements in subclause 457.223(6) of Schedule 2 continue to be
(A) the holder would be required to hold a licence, registration or
membership that is mandatory to perform the occupation nominated
in relation to
the holder; and
(B) in order to obtain the licence, registration or membership, the holder
would need to demonstrate that the holder has undertaken
a language test
specified by the Minister under subparagraph 457.223(4)(eb)(iv) of Schedule 2
and achieved a score that is better
than the score specified for the test by the
Minister under subparagraph 457.223(4)(eb)(v) of Schedule 2;
the holder demonstrates that he or she has proficiency in English of at least
the standard required for the grant (however described)
of the licence,
registration or membership;
(iii) the holder is an exempt applicant within the meaning of subclause
457.223(4) of Schedule 2;
(iv) unless subparagraph (ii) applies—the holder:
(A) has undertaken a language test specified by the Minister under
subparagraph 457.223(4)(eb)(iv) of Schedule 2; and
(B) achieved within the period specified by the Minister in a legislative
instrument for this subparagraph, in a single attempt at
the test, the score
specified by the Minister under subparagraph 457.223(4)(eb)(v) of Schedule 2;
(h) either:
(i) the person will:
(A) engage the visa holder, the applicant for a visa or the proposed
applicant for a Subclass 457(Temporary Work (Skilled)) visa
only as an employee
under a written contract of employment; and
(B) give a copy of that contract to the Minister; or
(ii) the nominated occupation is an occupation specified by the Minister in
an instrument in writing for sub-subparagraph (e)(iii)(B).
(10AA) For paragraphs (10) (c) and (cc), if no Australian citizen or
Australian permanent resident performs equivalent work in the
workplace at the same location, the person must determine, using the method
specified by the Minister in an instrument
in writing for this
subregulation:
(a) the terms and conditions of employment; and
(b) the base rate of pay, under the terms and conditions of employment;
that would be provided to an Australian citizen or an Australian permanent
resident to perform equivalent work in the person’s
workplace at the same
(10AB) Paragraphs (10) (c) and (cc) do not apply if the annual earnings
of the person identified in the nomination are equal to or
greater than the
amount specified by the Minister in an instrument in writing for this
subregulation.
(10A) The Minister may disregard the criterion in paragraph (10) (cc)
for the purpose of subregulation (2) if:
(a) the base rate of pay will not be greater than the temporary skilled
migration income threshold specified for that paragraph; and
(b) the annual earnings are equal to or greater than the temporary skilled
migration income threshold; and
(c) the Minister considers it reasonable to do so.
(11) If the person is a party to a work agreement (other than a Minister)
— the Minister is satisfied that:
(a) the nominated occupation is specified in the work agreement as an
occupation that the person may nominate; and
(b) if the nomination was made before 1 July 2010 - the person has certified
as part of the nomination, in writing, that:
(i) the tasks of the position include a significant majority of the tasks
(A) if the nomination is made using an ASCO code - the nominated occupation
listed in the ASCO; or
(B) if the nomination is not made using an ASCO code -the nominated
occupation specified in the work agreement; and
(ii) the qualifications and experience of the visa holder, or the applicant
or proposed applicant for the visa, identified in relation
to the nominated
occupation are commensurate with the qualifications and experience specified for
the occupation in the work agreement;
(c) if the nomination is made on or after 1 July 2010 - the person has
certified as part of the nomination, in writing, that:
(i) the tasks of the position include a significant majority of the tasks
(A) if the nomination is made using an ANZSCO code - the nominated occupation
listed in the ANZSCO; or
(B) if the nomination is not made using an ANZSCO code -the nominated
occupation specified in the work agreement; and
(ii) the qualifications and experience of the visa holder, or the applicant
or proposed applicant for the visa, identified in relation
to the nominated
occupation are commensurate with the qualifications and experience specified for
the occupation in the work agreement.
(12) If the person is a party to a work agreement and the work agreement
specifies requirements that must be met by the party to the
agreement — the Minister is satisfied that the requirements of the
work agreement have been met.
RTF format (148 KB)
Signed PDF/A format