Cansdall & Cansdall [2021] FamCAFC 162 (26 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Cansdall & Cansdall
[2021] FamCAFC
Appeal from:
Cansdall & Cansdall
[2020] FCCA 1929
Cansdall & Cansdall (No 2)
[2020] FCCA 1930
Appeal number(s):
SOA 54 of 2020
SOA 55 of 2020
File number(s):
MLC 2209 of 2018
Judgment of:
STRICKLAND J
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – INDEMNITY
COSTS AGAINST SOLICITORS – Where the respondent seeks costs on an
indemnity basis against
the solicitors for the appellant – Where the
application is made consequent upon the appellant’s solicitors advising
this Court part-way through the hearing of the appeals that they had received
instructions to abandon the appeals and the appeals
were subsequently dismissed
– Where an order for costs is justified – Where both appeals were
incompetent and had absolutely
no chance of success – Where the appeals
should not have been filed or been pursued to the point where they were both
mid-way through the hearing – Where there are exceptional
circumstances here which justify an order being made on an indemnity
– Where the appeals were commenced and continued in circumstances where
the appellant properly advised and his solicitors
should have known that the
appeals had no chance of success – Where the contentions in both appeals
as authored by the appellant’s
solicitors and his solicitor-advocate, and
purportedly put on his behalf, were baseless and had absolutely no merit –
the appellant waived privilege and permitted his solicitors to provide to
the court two file notes – Where the file notes provided
demonstrate that the advice given to the appellant from day one was that the
appeals had no chance of success and the instructions
from the appellant on the
basis of that advice was to proceed regardless – Where it is
incomprehensible that there were no
other file notes and correspondence that
would be relevant – Where the solicitors for the respondent were
corresponding with
the solicitors for the appellant correctly pointing out that
the appeals were flawed and should be withdrawn and giving notice that
client would seek costs on an indemnity basis not only against the appellant but
also against the solicitor if the appeals
proceeded – Where the
solicitors – Where
here, there was a significant breach of duty by the
appellant’s solicitors – Costs ordered in the sum as sought by the
respondent.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) rr 19.10, 19.11
Cases cited:
Cassidy v Murray
(1995) FLC 92-633
Colgate-Palmolive Co v Cussons Pty Ltd
(1993) 46 FCR 225
Collins & Collins
(1985) FLC 91-603
[1985] FamCA 15
Fitzgerald (as child representative for A) Legal Aid Commission of
Tasmania)) v Fish v Another
(2005) 33 Fam LR 123
[2005] FamCA 158
Ex Christmas Islanders Association Inc v Attorney-General
[2006] FCA 671
Kohan and Kohan
(1993) FLC 92-340
[1992] FamCA 116
Levick v Deputy Commissioner of Taxation
(2000) 102 FCR 155
Munday v Bowman
(1997) FLC 92-784
22 Fam LR 321
R (A Barrister) and Anor & Roberts and Anor
[2010] FamCAFC
Ridehalgh v Horsefield
[1994] 3 All ER 848
[1994] Ch 205
White Industries (Qld) Pty Ltd v Flower & Hart (A Firm)
156 ALR 169
[1998] FCA 806
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Dates of hearing:
February 2021
Melbourne via video to Adelaide
Solicitor-Advocate for the Appellant
Solicitor for the Appellant
James McConvill & Associates
Counsel for the Respondent
Solicitor for the Respondent
Morrison & Sawers Lawyers
SOA 55 of 2020
MLC 2209 of
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
MR CANSDALL
MS CANSDALL
STRICKLAND J
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. James McConvill & Associates, the appellant husband’s
solicitors, pay the costs of the respondent wife fixed in the sum
$31,105.50.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Cansdall & Cansdall
has been approved by
the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
INTRODUCTION
1 This is an oral application by Ms Cansdall
(“the wife”) seeking an order for costs against James McConvill
& Associates,
the solicitors for Mr Cansdall (“the
2 The costs are sought on an indemnity basis in the amount of $31,105.50.
3 The application is made consequent upon the dismissal on 19 November 2020
of two appeals filed by the husband on 7 July 2020, respectively
numbered SOA 54
of 2020 and SOA 55 of 2020.
4 The application is opposed by the solicitors. However, the amount sought
includes the costs thrown away on 7 December 2020 as a
result of that hearing
having to be adjourned, because of the failure by the husband’s solicitors
to arrange for the husband
to attend that hearing. At that hearing the
solicitor-advocate appearing for the husband indicated that there was no
opposition to
an order covering those costs against the solicitors. Thus, I
proceed on the basis that the application now before the court is only
insofar as it relates to the costs sought, other than those thrown away on 7
December 2020.
5 I record that the solicitors chose not to be represented by independent
counsel, and the husband’s solicitor-advocate, who
is a member of the firm
of solicitors, argued the case for the solicitors.
6 On 14 November 2018, final orders for property
settlement were made by consent. Relevantly those orders provided for a property
at Suburb D in the State of Victoria to be sold forthwith.
7 As a consequence of the husband’s failure to comply with the orders
for that sale, on 4 June 2019, the wife filed an Application
in a Case seeking
specific orders relating to that sale.
8 On 3 July 2019, the husband filed a Response seeking that he have the sole
right to occupy the property, and orders pursuant to
s 79A(1)(b)
[sic] of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”), seeking in effect to
delay the sale of the property, and discharging the order appointing the real
estate agent and substituting another agent.
9 On 15 July 2019, a Judge of the Federal Circuit Court of Australia
dismissed the husband’s s 79A application, provided for
the wife to
have sole occupation of the property after three months, maintained the same
real estate agent, appointed the wife trustee
for sale, and provided for the
sale price to be such amount as was accepted by the wife.
10 On 3 April 2020, the property sold for $350,000, and that sale was
ultimately settled on 17 August 2020.
11 On 15 April 2020, the husband filed an Amended Application in a Case
seeking the following orders:
1. That the Court grant an injunction forthwith,
restraining the sale and settlement for the property situate at C Street, Suburb
(“Family Home”)
from proceeding.
2. That the current contract of sale for the Family Home be set aside forthwith
in its entirety.
3. That the currently appointed real estate agent ... be immediately removed
from any real estate dealings associated with the sale
of the Family Home.
4. That the parties may list the sale of the Family Home with multiple real
estate agencies for the purpose of maximising sale opportunities
5. That the Applicant be provided with access to the Family Home for the
purposes of rubbish removal and preparing the Family Home
7. That the Court grant a cost Order in favour of the Applicant for all costs
associated with this Application.
(Emphasis as per original)
12 For some unexplained reason, on 28 April 2020, the husband filed another
Application in a Case seeking the same orders as in the
Amended Application in a
13 On 26 May 2020, the wife filed a Response seeking dismissal of the
husband’s application, and specific orders of a mechanical
nature to give
effect to one of the orders made on 15 July 2019.
14 At a directions hearing on 9 June 2020, the husband’s solicitor
insisted on the application being listed before a judge,
despite being put on
notice that the court did not have the jurisdiction, or more to the point, the
power, to hear those applications.
15 The matter proceeded before the primary judge on 11 June 2020, when her
Honour found that she did not have the “jurisdiction”
to deal with
the husband’s applications, and they were dismissed.
16 Her Honour did though make the specific orders sought by the wife, and
heard submissions as to the wife’s application for
costs calculated on an
indemnity basis.
17 On 12 June 2020, her Honour delivered her reasons for judgment on the
costs application, and made orders that the husband pay the
wife’s costs
on an indemnity basis fixed in the sum of $14,605, and that that amount be paid
to the wife by way of an adjustment
of the surplus funds payable to the parties
pursuant to the final orders for property settlement made on 14 November
18 On 7 July 2020, as referred to above, the husband filed his appeals
against the orders made by her Honour respectively on 11 June
2020 and 12 June
19 On 14 July 2020, the husband filed an Application in a Case seeking leave
to join the purchasers of the property and the real estate
agent, and a stay of
the orders made by the primary judge, pending the determination of the
20 On the same day the wife filed a Response seeking dismissal of the
husband’s application and costs on an indemnity basis
with such costs to
be paid by the husband and/or his solicitors.
21 Her Honour heard the husband’s application on 12 August 2020, and on
24 August 2020 delivered her reasons for judgment, and
made orders dismissing
the husband’s application and providing for the filing of written
submissions on costs. The wife complied
with that order, but the husband did
not, and at the time of the hearing of the appeals judgment was still
22 The appeals were heard by this Court on 19 November 2020, and part-way
through that hearing the husband’s solicitors obtained
instructions to
“abandon both appeals”. As a result, the wife, through her counsel,
made an oral application for an order
for costs against the solicitors
calculated on an indemnity basis.
23 Orders were then made for the appeals to be dismissed, for the parties to
file written submissions as to the issue of costs, and
for the hearing to take
place on 7 December 2020.
24 The wife complied with the order, but the husband filed his submissions
late. However, more importantly, the solicitors made no
arrangements for the
husband to appear at the hearing. That was necessary because if the inevitable
order for costs was not made
against the solicitors, it would be made against
25 Accordingly, the hearing needed to be adjourned, and the wife made an
application for the costs thrown away, which was not opposed
solicitor-advocate for the husband. However, an order was not made at that time
because it was thought appropriate to conclude
the hearing before any costs
orders were made.
26 The hearing was adjourned to 12 February 2021, when the husband appeared
and further submissions were received.
27 There is no question that an order can be made
providing for the solicitors of the husband to pay the costs of the wife (e.g.
Collins & Collins
[1985] FamCA 15
(1985) FLC 91-603
Cassidy v Murray
[1995] FamCA 91
(1995) FLC 92-633).
28 The first issue though is whether there should be an order for costs at
all. In that regard, at the hearing on 19 November 2020,
the solicitor-advocate
for the husband indicated that he anticipated “receiving instructions not
to oppose an application for
indemnity costs” (Transcript 19 November
2020, p.38 lines 26 – 27), but on 7 December 2020 he said this:
Your Honour, I can say this. I’m formally bound by
my instructions to oppose an order for costs, but from the material and the
the matter has proceeded, I don’t hold any prospect of succeeding in
opposing [a] costs order.
(Transcript 7 December 2020, p.3 lines 32–35)
29 However, regardless of any concession by the husband’s
solicitor-advocate, there can be no doubt that an order for costs
is justified
here pursuant to
of the Act. Both appeals were incompetent and had
absolutely no chance of success. They should never have been filed, or been
to the point where they were both abandoned midway through the hearing
on 19 November 2020, and dismissed as a result.
30 The relevant circumstances to be found in
of the Act that
justify an order for costs are first, the fact that the husband was wholly
unsuccessful in the proceedings
(s 117(2A)(e))
, and secondly, the conduct
of either the husband and/or the solicitors in bringing the appeals and pursuing
(s 117(2A)(c)
and/or (g)).
31 The detail of that will be addressed shortly when considering who the
costs order should be against. I will also leave for the
moment the issue of the
financial circumstances of the parties, because that may not necessarily be
relevant depending on who is
to bear the order for costs. In other words, if it
is the solicitors, then there will be no need to address the financial
circumstances
of the parties, and it was not suggested otherwise by the
husband’s solicitor-advocate.
32 As for how the costs should be calculated, the ordinary rule is that it is
done on a party/party basis, but if there are exceptional
circumstances which
warrant the court departing from that approach, they can be calculated on an
indemnity basis (
Colgate-Palmolive Co v Cussons Pty Ltd
[1993] FCA 536
(1993) 46 FCR
Kohan and Kohan
[1992] FamCA 116
(1993) FLC 92-340
Munday v Bowman
FLC 92-784).
33 Here there are such circumstances. For example, the appeals were commenced
and continued in circumstances where the husband properly
advised, and the
husband’s solicitors, should have known that the husband had no chance of
success. Further, the contentions
in both appeals as authored by the
husband’s solicitors and his solicitor-advocate, purportedly on behalf of
the husband, were
baseless and had absolutely no merit (
Colgate-Palmolive Co
v Cussons Pty Ltd
per Shepherd J at 256).
34 Turning then to the primary issue here, namely whether the order for costs
should be made against the solicitors, as is sought
by the wife.
35 To repeat, the appeals as drawn were incompetent, the written summaries of
argument were baseless, and the oral submissions made
at the hearing were devoid
of all merit.
36 In relation to the appeal against the order dismissing the application
(“the first appeal”), her Honour found that
above, it is probably more accurate to
say that her Honour had no power rather
than no jurisdiction, and her Honour appeared to recognise that in [5] of her
reasons for
judgment. Nothing though turned on that distinction for the purposes
of the appeals, and her Honour was correct to find that she
could not make
the orders sought in the husband’s applications. As her Honour pointed out
in [5] of those reasons, no appeal
had been filed from the orders for the sale
of the property, and her Honour could not vary those orders as the husband
the applications that were before the court.
37 Her Honour did not consider this in her reasons, but it is relevant to
note that the sale had already taken place, and thus it
was not open to grant
“an injunction restraining the sale of the property” or to
“set aside” the “contract
of sale”, or to remove the
real estate agent, or for the husband to have “access” to the
property, all of which
were orders sought by the husband.
38 During the hearing before her Honour an oral application was made by the
husband to stay the order for sale, but her Honour, correctly,
was not prepared
to exercise her discretion to grant a stay of the order because she was not
“satisfied” that the husband
had “identified any factors which
would warrant the granting of a stay” ([8]). I add of course that it would
of no utility to do so because, to repeat, the property had been
39 In the Notice of Appeal filed on 7 July 2020, leave to appeal was sought,
however, the facts outlined in support of that application
were completely
inadequate in demonstrating a basis for granting leave, and not only identified
a finding that the primary judge
did not in fact make, but also referenced
certain evidence as being in her Honour’s reasons, when that was not the
40 Importantly, there was nothing whatsoever in the facts relied upon that
addressed her Honour’s finding that she had no jurisdiction
or power to
make the orders sought. And in any event, no argument was included in the
written summary of argument filed on 2 November
2020, or in the amended summary
of argument filed on 18 November 2020, which addressed the application for leave
41 As for the appeal, in the event that leave was granted, the grounds of
appeal were also completely inadequate. Those grounds were
as follows:
1. The learned Judge erred in failing to order an
Injunction restraining the sale of the property situate at C Street, Suburb D in
the State of Victoria (“the property”);
2. The learned Judge erred in failing to set aside the contract for sale of the
3. The learned Judge erred in failing to order the removal of the Court
appointed Real Estate agent ... in respect of the sale of
the property.
4. The judgment was against the evidence and/or the weight of the evidence;
5. The judgment was otherwise contrary to law.
42 Apart from the two general assertions in Grounds 4 and 5, the balance of
the grounds merely complain that her Honour erred in failing
to make the
specific orders sought. There was no indication as to how her Honour had erred,
and again, significantly, there was no
direct challenge to her Honour’s
finding that she had no jurisdiction or power to make the orders sought, and
that should have
been the primary issue raised in the appeal.
43 Then there were the orders sought in the appeal, and they were equally
deficient. For example, the husband sought to join the purchasers
property to the appeal, and how that could be an order sought in this appeal is
a complete mystery. The husband had filed
a separate Application in a Case
seeking joinder of these third parties, and a stay of the orders the subject of
the appeal. However,
that application was dismissed on 24 August 2020, and there
was no appeal against that dismissal. Thus, there could be no basis for
an order to the same effect in this appeal, and attempting to justify it by the
bare assertion in the summary of argument
that “[t]he Court has power and
amended summary
of argument filed on 18 November 2020).
44 Further, despite the sale already having taken place, another order sought
by the husband in the appeal was an injunction restraining
the sale and
settlement of the property, and the removal of the real estate agent.
45 As referred to above, the husband’s solicitors filed his initial
written summary of argument on 2 November 2020, but they
then sought to file an
amended summary of argument on 18 November 2020, namely the day before the
hearing of the appeal. At the hearing
of the appeal I gave leave to rely on that
amended summary.
46 However, as with the initial summary of argument, the amended summary of
argument was completely without merit, either legally
or factually. Further, to
compare either summary with the reasons given by her Honour in dismissing the
husband’s application,
was like comparing chalk and cheese.
47 Despite there being nothing in the application for leave to appeal, or in
the grounds of appeal, directly challenging her Honour’s
finding as to her
in the amended summary of argument,
was to include the submission that her
Honour’s decision in that regard “ignored the potential application
” and “was therefore a failure by her Honour to consider the
exercise of her discretion under that Section” (paragraph
amended summary of argument filed on 18 November 2020).
48 The husband’s solicitors went on in that summary to identify
of the Act as providing “the Court with jurisdiction and power
to vary or set aside Orders with respect to matrimonial property
where there has
been a ‘miscarriage of justice’ arising from the several particular
factors enumerated in the Section
or by reason of ‘any other
circumstance’”, and submitted that that applied in this matter
(paragraph 45 of the
amended summary of argument filed on 18 November
49 However, there were two insurmountable hurdles to
s 79A(1)(a)
the relevant jurisdiction or power. First, there was no application made by the
husband seeking orders pursuant to that
paragraph. Thus, her Honour could not
have erred by not applying it. Secondly, and equally fatal to this submission,
the miscarriage
of justice has to arise out of events prior to or occurring at
the time of the making of the orders being sought to be varied or
Plainly, this was not the case here, yet not only was that not recognised by the
husband’s solicitors who prepared
the amended summary of argument, but it
was not recognised by the solicitor-advocate, who, to repeat, was a member of
that firm of
solicitors, at the hearing of the appeal. And this, despite the
quote from the one authority cited by the husband’s solicitors
amended summary of argument recording that well-known principle.
50 Although this Court pointed out these hurdles to the solicitor-advocate at
the hearing of the appeal, he persisted in submitting
provided the
sought, but also making the submission
in any event that even if it did not, her
Honour still erred because the husband had presented sufficient evidence in his
material to demonstrate that the wife had sold the property at an
undervalue, and that was all that was required for her Honour to
make the orders
sought by the husband in his applications. Of course, what this submission
overlooked was, if there was no jurisdiction
or power to make the orders sought,
it mattered not what the evidence said.
51 Inexplicably, the solicitor-advocate also submitted that with the evidence
the husband presented, her Honour should have granted
a stay of the orders. How
this overcomes the lack of jurisdiction or power to entertain the applications
that were before her Honour,
which did not include an application for a stay,
was not explained by the solicitor-advocate. Indeed, as referred to above, there
was an oral application for a stay made to her Honour, but to repeat, her Honour
found there was no basis for her to exercise her
discretion in making such an
52 It was also apparent that in this context the solicitor-advocate made up
submissions as he went along. For example, he then submitted
court has inherent jurisdiction to protect its processes” (Transcript 19
November 2021, p.9 lines 22–23)
but without relating that to anything that
her Honour did or did not do, or to anything in the application for leave to
in the appeal.
53 Further, in his convoluted submissions at the hearing of the appeal, the
solicitor-advocate attempted to rely on a separate paragraph
without understanding that it was a separate paragraph, namely (b). In the
context of paragraph (a) he submitted that it could apply
where an order had
become “unworkable”, whereas impracticability is to be found in
54 Her Honour indicated in her reasons for judgment that the proper course
for the husband would have been to appeal the orders for
sale, and in that
regard her Honour was entirely correct. However, the husband’s
solicitor-advocate, without any reference
to authority, and without providing
any basis for the argument, submitted that her Honour was wrong in this regard
and continued
to insist that her Honour had the “jurisdiction” to
make the orders sought.
55 In this context the solicitor-advocate misrepresented what her Honour
found. He insisted that her Honour found that she had no
appeal had been filed. However, what her Honour in fact said was as referred to
above, namely, she had no
the appropriate course for the husband would have been to appeal.
56 In relation to the appeal against the order for costs (“the second
appeal”), her Honour found that there were circumstances
that justified
the making of an order for costs against the husband, and that those costs
should be calculated on an indemnity basis,
because of the husband’s
conduct in pursuing an application where the court had no power to make the
orders sought, and where
properly advised, the husband would have been aware of
57 In the Notice of Appeal leave to appeal is sought, but because it is a
final order, leave is not in fact required. It is relevant
to note though that
if it was, the facts relied on in support of leave to appeal are precisely the
same as the facts relied on in
support of the application seeking leave to
appeal in the first appeal. I rhetorically ask, how could that be, and when I
to the solicitor-advocate for the husband, he was non-responsive,
reverting to the argument that her Honour should have made the
sought. Clearly, that was of no assistance.
58 There was only one ground of appeal here, and that was the general
assertion that her Honour erred; plainly an inadequate pleading.
59 The written summary of argument fares no better, and the description I
used during the hearing was that it was “nonsense”,
and I stand by
that description.
60 The primary argument of the husband’s solicitors was that
applied, and the proceedings were necessary because the wife had
failed to fulfil her “fiduciary duties as trustee”,
accepted a sale price below market value. However, this overlooks the fact,
apart from this not being an order of the court,
that her Honour had no
proceedings were fatally flawed.
61 A secondary argument put by the husband’s solicitors was that even
if the first appeal was dismissed, the appeal against
the order for costs could
still proceed. However, the solicitor-advocate for the husband failed to
appreciate that if the first appeal
was dismissed, then that would mean that her
Honour was correct in dismissing the application, and the husband having been
unsuccessful, there could be no doubt that that provided the circumstance
justifying an order for costs. Indeed, this was the primary
basis for her Honour
making the order for costs, but as referred to above, the conduct of the husband
in bringing the flawed application
was also highly relevant. Thus the second
appeal would have to be dismissed as well.
62 When this was pointed out to the husband’s solicitor-advocate he
submitted that it was incorrect that only one circumstance
justifying an order
for costs needed to be found. That submission of course flies in the face of
authority, for example, the Full
Court decision of
Fitzgerald (as child
representative for A) Legal Aid Commission of Tasmania)) v Fish v Anor
[2005] FamCA 158
(2005) 33 Fam LR 123
, and reveals a lack of understanding of
63 Finally, in the amended summary of argument filed on 18 November 2020, and
repeated at the hearing of the appeal, it was put that
the husband’s
financial circumstances should have resulted in no order for costs being made.
However, her Honour was made aware
of the husband’s then financial
position, and took it into account in ordering that the amount of costs be paid
to the wife
by way of an adjustment of the surplus funds payable to the parties
following the sale of the property.
64 Further, I point out that at the hearing of the appeal, without any
application seeking leave to adduce further evidence, the husband’s
solicitor-advocate sought to make submissions as to the husband’s
financial circumstances since the order for costs was made,
to demonstrate that
her Honour had erred in making that order.
THE DISPOSITION OF THE APPLICATION
65 The husband’s solicitors’ opposition
to a costs order being made against them is twofold. First, it is alleged that
they gave appropriate advice to the husband and he instructed them to pursue the
appeals. Secondly, if that is not the case, then
the only realistic basis for an
order for costs to be made against them is if it is demonstrated that there was
a serious dereliction
of duty, and they argued that that was not the case. They
say that this was “a case of a mistaken yet genuinely believed
understanding
of the Law” (page 1 of the appellant’s submission on
costs filed on 7 December 2020).
66 As to the first issue, at the hearing on 12 February 2021 the husband
spoke on his own behalf, and he waived his privilege by permitting
solicitors to provide to the court two file notes dated respectively 26 August
2020 and 2 October 2020, allegedly recording the
advice given to him about his
prospects upon appeal, and of his potential exposure to a costs order. Those
file notes are as follows:
2019. ... . .......
Your family law matter Mr
Notes: Conference call with client/
James/Sean/Simone
Discussed most recent letter with client and strategy moving forward.
James advised client that while we still had a number of things we could do
in relation to further proceedings with this matter, we
also need to consider
not bankrupting the client, particularly in view of the costs the client is
incurring from the other party
(excluding any of our fees)
We maintain that the law is in our favour however the Judge is clearer
putting up obstacles at every step and therefore even should
we continue our
prospects of success is questionable.
The appeal is still on foot at this time as is VCAT – pending response
as to whether the matter will be heard (VCAT closed due
In relation to the recent letter, James confirmed that despite the appeal the
OS have already taken the costs from the settlement
amount which they are
permitted to do.
James advised client that this was probably the one window of opportunity for
him to walk away without incurring even further costs.
James confirmed that we had really exhausted every possible option at this
James confirmed that he would look at the numbers put forward by the OS and
despite their demands for a response today, we would be
responding tomorrow,
however we would look at accepting this once numbers had been reviewed.
Client would like complaint lodged against the
2019. .... .......
Your family law
Discussed the two appeals
James raised the possibility abandoning the appeal for the stay and only follow
with the costs appeal due to risk of further costs.
James explained the difference between the two appeal
- Stay, even if agreed that the Judge was wrong there is not much that can be
done which may be seen by the Court as unfortunate
but nothing can be done
- Costs – Explained to try and minimise costs to Mr Cansdall that the
other side is seeking against him
Mr Cansdall raised that he is concern that there should be some accountability
for the error of the Judge (if Appeal is successful)
and he wants someone to be
held responsible.
Client instructed to proceed with both appeals
James explained risk of costs
Client advised that he is not prepared to allow OS to get away with what they
James acknowledge Mr Cansdall’s honesty
(As per originals)
67 A number of issues arise from those file notes.
68 First, having waived privilege, it is concerning that the
solicitors’ entire file in relation to the appeals was not made
or at the very least, all other file notes and correspondence wherein advice was
given and instructions received. The
solicitor-advocate conceded correctly that
legal professional privilege had been waived for the entire file, yet it would
be incomprehensible
that there were no other file notes and correspondence that
would be relevant.
69 Secondly, and as an extension of the first issue, it is concerning that
the only file notes produced were those dated 26 August
2020, and 2 October
2020. The most relevant time to explore the advice given and the instructions
received, would be in the lead-up
to the filing of the Notices of Appeal on 7
July 2020, and in the lead-up to the hearing of the appeals on 19 November 2020,
all summaries of argument were in.
70 Thirdly, it is unclear why in the context of the opposition of the
solicitors to an order being made against them, it was those
two file notes that
were released, because they do not assist the primary argument of the
solicitors. For the solicitors to succeed
in that argument, they had to
demonstrate that the advice given to the husband from day one was that the
appeals had no chance of
success, and the instructions from the husband on the
basis of that advice was to proceed regardless, and for that advice to be
at all times thereafter with the same instruction from the husband.
However, in the file note of 26 August 2020, which was a conference
call between
the husband, the principal of the firm who authored the majority of the appeal
documents, the solicitor-advocate who
was a member of the firm, and another
member of the firm, it is recorded that the solicitors maintain “that the
law is in our
favour”. It is then suggested that the “prospects of
success” were “questionable”, but the solicitor-advocate
explained that that comment stemmed from the primary judge’s handling of a
stay application, and not in relation to the merits
of the appeal.
71 Now, nothing could be further from the truth than to suggest to the client
that the law was in his favour, and demonstrates that
the advice being given to
the client was not correct, but presumably it would have been on the basis of
advice such as that that
the client instructed the solicitors to proceed with
the appeals.
72 Importantly, it should be noted that at all times, including at the time
that this file note was made, the respondent’s solicitors
corresponding with the husband’s solicitors, correctly pointing out that
the appeals were flawed and should be withdrawn.
73 Turning to the other file note of 2 October 2020, it might be thought that
that provides some comfort to the husband’s solicitors,
but that is not
74 The context of this note was that on 29 September 2020, the wife’s
solicitors had again written to the husband’s solicitors
pointing out the
flaws in the appeal, and inviting them to discontinue the same prior to the
directions hearing in this Court set
for 6 October 2020, when the appeals would
be listed for hearing. As can be seen there was discussion around abandoning the
appeal, and only pursuing the costs appeal, but the reason for that was
not lack of merit in the primary appeal, but because the
settlement of the sale
of the property had taken place, and thus there was “not much” that
could be done. Again, it is
not apparent that the appropriate advice was given,
and without that advice, the husband instructed the solicitors to proceed with
both appeals.
75 Importantly, on 6 October 2020, orders were made for the filing of
summaries of argument, and for the hearing of the appeal to
take place on 19
November 2020. I again note that I have not been provided with any file notes or
correspondence between the solicitors
and the client between 6 October 2020 and
19 November 2020, but it is readily apparent from the correspondence passing
between the
solicitors in this period, that the advice the solicitors were
giving the husband, was that the appeals had good prospects of success.
example, having received the husband’s initial summary of argument, the
wife’s solicitors again correctly wrote suggesting
that on the arguments
to be put, the appeals were “doomed to fail”, and giving notice that
their client would be seeking
costs on an indemnity basis, not only against the
husband, but also against the solicitors, if the appeals proceeded (paragraph
affidavit of Ms B filed on 7 December 2020).
76 Tellingly, the response by the husband’s solicitors on 11 November
2020 was as follows:
We confirm that we have sought instructions from our
client in relation to the proposed withdrawal of the Appeal based on your
that the Appeal has no prospect of success, however as we do not share
this same view, we confirm that it is our intention to proceed
with the Appeal
as filed. In this regard, we hereby advise that no withdrawal of our Appeal will
be provided.
(paragraph 37, affidavit of Ms B filed on 7 December
77 Finally, although the participation of the husband in the hearing on 12
February 2021 was not particularly helpful, given he was
non-responsive to questions about the advice that he was given and the
instructions that he gave, he did say that he relied
on the expertise and
knowledge of his solicitors, and that he left it to them to undertake what was
required for the appeals.
78 In the circumstances I am satisfied that the primary position of the
husband’s solicitors that they were acting on the instructions
husband having given him appropriate advice cannot be maintained. It is readily
apparent, even from what this Court now knows
husband and his solicitors, that he was not given the correct advice, and indeed
the advice given
was substantially flawed, and devoid of any merit, and the fact
that the husband instructed the solicitors to proceed with the appeals
prevent an order for costs being made against them.
79 That leads to a consideration of the secondary argument, namely that the
relevant principles pursuant to which an order for costs
may be made against
solicitors, do not apply here, and this was a case of a misunderstanding of the
80 The power to order the solicitors of one party to pay the costs incurred
by the other party “arises from the inherent jurisdiction
of the court
over solicitors in their capacity as officers of the court and from the duty of
the solicitor to conduct litigation
with propriety” (
at 79,878).
Cassidy v Murray
, the Full Court, in approving the decision of
Sir Thomas Bingham MR in
Ridehalgh v Horsefield
[1994] 3 All ER 848
set out the principles relevant to an award of costs against a solicitor at
82,364-82,365, namely:
Whereas some of the cases say that there must be
“a serious dereliction of duty” by the solicitor before a costs
can be made against that solicitor, in our view the matters identified by
the Master of the Rolls in
Ridehalgh v Horsefield
accurately reflect the
law, which, in its application to this jurisdiction, can be set out as
1. Pursuant to
Family Law Act
, the Court has jurisdiction to make an
order for costs against a solicitor or a non-party.
2. The [C]ourt should not make such an order without giving the person to be
affected by the order an opportunity to be heard.
3. The Court may make an order for costs against a solicitor without the
necessity to establish that the solicitor has been guilty
professional misconduct.
4. The solicitor has a duty to the Court to promote the interests of justice
whilst at the same time attending to the needs of the
solicitor’s
5. A mistake or error of judgment would not justify an order for costs against a
solicitor. However, misconduct, default or negligence,
any of which are found by
a Court to be of a serious nature, may be sufficient to justify an order.
6. The jurisdiction is compensatory.
82 I note that rr 19.10 and 19.11 of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(“the Rules”) largely reflect the principles approved in
R (A Barrister) and Anor & Roberts and Anor
FamCAFC 147
83 Subsequent authorities confirm that a solicitor commencing and maintaining
proceedings on behalf of a client in the absence of
consideration as to the
legal merits may lead to an award of costs against that solicitor.
84 Goldberg J in
White Industries (Qld) Pty Ltd v Flower & Hart (A
[1998] FCA 806
(1998) 156 ALR 169
said this at 236:
The authorities do not support the proposition that
simply instituting or maintaining a proceeding on behalf of a client which has
no or substantially no prospect of success will invoke the jurisdiction. There
must be something more namely, carrying on that conduct
unreasonably. It is not
clear what is encompassed by ‘unreasonably’ initiating or continuing
proceedings if they have
no or substantially no chance of success. It seems to
me that it involves some deliberate or conscious decision taken by reference
circumstances unrelated to the prospects of success with either a recognition
that there is no chance of success but an intention
to use the proceeding for an
ulterior purpose or
with a disregard of any proper consideration of the
prospects of success
(Emphasis added)
And further at 239:
This analysis of the cases makes it clear that the
enlivened when they have unreasonably initiated or continued an action when it
had no or substantially no prospects of success but
such unreasonableness must
relate to reasons unconnected with success in the litigation or to an otherwise
ulterior purpose or to
a serious dereliction of duty or serious misconduct in
promoting the cause of and the proper administration of justice. Further,
cases establish the proposition that it is a relevant serious dereliction of
duty or misconduct not to give reasonable or proper
attention to the relevant
law and facts in circumstances where if such attention had been given it would
have been apparent that
there were no worthwhile prospects of
85 The Full Court of the Federal Court in
Levick v Deputy Commissioner of
[2000] FCA 674
(2000) 102 FCR 155
, while noting that the jurisdiction to award
costs against solicitors is to be exercised cautiously, approved Goldberg
statements at [44] as follows:
Having said that, it is equally important to uphold the
right of a court to order a solicitor to pay costs wasted by the
solicitor’s
unreasonable conduct of a case. What constitutes unreasonable
conduct must depend upon the circumstances of the case; no comprehensive
definition is possible. In the context of instituting or maintaining a
proceeding or defence, we agree with Goldberg J that unreasonable
conduct must
be more than acting on behalf of a client who has little or no prospect of
success. There must be something akin to
abuse of process; that is, using the
proceeding for an ulterior purpose
or without any, or any proper,
consideration of the prospects of success.
(Emphasis added)
86 In the circumstances of that case, the Full Court was satisfied that the
primary judge had made no appealable error and said this
In the present case, Hill J inferred that the subject
arguments “clearly originated with the lawyers”; that is, Mr Levick
and Mr Fitzgibbon. No challenge can be made to that inference. So this is not a
, where a difficult case was taken to a lawyer by a
client who wished it to be pursued in the court. Neither is it a case, like that
contemplated in
Ridehalgh v Horsefield
, where the lawyer had “to
present, on instructions, a case which he regards as bound to fail”.
This is a case where the lawyers themselves thought up the
“legal” points and advanced them on behalf of the client. It
unreasonable, in the sense of a dereliction of duty (to both the client and the
court), for any lawyer to take that course without
first being satisfied that
the points are, at least, seriously arguable. We agree it was not necessary in
the present case that the
lawyers be satisfied that the points would succeed;
but it was necessary they be satisfied there was a rational basis upon which
they might succeed.
(Emphasis added)
87 French J (as he was then) took up those statements of the Full Court in
Ex Christmas Islanders Association Inc v Attorney-General (Cth) (No 2)
[2006] FCA 671
(2006) 233 ALR 97.
His Honour said at [2] the “preparation and
presentation of the application ... was done at such a poor level of competence
as to amount to a significant breach of duty” by the applicant’s
solicitor. And further, his Honour said this at [21]–[22]:
21. In the present case the way in which the application
was formulated and the argument presented indicated not merely the presentation
of an unarguable case,
it indicated a failure to discharge the
practitioner’s basic duty to consider the legal issues which should have
been considered
before the application was prepared and filed and before
argument on it was presented to the court
22. Having regard to the passages to which I have referred from the decision of
the Full Court in
and the subsequent cases, I do not consider that
the generality of the approach enunciated in
has been relevantly
A costs order may be made under s 43 of the Federal Court Act or O
62 r 9 when the solicitor or counsel has so failed in the duty
proper consideration to the legal and/or factual questions involved in the
preparation and presentation of an application
as to be seriously derelict in
his or her duty to the client and/or the court.
(Emphasis added)
88 Plainly, recalling what I have outlined above as to the initiation of the
appeals and the progressing of the same until part-way
through the hearing on 19
November 2020, when both appeals were abandoned, enlivens the jurisdiction to
order costs against the husband’s
solicitors. To adopt the phraseology of
Goldberg J, they have “unreasonably initiated [and] continued [the
appeals] when [they]
had no prospect of success” and that unreasonableness
relates “to a serious dereliction of duty or serious misconduct”.
his Honour also said, and which applies here, “it is a relevant serious
dereliction of duty or misconduct not to give reasonable
or proper attention to
the relevant law and facts in circumstances where if such attention had been
given it would have been apparent
that there were no worthwhile prospects of
success”. In other words, there was a significant breach of duty by the
solicitors here.
89 To repeat, the amount of costs sought on an indemnity basis is $31,105.50,
and that includes the costs in relation to the aborted
hearing on 7 December
90 I confirm that as discussed, indemnity costs are warranted, given the
extraordinary conduct of the husband’s solicitors,
and I note that when
asked, the husband’s solicitor-advocate indicated that he had no comment
to make as to the reasonableness
or otherwise of the amount of costs sought.
91 Thus, there will be an order that James McConvill & Associates, the
husband’s solicitors, pay the costs of the wife fixed
in the sum of
$31,105.50.
I certify that the preceding ninety-one (91)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 26 August 2021
RTF format (461 KB)
Signed PDF/A format