Franklyn & Franklyn (No. 2) [2021] FamCAFC 160 (24 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Franklyn & Franklyn (No. 2)
FamCAFC 160
Appeal from:
Franklyn & Franklyn
[2021] FCCA 588
Appeal number(s):
EAA 37 of 2021
File number(s):
DUC 63 of 2018
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – Costs
– Application for costs of the appeal – Where the appeal was not
wholly unsuccessful –
Applications dismissed – Where the appeal
succeeded on errors of law – Costs certificates granted in relation to the
appeal and the re-hearing – Where the Independent Children’s Lawyer
sought costs against the mother – Costs ordered
in a fixed sum, but
payment stayed until determination of the parties’ remitted applications.
Legislation:
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
Family Law Act 1975
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) r 19.04(4)
Cases cited:
CDJ v VAJ (No 2)
(1998) 159 ALR 138;
[1998] HCA 76
Cramer v Davies
(1997) 72 ALJR 146
[1998] 1 Leg Rep 20
Re JJT; Ex parte Victoria Legal Aid
(1998) 195 CLR 184
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Heard by way of written submissions
In Chambers
Counsel for the Appellant:
Solicitor for the Appellant:
Urban Family Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Matthew Folbigg Lawyers
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Mr Guterres
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Legal Aid NSW Sydney Central Family Law
DUC 63 of 2018
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
MS FRANKLYN
MR FRANKLYN
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The appellant shall pay the Independent Children’s Lawyer’s
costs of the appeal in the sum of $4,656, the payment of
which sum is stayed
until the parties’ remitted applications for relief under Pt VIII of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) are determined by the Federal Circuit Court of
2. The appellant’s application for costs against the respondent is
3. The respondent’s application for costs against the appellant is
4. The appellant is granted a costs certificate pursuant to the provisions of
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
(Cth), being a
certificate that, in the opinion of the Court, it would be appropriate for the
Attorney-General to authorise a payment
under that Act to her in respect of the
costs incurred in relation to the appeal.
5. The respondent is granted a costs certificate pursuant to the provisions
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
(Cth), being a
certificate that, in the opinion of the Court, it would be appropriate for the
Attorney-General to authorise a payment
under that Act to him in respect of the
costs incurred in relation to the appeal.
6. The appellant and the respondent are both granted costs certificates
pursuant to the provisions of
Federal Proceedings (Costs)
(Cth), being certificates that, in the opinion of the Court,
it would be appropriate for the Attorney-General to authorise payments
that Act to the parties in respect of such part, as the Attorney-General
considers appropriate, of any costs incurred by them
in relation to the new
trial granted by the orders made on 9 July 2021.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Franklyn & Franklyn (No. 2)
approved by the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR
1 On 9 July 2021, orders were made to determine the mother’s appeal
from orders made under both
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”) on 26 March 2021 by a judge of the Federal Circuit
Court of Australia.
2 The part of the appeal brought from the parenting orders made under
of the Act failed, but the other part of the appeal brought from the property
settlement orders made under
of the Act succeeded.
3 At the conclusion of the appeal, the parties and the Independent
Children’s Lawyer (“the ICL”) agreed that costs
reserved for 28 days and an order was made to that effect.
4 Within that stipulated period, both the ICL and the father filed
Applications in an Appeal seeking costs orders against the mother.
orders were made in respect of the applications, on 16 July and 4 August 2021
respectively, to enable the applications’
determination on the papers in
5 In written submissions filed on 4 August 2021, the mother said:
As the respondent father was wholly unsuccessful in the
property aspects
appeal, on 15 July 2021,
we file an application in an appeal for
(As per the original, but emphasis added)
6 The mother did not actually file an Application in an Appeal, but her
submissions will be treated as an application. Nor did she
file any affidavit
evidence to support her rebuttal of the costs applications made by the father
and the ICL or in support of her
own informal costs application.
The ICL’s costs
7 By way of an Application in an Appeal filed on 15
July 2021, the ICL sought costs against the mother in the fixed sum of
8 In support of the application, the ICL relied upon her affidavit filed on
15 July 2021 and her written submissions filed on 23 July
9 In opposition, the mother did not file any affidavit and relied upon only
her submissions filed on 4 August 2021.
10 The ICL is a solicitor employed by Legal Aid NSW. In advance of the appeal
hearing, she filed and served a schedule of her party/party
scale costs
totalling $4,656. Those costs were incurred in relation to only that aspect of
the mother’s appeal which concerned
parenting orders, as the ICL had no
interest in the parties’ property settlement dispute. The ICL seeks to
recoup those costs
because that part of the appeal was wholly unsuccessful.
11 The only submission usefully made by the mother in rebuttal of the
ICL’s application was in these terms:
I would ask that ICL costs not be awarded given the
[mother’s] impecuniosity.
12 But there was no evidence of the mother’s asserted impecuniosity.
She chose not to file any evidence about her financial
circumstances, even
though procedural orders were made allowing her to do so. She was the only
person empowered to adduce evidence
current application. It cannot be accepted she is “impecunious”
– literally
devoid of financial capacity – given the evidence in the
appeal. Having only modest financial circumstances, comprising consideration
both income and assets, is not the same thing as impecuniosity. The
mother’s implication of suffering financial hardship
if ordered to bear a
proportion of the ICL’s costs
(s 117(4)(b))
falters without foundational
13 While the mother may not be able to easily muster $4,656 in payment of the
ICL’s costs in the immediate future, she is yet
to secure her final share
of the parties’ net assets from the remitted property settlement dispute,
which she expects will
yield her exclusive ownership of property worth several
hundred thousand dollars in net value. The ICL was willing to defer receipt
her costs for six months but, instead, payment of the costs should be deferred
until the parties finally resolve their property
settlement dispute, either by
agreement or re-hearing. Any hardship the mother perceives she would experience
in paying the ICL’s
costs should then be entirely alleviated.
Respondent father’s costs
14 By way of an Application in an Appeal filed on 2
August 2021, the father claimed for relief in two different forms, being:
(a) costs of $7,765 against the mother in respect of the
unsuccessful aspect of the appeal from the parenting orders; and
(b) costs certificates in his favour under
Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
(Cth) (“the Costs Act”) in respect
of both the successful aspect of the appeal concerning property settlement
and the subsequent re-hearing of the parties’ applications under Pt
VIII of the Act.
15 Before dealing with the components of the application, it is as well to
observe that there was only one appeal, even though it
comprised challenges to
orders made under two separate parts of the Act. Costs certificates under the
Costs Act may only be granted
if each party to the appeal bears his or own costs
of the appeal. Therefore, if the father’s first application for a costs
order against the wife succeeds, his additional application for costs
certificates must fail.
16 In support of his application, the father relied upon his affidavit and
the written submissions he filed on 2 August 2021.
17 The mother filed written submissions on 4 August 2021, but they were
plainly not filed in response to the procedural orders made
the same day
allowing her until 13 August 2021 to file evidence and submissions in rebuttal
of the father’s application. The
only material placed before the Court by
the mother was her written submissions filed on 4 August 2021, from which it is
opposed the father’s application.
18 In compliance with procedural orders made earlier in the appeal, the
father filed and served a schedule of his party/party scale
legal costs in the
appeal, which totalled $15,531.18. His claim for costs in the sum of $7,765 is
approximately one-half of that
amount, notionally attributed to his successful
resistance of the mother’s appeal from the parenting orders.
19 The father contended his entitlement to one-half of his costs in the
appeal rested on: the mother’s complete lack of success
in challenging the
parenting orders; his sensible concessions made during the appeal hearing in
respect of the property orders; the
mother’s alleged failure to comply
with operable orders upon determination of the appeal; and the lack of evidence
mother’s current financial circumstances.
20 The mother’s challenge to the parenting orders was indeed
unsuccessful, but she was not wholly unsuccessful in the appeal
proceedings (s
117(2A)(e)) because she succeeded with her challenge to the property settlement
orders. During the appeal hearing,
the father’s counsel did make candid
concessions as were warranted (s 117(2A)(c)), but the appeal from the property
orders was still resisted by the father from start to finish. He did
not concede the part of the appeal from the property settlement
orders, let
alone well in advance of the appeal hearing. The appellate contest over the
property settlement orders occupied less
time than that over the parenting
orders, but it still occupied time in the determination of the whole appeal.
21 The father asserted the mother’s failure to comply with operable
orders, thereby precluding him from now re-financing a mortgaged
loan, which he
expects he will have to remedy by invoking s 106A of the Act seeking the
registrar’s execution of a Discharge
of Mortgage form on the
mother’s behalf. That may be so, but the mother’s conduct at large
is an irrelevant consideration
on the question of costs. The only relevant
aspect of the mother’s conduct for present purposes is the manner of her
of the appeal proceedings (s 117(2A)(c)).
22 As for the parties’ financial circumstances, not too much is known
aside from the findings made by the primary judge at first
instance. The father
deposed to his current financial circumstances being much the same, though he
has increased debts. The precise
net value of the parties’ assets and
superannuation interests is not yet clear, but their most valuable assets are
and at least his income is used to service the secured debt. The
father has a reasonable income as a self-employed farmer, but it
fluctuates and
is all but exhausted by meeting his ordinary expenses. According to the evidence
in the appeal, the wife is unemployed
and reliant upon social security payments
to help meet her living expenses. Following remitter of the parties’
property settlement
dispute, another judge is still yet to determine the
division of their assets, but it is certain the mother will receive a share
23 The father’s application for costs is dismissed. He enjoyed success
in respect of the parenting orders, but the mother enjoyed
success in respect of
the property settlement orders. Neither conducted the appeal inappropriately.
Neither was favoured with a grant
of legal aid. The father’s financial
circumstances are modest, but the mother’s could be no better.
24 The father should, however, have costs certificates for the appeal and the
re-hearing of the remitted applications for property
settlement orders. The part
of the appeal from those orders was successful for demonstrated errors of law
after a hearing on the
merits and the father will bear his own costs of the
Cramer v Davies
(1997) 72 ALJR 146).
Appellant mother’s costs
25 In her written submissions filed on 4 August
2021, the mother informally notified of her application for a costs order
the father in the sum of $9,509.43, which sum represented one-half of
her legal costs in the appeal and was therefore claimed in
respect of her
successful challenge to the property settlement orders.
26 The mother incorrectly submitted that her schedule of costs in the total
sum of $19,018.86 was a “costs notice provided under
19.04(4) of the
Family Law Rules
”. It was instead the schedule she was obliged to file in
advance of the appeal pursuant to orders made by the regional appeal
on 25 May 2021. Regardless, unlike the father, the mother failed to demonstrate
those costs were calculated on a party/party
basis according to the scale costs
specified with the
Family Law Rules 2004
27 The only substantive submission made by the mother in support of her
application was that the father was “wholly unsuccessful
appeal insofar as it related to property issues” (emphasis added), but the
submission is rejected as being misconceived. The
appeal was not the
father’s; it was hers. He successfully defended her appeal to the extent
that it challenged parenting orders
and, while her overall appeal was not wholly
unsuccessful, a substantial part of it was.
28 The mother’s application for costs is dismissed. She enjoyed success
in respect of the property settlement orders, but the
father enjoyed success in
respect of the parenting orders. Neither conducted the appeal inappropriately
and nothing can be usefully
added to the earlier commentary about the
parties’ respective financial circumstances.
29 In her submissions, the mother also sought costs certificates under the
Costs Act for the appeal and re-hearing of the parties’
settlement dispute. Such certificates are granted for the same reasons they are
granted to the father.
30 Only the mother and father were parties to the appeal and they each bear
their own costs, which is a pre-condition to the grant
of costs certificates.
The ICL was a participant in, but not a party to, the proceedings (
parte Victoria Legal Aid
(1998) 195 CLR 184
at 207 and 225–226) and
her duty carried over to the appeal (
CDJ v VAJ (No 2)
(1998) 159 ALR 138
at [11]), so the costs order made in favour of the ICL against the mother does
not preclude the grant of costs
certificates to the parties.
I certify that the preceding thirty (30)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 24 August 2021
RTF format (359 KB)
Signed PDF/A format