URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1989/28.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:25:27
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Murphy v R [1989] HCA 28; (1989) 167 CLR 94 (30 May 1989)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
MURPHY v. THE QUEEN AND MURDOCH v. THE QUEEN AND MURPHY v. THE QUEEN
[1989] HCA 28
; (1989) 167 CLR 94
F.C. 89/024
Evidence - Criminal Procedure (N.S.W.)
High Court of Australia
Mason C.J.(1), Brennan(2), Deane(3), Dawson(4) and Toohey(1) JJ.
Evidence - Criminal - Expert evidence - Confession - Opinion of psychologist
that accused of limited intellectual ability - Admissibility
- Listening
device - Warrant to use - Regularity - Sufficiency of material before court on
application for warrant - Whether relevant
to admissibility of evidence -
Listening Devices Act 1984
Criminal Procedure (N.S.W.) - Jury - Challenge for cause -
Jury Act 1977
1988, December 7; 1989, May 30. 30:5:1989
APPLICATIONS for special leave to appeal from the Supreme Court of New South
MASON C.J. AND TOOHEY J. These three applications for special leave to
appeal were heard together. The three applicants - Leslie
Joseph Murphy,
Michael James Murdoch and Gary Steven Murphy - together with Michael Patrick
Murphy and John Raymond Travers were
convicted of murder and of a number of
other offences.
2. The convictions arose from the killing of a young woman, Anita Lorraine
Cobby, in brutal circumstances. She was seized whilst
walking along a
suburban street in Blacktown just before 10 p.m. on the evening of 2 February
1986 and was dragged into a car containing
five men. She was sexually
assaulted in the car and was later the subject of a series of sexual assaults
after she had been dragged
from the car, through a barbed wire fence, and into
a paddock. Her throat was cut.
3. The applicants, Michael Murphy and John Travers were each convicted of
murder (for which the sentence was penal servitude for
life), of taking with
intent to hold for advantage (for which the sentence was sixteen years
imprisonment), of assault and robbery,
immediately after such robbery using
corporal violence wounding the victim (for which the sentence was seventeen
years imprisonment),
of inflicting actual bodily harm with intent to have
sexual intercourse (for which the sentence was twelve years imprisonment) and
of stealing a car (for which the sentence was five years imprisonment, save
for Leslie Murphy, who was sentenced to three years imprisonment).
judge declined to specify non-parole periods and directed that the file of
each man be marked "Never to be released".
4. The present applicants and Michael Murphy appealed to the Court of
Criminal Appeal of New South Wales against their convictions
and sentences; in
each case the appeal was dismissed.
5. Four grounds of appeal are common to all applicants. The first ground
arises from media publicity at the time of their trial.
The trial began in
Sydney on 16 March 1987, following pleas of guilty by Travers. That evening
The Sun, a Sydney newspaper, published
on its front page a photograph of
Travers alongside the headline in bold type: "ANITA MURDER MAN GUILTY". There
followed on the
front page and on p 2 an account of Travers' pleas and the
opening of the trial which named the accused and identified Michael Murphy
the following terms: "Michael Patrick Murphy 34, unemployed, a prison escapee
of no fixed address". The newspaper was on sale
at the time the jury left the
court. On the morning of 17 March the trial judge, Maxwell J., was asked by
counsel for Michael Murphy
to discharge the jury on the ground that the
publication would result in unfair prejudice to his client. The Crown did not
the application, which his Honour acceded to, discharging the jury in
relation to all accused and directing that the trial be relisted
to commence
on the following Monday, 23 March. His Honour expressed his reasons for
discharging the jury in these terms:
" This is clearly introducing to the minds of
the jury the question of character in relation to
this accused person. I am driven to the
conclusion that the jury should be discharged.
It is with great reluctance that I come to this
decision. However, the potential prejudice
engendered by this offending publication cannot,
in my view, be adequately dissipated by any
direction I could give to the jury.
Unfortunately for this jury the problem will not
go away or be blown away by any directions from
the trial judge."
6. There had been extreme media publicity concerning the killing of Mrs.
Cobby, the hunt for her killer or killers, the arrest of
the accused and the
committal proceedings. In its edition of 25 February 1986 The Sun had
published on the front page a large photograph
of Michael Murphy, who was then
being sought for questioning in connection with Mrs. Cobby's death, and on p 3
a detailed recital
of Murphy's prison record together with the fact that he
had escaped from Silverwater Jail on 27 December 1985 and was still at large.
7. Unhappily, later on the same day the jury was discharged, and on the
following day, reference was made in the media, particularly
over the radio,
to the fact that the jury had been discharged by reason of publication of the
description of Michael Murphy as an
unemployed prison escapee of no fixed
address. For instance, in news broadcasts at 12 noon on 17 March 1987 at
least two radio stations
referred to the fact that the trial had been aborted
because Michael Murphy had been identified as a prison escapee.
8. When the Court reconvened on 23 March, an application was made to Maxwell
J. on behalf of each accused to adjourn the trial for
a period of six months.
The application was based upon the publication in The Sun on 16 March and upon
the further publicity of 17
and 18 March. His Honour rejected the
application. In the course of giving his reasons for doing so, his Honour
" This is an unusual trial attended with great
publicity from the moment of detection through to
the present time. It will always be attended
with great publicity and no doubt if the trials
were to be adjourned part of the history would be
regurgitated; that at an earlier stage in March
1987 a trial had been discharged because of some
piece of offending journalism in respect of the
accused Michael Patrick Murphy. I am fully
conscious of the right of an accused person to a
fair trial. I am also conscious of the interests
of the community in having trials brought on with
regularity and expedition.
Rightly or wrongly I have come to the
conclusion that the present problem can be dealt
with by adequate and repeated directions to the
9. The view of the Court of Criminal Appeal was that Maxwell J. had not erred
in this decision and had properly weighed the interests
of the accused on the
one hand and the public interest in the due administration of the criminal law
on the other. Street C.J.,
with whom Yeldham and Finlay JJ. agreed,
considered that, having regard to the directions given by Maxwell J. to the
jury and the
discretion he had as trial judge, there was "no basis for this
Court to interfere by overruling the convictions upon the ground that
Honour erred by not granting the adjournment of six months which had been
10. It is fundamental that, for an accused to have a fair trial, the jury
should reach its verdict by reference only to the evidence
admitted at trial
and not by reference to facts or alleged facts gathered from the media or some
outside source. However, the might
of media publicity in "sensational" cases
makes such a pristine approach virtually impossible. Recognizing this, the
courts have
used various remedies such as adjournment, change of venue,
severance of the trial of one co-accused from that of the others, express
directions to the jury to exclude from their minds anything they may have
heard outside the courtroom and the machinery of challenge
11. It may be that in a particular case none of these remedies will be fully
effective. But it is misleading to think that, because
a juror has heard
something of the circumstances giving rise to the trial, the accused has lost
the opportunity of an indifferent
jury. The matter was put this way by the
Ontario Court of Appeal in The Queen v. Hubbert (1975) 29 CCC (2d) 279, at p
" In this era of rapid dissemination of news by
the various media, it would be naive to think
that in the case of a crime involving
considerable notoriety, it would be possible to
select 12 jurors who had not heard anything about
the case. Prior information about a case, and
even the holding of a tentative opinion about it,
does not make partial a juror sworn to render a
true verdict according to the evidence."
12. It is now just over a hundred years since Waite C.J. commented in
Reynolds v. United States
[1878] USSC 141
; (1878) 98 US 145, at pp 155-156
(25 Law Ed 244, at p
"In these days of newspaper enterprise and
universal education, every case of public
interest is almost, as a matter of necessity,
brought to the attention of all the intelligent
people in the vicinity, and scarcely any one can
be found among those best fitted for jurors who
has not read or heard of it, and who has not some
impression or some opinion in respect to its merits."
Intelligence and literacy are not necessarily synonymous but the message is
13. The importance of a fair trial to an accused must not be underestimated.
But it is not the only consideration. It is important
that anyone charged
with a criminal offence be brought to trial expeditiously. Not only is that
in his or her own interest but it
is in the interest of witnesses and also, in
cases such as the present, in the interest of the family of the victim. It is
to the orderly disposition of the work of the courts that trials are
adjourned unnecessarily. As Maxwell J. observed when declining
further adjournment of the trial of the accused, the trial would continue to
attract great publicity whenever it was heard.
It is true that future
publicity would not necessarily include renewed descriptions of Michael Murphy
as a prison escapee but it
is likely enough that there would be reference to
an aborted trial and some allusion to the reason why it was aborted. However,
the correctness of Maxwell J.'s refusal to grant a further adjournment must be
judged by reference to the situation then existing.
14. It is important to stress that this ground, as with the second, does not
relate to the general mass of publicity. Each is confined
to the reference to
Michael Murphy. It is true that this gives rise to something of a paradox for
specific warnings by Maxwell J.
were likely to create the very danger sought
to be avoided. His Honour dealt with the matter with some generality, as he
to do to avoid that problem. At the same time he did not speak only
of matters extraneous to the courtroom; he spoke of media publicity.
instance, he said in his charge to the jury:
" When you sit as jurors in these trials, you
are not just individuals anymore. You represent
the community. You represent its sense of
justice. The privilege which you have of sitting
in judgment upon some of your fellow men is one
which has corresponding duties and obligations.
It is your duty to act with complete
impartiality, complete detachment and without
letting matters of sympathy, prejudice, sentiment
or emotion play any part. That not only covers
all those persons concerned with the trial, who
in one way or another have been before you, but
those words calling upon an exercise of your duty
to act with complete impartiality, detachment and
without letting matters of sympathy, prejudice,
sentiment or emotion play any part, applies to
matters extraneous to this court room and matters
to which I have already referred to and from
which I will now depart, those matters of
publicity which you have read about, seen or
heard pervaded per medium of the media and I feel
quite confident that you need no further
directions in that regard."
This sort of direction was given on more than one occasion during the trial.
15. In view of the limited nature of the complaint, it is possible and not
inappropriate to dispose of this ground, and indeed the
second ground, on the
narrow basis that Michael Murphy, to whom the offending description related,
is not an applicant before this
Court. The argument of the present applicants
must be that, notwithstanding the absence of any complaint from Michael Murphy
this Court, there was a miscarriage of justice in each of their cases
because the members of the jury were likely to be aware that
Michael Murphy
was a prison escapee and that this would unduly prejudice them against the
other accused. In the circumstances of
the case, the complaint can be put no
higher than that the other accused might be thought of as persons who
associated with a prison
escapee and were therefore likely to be of bad
character. However, Leslie Murphy and Gary Murphy are brothers of Michael
the jury would have realized that they would therefore be likely to
associate with him, regardless of the fact that he was a prison
escapee. They
were not linked in the publicity other than by their family association.
While of course he was named as one of the
accused, Murdoch was not otherwise
linked with the Murphy brothers. In these circumstances the applicants cannot
rely upon the fact
that Michael Murphy may have been prejudiced by the media
publicity. However, it is not necessary to rest our decision in relation
either of these grounds on this relatively narrow basis.
16. A decision as to the proper course to take in such circumstances must be
one for the trial judge. That is not to suggest that
the decision is not
reviewable; but it is to accord full weight to the position of the trial judge
who, generally, is in the best
position to assess what the interests of
justice demand and, by appropriate steps, to try to ensure that an accused
receives a fair
trial. It may be said that there can be no guarantee that
directions given by a trial judge in an effort to counter the effect upon
jury of media publicity will be successful. That is true just as it is true
that there can be no guarantee that a juror may not
have been influenced by
other matters of which he or she has heard before the trial. But, putting to
one side for a moment the question
of challenge for cause, which is the
subject of a separate ground, there is no reason why this Court should
conclude that Maxwell
J. erred in the exercise of his discretion when he
declined to adjourn the trial again. The first ground is accordingly not made
17. Upon the rejection of the application for an adjournment, counsel for the
accused had sought to renew an application which had
first been made on 16
March 1987, namely, to challenge each potential juror for cause and to
cross-examine him or her in support
of that challenge. Maxwell J. refused the
renewed application as he had refused the earlier application. On 16 March he
"... I am not able to come to the conclusion that
any proposed juror in the present proceedings
would have a mind which had become so clogged
with the matter which (counsel) refers to and
relies upon in the application as to prevent that
person from trying a case impartially."
At the hearing on 23 March this test was criticized by counsel for the
accused. The real test, it was said, was whether there was
a real possibility
of the juror being biased in the relevant sense. Accepting that to be so, his
Honour said he was unable to come
to such a conclusion.
Jury Act 1977
(NSW) provides: "A challenge for
cause shall be tried by the presiding judge at the trial." On the hearing of
the first application
to challenge for cause, Maxwell J. had identified the
causes for challenge as:
"That the proposed juror does not possess the
necessary qualifications or that he has some
personal defects which render him incapable of
discharging his duty as a juror or that he is not
impartial or that he has served on another jury
in respect of the same matter or that he has been
convicted for an infamous crime."
These words appear to have been taken from Watson and Purnell, Criminal Law in
New South Wales, 2nd ed (1981), vol 1, p 802. In the
circumstances, any
challenge for cause would be confined to showing that a juror was "not
impartial" because of having read or heard
the description of Michael Murphy.
19. The second ground of appeal alleges that Maxwell J. should have permitted
counsel to challenge jurors for cause. The Court
of Criminal Appeal regarded
the decision to permit a challenge for cause as essentially one that was
within the discretion of the
trial judge. The view taken by the Court is
encapsulated in the following passage from the judgment of Street C.J.:
"There must be a sound basis made out on a prima
facie footing to anticipate the probability of
prejudice on the part of an individual juror.
The fortuitous circumstances that one such juror
disclosed a concern on her part in conjunction
with the media publicity falls short of carrying
the case to the point where it can be said that
the judge no longer had any discretion to
exercise in this field and that the only proper
decision for him to have made would have been
that presently contended for by the appellant."
The reference to "fortuitous circumstances" was a reference to the fact that
one of the potential jurors had asked to be excused,
saying: "I can't give
these people a fair trial". We were not told whether this incident occurred
at the time of the first trial
or the second one and whether the juror's
concern related to publicity surrounding the trial or to earlier publicity.
In rejecting
the ground based on Maxwell J.'s refusal to allow a challenge for
cause, the Court of Criminal Appeal gave its apparent approval
to The Queen v.
Kray (1969) 53 Cr App R 412 and to The Queen v. Stuart and Finch (1974) Qd R
297, though the former was distinguished
in the latter.
20. In Kray Lawton J. permitted a challenge for cause because of publicity,
following conviction of men for murder on 5 March 1969
and before their
further trial for murder on 15 April 1969. His Honour distinguished between
fair comment on the earlier trial and
the situation where newspapers-
"knowing that there is going to be a later trial,
dig up from the past of the convicted who have to
meet further charges discreditable allegations
which may be either fact or fiction and those
allegations are then publicised over a wide area"
(at p 415).
21. Having read the newspapers, Lawton J. concluded that there was "such a
prima facie case of probability of prejudice" that defence
counsel should be
allowed to examine jurors who came into the jury box to be sworn. Lawton J.
was at pains to stress that the combination
of facts which had brought about
the situation before him was "wholly exceptional."
22. In Stuart and Finch the Queensland Court of Criminal Appeal upheld a
refusal by the trial judge to allow a challenge for cause
when there had been
extensive publicity surrounding the events which gave rise to the trial and
conviction of the appellants. As
we read the judgments of the members of the
Court (Douglas, W.B. Campbell and Matthews JJ.), they upheld the trial judge's
because an insufficient foundation of fact had been laid to justify the
examination of prospective jurors. The ruling in Kray was
thought to have
turned on the "peculiar facts" of that case (Douglas J., at p 304) and on "its
own very special facts" (W.B. Campbell
J., at p 327). Matthews J. went
further, commenting (at p 370) that "the only foundation of fact which had
been laid was that matter
prejudicial to the accused had been published by
newspapers and the translation of this into a finding that each of the
prospective
jurors was probably not indifferent between the Crown and the
accused was a matter of speculation and not in the circumstances justified".
23. A challenge for cause based on partiality runs into an obvious
difficulty:
"It seems unlikely that a prejudiced juror would
recognize his own personal prejudice - or,
knowing it, would admit it. However, since there
are no empirical data to contradict his
declaration of detachment, his word is ordinarily
the determining factor. What is more, the more
prejudiced or bigoted the jurors, the less can
they be expected to confess forthrightly and
candidly their state of mind in open court."
(Friendly and Goldfarb, Crime and Publicity,
(1967), pp 103-104, quoted in LaFave and Israel,
Criminal Procedure, (1984), vol 2, pp 766-767)
24. It is beyond question that some foundation must be laid before an
application to challenge for cause will succeed. Ordinarily
this will take
the form, at least initially, of an affidavit relating to the disposition of a
particular juror or jurors. There
may be cases where a reading by the trial
judge of offending material, where it has been published in circumstances that
an inference that members of the jury are likely to have read it and
to have been influenced against the accused, will be enough
acceding to an application to question potential jurors. But they are
exceptional cases. There is still a need to provide
a sufficient foundation of
fact to justify acceding to the application. And the trial judge must still
have regard to the other
considerations mentioned earlier in these reasons; a
decision to refuse an application will not be lightly interfered with.
Notwithstanding
that the jury had been discharged on 17March, the media
publicity relating to Michael Murphy did not bind Maxwell J. to conclude
March that there was such a prima facie case of probability of prejudice that
counsel for the accused should be permitted to
question potential jurors.
Accordingly, the necessary foundation for a challenge for cause could not be
laid and, if his Honour's
decision not to permit such questioning is upheld,
there can be no complaint that challenges for cause should have been
25. As in the case of the adjournment sought, Maxwell J. was not faced with
an easy decision but it has not been shown that he erred
in the decision he
made. Indeed, we consider that his decision and the manner in which he
implemented it by giving suitable directions
to the jury were the appropriate
steps to take in all the circumstances. The second ground accordingly fails.
26. The third ground relied on by all applicants is that Maxwell J. erred in
refusing to allow counsel for the applicants to investigate
the circumstances
leading to the grant of a warrant under
Listening Devices Act 1984
(NSW) and that the Court of Criminal Appeal erred in upholding that decision.
A witness, known only as Miss X, gave evidence of a
conversation she had with
Michael Murdoch at a time when she was equipped with a listening device. A
warrant authorizing the use
of such a device had earlier been granted by a
judge of the Supreme Court of New South Wales pursuant to
Listening Devices
, upon complaint by telephone. It was not contended that
the warrant, on its face, failed to authorize what Miss X had done.
the submission was that counsel should have been permitted to investigate the
basis upon which the warrant had been granted
in the event that
there had been some procedural or substantive error in relation to its issue,
the trial judge should
have rejected
the resulting evidence as not having been
obtained pursuant to a valid warrant.
Section 5(1)
Listening Devices Act
prohibits the use of a
listening device to record or listen to a private conversation.
sub-section is expressed not to apply
to the use of a listening device
pursuant to a warrant granted under
of the Act.
evidence, in civil or criminal proceedings, of a conversation which has come
to the knowledge of a person as
a result of
the use of a listening device in
contravention of
There is, however, a discretion in certain
circumstances, including
proceedings for an offence punishable by penal
servitude for
life, to admit the evidence "if the court considers that the
should be admissible"
(s.13(2)(d)).
In determining whether to admit
evidence the court shall have regard to the matters set out
28. The Court of Criminal Appeal agreed with the trial judge that no
investigation of the circumstances of the grant of the warrant
in relation to
Miss X should be permitted in the course of the trial. In the Court's view,
the warrant was granted by a judge of
the Supreme Court and, being an order of
a superior court, its validity was to be presumed "until it be set aside or
corrected on
appeal or by other due process of law". The question is whether
the presumption of validity could be displaced by a collateral attack
warrant founded on an alleged insufficiency of the materials placed before the
Supreme Court by the applicant for the warrant.
There was no challenge to the
challenge the sufficiency
of the grounds on which the warrant had been
granted. This attack on the warrant was misconceived. The admissibility of
the evidence
of Miss X depended on the existence of the warrant, not on the
sufficiency of the grounds for granting it. In McArthur v. Williams
55 CLR 324 where the validity of a magistrate's warrant of arrest was in
question, Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan
JJ., referring
to the necessity for a
sworn information or complaint to found the issue of a warrant, said (at pp
"But it has never been considered that the
validity of the warrant could depend upon the
nature or sufficiency of the materials upon which
a magistrate granted the warrant if there was an
information on oath before him which, however
irregular, was not a nullity. ... In general
the sufficiency or character of materials which
are required for the purpose of exercising a
discretion is not a matter upon which the
validity of the discretionary act is made to
depend (cf. Cooper v. Booth
[1785] EngR 7
; ((1785) 3 Esp 135,
[1785] EngR 7
; 170 ER 564, at pp 567, 568))."
Where a warrant can be issued by the appropriate authority only upon its being
satisfied of prescribed matters to be shown by the
applicant for the warrant,
the validity of the warrant is not open to collateral attack merely on the
ground that the material laid
before the authority was insufficient to satisfy
it of those matters: see Rubinstein, Jurisdiction and Illegality, (1965),
Groenvelt v. Burwell
[1795] EngR 1872
; (1700) 3 Salk 354 (91 ER 869); and The King v.
Watts (1830) 1 B. & Ad. 166, at p 177
[1830] EngR 215
; (109 ER 749, at p
To determine
the admissibility of evidence obtained by use of a listening device
purportedly under the
authority of a warrant,
court must determine merely
whether the warrant was regularly granted by the Supreme Court. It does not
enquire into the sufficiency
of the material which satisfied the Supreme Court
of the matters referred to in
s.18(2)(b).
There was neither need nor occasion
for the Court in the present case to investigate the basis on which the
warrant had been granted.
29. There was a warrant in existence authorizing the use of a listening
device by Miss X at the time she used it.
Section 5(2)(a)
of the Act was
therefore applicable, with the consequence that there was no contravention of
and therefore no exclusion in terms
It was therefore unnecessary
to call in aid the discretion in
s.13(2)(d).
30. It may be noted that the evidence obtained by the use of the listening
device carried by Miss X was admitted as part of the
case against Murdoch, not
as part of the case against the other applicants. But, on the view we have
taken of the matter, it is unnecessary
to consider the implications that this
situation may have for the other applicants' argument.
31. The fourth and final ground advanced on behalf of all applicants arises
from a remark made by Maxwell J. when charging the jury.
His Honour was
dealing with an argument put on behalf of the applicants that, in so far as
the evidence by police officers was relevant,
that evidence was "a complete
fake". There was a further argument that the applicants or some of them had
been the victims of violence
by police officers. His Honour said:
"Of course, it hardly needs me to say that these
allegations constitute grave allegations against
the police officers concerned. You are entitled
to have regard to the whole of the surrounding
relevant evidence of any submission put to you by
any counsel. If one were, for example, to
include those unidentified detectives, two at a
time, three times, who visited Michael Patrick
Murphy in the interview room and assaulted him in
the absence of the officers taking the record of
interview, there would appear to be some
twenty-six officers involved in these
conspiracies, assaults and fabrications. I am
not again intending to be entering the
fact-finding arena which is your arena not mine,
but not that it proves conclusively one way or
the other, but on the probabilities, on what is
likely to be the situation, and I am not talking
Is it that you get twenty-six police officers?
It is a matter for you. Numbers perhaps do not
count, but it is the acceptability or otherwise
in relation to these alleged assaults,
conspiracies and fabrications that matters.
I say once again that the mere fact that a
witness is a police officer does not bestow extra
credence on his evidence. The worth of what he
swears is to be gauged by the same criteria or
matters as applied to any other class of witness.
The mere fact that he is a police officer does
not entitle the Crown to say: you must accept
that because he is a police officer. Indeed, you
are entitled to look at some of the police
evidence with some caution as I will indicate to
you in a few minutes."
32. Street C.J. summarized the attack made on this part of his Honour's
charge to the jury in the following way:
" The challenge is first that this is not borne
out by the actual allegations made by the
individual accused persons, and secondly, that it
adopts an impermissible global aggregation of the
defence cases thus tending to divert the jury
away from its proper task of considering each
Crown case and each defence case as a separate
33. It is apparent that no one applicant challenged twenty-six police
officers. It is equally apparent that what Maxwell J. was
seeking to do was to
restore to some balance what had been said by counsel during their final
addresses on behalf of the accused.
His Honour made it quite clear that the
issues involved were for the jury to decide. And, when his Honour's remarks
are taken in
their entirety, nothing was said to suggest that the issue for
the jury was the likelihood or otherwise of police officers having
into a conspiracy rather than the question whether the Crown had proved the
case against the accused beyond reasonable doubt.
Cf. Duke v. The Queen
[1989] HCA 1
; (1989) 63 ALJR 139; 83 ALR 650; The Queen v. White (1976) 13 SASR 276. There
is no substance in this ground.
34. There remain three grounds of appeal particular to individual applicants.
One ground, advanced on behalf of Leslie Murphy, alleges
that the trial judge
erred in ruling inadmissible certain evidence proposed to be called on behalf
of Murphy. The evidence was that
of Ricki Sharpe, a consultant psychologist,
whose evidence, it was said, would be that Murphy was of limited intellectual
and that the confessional material adduced through the police record
of interview with him was thereby rendered inadmissible or at
dangerously unreliable.
35. Maxwell J. rejected the proposed testimony as not truly qualifying as
expert evidence, adding that he did so "with some perturbation".
admissibility of Mr. Sharpe's evidence only became an issue immediately before
the case for Leslie Murphy began; that case comprised
his unsworn statement
and two witnesses whose testimony may fairly be said to have been peripheral
to the main issues at the trial.
His Honour gave short reasons for excluding
the evidence. In effect, he said that Mr. Sharpe's report, which had been
made available
to his Honour, excluded brain damage and also any mental
retardation. In those circumstances, the evidence of Mr. Sharpe related
matters of human nature and behaviour within the limits of normality. It was
not, therefore, evidence of an expert in any relevant
sense and related to
matters which the members of the jury could well assess for themselves.
36. Properly to consider this argument, it is necessary to set out the final
summary in Mr. Sharpe's report. It read:
"Leslie Murphy is functioning intellectually at
the level of a ten year old person. He shows
adequate adaptive functioning and could not be
considered to be mentally retarded. His poor
educational performance would seem to be almost
entirely due to a disturbed childhood and
inadequate educational opportunities and not due
to any biological or anatomical reasons.
Leslie Murphy shows severe impairment in most of
the basic educational skills. The greatest
deficits are in his reading and comprehension
skills. Spelling, vocabulary, arithmetic,
reading and comprehension (silent and auditory)
are in the nine to ten year old range.
In my opinion, Leslie Murphy would have had great
difficulty in reading and fully comprehending the
record of interview. It would have taken him
five to ten minutes to read each page with 50%
comprehension. If the record was read to him at
normal speech rate, he would have had
approximately 25% comprehension. His auditory
comprehension is very much dependent on the speed
with which things are read or spoken, whether or
not he is able to follow along by reading his own
copy and whether he is able to make interruptions
so as to mark his own copy to 'jog' his memory at
the conclusion of the reading. I strongly doubt
that he could fully comprehend the medical
authorisations he signed, whether he read them
himself or they were read out to him. I believe
that the words mentioned in the medical
authorisations would not have been within his
vocabulary."
37. The Court of Criminal Appeal regarded the matter as "finely balanced".
Street C.J. saw the question at issue to be, not so much
whether Murphy was
capable of understanding the record of interview when it was read back to him,
but rather whether he was capable
of understanding and answering the questions
that were asked of him. His Honour considered that Maxwell J. was not in
error in excluding
the evidence. Street C.J. had earlier formulated the
question of admissibility in these terms:
" He (Murphy) was undoubtedly substantially
illiterate. But the critical question ... was
whether Leslie Murphy should be treated as in a
special category, apart from the broad range of
persons in society in relation to whom the jury
could bring to bear their own original judgment,
so as to justify putting before the jury this
expert opinion for the jury to take into account
when considering the extent to which the
confessional material should be weighed against
The Court of Criminal Appeal must be taken to have concluded that Murphy was
not within this "special category".
38. The Court went further and held that, even if Maxwell J. had erred, the
case was one for the application of the proviso. The
matter was put this way
by Street C.J.:
"Even allowing for every possible discount in his
favour by reason of the contents of the report of
the psychologist, there remained the convincing
framework of a course of conduct which could
plainly have been accepted by the jury, as it
was, as establishing his guilt. There was no
doubt regarding his involvement in the whole
venture. The precise details as recorded in the
record of interview do not depend upon the level
of intellect of the person being interrogated.
The matters that weighed significantly against
him were stated specifically and precisely by him
in his answers. They were stated, I repeat, in a
vocabulary which does not differ markedly from
his own unsworn statement at the trial. This, to
a substantial extent, points against the
reliability of some of the views expressed in the
psychologist's report."
39. The question of the admissibility of Mr. Sharpe's evidence cannot be
considered in a vacuum. The Crown case against Leslie
Murphy and the other
accused had concluded. It is relevant to enquire - had there been anything in
the cross-examination of the
Crown witnesses to suggest that Murphy's capacity
to understand what was asked of him or what was read back to him was in issue?
40. It is evident, from the cross-examination of police officers and to some
extent from Murphy's unsworn statement, that he disputed
having made the
admissions attributed to him. That is a different matter but it cannot be
dissociated from the questions now under
consideration. It is apparent that
Detective Sergeant Raue, who conducted the interview with Murphy, was asked
questions aimed at
showing that Murphy did not understand what was being put
to him and that he was unable to read the record of interview when it was
presented to him for signature. Raue denied the first allegation. He
conceded the second to the following extent. He said that
interview with Murphy the latter was shown a copy of a statement that had been
made by the applicant Murdoch. Murphy seemed
to have difficulty in reading
some of the words in the statement so Sergeant Raue had the statement read to
him by a police officer.
When the interview with Murphy had concluded,
Sergeant Raue asked Murphy whether he would prefer to read aloud the record of
or have someone read it to him. Murphy said he would prefer to have
the statement read to him and this was done by Sergeant Markwell.
Raue then asked some further questions, the answers to which were recorded by
Detective Constable Heskett and read to Murphy
by Sergeant Markwell. Murphy
then signed each page of the record of interview.
41. There was cross-examination of Detective Constable Heskett along similar
lines to that of Detective Sergeant Raue but, in addition,
that police officer
was questioned with a view to showing that Murphy did not use various words
and expressions attributed to him,
words such as "unconscious", "intercourse",
"penis", "vagina" and "incident". Heskett insisted that Murphy did use those
His evidence corroborated that of Detective Sergeant Raue, namely,
that Murphy understood what was asked of him but had difficulty
Murdoch's statement so that it and his own record of interview were read to
42. No doubt counsel for Murphy was in some difficulty running a line of
cross-examination aimed at showing that his client had
not made the admissions
alleged, and at the same time attempting to show that he could not have made
the admissions in the terms
alleged. But a sufficient foundation was laid to
justify the evidence of Mr. Sharpe, had it been otherwise admissible.
43. Was the evidence proposed to be led from Mr. Sharpe admissible? It is
unnecessary to spend time on the question whether an
expert may give an
opinion on the very issue of fact or law which the court has to determine. It
is doubtful that there is now an
absolute rule precluding an expert witness
from expressing a view as to the ultimate issue: see Cross on Evidence, 3rd
(1986), p 717. But we do not think that question arises here. The
ultimate issue was whether Leslie Murphy gave the answers which
are contained
in the record of interview. That was a question for the jury and Mr. Sharpe's
evidence would not have usurped their
function. His evidence, if accepted,
would have assisted the jury in answering that question in so far as it bore
upon the capacity
of Murphy to comprehend what was read to him and further to
give the particular answers attributed to him in the record. Mr. Sharpe's
report referred to the record of interview and continued:
"I consider there are certain questions put to
Leslie Murphy which may not have been fully
understood by him. As well, in framing his
answers, I consider he used certain words which
would not have been in his vocabulary at the time
and also used certain phrases and sentence
structures which are uncharacteristic of him."
Mr. Sharpe amplified these views by reference to words, phrases and sentence
structures in the record of interview. Of course the
jury may have rejected
this testimony but that is irrelevant to the issue this Court has to
44. The question then is whether the evidence of Mr. Sharpe was admissible
expert evidence. In The Queen v. Turner (1975) QB 834
Lawton LJ., at p 841,
expressed the basis upon which expert evidence is received in terms about
which there can be no quarrel:
"An expert's opinion is admissible to furnish the
court with scientific information which is likely
to be outside the experience and knowledge of a
judge or jury."
45. Later, on p 841, Lawton L.J. added some remarks which may not be so
unquestionable:
"Jurors do not need psychiatrists to tell them how
ordinary folk who are not suffering from any
mental illness are likely to react to the
stresses and strains of life."
There are difficulties with such a statement. To begin with, it assumes that
"ordinary" or "normal" has some clearly understood meaning
corollary, that the distinction between normal and abnormal is well
recognized. Further, it assumes that the commonsense
of jurors is an adequate
guide to the conduct of people who are "normal" even though they may suffer
from some relevant disability.
And it assumes that the expertise of
psychiatrists (or, in the present case, psychologists) extends only to those
who are "abnormal".
None of these assumptions will stand close scrutiny.
46. Nevertheless, before Mr. Sharpe's evidence could be admitted there had to
be some identification of the expertise he could bring
to bear. In particular
the trial judge had to be satisfied that the matters to which he would speak
were outside the experience and
knowledge of the judge and jury. It was not
the case being put forward that Murphy was mentally retarded. His
difficulties, it
was said, related to "a disturbed childhood and inadequate
educational opportunities". By this, we take it, was meant that he had
learned to read properly and that he possessed a very limited vocabulary. No
doubt these were matters to which Murphy himself
could speak, as could members
of his family and friends. As it happens, his unsworn statement speaks only
of "a lot of questions
that I did not answer". He did continue, "nor did the
questions were put to me (sic), I will get to that later", but he did not
describe events and behaviour, expert evidence is unavailable
to explain those
events and that behaviour. Expert opinion will often build upon lay
observations.
47. A problem in the present case is to know whether Mr. Sharpe was to be
called to give evidence as a psychologist or more truly
knowledgeable in the field of literacy. In other words, the question upon
which his opinion may have been sought was
whether Murphy was in truth
"functionally illiterate": see McPherson J. in The Queen v. Barry (1984) 1 Qd
R 74, at p 84. But that
problem was never explored. The argument of counsel
before this Court focused on Murphy's normality or abnormality. With all its
inherent difficulties, this distinction may be a useful guide to the
admissibility of psychiatric evidence (the cases are discussed
by Rosemary
Pattenden in "Conflicting Approaches to Psychiatric Evidence in Criminal
Trials: England, Canada and Australia", (1986)
Criminal Law Review 92). But
it tends to obscure the fact that in a particular case evidence may be offered
to which the distinction
has no relevance. The present case is one such for
it was not Murphy's normality or abnormality that was in issue but rather the
standard of his vocabulary and literacy and thus of his comprehension.
48. It was not suggested at the trial or in the Court of Criminal Appeal that
Mr. Sharpe was not truly qualified to give the evidence
sought from him. At
the trial, when counsel for the accused sought to tender Mr. Sharpe's report,
he handed to the trial judge a
statement of Mr. Sharpe's qualifications. The
Crown Prosecutor's objection to the reception of the report was not that Mr.
lacked the qualifications to express the opinions contained in the
report but that the opinions were not related to matters susceptible
becoming the subject of expert evidence. For that reason the case is to be
distinguished from Clark v. Ryan
[1960] HCA 42
103 CLR 486.
Mr. Sharpe had made a
report which, prima facie, he was equipped to prepare by reason of his
training and which
relevant to
the issue whether Leslie Murphy had given
the answers attributed to him. In our view his testimony should not have
On the face of it, he was an expert sought to be called to give
evidence on a matter calling for his expertise.
49. Once that is accepted, there is really no room for the operation of the
proviso. It is true that Murphy's own statement from
the dock placed him at
the scene of Mrs. Cobby's abduction, assaults and killing. But evidence of the
extent of his involvement,
particularly in the killing, depended almost
entirely upon his record of interview. Had the record of interview been
rejected, it
cannot be said that Murphy would inevitably have been convicted;
it follows that there was a substantial miscarriage of justice:
Wilde v. The
[1988] HCA 6
; (1988) 164 CLR 365, at pp 371-372. Leslie Murphy's conviction for
murder should be quashed and
there should
be a retrial. Murphy's
application
for special leave to appeal is in respect of all his convictions but in the
of argument
his counsel made it clear
that, at least so far as this
ground is concerned, any appeal was restricted to the murder
conviction.
50. Finally, two complaints are made on behalf of the applicant Murdoch only.
The first is made by reason of s.410(1)(a) of the
Crimes Act 1900
(NSW) which
" (1) No confession, admission or statement
shall be received in evidence against an accused
person if it has been induced-
(a) by any untrue representation made to him
by the prosecutor, or some person in
authority; or
Sub-section (2) deems a confession, admission or statement, made after any
such representation, to have been induced "unless the contrary
be shown". A
police officer, Detective Sergeant Kennedy, gave evidence on the voir dire
held to deal with a challenge that had been
made to the admissibility of the
record of interview of Murdoch. The interview in question took place at 12.40
a.m. on Monday, 24
February 1986. Detective Sergeant Kennedy began the
interview by identifying himself and an accompanying detective. He mentioned
the nature of the enquiries being made and then said: "Since I spoke to you
last Friday I have received further information particularly
in relation to
your involvement in this murder. I am going to ask you some questions about
this matter." After administering the
usual caution Kennedy asked Murdoch
several questions, each of which was prefaced with the words "I have been
told" and was followed
by a description of what the detective had allegedly
been told about various events surrounding the commission of the offences.
the course of cross- examining Detective Sergeant Kennedy on the voir dire,
counsel for Murdoch asked a question which lies at
the heart of this
complaint. It is desirable to set out verbatim part of the relevant
transcript.
"Q. Would you have a look at question 4? A. Yes.
Q. You say 'Since I spoke to you on Friday I have
been told that yourself, John Travers, Les
Murphy, Gary Murphy and Michael Murphy were
the five persons responsible for abducting
Anita Cobby in Newton Road Blacktown on
Sunday 2 February 1986?' and you go on. Were
you told that (objected to by Crown
Prosecutor: question pressed: question
(Mr. Bleasel applied to argue the objection.
Application rejected)."
51. Unfortunately the question objected to was not asked in its entirety so
there is an element of speculation as to what it might
have been. However, the
Court of Criminal Appeal took the following view of the matter:
"It seems plain enough, however, that the obvious
and only ground which could have been brought
forward by the Crown was that probing the source
of information received by Det. Sgt Kennedy would
have infringed the anonymity that during the
course of the trial had already been accorded to
the witness, Miss X. There is nothing to suggest
that any other ground could have motivated the
objection or the ruling upholding it."
Proceeding on that assumption, the Court of Criminal Appeal concluded that it
had not been shown that Maxwell J.'s ruling was in error.
Street C.J. said:
"It may not be positively shown that the ruling was soundly based, but being
left, as the Court is, without a
clear intimation of the ground for the
ruling, I am not persuaded that it was erroneous."
52. The Court of Criminal Appeal found a "strong likelihood" that the learned
trial judge refused to allow the question because
"it was protection of the anonymity of the
informant that led to the objection being taken
and ... that was recognised at once by the judge
without his needing to hear evidence about it as
the ground for closing off this particular line
of investigation.
It would no doubt have been preferable for his
Honour to have permitted the matter to be
canvassed a little further, so that the reasons,
both for the objection and for the ruling, would
have been known. At the same time the
proposition regarding the preservation of
anonymity of the informant was present in the
minds of all concerned in this trial."
The transcript provides some support for the view that the cross-examination
for the purpose of ascertaining the identity of the police
informer had
already been ruled on. A few pages earlier the cross-examiner had asked this
"Q. Prior to conducting the second record of
interview with Michael Murdoch, that is the
record of interview dated 24 February 1986, I
suggest to you that you had been told various
things by persons other than Michael Murdoch in
relation to the death of Anita Cobby? (Objected
to by Crown Prosecutor; question rejected as to
form and substance.)"
However, in considering this ground of appeal, there are two related points of
complaint. One is that there was an error on the part
of the trial judge in
refusing to allow the objection to be argued by counsel; the other, that the
trial judge's ruling upholding
the Crown's objection to the question was
erroneous. It was erroneous not to permit argument in support of the
propriety of the
question in cross-examination unless it was clear that there
was no proper basis for allowing it. The earlier ruling by no means
further questioning for the legitimate purpose of testing the application of
s.410(1)(a) of the
. By shutting
out argument on the question, the
trial judge precluded the Court of Criminal Appeal from being satisfied that
applicant did
not seek to rely on s.410(1)(a) at the trial.
53. As the transcript does not show that s.410(1)(a) was not intended to be
raised, it was incumbent on the Court of Criminal Appeal
to consider the
admissibility of the question on the footing that it was intended to found a
submission based on that provision.
On that footing, what ground did the
trial judge have for not allowing the question? It is by no means clear why
cross-examination
of Detective Sergeant Kennedy directed at ascertaining the
information given to him and the identity of the person who had given
have newly disclosed the identity of Miss X. Miss X had already given
evidence and her identity was to that extent known.
The Court of Criminal
Appeal ought to have held that the question ought to have been allowed.
54. But it does not follow that that is sufficient to justify the setting
aside of the conviction. The answer to the question,
had it been allowed, may
or may not have shown that Detective Sergeant Kennedy induced Murdoch's
statement by an untrue representation.
Street C.J. observed that the evidence
that had been adduced, before Detective Sergeant Kennedy detailed the
interview with Murdoch
that led to the record of interview in question, was
that on Sunday 23February 1986, that is, on the immediately preceding day, an
unnamed informant, referred to throughout the trial as Miss X, "had taken part
in an investigatory exercise involving the use of
a concealed listening device
in which she had a conversation with John Travers at the Blacktown Police
Station. That having taken
place on the Sunday, it would be reasonable to
assume that the result of Miss X's venture was promptly made known to Det. Sgt
and that his interview at 12.40 am followed thereafter". However, the
Court of Criminal Appeal was not entitled to make that assumption
pursuing the question which had been improperly disallowed. The Court was in
no position to say whether counsel for Murdoch
could have made out a case,
based on s.410(1)(a), for the rejection of the confessional material. Taking
the view it did of the
purpose of the question, the Court of Criminal Appeal
did not pursue the necessary enquiry. It did not exhaust its function of
ascertaining
whether Murdoch's statement was inadmissible by reason of
s.410(1)(a). That issue having been left undetermined by the trial judge,
had to be determined by the Court of Criminal Appeal. It is therefore
necessary for this Court to take the same course as it
took in Jones v. The
[1989] HCA 16
; (1989) 63 ALJR 312; 84 ALR 193 where the Court of Criminal Appeal had
not fully disposed of the issues
before it. In Murdoch's case
it is necessary
to allow the appeal in part, set aside the order of the Court of Criminal
Appeal dismissing
the appeal in his case
and remit the matter to that Court to
complete the hearing and determination of the appeal to that Court.
meantime, of course,
the convictions stand.
55. In reaching this conclusion, we have not overlooked the fact that the
Court of Criminal Appeal was of the view that, even if
this ground had been
made good, it would have applied the proviso. This was on the basis that the
Court found it "difficult to conclude"
that questions asked by Detective
Sergeant Kennedy and prefaced with a statement as to what he had been told of
Murdoch's involvement
in the offences against Mrs. Cobby were "of significance
in inducing the proffering of confessional material which would not have
otherwise been forthcoming".
56. But s.410(2) of the
, as already noted, deems a confession or
admission made after an untrue representation to have
been induced "unless the
be shown". If there was an untrue representation by Detective
Sergeant Kennedy, any confession
or admission by Murdoch would have
inadmissible unless the Crown could show that he had not been induced thereby.
These matters
were not explored because of the
trial judge's refusal to allow
cross-examination. In those circumstances it is not appropriate
conclusions as to whether
what Kennedy said induced Murdoch's answers. The
proviso is inapplicable.
57. The final complaint also relates to Murdoch alone. As with the previous
complaint, there are unsatisfactory features because
the facts have not fully
emerged. It appears that counsel for Murdoch (Mr. Bleasel) wished to
cross-examine a Crown witness, Detective
Sergeant Kennedy, by reference to a
video tape. The background was that, during the course of the police
investigation, Murdoch
went with police officers to a number of locations
where relevant events were said to have taken place. Still photographs of
locations, featuring Murdoch, were admitted into evidence.
Cross-examination was proceeding on the basis that some of the gestures
by Murdoch shown in the photographs, suggesting some initiative on his part,
were in fact made at the instigation of police
officers. A video tape, it
appears (unfortunately, it is necessary to express the matter in this
uncertain way), was made at the
time Murdoch was being photographed at various
locations. The relevant passage in the transcript reads:
"(Mr. Bleasel sought leave for his instructing
solicitor to approach a video machine in the
court room and place a video cassette into it for
the purpose of showing a film, which course was
objected to by the Crown Prosecutor.
Mr. Bleasel submitted that the course that he was
proposing to adopt would be similar to having a
photograph put in front of a witness and that
witness asked to indicate various things on the
photograph or on a tape recording ...)."
Maxwell J. refused to allow this course to be taken, as to which Street C.J.
" This ruling as a matter of technicality was
fully justified. If cross examining counsel
wished to challenge a witness with what was at
that stage an unproved video film, it would have
been legitimate for him to have shown that to the
witness, but not to the jury at that stage.
It was not sought to be used for the purpose,
that is to say, for the sole purpose of drawing
attention of the witness alone to the film. It
was sought to show the film to the court,
including the jury. There was no undertaking
proffered that the film would in due course be
proved. It was thus entirely technically correct
for his Honour to reject the application at that
stage to display to the jury a video cassette as
to the provenance and reliability of which there
was neither existing evidence nor evidence
foreshadowed as likely to be forthcoming."
58. The factual background has been clarified as a result of an affidavit
sworn by Peter Snelgrove who was solicitor instructing
counsel on behalf of
Murdoch. That affidavit, sworn 6 December 1988, was filed following questions
asked by members of this Court
in an effort to find out just what had happened
at the trial. For present purposes, we shall assume that it is appropriate
this Court admit the affidavit into evidence for this purpose, and that
it does not amount to "fresh" evidence which was denied to
the Court of
Criminal Appeal.
59. Mr. Snelgrove has deposed that he had obtained a video machine and
television which were positioned in the courtroom in such
a way that the
screen could be seen by Maxwell J. and by any witness in the witness box but
not by the jury. There were no human
voices on the tape "although there was
some background noise such as birds and motor vehicles".
60. Although the affidavit indicates that it was possible to screen the video
tape so that the jury could not view the screen, counsel
did not make it clear
to the trial judge that this was what he proposed. Nor did counsel give the
trial judge any assurance that
the playing of the video tape, which
incorporated a sound recording, would not result in evidence being placed
impermissibly before
the jury. Instead the trial judge was given to
understand that the witness would be asked to indicate various things on the
tape as it was screened. If counsel intended to use the video tape for
a different purpose, namely to confront or challenge the
cross-examination, or perhaps to introduce the video tape into evidence, it
was incumbent upon counsel to make such a
purpose plain to the trial judge.
This he did not do. Moreover, counsel failed to make such a purpose clear to
the Court of Criminal
Appeal, as the passage already quoted from the judgment
of Street C.J. reveals. In these circumstances, it would be inappropriate
this Court to deal with the matter on a basis different from that argued in
the courts below. Accordingly, the point is not
one which calls for the
interference of this Court.
61. In the result, we would grant special leave to appeal to each applicant.
We would allow the appeal of Leslie Joseph Murphy against
his conviction for
murder, quash that conviction and order a retrial on that charge. Otherwise
his appeal should be dismissed.
As to the appeal of Michael James Murdoch, we
would set aside the order of the Court of Criminal Appeal dismissing his
that Court and remit the matter to that Court to determine the
appeal, in accordance with the reasons of this Court concerning the
raised by s.410 of the
in relation to the cross-examination of
Detective Sergeant Kennedy. We would dismiss the
appeal of Gary Steven Murphy.
BRENNAN J. I would agree with the reasons for judgment of Mason C.J. and
Toohey J. except on one question. It is a question of
central importance in
the case of the applicant Leslie Joseph Murphy. I do not think that, on the
material before him, Maxwell J.
erred in rejecting the proposed evidence of
the psychologist Mr Sharpe. Maxwell J. gave short reasons for excluding the
noting that Mr Sharpe's report excluded brain damage, biological or
anatomical dysfunction and mental retardation. His Honour rejected
Sharpe's evidence on the basis that in Australia psychological evidence is
excluded in "situations where there is no evidence
of abnormality in relation
to the accused". He cited an article expressing the view that Australian
courts will, to some extent,
"block psychiatric evidence unless the person in
question is abnormal", leaving the jury to assess the person "on a
common-sense
basis". His Honour rejected the evidence "with some
perturbation". The Court of Criminal Appeal regarded the matter as "finely
2. The facts which might have supported the admission of Mr Sharpe's evidence
and the content of the proposed evidence appear from
his report. That report,
dated 17 March 1987, shows that Mr Sharpe made an assessment of Mr Leslie
Joseph Murphy on 11 March 1987
at Parklea Prison. The report does not reveal
the time taken in making the assessment. The report states that Mr Murphy
very poorly in reading, writing, arithmetic and comprehension, but
rules out any biological or anatomical dysfunction as the cause
of his poor
educational performance. Although he performed poorly on the standard general
intelligence test, the report states that
he was not suffering from mental
retardation. The report concludes:
"Leslie Murphy is functioning intellectually at
the level of a ten year old person. He shows
adequate adaptive functioning and could not be
considered to be mentally retarded. His poor
educational performance would seem to be almost
entirely due to a disturbed childhood and
inadequate educational opportunities and not due
to any biological or anatomical reasons.
Leslie Murphy shows severe impairment in most of
the basic educational skills. The greatest
deficits are in his reading and comprehension
skills. Spelling, vocabulary, arithmetic,
reading and comprehension (silent and auditory)
are in the nine to ten year old range.
In my opinion, Leslie Murphy would have had great
difficulty in reading and fully comprehending
the record of interview. It would have taken
him five to ten minutes to read each page with
50% comprehension. If the record was read to
him at normal speech rate, he would have had
approximately 25% comprehension. His auditory
comprehension is very much dependent on the speed
with which things are read or spoken, whether or
not he is able to follow along by reading his own
copy and whether he is able to make interruptions
so as to mark his own copy to 'jog' his memory
at the conclusion of the reading. I strongly
doubt that he could fully comprehend the medical
authorisations he signed, whether he read them
himself or they were read out to him. I believe
that the words mentioned in the medical
authorisations would not have been within his
vocabulary."
3. Evidence of Leslie Murphy's poor reading and comprehension was not
tendered to show the state of mind with which he did the acts
charged in the
indictment. This was not a case where insanity, absence of intention,
involuntariness or diminished responsibility
was in issue. Leslie Murphy's
case was that he had not done the acts charged in the indictment. Mr Sharpe's
opinion was being tendered
in order to contradict the police evidence that
Leslie Murphy had given the incriminating answers they alleged to the
questions they
said he had been asked. The relevant part of Mr Sharpe's report
commenced with this paragraph:
"I have read the statement of Detective Waters
dated 19 May 1986, the statement of Detective
Heskett dated 20 May 1986, and the record of
interview between Detective Raue and Leslie
Murphy dated 24 February 1986. I consider there
are certain questions put to Leslie Murphy which
may not have been fully understood by him. As
well, in framing his answers, I consider he used
certain words which would not have been in his
vocabulary at the time and also used certain
phrases and sentence structures which are
uncharacteristic of him."
4. The admissibility of opinion evidence tendered by an expert depends upon
the fact which is sought to be proved by the admission
of the evidence. As
Wigmore on Evidence (Chadbourn rev. 1979), vol 2, p 750, points out:
"The object is to be sure that the question to the
witness will be answered by a person who is
fitted to answer it. His fitness, then, is a
fitness to answer on that point. He may be
fitted to answer about countless other matters,
but that does not justify accepting his views on
the matter in hand. ... Since experiential
capacity is always relative to the matter in
hand, the witness may, from question to question,
enter or leave the class of persons fitted to
answer, and the distinction depends on the kind
of subject primarily, not on the kind of person."
There was no doubt about Mr Sharpe's expertise as a psychologist but the
question was whether he should be permitted to express an
opinion as to Leslie
Murphy's ability to understand the particular questions allegedly asked of him
by the police and as to the likelihood
of his using the words or phrases
attributed to him in reply. In his unsworn statement Leslie Murphy, not very
coherently, denied
making the material statements attributed to him by the
5. It does not appear from the report that Mr Sharpe enquired about Leslie
Murphy's understanding of the questions which the police
alleged they had
asked him or about Leslie Murphy's familiarity with the actual words and
phrases which Mr Sharpe described as "uncharacteristic"
of him. It appears
that Mr Sharpe assessed education, intellectual functioning, comprehension and
other aspects of the applicant's
psychological state and from that assessment
concluded that "(t)here (were) certain words and phrases in the statements and
of interview that Leslie Murphy would have had difficulty
understanding and which would have impeded his full comprehension of a
particular question." If one poses the question: "Did Mr Sharpe have the
expertise which was necessary to the formation of an opinion
as to Leslie
Murphy's understanding of particular questions or as to his use of particular
words or phrases?" Mr Sharpe's report
does not reveal any expertise which
would lead to an affirmative answer. Mr Sharpe's report was supplemented by a
statement of his
qualifications which was handed to Maxwell J. but there is
nothing in the appeal book or in the argument before us to indicate that
statement of qualifications bore upon Mr Sharpe's possession of the expertise
relevant in this case. Unless it were shown that
the general expertise of a
well-qualified psychologist enables him to say whether a subject understands
particular words and phrases
or enables him to assert the unlikelihood of the
subject's use of particular words and phrases, the opinion evidence which the
sought to adduce from Mr Sharpe was inadmissible. That link in the
chain of admissibility was missing. The onus of establishing
that Mr Sharpe
possessed the relevant expertise rested on the defence: Wigmore, vol 2, p 756.
6. The present case must be distinguished from Lowery v. The Queen (1974) AC
85 where a psychologist was permitted to give evidence
as to the personality
of two accused each of whom sought to cast on the other sole responsibility
for a murder with which they were
jointly charged. The respective
personalities of the two accused in that case were relevant to the issue of
sole responsibility and
a description of their personalities was held to be
within the psychologist's field of expertise. Lowery was distinguished in
v. Turner (1975) QB 834 where the Court of Appeal, pointing out that what
is relevant and admissible depends on the issues in each
case, said (at p
"We adjudge Lowery v. The Queen to have been
decided on its special facts. We do not consider
that it is an authority for the proposition that
in all cases psychologists and psychiatrists can
be called to prove the probability of the
accused's veracity. If any such rule was applied
in our courts, trial by psychiatrists would be
likely to take the place of trial by jury and
magistrates. We do not find that prospect
attractive and the law does not at present
provide for it."
7. It may be that psychologists, after close inquiry of a subject, are
equipped to express an expert opinion on the likelihood of
the subject's
understanding particular questions and using particular words or phrases. If
that is the fact, it did not appear in
Mr Sharpe's report. A court should not
assume the existence of expertise to give an opinion as to the unlikelihood of
conversations
which have been deposed to by another witness unless the
necessary foundation is laid to establish expertise relating precisely to
issue. It may be going too far to say that no psychological evidence could
ever be admissible on this topic (cf. Reg. v. Ashcroft
(1965) Qd R 81, at p
85; Reg. v. O'Callaghan
[1976] VicRp 43
; (1976) VR 441) but the field of relevant expertise
must be clearly and closely defined.
Here the relevant question was not the
general question whether a psychologist's evidence is admissible to prove the
state of mind
of a "normal" accused but the more particular
question whether
Mr Sharpe possessed the expertise needed to express an opinion about
Murphy's understanding of particular
questions and the likelihood of his using
particular words or phrases. Having regard
to the contents of the report -
there being
no other relevant material - I am unable to conclude that the
ruling by Maxwell J. was
8. Taking the approach which he did, Maxwell J. did not direct his attention
to Mr Sharpe's qualifications to express an opinion
on the particular question
which his evidence was to be tendered to prove. Had he decided that Mr Sharpe
did not possess the relevant
expertise, his decision would not have been
readily reviewed: see Clark v. Ryan
[1960] HCA 42
; (1960) 103 CLR 486, at p 503. But
not identify the particular expertise which was relevant to the
admission of Mr
Sharpe's opinion evidence. The admissibility
now falls to be decided on the written report. Since there is no general
that psychological opinion evidence
is admissible
in cases where the issue is
whether a confessional statement was in fact made
and as it does not appear
that the foundation
to establish
the relevant expertise was laid in this case,
I would not allow the appeal
on the ground of wrongful rejection of evidence.
9. I would add some observations relating to the effect of media publicity on
the fairness of a criminal trial. There is a legitimate
public interest in
knowing of the solving of serious crime as well as a legitimate public
interest in having the trial of alleged
criminals conducted free from
prejudice. There may be a tension between the two interests of the public
which has to be resolved:
see per Jordan C.J. in Ex parte Bread Manufacturers
Ltd.; Re Truth and Sportsman Ltd. (1937) 37 SR (NSW) 242, at p 249; Victoria
v. Australian Building Construction Employees' and Builders Labourers'
[1982] HCA 31
; (1982) 152 CLR 25, esp. at pp 59-60,
76-77, 95-97,
98-99, 133-135,
166-168. This is not the occasion to discuss contempt of court
but it should
be remembered that one
of the purposes
of the law of contempt is to prevent
the publication of information which tends
to prejudice the fair trial of
proceedings.
Among the categories of publications which may have that
tendency, even if they
do relate to the solving of serious
publications
which vilify an accused by reference to past criminality or
association
with persons of doubtful repute and
publications of evidence
is to be tendered against an accused over and above the "bare
facts": see
Packer v. Peacock
; (1912) 13 CLR 577, at p 588.
10. In this case we are not concerned with contempt of court but with a
related question: how can a trial judge avoid damage to
the fairness of a
trial in a sensational case when one of the accused is vilified by publicity
alleging that he is a prison escapee.
The jury having been discharged on one
occasion, can the trial proceed after republication of the information in
reports of the
discharge? The avoidance of delay in a trial as well as bias
for or against an accused are both aspects of a fair trial. Sometimes
aspects are in competition. When they are, the trial judge must form a
prudential judgment in determining how fairness can
best be achieved. In
reaching his decision the trial judge is entitled to consider whether any bias
for or against an accused can
be mollified if not abated by appropriate
directions and whether a procedure of questioning jurors on a challenge for
cause is an
appropriate safeguard against the empanelling of biased jurors.
The latter procedure has more attraction in theory than in practice.
theory, one might think that bias can be detected by questioning jurors and
disqualifying those who admit bias. In practice,
the efficacy of the
procedure in detecting bias is doubtful. If the procedure is adopted, it may
lead the jurors to think that the
community's confidence in their impartiality
and sense of responsibility is heavily qualified. A juror who would not
voluntarily
seek to be excused because of bias would not readily confess that
bias under questioning if he were challenged for cause. Though
the procedure
is available, the practice of Australian courts has been against its adoption.
In the Australian community of today,
I think that approach is generally
11. The decision of a trial judge as to the best means of securing a fair
trial in the face of prejudicial pre-trial publicity will
be always difficult
and often finely balanced. It is, of course, a judgment subject to review on
appeal but the opinion of the trial
judge, who can appreciate most acutely the
atmosphere of the trial, is entitled to the greatest weight. In this case,
criticize the decision taken by Maxwell J. in difficult
circumstances. I would grant special leave to appeal but dismiss the appeals
except in the case of Michael James Murdoch. In his case I agree with the
order proposed by Mason C.J. and Toohey J.
DEANE J. I agree with the orders proposed by the Chief Justice and Toohey
J. Subject to what is said hereunder, I am in general
agreement with their
Honours' reasons for those orders.
2. The applicants' attack upon the learned trial judge's refusal to adjourn
the trial by reason of the likelihood of prejudice caused
by the media
publication of the information that Michael Patrick Murphy was "a prison
escapee" cannot, in my view, be diverted by
the riposte that Michael Patrick
Murphy is not an applicant for special leave to appeal. The publication of
that information in a
Sydney afternoon newspaper and on two radio stations
took place some days before the jury which convicted the applicants was
empanelled.
Three of the five accused bore the surname "Murphy"; two of the
five accused were called "Michael". It appears to me to be highly
that any member or members of the jury who had read or heard (or been told of)
the particular piece of information would,
by the time he or she became a
juror, remember the precise identity of the particular accused who was said to
be a prison escapee.
It would be far more likely that such a juror would
remember merely that one of the accused or, at the very most, one of the
brothers, was a prison escapee at the time of the alleged offences.
That being so, this ground of appeal must be approached on the
there was a real likelihood that any prejudicial effect resulting from the
media publication of the particular information
would have been shared by all
accused. Indeed, the unfairness of any such prejudice would, if anything, be
greater in the case of
the applicants who were not prison escapees than in the
case of Michael Patrick Murphy who was. In that regard, it is not suggested
that any of the applicants was in a position where he could, as a practical
matter, avoid the risk of such prejudice by leading positive
evidence to
establish good character. Nor, in circumstances where evidence of bad
character was inadmissible against Michael Patrick
Murphy, could the learned
trial judge remove the risk of unfair prejudice to the applicants by expressly
informing the jury that
none of them was a prison escapee. The practical
effect of such a selective clearance would be to ensure direct prejudice to
Patrick Murphy and, arguably, a degree of prejudice to the other
accused by reason of their obvious relationship or association with
3. In these circumstances, the question whether the trial should be adjourned
for some further period, which confronted the learned
trial judge, was not
without difficulty. There were considerations militating for and against such
an adjournment. The likely prejudice
which would result from knowledge that
one of the accused was a prison escapee would obviously be extremely difficult
to dispel even
by strongly worded directions. Against that were all the
ordinary disadvantages of a lengthy adjournment of a criminal trial. Perhaps
most important, the brutality and consequent notoriety throughout New South
Wales of the abduction, rape and killing of Mrs Cobby
meant that it was
impossible to be confident that one or more members of any future jury would
not have acquired and retained either
the information that one of the accused
was a prison escapee at the time the crimes were committed or some other
comparably prejudicial
piece of inadmissible information about one or more of
the accused. In all the circumstances, the decision to refuse the adjournment
was plainly open to the learned trial judge in the exercise of what was a
discretionary judgment. It has not been suggested that
the vigorous
directions which his Honour gave in a sustained endeavour to overcome the risk
of prejudice through extraneous information
were other than appropriate to the
circumstances.
4. The other question to which I would direct some detailed comment is the
admissibility of the evidence of Mr Sharpe. There was
no dispute about Mr
Sharpe's qualifications as an expert psychologist. The basis upon which his
evidence was rejected in its entirety
was that the matter to which it would
have been directed was not susceptible of expert testimony.
5. The essence of Mr Sharpe's evidence would presumably have been that, after
interviewing and testing the applicant Leslie Murphy,
he had formed the
opinion that Leslie Murphy "is functioning intellectually at the level of a
ten year old person" and "shows severe
impairment in most of the basic
educational skills. ... Spelling, vocabulary, arithmetic, reading and
comprehension (silent and
auditory) are in the nine to ten year old range."
Those were matters which were, in my view, properly the subject of expert
of a qualified psychologist if Leslie Murphy's extraordinarily low
levels of intellectual function, silent and auditory comprehension
linguistic ability were themselves relevant to a question to be decided by the
jury. Indeed, no one but an expert could properly
give evidence grading
Leslie Murphy's level of intellectual functioning and silent and auditory
comprehension by reference to average
general levels of other members of the
community. Certainly, the ordinary juror would lack the specialised knowledge
and experience,
the expertise in administering relevant tests and the
opportunity of appropriate direct examination, necessary for the making of
reliable comparative (i.e. as against the norm) assessment of Leslie Murphy's
levels of intellectual functioning and silent and
auditory comprehension.
6. The question of the reliability of Leslie Murphy's allegedly voluntary
confessional statements was one of the main issues upon
the trial of the
charge of murder against him. Mr Sharpe's expert evidence was not only
relevant on that question. It may have
been of great assistance to the jury
in determining it. As Dixon C.J., McTiernan, Taylor, Windeyer and Owen JJ.
commented in Jackson
v. The Queen
[1962] HCA 49
; (1962) 108 CLR 591, at p 596:
"... where a question arises as to the weight to be
given by the tribunal of fact to a confession of
guilt, no authority is needed for the proposition
that all the circumstances surrounding the making
of it which tend to show either that it can safely
be relied upon or that it would be unwise to do so
are admissible. It would for example be clearly
permissible to show that, at the time a person
confessed to the commission of a crime, he was
drunk or insane or had made it as the result of
fear or under some other form of pressure and to
base upon that evidence an argument that the
confession had little or no probative value."
In short, Mr Sharpe's testimony would have been relevant expert evidence given
by a qualified expert upon a subject which was properly
susceptible of expert
evidence and upon which such expert evidence could well have been of
considerable assistance to the jury.
To the extent that his evidence would
have tended to establish the abnormally low levels of Leslie Murphy's
intellectual functioning,
linguistic ability and silent and auditory
comprehension, it was admissible. Mr Sharpe's conclusions that, on his expert
of Leslie Murphy's relevant capacities, it "would have taken him
five to ten minutes to read each page (of the written record of
with 50% comprehension" and that "(i)f the record was read to him at normal
speech rate, he would have had approximately
25% comprehension" were likewise
admissible as relevant expert testimony on a subject which was susceptible of
expert testimony and
on which such testimony might have been of assistance to
the jury. In my view, it is simply not to the point to say that references
the intellectual level "of a ten year old" child and to reading and
comprehension "in the nine to ten year old range" are unhelpfully
Plainly enough, Mr Sharpe was referring to the average child of nine or ten.
No doubt, he could, if objection had been
taken to the form of his evidence,
have expressed in more concrete terms exactly what he meant by those
references. Nor is it an
acceptable answer to assert that expert evidence is
not admissible on the very question which a jury is required to decide. Such
an assertion is plainly unacceptable as a general rule of the law of evidence.
It would, for example, preclude expert opinion that
a bullet admittedly fired
by an accused was the cause of death in a case where the only defence to a
charge of murder was that death
had resulted from some other cause. In any
event, the relevant question for the jury in the present case was the
reliability of
Leslie Murphy's allegedly voluntary confessional statements.
The critical evidence of Mr Sharpe would, upon analysis, have done no
than establish circumstances which the jury was entitled to take into account
in their consideration of that question.
7. In the course of rejecting Mr Sharpe's evidence the learned trial judge
expressed the view that such psychological evidence should
be rejected in this
country in "those situations where there is no evidence of abnormality".
While, as His Honour pointed out, there
is some support in authority for that
proposition, there is none binding this Court and I do not accept it as a
general principle
of law. It appears to me that expert psychological evidence
of identified and significant difficulty in intellectual functioning
comprehension and expression could well be admissible on the question of the
reliability of a confessional statement notwithstanding
that the identified
difficulty did not take the case out of the lower range of what would be
classified as normal. It is, however,
unnecessary to pursue the question
since I am firmly of the view that, in the context of the present case,
relevant evidence that
an adult accused is functioning intellectually at the
level of a ten year old child, that his comprehension (silent and auditory)
and linguistic ability is in the nine to ten year old range and that he could
have only twenty-five per cent comprehension of the
record of interview read
at normal speech rate is evidence of abnormality. In that regard, it appears
to me to be irrelevant that
those abnormally low levels of intellectual
function, comprehension and linguistic ability were the result of
environmental factors
rather than innate mental defect.
DAWSON J. I, like Brennan J., am unable to agree that the applicant Leslie
Joseph Murphy ought to have been allowed to call a psychologist,
Mr Sharpe, as
an expert witness. Otherwise I agree with the judgment of Mason C.J. and
Toohey J. and with their reasons. Thus I
would grant special leave to each
applicant, but would dismiss the appeals in the cases of LeslieJosephMurphy
and Gary Steven Murphy.
In the case of MichaelJamesMurdoch I would allow the
appeal, set aside the order of the Court of Criminal Appeal and remit the
to that Court to determine the appeal in accordance with the reasons of
this Court upon the issue raised under s.410 of the
Crimes Act 1900
2. The nature of the evidence which Mr Sharpe was intended to give is to be
gleaned only from a report prepared by him and handed
up by counsel for the
applicant. No examination of Mr Sharpe took place upon a voir dire for the
purpose of assessing the admissibility
of his evidence. The report, which is
headed "Psychological Assessment of Leslie Joseph Murphy", reveals that Mr
Sharpe is a consultant
psychologist. No objection was taken to his
qualifications as a psychologist. The report goes on to set out a personal
of the applicant, presumably taken from him, and to rule out any
"biological or anatomical dysfunction". It relates a low score
applicant upon a standard intelligence test, which is put down to a poor
educational background and an inability to read and
comprehend the questions
making up the test. Mr Sharpe expresses the view that the applicant suffers
no mental retardation and shows
no significant impairment in adaptive
function. The report goes on to set out the results of certain tests
conducted by Mr Sharpe
indicating a limited capacity on the part of the
applicant to comprehend the spoken and written word and a similar limited
in expressing himself. Under a heading "Analysis of Police Statements
and Record of Interview" the following statement appears:
"I have read the statement of Detective Waters
dated 19 May 1986, the statement of Detective
Heskett dated 20 May 1986, and the record of
interview between Detective Raue and Leslie Murphy
dated 24 February 1986. I consider there are
certain questions put to Leslie Murphy which may
not have been fully understood by him. As well, in
framing his answers, I consider he used certain
words which would not have been in his vocabulary
at the time and also used certain phrases and
sentence structures which are uncharacteristic of
At the end of the report appears a summary containing the following passages:
"Leslie Murphy is functioning intellectually at the
level of a ten year old person. He shows adequate
adaptive functioning and could not be considered to
be mentally retarded. His poor educational
performance would seem to be almost entirely due to
a disturbed childhood and inadequate educational
opportunities and not due to any biological or
anatomical reasons.
Leslie Murphy shows severe impairment in most of
the basic educational skills. The greatest
deficits are in his reading and comprehension
skills. Spelling, vocabulary, arithmetic, reading
and comprehension (silent and auditory) are in the
nine to ten year old range.
In my opinion, Leslie Murphy would have had great
difficulty in reading and fully comprehending the
record of interview. It would have taken him five
to ten minutes to read each page with 50%
comprehension. If the record was read to him at
normal speech rate, he would have had approximately
25% comprehension."
3. Some of the opinions expressed in the report would appear to extend beyond
the expertise of Mr Sharpe. In particular, there is
nothing to indicate that
his qualifications as a psychologist would equip him to express an expert
opinion whether the use in the
record of interview of phrases and sentence
structures was uncharacteristic of the applicant. Cf. Reg. v. Tilley
[1985] VicRp 50
; (1985) VR
But it may be assumed that had Mr Sharpe been called as a witness, his
evidence would not have been led in the manner
in which his
views are set out
in the report. The essential nature of the evidence which Mr Sharpe was
proffering as an expert is
clear enough,
namely, an opinion that the applicant
was a man with a limited capacity to comprehend the oral and written word and
a limited capacity
to express himself.
4. The purpose for which the applicant sought to tender this opinion was to
found an argument that little or no weight should be
given to admissions
alleged to have been made by him, particularly those contained in the record
of interview. Clearly the capacity
of the applicant to understand what was
asked of him and to express himself in the manner alleged were relevant upon
that issue (see
Jackson v. The Queen
[1962] HCA 49
; (1962) 108 CLR 591, at p 596), but expert
opinion evidence may be inadmissible notwithstanding
that it is relevant.
5. Professor Thayer, writing in 1898, made the following observation with
characteristic perspicacity:
"... any rule excluding opinion evidence is limited
to cases where, in the judgment of the court, it
will not be helpful to the jury. Whether accepted
in terms or not, this view largely governs the
administration of the rule (that opinion evidence
is not generally receivable). It is obvious that
such a principle must allow a very great range of
permissible difference in judgment; and that
conclusions of that character ought not, usually,
to be regarded as subject to review by higher
courts. Unluckily the matter is often treated by
the courts with much too heavy a hand; and the
quantity of decisions on the subject is most
unreasonably swollen." (A Preliminary Treatise on
Evidence at the Common Law, (1898), at p 525)
6. The swell of cases has hardly reduced in the intervening years and the
heavy hand of the courts (and, even more, of academic
commentators) can be
seen in the apparently irresistible tendency to lay down rules and then to
criticize them as being inappropriate
where there is in truth but a single
principle. One such rule is that which says that expert evidence is not
admissible to prove
the behavioural characteristics of normal people. Normal
behaviour, it is said, is within the range of experience of the ordinary
being and hence the ordinary juror. See Chard (1971) 56 Cr App R 268, at p
271; Reg. v. O'Callaghan
[1976] VicRp 43
; (1976) VR 441, at p 444.
7. While the difference between normal and abnormal behaviour, where it is
apparent, may offer considerable guidance, the true principle
does not rest
upon the drawing of a line which must often be difficult, if not impossible.
The principle is simply that evidence
which is put forward to tell the jury
something that is within their own knowledge or experience is not helpful and
not admissible
for that reason. As Lawton LJ. put it in Reg. v. Turner (1975)
QB 834, at p 841:
"An expert's opinion is admissible to furnish the
court with scientific information which is likely
to be outside the experience and knowledge of a
judge or jury. If on the proven facts a judge or
jury can form their own conclusions without help,
then the opinion of an expert is unnecessary. ...
Jurors do not need psychiatrists to tell them how
ordinary folk who are not suffering from any mental
illness are likely to react to the stresses and
strains of life."
8. But the distinction between helpful and unhelpful expert evidence cannot
of its nature be very precise. In the present case
the matter cannot be taken
much further than to say that opinion evidence concerning the applicant's
behavioural characteristics
was not admissible unless the significance of
those characteristics could not be understood without the aid of that
evidence: see
Schultz (1981) 5 A Crim R 234, per Burt C.J. at p.237.
Although the modern attitude towards expert evidence is, perhaps, less
exclusionary
than in the past, it is nevertheless still important to recognize
the dangers of wrongly admitting it. The admission of such evidence
with it the implication that the jury are not equipped to decide the relevant
issue without the aid of expert opinion and
thus, if it is wrongly admitted,
it is likely to divert them from their proper task which is to decide the
matter for themselves
using their own common sense. And even though most
juries are not prone to pay undue deference to expert opinion, there is at
a danger that the manner of its presentation may, if it is wrongly
admitted, give to it an authority which is not warranted. In addition
calling of unnecessary expert evidence tends to prolong a trial, particularly
when it provokes the calling of further expert
evidence in reply. Moreover
there is then a risk that the focus of the trial will shift from the evidence
of the facts in dispute
to the conflict between the competing theories of the
various expert witnesses.
9. In this case, so far as can be judged from his report, Mr Sharpe could go
no further, having regard to his qualifications as
a psychologist, than to
express in substance the opinion that the applicant was poorly educated and of
limited intellectual capacity.
Those were relevant matters for the jury when
assessing the weight to be given to the admissions which the applicant was
to have made and evidence was admissible to prove them. Indeed, the
applicant himself in his unsworn statement made reference to
his inability to
read fast and his lack of understanding, although, curiously enough, he made
no attempt to establish the personal
history upon which Mr Sharpe based a
considerable part of his report. That history would, of course, have been
required to be proved
had Mr Sharpe been allowed to express his opinion.
10. But expert evidence was not required to prove these matters. Expert
evidence would have been admissible to prove some impairment
applicant's capacity which was not discernible by the jury in the ordinary
exercise of their function from facts proved in
the normal way. Mr Sharpe's
report, however, denied any such impairment. The admission in evidence of the
opinion which he was able
to express would have suggested to the jury that
they were not sufficiently equipped by their ordinary, everyday experience
to assess the applicant's capabilities. The learned trial judge
was justified in reaching the conclusion that Mr Sharpe's evidence
have been helpful to the jury and in excluding it for that reason.
Order in Matter No. S2 of 1988
Application for special leave to appeal granted.
Appeal allowed in part.
Set aside the order of the Court of Criminal Appeal in so far as it
dismisses the appeal to that Court against the conviction for
murder. In lieu
thereof order that the appeal to that Court against the conviction for murder
be allowed, that that conviction be
quashed and that there be a new trial.
Otherwise dismiss the appeal.
Order in Matter No.
Application for special leave to appeal granted.
Appeal allowed.
Set aside the order of the Court of Criminal Appeal dismissing the appeal to
that Court.
Remit the matter to the Court of Criminal Appeal to determine the appeal to
that Court in accordance with the judgment of this
Order in Matter No.
Application for special leave to appeal granted.
Appeal dismissed.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter