Mr Baydon Smith v Thunder Tax Pty Ltd [2025] FWC 3405 (13 November 2025)
[2025] FWC 3405
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Application for unfair dismissal remedy
Thunder Tax Pty Ltd
(U2025/11868)
DEPUTY PRESIDENT BUTLER
BRISBANE, 13 NOVEMBER 2025
Application for unfair dismissal remedy – request for permission to
be represented by a paid agent – permission declined
party wants to be represented by a paid agent, they need the Commission’s
permission. The Applicant in these proceedings,
Mr Baydon Smith, has applied
for permission to be represented by a paid agent. Thunder Tax Pty Ltd opposes Mr
Smith’s application
for permission.
Commission may grant permission only
(a) it would enable the matter to be deal with more efficiently, taking into
account the complexity of the matter; or
(b) it would be unfair not to allow the person to be represented because the
person is unable to represent himself, herself or itself
effectively; or
(c) it would be unfair not to allow the person to be represented taking into
account fairness between the person and other persons
in the same
whether to grant permission is a two-step
Commission decides if at least one of the above requirements has been met. If
so, that activates the discretion about whether
permission.
the Commission decides whether to exercise the discretion and grant
permission.
the question of representation the Applicant submitted that the involvement of a
representative would allow the matter to be dealt
with more efficiently. He
submitted this matter is extremely complex in nature, and turns primarily on the
correct standard of proof
an employer should be required to demonstrate for
time-theft. He submitted that the remote working context of the matter is novel.
He submitted the involvement of a representative would help to keep the hearing
focused on the legally relevant issues, therefore
allowing this matter to be
dealt with more efficiently.
Applicant also submitted that it would be unfair not to allow him to be
represented because he is unable to represent himself
effectively. He submitted
this is a complex and nuanced legal matter which he is not equipped to navigate
himself. He submitted the
involvement of a representative would address this
Applicant submitted that it would be unfair to not allow him to be represented
based on the relationship between the Applicant
and the Respondent. He made
assertions about the Respondent’s conduct and said that there had been a
breakdown in relations.
He submitted it would be unfair to force the Applicant
to confront the Respondent directly at a hearing, and that therefore, he should
be allowed to be represented.
Respondent submitted that the general rule under
section 596(1)
is that parties
must appear on their own behalf and permission for representation should only be
granted in limited circumstances
where representation would assist the matter
without causing unfairness to the other party.
disagreed that this is a matter that contains sufficient complexity to grant
permission. It submitted that this matter initially
involves a jurisdictional
issue for which the Applicant can prepare prior to the hearing, with their paid
agent. It said these are
routine matters within the Commission’s expertise
and do not require complex legal submissions or formal advocacy, and in that
regard drew the Commission’s attention to the matter of
Australian Campus Network Pty
submitted that the Commission has been dealing with cases involving remote
working matters in a variety of contexts for 15 years
or more, citing various
single Member decisions in that
It submitted there is
nothing novel in this matter involving remote work.
Respondent disagreed with the Applicant’s submission that “the
involvement of a representative will keep the hearing
focused on the legally
relevant issues.” It pointed out that the paid agent has previously made
numerous errors, including
ex-parte conversations contrary to instruction,
documentation errors, and failure to follow instructions in relation to filing
It pointed out that the paid agent had indicated during the mention
that it might not call any witnesses. It submitted that this
paid agent’s
involvement would prolong the matter rather than expedite it. It disputed the
paid agent’s characterisation
of what this case is about.
Respondent pointed out that the paid agent has sought permission to participate
in the hearing remotely. It submits this is obviously
not efficient. It intends
that its relevant officer, Mr Jeffery will travel to Brisbane to attend
in-person, and submits it does
not seem efficient to have a paid agent granted
permission to represent remotely.
Respondent disputes the proposition that the Applicant cannot effectively
represent himself due to the matter’s complexity.
It points out the
applicant is 55 years old, has an undergraduate and a Masters degree, and
operates in the same industry as the
Respondent. It submits that the Applicant
appears to have had greater experience than the Respondent (presumably a
reference to Mr
Jeffery), and has had the benefit of paid assistance to prepare
his case. The Respondent submits that it is extremely unlikely that
meets any criteria of being unable to represent himself.
Respondent submits that allowing paid representation here would create an
imbalance, particularly as the Respondent is a small
business employer with
limited resources and without access to paid advocates. It submits the
experience of both the Applicant and
the Respondent (again, presumably a
reference to Mr Jeffery) is roughly equivalent, and the addition of paid
representation would
create an imbalance.
Respondent submitted the Commission regularly conducts hearings where employment
relationships have broken down. This is not sufficient
to justify professional
representation. It referred the Commission to
Warrell vs Walton
as authority for the proposition that allowing representation “is
a decision which may fundamentally change the dynamics and
manner in which a
hearing is conducted. It is apparent from the very terms of
that a party
“in a matter before FWA” must normally appear on his own
behalf.” It also referred to a single Member
decision in
Tas Manoleskos
v Valspar Paint (Australia) Pty Ltd
noting an imbalance if one party was represented.
Respondent also submitted it is a small business employer. It submits the
Parliament designed the Small Business Fair Dismissal
Code to simplify unfair
dismissal processes for small employers. It submitted that the Commission is
expected to ensure such matters
remain accessible, informal, and cost effective.
In that regard it referred the Commission to paragraphs 2291 and 2292 of the
Explanatory
Memorandum to the
Fair Work Bill 2008
. It submits that
allowing professional representation to the Applicant where the Respondent does
not hold representation directly
undermines that
Consideration and disposition
have carefully considered the parties’ submissions.
not persuaded that allowing the Applicant to be represented by a paid agent
would enable the matter to be dealt with more efficiently,
taking into account
the complexity of the matter. The paid agent firm has attempted to file
documentary evidence without annexing
it to a witness statement as directed,
sent ex parte correspondence to my chambers, and seemed to have given limited
consideration,
prior to the mention in this matter, as to whether and if so how
many witnesses would be called. These matters suggest a lack of
familiarity that
militates against a finding that their participation in the hearing or
determinative conference would enable the
matter to be dealt with more
efficiently, taking into account the complexity of the matter.
the Applicant’s own case, as set out in his application, he was employed
as “Head of Portfolio Construction”
and his duties involved
identifying investment opportunities, constructing model portfolios, and
supporting financial planners in
delivering investment advice to clients. He has
not provided any material on which I could be satisfied that he would be unable
represent himself effectively.
to fairness as between the parties I do not consider that the state of their
relationship gives rise to some issue of fairness
as between the two of them
that would make it unfair for Mr Smith not to be represented by a paid
follows that the discretion under
section 596
Fair Work Act
enlivened. As it is not enlivened, the application for permission for the
Applicant to be represented by a paid agent is dismissed.
accordingly.
DEPUTY PRESIDENT
On the papers.
Fair Work Act 2009
section 596(2)
Warrell v Fair Work
[2013] FCA 291.
Wright, Damian Andrew v
Runge ICT Group Pty Ltd T/A Runge Networks
Barnett, Simon v FMG T/A Fortescue
Karbowiak, Kirsten v 1000 Mile Travel Group Pty Ltd
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government
RTF format (2.91 MB)
Signed PDF/A format