URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/HCA/1936/64.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 12:42:49
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxes (SA) v Elder's Trustee & Executor Co Ltd [1936] HCA 64; (1936) 57 CLR 610 (10 December 1936)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
The Deputy Federal Commissioner of Taxes (South
Australia) Respondent, Appellant; and Elder's Trustee and Executor
Company Limited
Appellant, Respondent.
On appeal from the Supreme Court of South Australia.
10 December 1936
Latham C.J., Starke, Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ.
Ligertwood K.C. (with him Brebner), for the appellant.
Mayo K.C. (with him Norman), for the respondent.
Ligertwood K.C., in reply.
The following written judgments were delivered:—
Latham C.J.
The question which arises upon this appeal from the Supreme
Court of South Australia is whether the interests of the respondent
certain lands held by lease from the Crown, used for pastoral
purposes, and subject to a liability to resumption by the Crown
the term of the lease, are taxable under the
Assessment Act 1914
. Sec. 27 provided for the taxation of
leases of land leased after the commencement of the Act. Sec. 28
provided for the taxation
of leases of land which had been leased
before the commencement of the Act. Sec. 29 was in the following
"Notwithstanding anything in the last two preceding sections,
the owner of a leasehold estate under the laws of a State relating
the alienation or occupation of Crown lands or relating to
mining (not being a perpetual lease without revaluation or a lease
a right of purchase) shall not be liable to assessment or
taxation in respect of the estate."
The tax was levied upon the unimproved value of all lands within
the Commonwealth owned by taxpayers and not exempt from taxation
(sec. 10). Land tax was charged on land as owned at noon on the
thirtieth day of June immediately preceding the financial year for
which the tax was levied. The question which arises relates to
taxation for the financial year 1914-1915. In the case of that
the tax was charged on land as owned at noon on the thirtieth
day of June 1914.
The taxpayer owned the leasehold estates in question on 30th
June 1914, but, by reason of sec. 29, he was not liable to
or taxation in respect of them. The question is whether
certain subsequent amendments of the law have made him so
The first amendment to be considered is to be found in the
Land Tax Assessment Act 1914
. This Act, by sec. 3, amended
sec. 29 by removing certain Crown leases, including leases of land
to be used for pastoral purposes,
from the exemption contained in
sec. 29 as it originally appeared in the 1910 Act. They therefore
became taxable. This Act came into
operation on 21st December 1914.
There was no provision in the Act which specified the assessments
to which the amendment in question
was applicable.
On the same day, 21st December 1914, the
Land Tax Act
came into operation. This Act repealed the first and
second schedules to the
Land Tax Act 1910
and substituted
other schedules declaring rates of tax. In this Act sec. 4 provided
that "the amendments of the principal Act made
by this Act shall
apply to land tax levied in and for the financial year beginning on
the first day of July, One thousand nine hundred
and fourteen and
all subsequent years."
Subsequent legislation in the
Land Tax Assessment Act
repealed the amendment made in sec. 29 by the
Tax Assessment Act 1914
to which I have referred, and
reinstated sec. 29 in its original form, so that the respondent's
leasehold interests in the lands
in question again became
non-taxable. The alteration made in the law in 1923 did not,
however, extinguish the respondent's liability
(if any) to taxation
for the year 1914-1915, because sec. 3 of the Act provided that the
Act should be deemed to have commenced on
the first day of July one
thousand nine hundred and twenty-three, and that it should apply to
assessments for the financial year
commencing on that date and all
subsequent years. Here again is a definite provision clearly
specifying the assessments to which
the amended Act is to apply. In
other amending Land Tax Assessment Acts, namely, No. 12 of 1911,
sec. 13, and No. 37 of 1912, sec.
12 (2) (as well as in No. 29 of
1923 already mentioned), it was provided that the amendments of the
principal Act made by the Acts
in question should apply to
assessments for a specified financial year beginning on the 1st
July immediately prior to the coming
into operation of the Act.
Land Tax Assessment Act 1930
was passed after the
decision of this court in
Clark Tait & Co. v. Federal
Commissioner of Land Tax
], in which it was held that, although Crown
leases of land used for pastoral purposes were taxable antecedently
to 1923, the method
provided in the
Land Tax Assessment Act
for valuing leasehold interests was such as to be
inapplicable where (as in this case) leased land was subject to
liability to resumption.
Sec. 3 of the Act of 1930 provided a new
method for valuing such leasehold interests. Sec. 4 of the same Act
provided that the amendment
made by sec. 3 should be deemed to have
commenced on the date of the commencement of the
Assessment Act 1914
, i.e., 21st December 1914—the first
date upon which it was provided that pastoral leases held from the
Crown should be subject
to land tax. It was further provided in the
same section that the amendment made by sec. 3 "shall apply to all
assessments for the
financial year beginning on the first day of
July one thousand nine hundred and fourteen, and all subsequent
The last-mentioned provision shows that Parliament, in enacting
the Act of 1930, proceeded upon the assumption that pastoral leases
were taxable in respect of the financial year beginning on 1st July
1914—i.e., that persons who were lessees under such leases
30th June 1914 were liable to tax. Such an assumption, however,
cannot make law, unless there are affirmative provisions positively
bringing the subject matter in question into the taxing area. It is
unnecessary for me to refer to the many cases which establish
the intention to impose a charge upon the subject must be shown by
clear and unambiguous language. It is therefore necessary
Land Tax Assessment Act 1914
in order to see
whether it imposes a charge in respect of the pastoral leases in
It is clear that the amendment made by that Act applies so as to
bring into tax Crown pastoral leases held on 30th June 1915 and
years up to 30th June 1922. The question is whether the
Act also applies in the case of such leases as held on 30th June
It has not been contended for the commissioner that the
amendment made by the 1914 Act should be construed as applying to
all assessments
of land tax which happen to be made after the 21st
December 1914, whether for the year 1914-1915 or for other years,
but not to assessments
made before that date. Such a construction
of the Act would be so unjust as between individuals and so
irrational in principle that
it should not be adopted unless no
other construction is open upon a fair reading of the words.
The contention submitted to the court for the commissioner is
that the amendment applies to all assessments for the financial
1914-1915 and that, therefore, Crown leases of land used for
pastoral purposes held by a person on 30th June 1914 are
The argument rests upon the contention that every amendment of
Land Tax Assessment Act
must prima facie be held to
relate to all assessments for the then current year, as well as to
subsequent assessments.
The 1914 Act came into operation on 21st December 1914. It was
not in operation on 20th December 1914 or on any antecedent date.
was in operation on and after 21st December 1914 until the
further amendment was made in 1923. It contains the amendment which
into the taxing area land which would be otherwise untaxed.
No tax is chargeable as against any person in respect of any land
that land was owned by that person on 30th June in a
relevant year, and unless its unimproved value with or without
other land owned
by the same person exceeded £5,000. Further,
the rate of tax depends upon the value of all the taxable land
owned by the taxpayer.
Thus the state of ownership of land upon
30th June is an element which must necessarily be considered in
determining both liability
to tax and amount of tax. On 30th June
1914 the leases in question were not liable to assessment or tax.
There is no provision which
in clear and definite terms provides
that they shall be so liable. It may have been intended to make
them liable, but the legislature
has not introduced into the
Land Tax Assessment Act 1914
the provision, which, in
several other Acts to which reference has been made, applied
amendments made after 30th June immediately
preceding a financial
year to all assessments in respect of that financial year. The
practice of the legislature, as shown by the
examples quoted, is
contrary to the contention that, without express words, amendments
of the Act apply to all assessments for the
current year.
Further, the general principle, to which I have already
referred, that a tax must be shown to be expressly imposed in
accordance with
a literal construction of a taxing Act, is also
contrary to the contention. On 30th June 1914 any person who owned
pastoral leases
of the description mentioned was free from land tax
in respect of them. He was entitled to make his arrangements upon
that basis,
unless the legislature by quite clear words stated that
tax was imposed in respect of them. I am unable to find such clear
and, therefore, in my opinion, these leases are not
assessable to taxation for the financial year beginning on 1st July
Upon the hearing of the appeal before the Supreme Court of South
Australia a preliminary objection was taken on behalf of the
commissioner
and that objection has been repeated in this court.
The objection is that the taxpayer is not entitled to contend that
liable to taxation in respect of the leasehold interests
included in the assessment.
The original objection was lodged on 19th June 1917. It was in
the following terms:—
The departmental valuations of pastoral leases are
excessive. I claim that the assessment should be made on a taxable
balance of £_____.
It may be observed that the taxpayer had made a return including
the pastoral leases in which he valued them at about £5,000.
There is nothing in the objection to show that the taxpayer
contended that no assessment whatever should be made in respect of
pastoral leases. The objection was that the valuations were
excessive and that the value should be reduced, apparently to
On 2nd February 1918 the objection was disallowed and on 27th
February 1918 the taxpayer required the commissioner to treat the
as an appeal and to transmit it to the Supreme Court of
South Australia. Negotiations with respect to the value of the
leases ensued,
and ultimately, in August 1934, an agreement on
values was reached. The taxpayer then for the first time raised a
contention in the
following terms:—
"The taxpayer contends that the taxation of pastoral leaseholds
was not made retrospective so as to enable any assessment to be
for such land held on 30th June 1914. Our client will obtain
legal advice as to the liability for tax on land held at 30th June
and we will communicate further with you regarding such
last-mentioned assessment."
This is the first indication of any such contention, and it will
be observed that at this time (seventeen years after the objection
was made) the taxpayer was only proposing to obtain legal advice on
this aspect of the matter. I cannot see that the commissioner
wrongly in any respect in forwarding to the Supreme Court the only
objection which had been made within the prescribed time.
the commissioner guilty of any impropriety in submitting for the
decision of the court the question whether the taxpayer was
entitled to rely upon a ground of objection which he raised for the
first time seventeen years after he had requested that his
be treated as an appeal.
I have had much doubt as to whether this preliminary objection
should not be held to be effectual. The other members of the court,
however, are of opinion that it should not prevail, and I am not
prepared to dissent from this opinion. The matter is now covered
Land Tax Assessment Act 1910-1934
The judgment of the Supreme Court should be affirmed.
The legislation affecting this case is confused and confusing. I
have reached the same conclusion as the Chief Justice, and concur
in his opinion. But I desire to add some observations upon the
argument for the commissioner that the ground taken by the
on this appeal—that it was not liable for the
tax—was not open to it because not stated in the notice of
objection, and
that it should be confined to an objection that the
departmental valuations were excessive. Under the
Assessment Act 1910-1916
, a taxpayer might, within the
prescribed time, appeal to the High Court, or other tribunal,
against any assessment by the commissioner
with respect to his land
on the ground that he was not liable for the tax or any part
thereof or that the assessment was excessive
(sec. 44). The
Governor-General in Council was authorized to make regulations not
inconsistent with the Act prescribing all matters
which by the Act
were required or permitted to be prescribed, or were necessary or
convenient to be prescribed for giving effect
to it (sec. 74).
Under this authority, the Governor-General purported to make
regulations dealing with,
, appeals against land
tax. They are contained in Part IV. of Statutory Rules 1912 No.
141, as amended, and deal with "Appeals against
Land Tax" (clauses
32-39), and "Objection in lieu of Appeal" (clause 40). Appeals
against land tax under sec. 44 were required by
these regulations
to be made to the court within thirty days from the service of the
notice of assessment, and the appellant, by
clause 38, was
restricted on the hearing of any appeal to the grounds stated in
the notice of appeal. Under clause 40 ("Objection
Appeal"), it was provided that where a taxpayer was dissatisfied
with his assessment, but did not desire to appeal to
then he might within thirty days from the date of service of the
notice of assessment state his objections in writing
commissioner, who might allow them wholly or in part. The
commissioner was required to give notice of his decision upon the
objections to the taxpayer, who might, within a prescribed period,
ask that his objections be treated as an appeal, and "all
which may be treated as appeals shall be transmitted to
the court of appeal selected by the taxpayer as formal appeals."
not expressly provided that, on an appeal by means of
this procedure, the appellant is restricted to the grounds stated
in his objection.
Nor is the implication of such a provision
necessary, for all that is transmitted to the court of appeal is
the objection of the
taxpayer upon which the commissioner has made
a decision. In the present case, the taxpayer pursued the procedure
provided in clause
40 of the regulations and objected to an
assessment on the ground that the departmental valuations were
excessive, but in February
1918 the commissioner disallowed the
objection, and the taxpayer, being dissatisfied with the decision
of the commissioner, required
him in due time to transmit the
objection to the Supreme Court of South Australia, which he did in
1935, "as an appeal from the said
assessment as lastly amended on
31st August 1934." In 1918, however, the justices of the High
Court, pursuant to sec. 47 of the
Land Tax Assessment Act
, made rules of court regulating the practice and
procedure in relation to appeals against land tax assessments; it
is Statutory Rule
1918 No. 52, and now stands as Order
of the rules of this court. Some doubt existed
whether Part IV. of the regulations made by the Governor-General
were valid, in view
of the express power given in sec. 47 to the
justices of the High Court to regulate the practice and procedure
in relation to appeals
against land tax assessments, and those
doubts, I believe, led to the rules of court in 1918. A special
power was given to the court
in relation to the matter, and, when
exercised, established the practice and procedure of the court to
which its rules applied. The
general power given to the
Governor-General was necessarily superseded, if it existed, and
also any regulations made by him. Irregular
in form as the appeal
is in the present case, yet it should be regarded as an appeal
brought under sec. 44 of the
Land Tax Assessment Act
, as regulated by the rules of court made in 1918,
and not by the regulations made by the Governor-General. The
grounds of appeal
under sec. 44, as already set forth, are that the
taxpayer is not liable for the tax or any part of it, or that the
assessment is
excessive. The rules of court require that the
appellant shall, in his notice of appeal, specify his grounds of
appeal; and in the
ordinary course of procedure he would be
confined to those grounds, but an appeal court has still in reserve
the power to allow such
amendments as are just. The objection taken
by the Deputy Commissioner thus becomes a matter of form, and was
curable by amendment
in the Supreme Court of South Australia and
should now be treated as so cured. But this opinion may mislead
unless I add a reference
to the Act 1927 No. 30 (
Assessment Act 1910-1927
), sec. 44M (3): "A taxpayer shall be
limited, on the hearing of the appeal, to the grounds stated in his
objection." That provision
has no application to the present case,
which began by a notice of objection in June 1917 before the Act
was passed and before the
procedure under it was established.
The appeal should be dismissed.
Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan JJ.
The taxpayer, who is the respondent to the appeal, complains of
the inclusion in its assessment for land tax for the financial year
beginning 1st July 1914 of a number of pastoral leases held from
the Crown in South Australia.
Land Tax Assessment Act 1910-1912
provided that
land tax should be levied and paid upon the unimproved value of all
lands within the Commonwealth owned by taxpayers
and not exempt
from taxation under the Act; that it should be payable by the owner
of land upon the taxable value of all land owned
by him and not so
exempt; and that it should be charged on land as owned at noon on
the thirtieth day of June immediately preceding
the financial year
in and for which the tax is levied (secs. 10 (1), 11 (1) and
On 30th June 1914 the taxpayer held the pastoral leases in
question, but at that date they were excluded from liability to
by sec. 29, which provided that the owner of a leasehold
estate under the laws of a State relating to the alienation or
of Crown lands (not being a perpetual lease without
revaluation, or a lease with a right of purchase) should not be
liable to assessment
or taxation in respect of the estate. This
provision was, however, amended by the
Land Tax Assessment Act
, which was assented to on 21st December 1914. Sec. 3 of
that Act provided that sec. 29 of the
Land Tax Assessment Act
should be amended by the omission of the words
following the reference to a perpetual lease and by the insertion
in their stead of
other words the effect of which was to exclude
from the exemption given by sec. 29 most kinds of Crown lease and
in particular pastoral
leases. This exclusion from the exemption
remained in operation until the financial year beginning 1st July
1923, when it was ended
Land Tax Assessment Act
. But the financial year as from which the exclusion took
effect was not specified by the
Land Tax Assessment Act
, and in this appeal we are called upon to decide the
question whether the exclusion operated for the financial year
beginning on
1st July 1914, so that the taxpayer would be liable
for that financial year in respect of the pastoral leases which it
held on 30th
In 1929 a decision was given by this court to the effect that
Crown leases for terms of uncertain duration reserving rents of
indeterminate
amounts could not be taxed during the period when the
exemption had been excluded, because the method prescribed by sec.
Assessment Act
for computing the value could not
be applied (
Clark Tait & Co. v. Federal Commissioner of
following year, by the
Land Tax Assessment Act 1930
28 was amended so as to supply a method of calculating the value of
such leases and thus remove the objection upon which the
was founded. The matter is relevant to the present question only
because the amending Act of 1930 contains a provision showing
the legislature understood that the exclusion made by the Act of
1914 from the exemption of Crown leases operated in respect
financial year beginning 1st July 1914. Sub-sec. 2 of sec. 4 of the
Act of 1930 provides that the amendment made in sec. 28
deemed to have commenced on the date of the commencement of the
Land Tax Assessment Act 1914
, and shall apply to all
assessments for the financial year beginning on the first day of
July 1914 and all subsequent years.
Except for the evidence of legislative intention supplied by
this provision, we should have felt little doubt that the exclusion
by the Act of 1914 from the exemption conferred on Crown
leases by sec. 29 did not operate in respect of the financial year
1st July 1914.
The conditions of liability to land tax for that financial year
were fixed as on 30th June 1914. Returns by taxpayers for the
of the assessment and levy of land tax for that year were
due on 31st August 1914. The financial year was half way through
amending Act was passed. It had been, as it still is, the
general practice in amending taxation assessment Acts to specify
financial year to which the amendments shall apply,
particularly in the case of past or current financial years. Such a
was conspicuously absent from the
Land Tax Assessment
. In these circumstances, it appears to us that if the
question now before us had come up for decision before the passing
of 1930, or if it were now considered independently of
that Act, there would be no foundation for an interpretation of the
1914 which would produce a new liability for the financial
year beginning 1st July 1914 in respect of Crown leases held as at
June 1914. Both presumption and reason would be against it.
But sub-sec. 2 of sec. 4 of the Act of 1930 seems to be framed on
contrary view. It appears to assume that Crown leases falling
within the decision in
Clark Tait & Co.'s Case
] would have been taxable
for the financial year beginning 1st July 1914 but for the
considerations leading to that decision. It may
be true that leases
might conceivably exist which, while affected by those
considerations, were never within the exemption given
by sec. 29,
leases with a right of purchase but granted with a term of
uncertain duration, or at rents to be fixed from time to time.
possibility, one may be sure, is not the true explanation of the
adoption by sec. 4 (2) of the Act of 1930 of the financial
beginning 1st July 1914 as the commencing point of the amendment,
although, having regard to sec. 26 of the
Land Tax Assessment
Act 1910-1912
and to the condition of sec. 27 (3) before it
was amended by sec. 2 of the Act of 1914, that may be the first
financial year in which
sec. 28 could apply to a Crown lease not
covered by the exemption given by sec. 29 of the
Assessment Act 1910-1912
. Doubtless the true explanation is
that, in drafting the Act of 1930, it was supposed that the
exclusion by the Act of 1914 of Crown
leases from the exemption
took effect for the financial year beginning 1st July 1914. But, in
our opinion, the supposition ought
not to lead us to give that
effect to the Act of 1914. "An Act of Parliament does not alter the
law by merely betraying an erroneous
opinion of it" (
Interpretation of Statutes
, 6th ed. (1920), p. 544, and, per
Atkinson, Ormond Investment Co. v. Betts
]). "Where the interpretation of
a statute is obscure or ambiguous, or readily capable of more than
one interpretation, light may
be thrown on the true view to be
taken of it by the aim and provisions of a subsequent statute" (per
Cape Brandy Syndicate v. Inland
Revenue Commissioners
said: "I quite agree
that subsequent legislation, if it proceed upon an erroneous
construction of previous legislation, cannot alter
that previous
legislation; but if there be any ambiguity in the earlier
legislation, then the subsequent legislation may fix the
interpretation which is to be put upon the earlier." In reference
to this statement, Lord
Investment Co. v. Betts
]: "That is, in my opinion, an accurate
expression of the law, if by any ambiguity is meant a phrase fairly
and equally open to divers
meanings." But it is not permissible to
construe an unambiguous phrase in an earlier Act by an erroneous
assumption of its effect
contained in a later Act which did not
purport to alter or amend the earlier Act (per
Port of London Authority v. Canvey Island
Commissioners
In the present case the Act of 1930 did not intend to amend the
Act of 1914. It was not concerned with it and was dealing with a
unconnected with the question for what financial year the
amendments made by the Act of 1914 first took effect. On that
it did no more than proceed upon an assumption. It was a
question depending, not on an ambiguous word or phrase, but on the
from the Act of 1914 of any express statement of the
financial year first to be affected. The ordinary rules of
interpretation supplied
the deficiency and, in our opinion, made it
clear that the amendments first applied, not to the financial year
then current, for
which the land tax liabilities had accrued nearly
six months before, but to the then next ensuing financial year.
In our opinion the taxpayer is not liable to assessment for land
tax for the financial year beginning 1st July 1914 in respect of
pastoral leases from the Crown which it held on 30th June 1914.
Angas Parsons
A.C.J., who heard the taxpayer's appeal
to the Supreme Court of South Australia, adopted the same view as
we have expressed, and
gave effect to it by the order from which
the Deputy Commissioner of Taxes now appeals.
It is contended that it was not open to the learned judge to do
so, because the ground relied upon was not taken by the taxpayer in
his notice of objection to the amended assessment by which the
pastoral leases were brought under tax for the financial year
1st July 1914. It appears that the taxpayer's assessment
for that financial year was made on 14th July 1915, but did not
the pastoral leases. These were included by an amendment of
which the taxpayer was notified on 23rd May 1917. Within thirty
the taxpayer objected "to the assessment of land tax ...
contained in the notice of assessment" of that date, and gave as
that the departmental valuations of the pastoral leases
were excessive and claimed that the assessment should be on a
taxable balance
). The objection
was disallowed by notice dated 2nd February 1918, and the taxpayer
within thirty days requested that the objection
should be treated
as an appeal and transmitted to the Supreme Court of South
Australia. The transmission was withheld pending, no
solution of the many difficulties attending the taxation of Crown
leaseholds. At length, on 19th June 1935, the transmission
made. The procedure followed clause 40 of the
Regulations 1912-1914
(S.R. 1912 No. 141, as amended by S.R.
1913 No. 335 and S.R. 1914 No. 5). That clause was expressed to
give to a taxpayer who, although
dissatisfied with a land tax
assessment, did not desire to appeal to the court, a right to lodge
objections to it with the commissioner
and then, if he was
dissatisfied with the commissioner's decision upon his objection,
to require that the objections be treated as
an appeal and
transmitted to the court. Clauses 32 to 39 of the same regulations
provided the procedure for a direct appeal against
an assessment by
a form of notice stating reasons. The procedure for land tax
appeals is now regulated by secs. 44 to 44M of the
Assessment Act 1910-1934
, provisions which were introduced by
Act No. 30 of 1927 and superseded the regulations. The regulations
are recognized by sec. 29
of that Act, which seems to imply that
they shall not operate in relation to fresh appeals rather than to
"repeal" them or to repeal
the power under which
they were made. It may be that sec. 11 of the
Interpretation Act 1904-1932
or sec. 8 of the
Interpretation Act 1901-1932
preserves rights under
regulations abrogated by statute, but this is not clear. We assume,
however, that, in relation to pending
matters, the regulations lost
none of the force they possessed. What force they did possess was a
problem that remained unsolved
when they were superseded. Sec. 47
Land Tax Assessment Act 1910-1916
conferred upon
the justices of the High Court a power to make rules of court for
regulating the practice and procedure in relation
against assessments. It would appear at first sight that the
existence of this power must exclude the application to the
matter of the general power conferred upon the Executive by sec. 74
to make regulations not inconsistent with the Act, prescribing
matters which by the Act are required or permitted to be
prescribed, or which are necessary or convenient to be prescribed
giving effect to the Act. But sec. 44, which gives to the
taxpayer the right of appeal, imposes the condition that he shall
"within the prescribed time." Sec. 9 of the
Interpretation Act 1904-1932
provides that in any Act, unless
the contrary intention appears, "prescribed" means prescribed by
the Act or by the regulations under
the Act. Perhaps rules of court
may satisfy the description "regulations" in this definition. But
we think that the better view is
that sec. 44 and sec. 74 combined
to empower the Executive to fix by regulations the time within
which the appeal might be brought.
Rules of court were not made, it
seems, until 1918, when Statutory Rule No. 52 of 1918 introduced
, sec. I. of which applied, we think, to land
tax appeals in all courts. It may be that, in default of rules of
court, it was "convenient"
within the meaning of sec. 74 to
prescribe the full procedure on appeal, but it is difficult to
suppose that two authorities were
meant to possess and exercise
concurrently two independent powers of equal strength to regulate
the same matter. The power of regulating
appeals generally under
sec. 74 could be at best
pending the making of
rules of court. If clauses 33 to 39 ever were valid, we think they
ceased to operate when Statutory Rule No.
52 of 1918 was made. The
contention that the taxpayer could not rely upon the freedom of the
pastoral leases from liability to land
tax for the financial year
beginning 1st July 1914 was based upon clause 38. This clause
provided that the appellant should be restricted
on the hearing of
any appeal to the grounds stated in the notice of appeal. The
clause does not in terms apply to proceedings under
clause 40. In
those proceedings there is no notice of appeal. It is only by
making an implication in clause 40 that clause 38 can
incorporated. There is, in our opinion, no warrant for making such
an implication. Clause 40 itself was probably valid because
not interfere with the procedure after the institution of an
appeal. The power of the Executive to make regulations would
to giving a right to carry in objections to the assessment and to
providing that a taxpayer who does so shall have thirty
the decision to appeal. The rules of court appear to fix the same
time. Rule 1 speaks of the "decision of the commissioner."
in strictness, the taxpayer should have given notice of motion as
well as requiring the commissioner to treat the objection
appeal. That point was not taken and, if it had been, it could have
been cured under the non-compliance provisions of the rules
court. But, in our opinion, clause 38 had no force, at any rate
after Statutory Rule No. 52 of 1918, and never did apply to
proceedings
under clause 40 of the regulations.
The objection in fact taken was to the assessment and there was
nothing except the discretion of the court before which it came as
an appeal to restrict the appellant to the "reason" given in
support of the objection. We do not see how the fact that in sec.
Land Tax Assessment Act 1910-1916
continues to apply to this case as a result of sec. 8 of the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901-1932
, two grounds of appeal
are expressly mentioned operates to restrict the power of the court
to allow the appellant to rely on one
of them, although, in giving
the notice of appeal, he mentioned the other of them only.
In our opinion it was open to
Angas Parsons
entertain the ground of appeal upon which the taxpayer succeeded,
and his Honour's order was rightly made.
We think that the appeal should be dismissed with costs.
Appeal dismissed with costs.
Solicitor for the appellant, W. H. Sharwood, Crown Solicitor for
the Commonwealth, by Fisher, Powers, Jeffries & Brebner.
Solicitors for the respondent, Norman, Waterhouse, Chapman &
[1918] HCA 45
; (1929) 25 C.L.R.
[1929] HCA 23
; (1929) 43 C.L.R.
[1929] HCA 23
; (1929) 43 C.L.R.
] (1928) A.C. 143, at
] (1928) A.C., at p.
] (1921) 2 K.B. 403,
] (1928) A.C., at p.
] (1932) 1 Ch. 446,
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
PDF format (390 KB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter