1410436 [2015] MRTA 800 (9 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 800
(9 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
Mr Junyoung Hwang
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE(S):
BCC2014/559842
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant
a Student (Temporary) (Class TU) visa.
Statement made on 09 June 2015 at 8:35pm
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration to refuse to grant the applicant
a Student (Temporary) (Class
TU) visa under
Migration Act 1958
applicant applied to the Department of Immigration for the visa on 25 February
2014. The delegate decided to refuse to grant the
visa on 23 May 2014. At the
time the visa application was lodged, the Student (Temporary) (Class TU) visa
contained a number of subclasses:
Item 1222 of Schedule 1 to the
Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). Generally speaking, the subclass that can be
granted depends upon: the type of course in which the applicant is
enrolled or
has an offer of enrolment as his or her principal course (Subclass 570 - 575);
for certain applications made on or after
24 March 2012, whether the applicant
is an ‘eligible higher degree student’ (Subclass 573 – 574) or
university exchange student’ or ‘eligible non-award
student’ (Subclass 575); whether the applicant has the support
relevant Minister (Subclass 576); or whether the applicant has applied on the
basis of being a Student Guardian (Subclass
delegate refused to grant the visa because the applicant did not satisfy the
requirements of cl.572.223(2)(b)(ii) of Schedule
2 to the Regulations because of
the applicant’s study gap of 9 months, lack of academic progress to date
and explanations of
his reasons to study further, the delegate was not satisfied
that the applicant was a genuine applicant for entry and stay as a student.
applicant provided a copy of the delegate’s decision with his application
for review.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal on 19 December 2014 to give evidence
and present arguments. The Tribunal hearing was conducted
with the assistance of
an interpreter in the Korean and English languages. The applicant was
represented in relation to the review
by his registered migration agent.
the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded that the decision under review
should be affirmed.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
regard to the applicant’s current proposed course of study, the relevant
subclass in this case is Subclass 572.
issue in the present case is whether the applicant meets the time of decision
criterion in cl.572.223(2)(b). Clause 572.223(2)(b)
If subclause (1A) does not
(b) the Minister is
satisfied that the applicant is a genuine applicant for entry and stay as a
student, having regard to:
(i) the stated intention of the applicant to comply with
any conditions subject to which the visa is granted; and
(ii) any other
relevant matter; and
the hearing I asked the applicant about the attendance concerns raised by the
delegate. In relation to attendance I noted to him
the concern raised in the
delegate’s decision that PRISMS records indicated a period of non-study by
him from5 June 2013 until
4 April 2014. The applicant denied that he had not
attended and noted that he continued to pay fees on 6 November 2013. I noted
but asked if he was attending during this period. He did not directly
answer the question. I asked if he had any assignments or submissions
attendance records that he could provide to show that he had attended in this
period. He said that he stopped attending on 20
October 2013; that he had a
study plan and there was a unit in September. He said that his last day of study
was 22 October.
then asked the applicant about a further issue raised by the delegate, being the
applicant’s level of course completion. I
asked him when he had arrived in
Australia. He said that he had come on a working holiday visa in May 2010. He
said that his student
visa had been granted and he had arrived in June 2011. He
said that he then completed his Certificates in English. He said that he
completed these in December 2011. I asked if he had completed any courses since
then and he said he had not, but noted that he had
enrolled in a course and was
in the process of completing it. I asked if he had not completed his certificate
IV in Human Resources,
which the CoE he had provided indicated had a course
completion date of 30 August 2014. He said he had not completed this course
he did not have a student visa. I asked if he had had study rights on his
bridging visa in this time and he said he had. I asked
why then he did not
complete his studies whilst holding his bridging visa. He said that once he
applied for the MRT he was unable
to study. I asked what he meant and he
repeated this statement. I asked him who had told him this and he said that was
to the internet. I asked him what had happened with his enrolment and
he said that he had had it cancelled by Danford. He said he
had requested the
cancellation of his CoE because he applied for the MRT so you cannot study and
he could not attend school. I asked
if he had discussed this with anyone at
Danford and he said he had, with the marketing manager. I asked what they had
said and the
applicant said he just said ok. I asked if the applicant had asked
the marketing manager or anyone else if he could continue studying.
applicant said he did not ask in that way. I asked if he had asked the
Department of Immigration. He said he had not.
asked the applicant why he was proposing to study his current proposed courses
in Hospitality. He said that he wanted to work in
the field of Hospitality
Management. I asked why he had enrolled in Human resources and a Diploma and
Advanced Diploma of Management
with Danford. He said that he originally wanted
to study hospitality management and he requested this to Danford but the advised
him it would be beneficial to do these courses for many types of jobs.
applicant said he was not working anywhere at the moment.
asked the applicant what his plan was after his proposed studies. He said that
he planned to finish his studies and go back to Korea
and find work he would
like to do. I asked if he had anything in mind and he said first of all he was
interested in restaurants,
and was also interested in managing HR in companies.
I asked how certificates in hospitality would help him manage HR in companies.
He said that he originally wanted to do hospitality management. I noted to him
that I was concerned that his future plan was vague
and did not appear to fit in
with his proposed study plan. He said it did. I asked him again how his proposed
courses in hospitality
would help him manage HR in companies. The applicant said
that he kept trying to explain to me why he was studying HR.
asked the applicant if he could study his proposed courses in Korea. He said
that he had come to Australia at a young age and if
he studied overseas he would
be more attractive to potential employers. He said he had no family in
Australia; all of his family
was in Korea. I asked if he had any job offers in
Korea and he said he did not. I asked if there was any reason he could not
to Korea and he said because he had not completed a course and had
nothing to show.
noted to the applicant that after what he had told me I had concerns that in his
case he was using the student visa program to circumvent
the migration program
and maintain ongoing residence, and in particular I had a real concern that he
had withdrawn and cancelled
his CoE with Danford.
applicant said that he had studied Dental technology at Sheila Baxter for two
years and had found it too difficult. He said that
he had wanted to change
schools or to a different course but Sheila Baxter had not let him. He said that
he had been looking to study
hospitality management but an education agency had
suggested a HR course to him. He said that he was studying that but then stopped
because of his MRT case. I said that this was part of my big concern, that he
had been here in 2014 not studying even though he could
have studied, and could
have easily found out that he could have studied, all of which I might consider
indicated that he was not
interested in studying. He said that after he applied
for a student visa and was on a bridging visa waiting for his student visa
had studied, and he has not been studying or working during the time waiting for
the MRT to review the case.
told him that I had real concerns about the value of his proposed courses to his
future as well, given that he was unable to clearly
indicate how his proposed
studies would lead into his career. He said he did not have this job, but he is
preparing and then he will
go to find a job. He is studying now so he can find
that future job.
applicant said that everything on record at Sheila Baxter was wrong. He said it
was not that he did not attend school. I noted
to him that since his English
courses he had not completed any courses, and this was an additional
then discussed the applicant’s CoE’s for his certificates III, IV
and Diploma of Hospitality. At the hearing he presented
copies which included
the back page which indicated that the CoEs were generated on 15 December 2014.
I noted that this was only
four days prior to the hearing and caused me to have
concerns that they had been generated purely for the purpose of the hearing
did not represent studies that he was intending to pursue or interested in. He
said that Danford had told him they could not
issue a CoE, so he looked for a
CoE from another school. He said Danford had not informed him they had not
issued a CoE. I asked
when he had gone to Danford to get a CoE and he said in
November. I asked when he stopped attending Danford for his Certificate IV
Human Resources and he said until the beginning of June he had attended. I asked
what he had done form the beginning of June until
the hearing. He said he
stopped attending school, stopped going to work, and just studied English on his
own. He said all of this
time he had been attempting school work and then the
problem of getting the release letter from Baxter had occurred.
representative made oral submissions in which he noted that many of the issues
were down to an aptitude problem for the applicant
– the reason he moved
out of Holmesglen was because of an aptitude problem, and the problem had been
that the learning process
for the applicant had been an issue. He said that the
applicant was passionate about studies. He said that the CoEs had been obtained
before the hearing and noted that they were in hospitality management. He said
the applicant could not use this as a pathway to a
485 visa. He said that the
reason the applicant stopped working was a lack of understanding of conditions
on his visa. He said that
in relation to the applicant’s future plans his
sister had studied here and returned to Korea, and the applicant has a
in Korea. The applicant reemphasised that he considered it was an
issue of understanding and aptitude but that the applicant was
student. The representative noted that the applicant had almost completed his
Diploma of Dental Technology, being only
three units short.
applicant said that it was his mistake to not take further steps to find out if
he could study whilst his case was reviewed by
the MRT. He did not know.
a submission made pre-hearing, the applicant’s former representative
addressed the four concerns raised by the delegate.
I have had regard to the
attachments to that submission, in particular the GTE statement of purpose from
the applicant. This contains
considerable discussion from the applicant about
why he had decided to enrol in the certificate in Human Resources, diploma and
diploma of management.
further pre-hearing submission was made by the current representative, noting
the current CoEs. This submission also contains a
discussion about the process
of the applicant attempting to get a release letter from Baxter Institute.
post hearing submission was made on 22 December 2014. This included a letter
from Baxter Institute which noted that the applicant’s
last day of study
was in fact 22 October 2013. The letter notes that his enrolment was cancelled
for non-payment of fees, and noted
that based on their attendance records the
applicant did not attend any class from 23 October 2013 until 5 March 2014. The
raised a concern that there were several interpreting issues in the
hearing which led to the supporter of the applicant interjecting
at one point.
It was claimed that the applicant never stated that he wished to work in HR. the
submission argues that the applicant
had excellent attendance until his visa was
refused and that he then he was confused and believed he had lost his work and
rights, resigning from his work and cancelling his enrolment. He has
enrolled in hospitality courses as this is the area he is passionate
is claimed that this course is not on the SOL list. It is claimed that the
refusal of Baxter Institute to allow the applicant
to change providers has
caused a domino effect. It is suggested that the original decision be set aside
and substituting a new decision
with the imposition of condition 8534.
representative then wrote to the Tribunal on 10 January 2015 indicating that
they wished to provide evidence of interpreting errors
in the hearing. This was
agreed to and the representative was asked to indicate when he would be in a
position to provide this, he
stated on 13 January 2015 that they were passing
this on to a NAATI level translator and should be able to provide something to
Tribunal by mid-late next week.
4 March 2015, the Tribunal wrote to the representative, noting that that time
had substantially passed and that the Tribunal would
proceed to make a decision
on the material before it.
further material has been provided.
have considered the evidence of the applicant. I have considered the submissions
and the supporting documentation.
have considered the evidence in relation to the applicant’s attendance
from 5 June 2013 until 4 April 2014. On the basis of
the letter from Sheila
Baxter dated 30 August 2014, I accept that the applicant was attending until 22
October 2013. It is claimed
that he then enrolled and studied from 4 March 2014.
This is still a significant four month period in which the applicant was not
studying or attending classes. I accept that within this time he was attempting
to leave Sheila Baxter at this time and going through
the appeal process.
However, the evidence he has provided indicates, and I find, that he stopped
studying a full month before he
submitted a letter of release application form
to Baxter Institute. This continues therefore to cause me concerns. Various
have been made about what Baxter Institute should have done with the
release letter process, and about why the applicant did not
pay his last
instalment. I am willing to accept that the applicant should have been granted a
release letter, but I am concerned
that he did not pay his fees despite being
enrolled in this period.
have considered the applicant’s lack of academic progress. The
applicant’s evidence is that he has only completed a
certificate III and
IV in English. I have real concerns with this which I consider a low completion
rate for someone whose claimed
reason for remaining in Australia is to study. It
is claimed that the reason for his low completion rate is because the applicant
has tried to study but did not have the aptitude for the Dental Technician
course, that the dispute with Baxter Institute led to
a domino effect, and that
his attempts to complete various courses should be taken into account. It is
noted, and I accept, that
he had good attendance in his English courses, Diploma
of Dental Technology course and Certificate IV in Human Resources until the
was refused. However, as I have found above, he stopped studying and attending
Baxter Institute from 22 October, only applying
for a release letter more than a
month later. I do not accept that the dispute with Baxter has led to a domino
effect – he
did recommence study some time later and then stopped of his
own accord. I find the explanations proffered for why he has not achieved
qualifications in the time here to be lacking and I do not accept them. If it
really is a question of aptitude to study then
there is no evidence that the
applicant will have greater success in his proposed courses.
concerning to me is that the applicant cancelled his CoE when this visa
application was refused. He has claimed that this was
because he understood that
he could not study or work whilst he had his application before the MRT.
However, he took no steps to
disabuse himself of this notion. He informed his
provider that he wished to cancel his CoE but did not discuss this, or any
possibility
that he could continue studies with anyone there. He did not
approach the Department of Immigration. Even if this was his genuine
this time – and I have some concerns with that claim – it does not,
I believe, indicate that the applicant
is interested in pursuing his studies as
he claims to be. I would consider a genuine student, who wished to study her or
course, would seek to continue studying if at all possible. I note
that the applicant ceased studying and attending classes in 2013-214
seeking release from Baxter Institute as well. Ultimately, having considered his
claims about this and the explanations of
his representative, I do not accept
that this behaviour is consistent with that of a genuine student in this case
and in the context
of the applicant. This is further reinforced by his more
recent change of courses from HR and management to hospitality (and I do
account of the claim made by the representative, although not spelt out by the
applicant himself, that these are courses in
hospitality management), with
little explanation for the change in course direction. Even if I accept that the
applicant did not
provide evidence at the hearing that he may wish to work in HR
on return to Korea, the change of course has not been satisfactorily
The applicant claiming that HR ties in to his current courses, and that he was
given poor advice to do HR. I do not accept
this. It is the applicant’s
responsibility to enrol in courses which he wishes to study and believes will
lead to the outcomes
he desires, I do not accept that if a person is paying a
considerable amount of money and investing a considerable amount of time
course that they would chose to take a course that did not fit this
description.
to this, the applicant’s future plans, even if I discount his comments
not satisfy me that his HR and
management, or his hospitality management courses are undertaken to achieve
qualifications which he
will then put towards some plan or desired outcome.
I take into account that he has his family and girlfriend in Korea, that he has
worked in hospitality previously and apparently,
has passion for this industry,
I give these considerations less weight compared to the above concerns.
the basis of the above, when I weigh my findings, I find that my concerns in
relation to his attendance, his lack of academic progress
and decision to cancel
his CoE during the MRT process, and his future plans all lead me to find that I
am not satisfied that the
applicant is a genuine applicant for entry and stay as
a student, having regard to the stated intention of the applicant to comply
any conditions subject to which the visa is granted and any other relevant
matter. Accordingly, the applicant does not meet
cl.572.223(2)(b).
Tribunal has found the applicant does not meet an essential requirement of
cl.572.223. With the exception of Subclass 580, the
other subclasses within visa
Class TU all contain an identical requirement. For reasons given above, the
Tribunal also finds that
the applicant does not meet the requirements of these
subclasses. In respect of Subclass 580 (Student Guardian) visa, there is no
material before the Tribunal that suggests the applicant meets the prescribed
criteria for that subclass. As the Tribunal has found
that the applicant does
not meet a criterion for the grant of a student visa, it must affirm the
decision under review.
Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant a Student (Temporary)
(Class TU) visa.
RTF format (146 KB)
Signed PDF/A format