Australian Education Union [2024] FWCD 1039 (25 October 2024)
[2024] FWCD 1039
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
—Alteration of other rules of organisation
Education Union
CHRIS ENRIGHT
MELBOURNE, 25 OCTOBER 2024
Alteration of other rules of organisation.
On 8 July 2024 the ACT Branch of the Australian Education Union (the
Branch) lodged with the Fair Work Commission (the Commission)
a notice and
declaration setting out particulars of an alteration to its Federal Branch
Rules. Further information about the transaction
of the alterations was provided
on 10 July 2024 and 5 August 2024.
The Branch seeks certification of the alteration under
section 159
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
The particulars set out an alteration to Federal Branch
– Branch Officers. It is convenient to set out the alteration in full. If
the alteration is certified, Federal Branch Rule
15.7.4 will state (with the
struck-through words removed):
“15.7.4 Branch Executive may by resolution of a majority
of two thirds of the votes able to be cast by those present at a meeting:
impose a fine not exceeding $100.00, suspend from office for a period not
exceeding 6 months, or remove any person elected
to any office within the Branch
if that person has been found guilty of:
misappropriation
of the funds of the Union;
substantial breach of the Union's rules;
misbehaviour
in relation to their office
A Branch officer is currently liable to be reprimanded, fined,
suspended or removed from office for gross misbehaviour
in relation to their
, among other things. The proposed alteration removes the express
requirement for the impugned misbehaviour to occur in relation to
The objection
On 19 July 2024 Commission staff spoke with a Mr Glenn Fowler. Mr
Fowler is a member of the Australian Education Union, attached to
Mr Fowler is
a former Branch Secretary of the
and indicated
that he wanted to make submissions about the alteration. Mr Fowler was invited
to email the Commission about the application.
He did so later that
Before turning to the substance of Mr Fowler’
email it is necessary to deal with a preliminary procedural issue. As I
understand his email, Mr Fowler asked me to deal
with the current rule
alteration as an element of another matter he is pursuing before the Commission.
In my view, that is not an
appropriate course. The two matters are independent
of one another as they fall for consideration under different provisions of the
Act. The current alteration to the Federal Branch Rules will therefore be
decided solely under s.159.
Among other things, the email received from Mr Fowler on 19 July 2024
referred to “[t]he proposed rule change [which] has reportedly
been before
the Commission for approval since Monday 8
Fowler went on to say:
• “I would like to make a submission against its approval by the
• “I would like to have clarified what the process and timeline is
for any submission I make in opposition to the Branch's
• “can I be assured that the Commission will consider any submission
I make before making a decision about whether the
Branch's proposed rule change
Commission staff responded to Mr Fowler by email on 22 July 2024.
The email from the Commission noted “[t]he General Manager and
his delegate exercise a power under
section 159
Fair Work (Registered
Organisations) Act 2009
. We are only able to refuse certification if the
rule alteration does not satisfy the test in
setting out
of the Act. The email invited Mr Fowler to make his
objection by 2 August
and noted his
objection “will be provided to the AEU ACT branch for their
redacted copy of the documents lodged by the Branch was attached to the
In a further exchange of email on 22 July 2024 the Commission
informed Mr Fowler, among other things:
the Branch has
been informed that an objection has been flagged;
the Branch was
told a copy of its application would be sent to the objector;
documents lodged
by Mr Fowler in this matter would be given to the Branch; and
• the Branch would be given an opportunity to respond to any objection
Mr Fowler’s objection was lodged in the Commission on 31 July
The Commission received another email from Mr Fowler on 31 July
In my view,
the second email relates to Mr Fowler’s other matter in the Commission. It
is not relevant to my consideration
of the present Federal Branch Rule
alteration. It was not considered part of the objection and was not provided to
the Branch.
Fowler was informed of that
disputed that finding. The second email received from Mr Fowler on 31 July 2024
does not form part of the material I have
considered in reaching my decision in
this matter.
Mr Fowler’s objection was given to the Branch on 5 August
2024. The Branch was:
afforded an
opportunity to respond to the objection;
• given until 16 August 2024 to do
informed the
Commission could only refuse certification of the alteration if it did not
satisfy the test in s.159 of the Act; and
• advised any response it lodged would be forwarded to the
On 16 August 2024 two documents were lodged by the Branch:
• submissions in reply to Mr Fowler’s
• a copy of the Branch Council’s Standing Orders (Standing
Standing Orders are referred to in both Mr Fowler’s objection and the
Branch’s submissions in reply. It was inadvertently
omitted from the
Branch’s email containing the submissions in
Mr Fowler was provided a copy of the Branch’s submissions in
reply on 26 August
was afforded the opportunity to address the response, by 2 September 2024. He
was informed that the objection and responses
would be considered and a decision
drafted for me.
Mr Fowler successfully sought an extension of time—until 9
September 2024—to lodge his
Ultimately, Mr Fowler’s response was received on 7 September
For completeness, I note that Mr Fowler also emailed the Commission
on 30 August 2024. In my view, that email relates to Mr Fowler’s
matter in the Commission and is not relevant to my consideration of the present
Federal Branch Rule alteration. Mr Fowler
was informed that his 30 August 2024
email had been internally forwarded for
consideration.
Fowler’s 30 August 2024 email does not form part of the material I have
considered in reaching my decision in this matter.
As the chronology suggests, a volume of material has been placed
before me in this matter. In reaching my conclusion I have had regard
material lodged by Mr Fowler and the Branch in this
necessary to recite all the material placed before me, but relevant extracts
will be reproduced.
Consideration
Was the alteration made under the rules of the organisation –
s.159(1)(c) of the Act?
The declaration accompanying the particulars of the alteration
declared that the alterations were made in accordance with the rules
stated the action taken under the Branch’s Federal Branch Rules to make
the alteration.
Draft minutes of the relevant Branch Council were annexed to the
declaration,
with an offer to provide minutes of the meeting once they had been
minutes were lodged on 5 August
their approval at a 3 August 2024 Branch Council
On their face, the information contained in the declaration and the
minutes of the relevant Branch Council meeting suggest the alteration
under the rules of the organisation, as s.159(1)(c) requires.
However, it appears Mr Fowler’s objection urges me to reach a
different conclusion.
Mr Fowler submits:
“24. Following the cancellation of the Council meeting of
11 May 2024, the Council meeting scheduled for 18 June 2024 went ahead
planned. I had no intention of attending. I understand that for the first time
in the history of our union a paid security guard
was in place at the entrance.
As reported to me by multiple attendees at the meeting, the conduct of the
debate about the rule alteration
proposal was the antithesis of participative
democracy, and was conducted in a manner that was “oppressive,
unreasonable and
unjust”, despite what the minutes suggest. I have been
informed that:
Although it was
the most substantive matter on the agenda and likely to attract debate, the rule
alteration matter appeared at the
end of the agenda, making it likely that the
imminent close of the meeting would affect it;
Matters that
required no substantive decision by Council dominated the first two and a half
hours of the meeting;
After a long day
teaching, and as 8pm approached, Councillors had visibly lost their stomachs for
A thirty-minute
extension to the meeting could have been exercised, especially after it became
clear that there was opposition to
the motion, but it was not, and the stand-in
chair did not suggest it;
After the rule
alteration motion was moved and seconded, the stand-in chair did not follow
procedure by asking Council if anybody
wished to speak against the motion or
propose an amendment to the motion, despite what the minutes suggest;
The stand-in
chair tentatively proposed that Councillors vote on the motion;
A Councillor and
potential speaker against the motion, Tania Blak, who had not been invited to
speak against the motion by the chair
as she should have been, stated that she
had an objection to the rule alteration and would like to speak;
Ms Blak started
speaking against the motion but on three occasions was interrupted by the
stand-in chair and asked if she had a question
(which is a hopeless
misunderstanding of standing orders, as it appears the stand-in chair thought
she was encouraging those who
speak during the separate “Questions”
agenda item to frame their contribution as a question rather than a statement);
A Councillor,
Roger Amey, then spoke ostensibly about the mood in the room, which is
inappropriate, and he should not have been speaking
for the motion (as the
minutes record) if the previous speaker was not permitted to speak against the
motion without being cut off
repeatedly by the stand-in chair;
Councillor, Sue La Flamme, wanted to speak against the motion but was cut off
immediately;
The stand-in
chair proposed Council vote on the motion, but there was no mover, seconder or
decision that debate be ended and the
motion be put, despite what the minutes
A vote occurred
and the motion was carried, though not unanimously.
25. Tania Blak and Sue La Flamme are two Councillors who were not
permitted by the stand-in chair to speak against the motion, uninterrupted,
despite clearly intending to. These members have held office positions in the
AEU for decades. They have read the evidence of my
innocence and are committed
to supporting me. For seeking to debate a rule alteration, ostracism by the
current union leadership
will undoubtedly be their reward, as it has been for a
number of other members who have stood up for fair treatment and the presumption
of innocence. Both Tania and Sue are prepared to be interviewed by you or to
make a statement on this matter. I request that they
be contacted as part of
(original emphasis removed)
Although it is not clearly articulated, I am prepared to assume that
Mr Fowler is submitting—in effect—that the failure
to uphold the
Standing Orders:
invalidated (at
least) the portion of the Branch Council meeting which dealt with the
transaction of the rule alteration; and
consequence, the alteration was not made under the rules of the
organisation.
In reply, the Branch submitted:
“21. With respect to paragraphs 21 to 25, much of what is
asserted is wrong and/or not relevant. In respect of the process undertaken
the Branch Council in approving the rule alteration, we advise as follows:
21.1. The proposed rule change was considered at item 11 on the agenda of the
meeting held on 18 June 2024. As noted in the approved
minutes the motion was
moved by Angela Burroughs and seconded by Barbara Monsma.
21.2. After the motion was moved and seconded, the chair (Vice-President,
Sarah Warren) invited speakers against the motion. Tania
Blak spoke against the
motion. The chair then invited speakers for the motion. Roger Amey spoke for the
motion. The chair then invited
speakers against the motion. Sue La Flamme stood
21.3. However, at the same time, Jackson St George moved a procedural motion
that “the motion be put”. As defined under
the Branch’s
standing orders (point 22, attached), this, on being duly seconded, has to be
put without further discussion.
Jackson St George’s motion was seconded by
Dean Pilton. Accordingly, it was put and was carried by all eligible to vote
the exception of Tania Blak and Sue La Flamme, who voted against the
21.4. The original motion was then put. It was carried, by all eligible
voters with the exception of Tania Blak and Sue La Flamme,
who voted against
21.5. At the Branch Council meeting held on 3 August 2024, Tania Blak sought
to amend the minutes from 18 June 2024 to indicate that
she did not have the
opportunity to object to the motion about the rule change. This was disputed by
others in attendance at Council.
The Branch President as the chair, explained
the impact of the procedural motion having been carried, which meant that the
had to be put. Tania Blak claimed that this was not explained to
Councillors on 18 June 2024. This claim was roundly disputed by
attendance at the meeting.
21.6. The 18 June 2024 minutes were then put without amendment and approved
by Council as an accurate record. Tania Blak voted against
this motion, but all
others eligible to vote voted to approve the minutes.
21.7. Mr Fowler’s account of the meeting is not only false, it is
informed by a person in attendance (presumably Tania Blak)
whose account of the
meeting was demonstrably inaccurate and
misleading.”
Mr Fowler replied:
“(f) As much as the Branch seeks in paragraph 21 to
suggest that the rule alteration debate at Council on 18 June 2024 was an
exercise in democracy, any unionist would read between the lines on this and
immediately know that the procedural motion referred
to in 21.3 was an attempt,
and no doubt a pre-planned one, to silence debate and stifle democracy. The two
women referred to as having
sought to provide a contrary argument at that
meeting remain eager to speak with you about how democratic that moment
Leaving aside the first four dot points in paragraph 24 of Mr
Fowler’s 1 August 2024 submissions because they do not raise
considerations
relevant to s.159(1)(c) of the Act, there is a conflict between
Mr Fowler’s version of what took place at the 18 June 2024
Branch Council
meeting and the version put forward by the Branch. To resolve that conflict, it
is necessary to prefer one version
of events or the other.
I prefer the version put forward by the Branch, set out in paragraph
21 of its 16 August 2024 submissions. It is consistent with—and
substantiated by— the approved minutes of the 18 June 2024 Branch Council
meeting. It is also consistent with the Standing
other hand Mr Fowler provides a hearsay account of what took
Ultimately,
a hearsay account of what took place at a meeting should be accorded less weight
than the approved minutes of that meeting.
Mr Fowler is a very experienced and former long serving Secretary of
the Branch and as I have earlier indicated, expressed a desire
on 19 July 2024
to make submissions against the certification of a rule amendment which had
earlier been proposed by the Branch.
Over the following period of approximately
seven weeks, Mr Fowler continued to engage with the Commission by making written
submissions and then lodging a response in reply on 7 September 2024
to submissions which had been made by the Branch.
While it was open to them to do so, neither of the people referred
to in paragraph 25 of Mr Fowler’s 1 August 2024 objection
and paragraph
8(f) of his 9 September 2024 response to the Branch’s submission in reply
engaged in any form of contact with,
or provided any information to, the
Commission.
Mr Fowler’s request for the Commission to contact them
misconceives my role under s.159 of the Act. A decision under s.159 must
based on information provided by the applicant, any relevant authorities
and—in cases such as this—material provided
by way of objection. The
process is not akin to those which are likely to apply under Part 4 of Chapter
11 of the Act. Nor does the
process change because there is an objector.
It is not my role to conduct an expansive enquiry beyond the
materials submitted by the parties or to seek out persons who potentially
information capable of supporting one party or the other and
“interview”
them. As I have indicated above, it was open for the two people referred to by
Mr Fowler to come forward if they were “eager
to speak with” the
Commission in support of Mr Fowlers objection to the
application.
did not and I am bound to make my decision on the available material before
Even if I were wrong and Mr Fowler’s version of events is
accurate, it does not inevitably follow that the portion of the 18
Branch Council meeting devoted to the rule alteration (or for that matter the
whole of the meeting) was invalidated. There
may simply have been a dispute
with them. The chair’s
view prevailed. There is no suggestion that a
motion of dissent from the chair’s ruling was
event, the Standing Orders do not form part of the Federal Branch Rules. Even if
the Standing Orders were not complied with
in the manner complained of, neither
the nature of the non-compliance nor the degree of non-compliance would be
sufficient to result
in the meeting (or part of it) being vitiated and the
resolution transacting the alteration not being passed.
Mr Fowler also criticised the amount of notice given to the Branch
Executive before it met in the first stage of the process culminating
transaction of the proposed alterations. Under Federal Branch Rule 27.1,
alterations to the Federal Branch Rules are transacted
by the Branch Council,
after the proposed alterations have been proposed by the Branch Executive (see
Federal Branch Rule 27.1.1)
or at least ten
sub-branches.
Mr Fowler submits:
“18. ...[O]n 10 April 2024, the Branch Executive convened
online for an unscheduled meeting called at one day’s notice
the rule alteration you now have before you for
(original emphasis removed)
Although the point of Mr Fowler’s criticism is directed to
another matter,
is nonetheless—as I understand the submission—placing the adequacy
of the notice period in issue and perhaps also
arguing that the Branch Executive
was not entitled to meet electronically. If either of those criticisms were
borne out, the validity
of the Branch Executive meeting would be called into
question. A further question would then arise about whether the requirements
Federal Branch Rule 27.1.1 had been met.
In my view the Federal Branch Rules countenance Branch Executive
meetings taking place at short
these meetings may take place by electronic
I am satisfied the alteration has been made under the rules of the
organisation.
Does the alteration comply with, and is it not contrary to,
the Act, the
Fair Work Act 2009
(FW Act), modern awards and enterprise
agreements and is it not otherwise contrary to law –
ss.159(1)(a)
(b) of the Act?
As noted in paragraph [3] above the proposed alteration removed the
words “in relation to their office” from the gross
misbehaviour
ground for removal from a Branch office.
Any gross misbehaviour currently complained of must have occurred in
relation to the office held by the person charged under Federal
The proposed alteration removes that qualifier.
Mr Fowler submits:
“2. The rule alteration does not satisfy the test in
section 159(1)(a)
in that it is contrary to the
Fair Work (Registered
Organisations) Act 2009
3. The rule alteration is contrary to
section 142
of the Act in that it
allows the current leadership to use the rule to impose on one or more members
of the organisation a restriction
which is contrary to Parliament’s
intention in enacting the Act
(section 5)
and is “oppressive, unreasonable
and unjust”.
4. The rule alteration is contrary to
section 5(3)
of the Act which insists
that employee organisations registered under the Act (a) are representative of
and accountable to their
members, (b) encourage members to participate in the
affairs of organisations to which they belong, (c) encourage high standards
accountability of organisations to their members, and (d) provide for the
democratic functioning and control of
organisations.”
Mr Fowler did not provide particulars of those grounds of objection.
Nor did he provide any supporting authority or other material
to substantiate
those grounds.
In response, the Branch submitted:
“3. We disagree with the assertion in paragraph 2 of the
Objection that the rule alteration does not satisfy the test in
in that it is contrary to the
Fair Work (Registered Organisations)
(Cth) (FWRO Act).
4. We disagree with the assertion in paragraph 3 of the Objection that the
rule alteration is contrary to s 142 of the FWRO Act, in
that it is oppressive,
unreasonable or unjust.
5. To this end, we note that the proposed new rule 15.7.4 matches the wording
of s 141(1)(c) of the FWRO Act
6. Accordingly, Mr Fowler’s argument that a rule using the same words
as the above section could somehow be contrary to law,
is without any
A number of points need to be made.
First, the grounds of objection set out in paragraph 2 – 4 of
Mr Fowler’s 1 August 2024 Objection do not have a priori
force. Simply
referring to those sections of the Act does not demonstrate that the proposed
alteration is contrary to the
Secondly, the submission made by the Branch in paragraphs 5 and 6 of
its submissions in reply is compelling and of considerable force.
Section 141(1)(b) requires the rules of a registered organisation to
provide for “the removal of holders of offices in the organisation
Section 141(1)(c) states:
“(1) The rules of an organisation:
(c) may provide for the removal from office of a person elected to an office
in the organisation
where the person has been found guilty, under
the rules of the organisation, of:
(i) misappropriation of the funds of the organisation; or
(ii) a substantial breach of the rules of the organisation; or
(iii) gross misbehaviour or gross neglect of duty;
or has ceased, under the rules of the organisation, to be eligible to hold
the office;” (my emphasis)
Taken together these sections indicate that the Parliament has
decided the rules of registered organisations must allow officers to
in certain circumstances and have determined the circumstances where it is
appropriate to do so.
As the Branch points out in paragraph 6 of its submissions in reply,
the proposed alteration uses the same words as s.141(1)(c) of
the Act. As a
matter of logic, it is difficult to conceive how a rule which precisely adopts
the text of the Act would be contrary
to the Act.
Mr Fowler’s 1 August 2024 objection did not address
ss.141(1)(b) or 141(c) of the Act. Nor did he mention those sections in
September 2024 response to the Branch’s submission in reply, despite the
Branch’s reliance on s.141(1)(c) in its
submissions.
Mr Fowler did refer me to Division 2 of Part 4 of Chapter 8 of the
Act and particularly to
“[t]o prevent a paying member from holding office in a union is a serious
matter, and a high bar has been rightly
Division 2 of Part 4 of Chapter 8 does not deal with removal from
office for gross misbehaviour, as the culmination of a process contained
registered organisation’s rules. Section 215 of the Act is concerned with
ceasing to hold
office, and
being rendered
ineligible to be:
candidate for election to office;
to office; or
if they have been convicted of
certain criminal offences, unless the Federal Court of Australia rules
Irrespective of whether Mr Fowler’s characterisation of s.215
is correct, the existence of that
make the current alteration contrary to the Act. Section 215 is not presently
relevant. The circumstances dealt with under
Division 2 of Part 4 of Chapter 8
are different to those dealt with by ss.141(1)(b) and 141(1)(c).
At paragraph 2 of his submission Mr Fowler refers to section 142 of
the Act. He quotes some of the text of s.142(1)(c).
Section 142(1)(c) of the Act states:
“(1) The rules of an organisation:
(c) must not impose on applicants for membership, or members, of the
organisation, conditions, obligations or restrictions that, having
Parliament’s intention in enacting this Act (see section 5) and the
objects of this Act and the
Fair Work Act
, are oppressive, unreasonable or
Parliament’s
intention in enacting the Act is set out in
of the Act:
“(1) It is Parliament’s intention in enacting this
Act to enhance relations within workplaces between federal system employers
federal system employees and to reduce the adverse effects of industrial
disputation.
(2) Parliament considers that those relations will be enhanced and those
adverse effects will be reduced, if associations of employers
and employees are
required to meet the standards set out in this Act in order to gain the rights
and privileges accorded to associations
under this Act and the
(3) The standards set out in this Act:
(a) ensure that employer and employee organisations registered under this Act
are representative of and accountable to their members,
and are able to operate
effectively; and
(b) encourage members to participate in the affairs of organisations to which
they belong; and
(c) encourage the efficient management of organisations and high standards of
accountability of organisations to their members; and
(d) provide for the democratic functioning and control of organisations;
(e) facilitate the registration of a diverse range of employer and employee
organisations.”
There do not appear to be general objects of the Act buoying those
The objects of the FW Act are set out in section 3 of that
Act. It is not necessary to reproduce them.
Section 142(1)(c) of the Act is concerned with what the rules of a
registered organisation must not do. Section 142(c) contains a
four limbed test.
The prohibition in s.142(1)(c) is only engaged when all four limbs of the test
First, the rules must not impose on applicants for membership, or
members, of the organisation, conditions, obligations or restrictions.
Not every condition, obligation or restriction is proscribed.
Section 142(1)(c) is only concerned with conditions, obligations or
restrictions
imposed by the rules on members of an organisation, or applicants for
membership.
Next, the mere imposition of conditions, obligations or restrictions
on the relevant cohort is not enough. They must have a particular
character: the
conditions, obligations or restrictions placed on members of an organisation, or
applicants for membership must be
oppressive, unreasonable or unjust.
Finally, s.142(1)(c) does not invite a general assessment of
oppressiveness, unreasonableness or unjustness. The assessment is a limited
It is referrable to the matters set out in s.5(1) – (3) of the Act, s.3 of
the FW Act, modern awards and agreements.
The range of gross misbehaviour which could be sanctioned under the
proposed rule appears broader than the gross misbehaviour that
can be sanctioned
under the current rule. On that basis, I am prepared to assume the proposed
alteration imposes a condition, obligation
or restriction.
Further, because holding office in the Branch is tied to
membership,
accept the condition, obligation or restriction would be imposed on members of
the organisation.
However, the condition, obligation or restriction imposed on members
is not oppressive, unreasonable or unjust.
Sections 5(1) – (3) are not substantive enactments. They are
statements of intention, akin to objects of an Act. The Act thereafter
the substantive provisions which regulate the affairs of registered
organisations in a manner the Parliament considers conducive
to the attainment
of its Parliamentary intentions. Sections 141(1)(b) & (c) are two of those
substantive provisions. They require
the rules to make provision for the removal
of the holders of office from their office and they stake out the limits of
the Parliament’s view, constitute appropriate grounds for removal
from office. Sections 142(1)(b) & (c) embody what the
Parliament considers
conducive to the attainment of the standards set out in section 5, so far as
removal from office is concerned.
A proposed rule mirroring that embodiment can
hardly said to impose oppressive, unreasonable or unjust conditions, obligations
restrictions, having regard to those very standards.
None of this should be taken to suggest that I doubt Mr
Fowler’s displeasure with his treatment at the hands of the Branch.
I doubt that he sincerely holds the views he has set out in the material lodged
in this matter. I have no reason to doubt
the sincerity of Mr Fowler’s
concerns. However, Mr Fowler’s concerns about what might transpire should
the rules be altered,
is not a sufficient basis to conclude that the alterations
impose on members (or applicants for membership) of the Branch conditions,
obligations or restrictions that are oppressive, unreasonable or unjust when
regard is had to Parliament’s intention in enacting
the Act and the
objects of the Act and the FW Act.
So far as it relies on s.142(1)(c) of the Act, Mr Fowler’s
objection to the alteration must fail.
For similar reasons I also reject Mr Fowler’s submission that
the proposed alteration is contrary to s.5(3)(a)-(d) of the Act,
or any of them.
Those subsections set out standards required to be met by registered
organisations.
facilitate the meeting of those standards—so far as removal from office is
concerned—sections 141(1)(b) & (c)
have been included in the Act.
Again, the proposed alteration aligns the Federal Branch Rule with s.141(1)(c).
It is difficult to
understand how a rule which mirrors a provision the
Parliament considered appropriate to attain the standards which underpin the
intentions of the Act could be contrary to those standards.
The alteration is not contrary to ss.5, 141(1)(c) or 142(1)(c) of
the Act. Nor does it fail to comply with them. No other sections
of the Act are
relevant. Nor am I aware of any relevant provisions of the FW Act, modern awards
or agreements. I therefore reject
Mr Fowler’s submission that “The
rule alteration does not satisfy the test in section 159(1)(a) in that it is
Fair Work (Registered Organisations) Act 2009
Mr Fowler made a number of submissions going to other matters. While
it is not necessary to set those submissions out, they warrant
a brief response.
Mr Fowler suggests that the rule will be improperly used. He submits
the current rule alteration “has been expressly designed
to disenfranchise
one member, and that member is
not accept that characterisation. It is clear on the face of both Federal Branch
and the proposed alteration to Federal Branch Rule 15.7.4 that the
provisions are intended to apply to officers of the Branch generally.
Mr Fowler may in fact be submitting that the Branch intends to
improperly use the proposed rule to his detriment. If that is so, it
matter relevant to my considerations under
of the Act. If this rule is
misapplied, Mr Fowler’s remedy would lie under
of the Act. I agree
with Delegate Carruthers, who said:
“It is not enough that a rule is capable of being misused
in such a way as to operate unreasonably. Nor is it enough that a
give rise to an unintended, unreasonable consequence. To be incapable of
certification under
, the rule must be oppressive, unreasonable or unjust
on its face.... If a rule is applied in a way which produces an oppressive,
unreasonable or unjust result, relief is available to an affected member at that
Mr Fowler suggests that the Branch has acted against him under the
proposed rule.
Without making any finding about whether that has occurred, I draw both the
Branch and Mr Fowler’s attention to
of the Act, which states:
“An alteration of rules that has been certified under
subsection (1) takes effect on the day of certification.”
In any event, that is not be a matter relevant to my consideration
of the Act. If Mr Fowler’s suggestion is true, his remedy lies
of the Act.
In my opinion, the alteration complies with and is not contrary to
the Act, the FW Act, modern awards and enterprise agreements, is
not otherwise
contrary to law and was made under the rules of the organisation. I certify
accordingly under subsection 159(1) of
DELEGATE OF THE GENERAL MANAGER
See Schedules A
& B to Branch President Angela Burroughs’ 8 July 2024 declaration.
See Federal
Branch Rule 15.4.7(c).
attachment to Mr Fowler’s email to the 8.29 pm email to the Commission at
paragraphs 5 & 16 – 17. That attachment
describes itself as a 1 August
2024 objection and will be referred to those terms throughout this decision. See
also paragraph 6
of Mr Fowler’s 8 September 2024 response to the
Branch’s submission in reply and Federal Rules 2 (Re: definition of
9(1), 21(2)(a) & 5(9).
See paragraph 10
of Mr Fowler’s 1 August 2024 objection. See also the following annual
returns of information lodged in either
the Commission or the Registered
Organisations Commission under s.233 of the Act: AR2021/64, AR2020/65,
AR2019/87, AR 2018/90, AR2017/94,
AR2016/107, AR2015/115, AR2014/191 &
AR2013/271.
I note that
during his 19 July 2024 conversation, Mr Fowler indicated he had emailed the
Commission about the Branch’s rule
alteration application during the week
ending 12 July 2024 but had received no response. The earlier email was
initially thought
to form part of the material in support of the separate matter
referred to in paragraph [6] below.
See the fifth
paragraph of Mr Fowler’s 19 July 2024 email. There is no issue that this
is a reference to the present alteration.
See the ninth
paragraph of Mr Fowler’s 19 July 2024 email.
See the ninth
paragraph of Mr Fowler’s 19 July 2024 email.
See the fifth
paragraph of the 11.51 am 22 July 2024 email from the Commission to Mr
See the third
paragraph of the 11.51 am 22 July 2024 email from the Commission to Mr
See the fourth
paragraph of the 11.51 am 22 July 2024 email from the Commission to Mr
minutes were lodged by the Branch in their entirety. The version provided for
objections only included the sections relevant
to the rule alteration.
See the second
and third paragraph of the 5.03 pm 22 July 2024 email from the Commission to Mr
Fowler’s email to the 8.29 pm email to the Commission. That attachment
describes itself as a 1 August 2024 objection
and will be referred to those
terms throughout this decision.
Fowler’s email to the 8.58 pm email to the Commission.
latter email was referred internally to the appropriate team.
Commission’s 5 August 2024 email to Mr Fowler.
See paragraph
4 of the Commission’s 5 August 2024 email to the Branch.
Burroughs’ 16 August 2024 email to the Commission.
Director – Workplace Advocacy and Member Support Matthew Peterson’s
16 August 2024 email to the Commission.
The Standing Orders is an internal
administrative document (see Federal Branch Rule 9.1.2(b)). It deals with
procedural matters associated
with the control of the Branch Council meetings.
It does not form part of the Branch’s Federal Branch Rules (see Federal
Rule 9.1.2(b)).
See the second paragraph of Matthew Peterson’s
16 August 2024 email to the Commission.
August 2024 email from the Commission to Mr Fowler.
See the second
and third paragraphs of the 26 August 2024 email from the Commission to Mr
Fowler. See also ss.343A(1) & (3) of
Fowler’s 26 August 2024 email to the Commission and the Commission’s
29 August 2024 email in reply.
Fowler’s 10.53 am 7 September 2024 and 10.53 am 7 September 2024 emails to
the Commission.
Commission’s 30 August 2024 email to Mr Fowler.
However, as
stated, I have not had regard to the emails from Mr Fowler referred to in
paragraphs [12] and [17] above.
See paragraph
1 of Angela Burroughs’ 8 July 2024 declaration.
paragraphs 4(a) – (k).
paragraph 4(l).
See Matthew
Peterson’s 5 August 2024 email to the Commission.
Ibid: see the
second paragraph.
See paragraphs
24 - 25 of Mr Fowler’s 1 August 2024 objection.
See paragraph
21 of the Branch’s submissions in reply lodged on 16 August 2024.
See paragraph
8(f) of Glenn Fowler’s 8 September 2024 response to the Branch’s
submission in reply.
particularly Standing Orders 12, 22 & 20.
Mr Fowler has
admitted he did not attend the meeting; he had no intention of doing so –
see paragraph 24 of his 1 August 2024
See paragraph
25 of Mr Fowler’s 1 August 2024 Objection.
See paragraph
8(f) of Glenn Fowler’s 8 September 2024 response to the Branch’s
submission in reply.
See Standing
See Federal
Branch Rule 27.1.2.
See paragraph
18 of Mr Fowler’s 1 August 2024 Objection.
Which I will
discuss in paragraphs [72] - [73] below.
See Federal
Branch Rules 10.4.2(a) & (b).
See Federal
Branch Rule 29.
See paragraphs
2 - 4 of Mr Fowler’s 1 August 2024 Objection.
See paragraphs
3 - 6 of the Branch’s submissions in reply lodged on 16 August 2024.
Cf for example
an alteration that changed a term of office from four years to eight. That
alteration would be self-evidently contrary
to the Act; see s.145 of the Act
which imposes a maximum for terms of office.
that section, or elsewhere in the Act prohibit removal from office rules being
made on a branch by branch basis if an
organisation is divided into branches, so
the existence of a rule such as Federal Branch Rule 15 is unremarkable.
See paragraphs
3 - 6 of the Branch’s submissions in reply lodged on 16 August 2024.
See paragraph
8 of Mr Fowler’s 1 August 2024 Objection.
Division 2 of
Part 4 of Chapter 8 also deals with various associated matters, none of which
are relevant to consideration of the
current alteration under s.159 of the
provisions of Division 2 of Part 4 of Chapter 8 generally.
See column C
of the Election Table which forms part of the Federal Branch Rules. See also
Federal Branch Rule 15.7.2.
See s.5(2) of
See paragraph
2 of Mr Fowler’s 8 September 2024 response to the Branch’s
submission in reply. See also, for instance,
paragraphs 7 & 8(d) and
paragraph 7 of Mr Fowler’s 1 August 2024 Objection.
Master Plumbers' and Mechanical Services Association of Australia
; Ms Curruthers; 14 August 2012 citing, for instance,
v Australian Workers Union
[1938] CthArbRp 108
(1938) 39 CAR 323
Hay v Australian Workers
[1944] CthArbRp 791
(1944) 53 CAR 674
; Allshorn v Stapleton
(1984) 4 FCR 326 and
later referring to ss. 163 - 164A of the Act
See paragraph
8(g) of Mr Fowler’s 8 September 2024 response to the Branch’s
submission in reply. See also paragraph 7
of Mr Fowler’s 1 August 2024
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
RTF format (739 KB)
Signed PDF/A format