Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing and Kindred Industries Union' known as the Australian Manufacturing Workers Union (AMWU) v Berri Pty Limited [2017] FWCFB 3005 (9 June 2017)
[2017] FWCFB 3005
FAIR WORK COMMISSION
Fair Work Act 2009
—appeal of a decision
Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering,
Printing and Kindred Industries Union’ known as the Australian
Manufacturing Workers
Union (AMWU)
(C2017/857)
JUSTICE ROSS, PRESIDENT
DEPUTY PRESIDENT GOOLEY
COMMISSIONER
MELBOURNE, 9 JUNE 2017
Appeal against decision
of Deputy President Lawrence at Sydney on 27 January 2017 in matter
number C2016/5808 – errors in decision making process –
permission to appeal granted – appeal upheld and decision set aside
– remitted for rehearing.
Introduction
The matter before us is an appeal from a decision of Deputy President
Lawrence (the
which dealt
with a dispute arising under the
Berri Pty Limited (Leeton) Enterprise
Agreement 2014 – 2017
(the 2014 Agreement). The dispute in question
was about whether there is an entitlement to a ‘laundry allowance’
the 2014 Agreement and was characterised by the Deputy President in the
following terms:
‘It is about whether or not Laundry Allowance which is
contained in Attachment 3 of the Agreement is properly payable to employees
the Leeton plant who are required to wear and keep clean, as required by clause
26, their protective clothing which is provided
It was common ground that the Commission had jurisdiction to hear and
determine the dispute.
The Deputy President decided that ‘there is no entitlement to
the payment of Laundry Allowance to employees of Berri at the
Leeton factory
pursuant to the
Agreement.’
AMWU has appealed that decision.
We propose to say something about the 2014 Agreement and the
proceedings at first instance before turning to the appeal.
2. The 2014 Agreement
The 2014 Agreement was approved on 17 November 2014 and commenced
operation on 24 November 2014, with a nominal expiry date of 1 February
Agreement applies to Berri Pty Limited (Berri) and all employees covered by the
classifications set out in the Agreement.
The AMWU is covered by the 2014
Clauses 4.3 and 26 and Attachment 3 of the 2014 Agreement are
relevant to the determination of the dispute. These terms provide as
4.3 Interaction with awards
(i) This Agreement incorporates the terms of the Food, Beverage and Tobacco
Manufacturing Award 2010, in relation to employees who
are covered by that
award. For such employees, where there is conflict between this Agreement and
that award, this Agreement will
prevail to the extent of any inconsistency.
(ii) This Agreement incorporates the terms of the Manufacturing and Associated
Industries and Occupations Award 2010, in relation
to employees who are covered
by that award. For such employees, where there is conflict between this
Agreement and that award, this
Agreement will prevail to the extent of any
inconsistency.
26 Protective Clothing
26.1 The Company undertakes to provide suitable protective clothing and
footwear to employees as required by the respective health
regulations and/or as deemed necessary for the particular work area.
26.2 Protective clothing remains the property of the Company at all
26.3 All items provided by the Company under the foregoing provisions of this
Agreement shall be supplied without cost to the employee
provided that a used
item requiring replacement shall be returned to the Company before any
replacement without charge is made. Any
item may, if not returned on request of
the Company, be paid for at a reasonable rate by the employee concerned.
26.4 Protective clothing will be worn at all times during the employee's
attendance at work and be in a state of good repair.
26.5 It is the responsibility of the employee to ensure that their protective
clothing is kept clean and in good repair.
26.6 Employees engaged on a casual basis will be issued with sanitised or new
safety rubber boots.
26.7 Hearing protection is provided and is to be worn at all times in
designated areas.
26.8 Hair nets which completely cover the hair are to be worn at all times in
designated areas.
As set out above, clause 4.3 of the 2014 Agreement incorporates the
terms of the
Food, Beverage and Tobacco Manufacturing Award 2010
Manufacturing and Associated Industries and Occupations Award 2010
the agreement. Relevantly for present purposes, clause 26.2(e) of the
Beverage and Tobacco Manufacturing Award 2010
26.2 Other allowances
(e) Special clothing and equipment allowance
Where an employee is
required to wear special clothing and equipment, the employer must reimburse the
employee for the cost of purchasing
and laundering such special clothing and
equipment unless the clothing and equipment is paid for and/or laundered by the
Attachment 3 of the 2014 Agreement is titled ‘Allowance
Structure’ and sets out the quantum to be paid in respect of 10
allowances, one of which is a ‘laundry allowance’. The quantum of
each allowance is subject to annual increases
over the life of the 2014
Agreement. There is no other direct reference to the laundry allowance in any
other term of the 2014 Agreement.
3. The Proceedings at First Instance
Proceedings at first instance were initiated by an application
(C2016/5808) filed by the AMWU pursuant to
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) (the FW Act) for the Commission to deal with a dispute arising under
the 2014 Agreement. As mentioned earlier, the dispute concerned
the entitlement
to a laundry allowance under the agreement and it was common ground that the
Commission had jurisdiction to hear
and determine the dispute. In response to
the AMWU application, Berri filed an application under s.217 of the FW Act to
2014 Agreement to remove an ambiguity or uncertainty. The variation
sought the removal of the reference to the laundry allowance
in Attachment 3 of
the 2014 Agreement. The Deputy President decided to hear both applications in
the one proceeding.
It was common ground that all production and maintenance employees
are required to wear protective clothing supplied by Berri and
that there are no
laundry facilities on site. It was also uncontested that since sometime in the
1990’s two employees (Stephen
Alexander and Stephen Smith) have been paid
a laundry allowance. These two employees no longer work for Berri. We deal later
the predecessor agreements to the 2014 Agreement and to the fact that at an
earlier point in time (in the 1996 Agreement) there was
an express term setting
out the circumstances in which (and to whom) a laundry allowance was payable
– but that term was deleted
from the 1999 Agreement and subsequent
agreements.
We also note that during the course of the proceedings at first
instance, Berri’s representative informed the Commission that
there were 4
Berri employees (including Messrs Alexander and Smith) who had been employed
prior to the commencement of the 1999 Agreement.
Of those 4, Messrs Alexander
and Smith have recently left, the other 2 are still employed by Berri and are
not paid a laundry
The AMWU contended that the ‘Allowance Structure’ has a
plain meaning, namely, that a laundry allowance is payable weekly
to employees
who are required to launder their work clothes. The AMWU called two
Mr Olrick was involved in the negotiation of the 2014 Agreement. He
was not aware of any document exchanged between the parties which
talked about
the laundry allowance and, to his knowledge, no one mentioned the laundry
allowance specifically in any of the negotiations
for the 2014
Hattenfels was also involved in the negotiation of the 2014 Agreement and his
evidence was in essentially the same terms as Mr
Berri contended that the 2014 Agreement does not provide an
entitlement to a laundry allowance and that the reference to laundry allowance
in Attachment 3 was ‘an inadvertent error’. Berri relied on the fact
that while Attachment 3 refers to a laundry allowance
and identifies a monetary
amount, no other term of the 2014 Agreement makes any reference to the
circumstances in which a laundry
allowance would be paid. The essence of the
submission advanced by Berri is set out in the following extract from its
written submission
in the proceedings at first instance:
‘... there is no clause anywhere within the substantive
body of the current EA which provides that employees are entitled to
Allowance...
In the absence of any clause stating that employees should be paid a Laundry
Allowance ... no entitlement to a laundry allowance can
Attachment 3 causes a level of confusion because the Attachment refers to a
Laundry Allowance and identifies a rate of payment.
The Attachment does not, however, indicate who is to be paid this Laundry
Allowance, the circumstances in which the Allowance is payable
or the period
over which the Allowance is to be paid (ie hourly, weekly, monthly, etc).
In summary, the Attachment does not confer any right to the Laundry Allowance
as it does not indicate who is entitled to receive payment
or when they are to
receive it.
In such circumstances, the Attachment could not be said to confer any rights
or entitlements. It simply identifies a rate of pay.’
Berri advanced two other points in support of its contention:
(i) The fact
that employee entitlements to other allowances are generally identified in a
substantive term of the agreement.
historical context, particularly the removal of the reference to the laundry
allowance from the protective clothing clause
following the 1996 Agreement.
Berri called four witnesses:
Ms Smith was the payroll officer for Berri between 1994 and 2001.
She had no involvement in any enterprise agreement negotiations.
Smith’s evidence is that the laundry allowance stopped being paid to team
members in the late
Smith was not sure about when the payment was stopped, nor did she know if it
was immediately stopped for all team
Mr Burton was the site operations manager at Berri’s Leeton
site from 1991 to 2002, he ceased working for Berri some 5 or 6
years ago. Mr
Burton was involved in various enterprise bargaining negotiations while he was
site operations manager.
At paragraph [6] of his statement Mr Burton says:
‘I recall that one of our claims during these EA
negotiations was for the laundry allowance to be removed, as a trade off we
would make a one off pay out of all employees sick leave down to four
Mr Burton clarified this aspect of his statement during his oral
‘Is that paragraph correct?---In most words, yes. Except the I
made a blue here when I've written it, and it's been put down
here as the
laundry allowance and the sick leave were different items. The sick leave
was a to reduce the premium the moneys
that we had sitting owing
to the employees, it would give them the option to have the sick leave paid out
down to four weeks, so
if you had 16 weeks and we paid it down to four
weeks. They didn't have to take that but that was just part of the things
negotiations at the time. The laundry allowance was just a
trade-off, it's probably the wrong word, of the negotiation where you
take; you give a little bit, and we'll give a little bit. And I can't
remember what the figure was but the laundry allowance
was to be taken out of
the EBA and say four and a half or five per cent whatever it was at the period
of time, for the increase to
go through.
And you say that that's what took place?---Yes.
Who were those discussions with?---With Ray Warne who was the union organiser
at the time, myself and the union delegates, Ian Collins,
who happened to be the
factory delegate at the time.’
To be clear, your evidence is that as part of those negotiations there was a
- is this a true description - there was a package of
matters that were agreed
and one of them was that employees gave up their laundry allowance, that's your
evidence?---That's correct.
But we now know that not all employees gave up their laundry allowance?---I
was unaware that those two were still receiving laundry
But your evidence is that all employees gave up their laundry allowance; not,
for example, that laundry allowance only continued to
be paid to existing
employees and new-starters didn't get it - in other words it was
grandfathered? That's not your evidence?---No.
That wasn't the agreement?---Definitely not.
You're very clear about that?---100 per
We deal with Mr Burton’s evidence in more detail later.
Mr Westcombe was involved in the negotiation of the 2014
support role.
recollection of the negotiations was quite limited:
‘But it's on this company interest page?---As I said in
the statement, basically all I can recall is that the 3 per cent was
well at that time, whatever was negotiated as a wage increase - was going to go
straight onto the allowances.
You don't remember much about bargaining, do you?---No. Yes, I'm not -
as I've said, the only thing I can recall, it was just basically
being whatever
the pay increase was they would have increased accordingly. That's my
understanding.’
Mr Harrison was not involved in enterprise bargaining negotiations,
he supervised five employees in the laboratory. None of the employees
supervised received a laundry
Harrison gave the following evidence concerning Stephen Alexander and Stephen
‘Prior to my leaving in 1999 I was aware that two
employees, Stephen Alexander and Stephen Smith were employed initially to
prepare drums for our processing work.
The work these two employees were performing was especially dirty, as they
were continually in contact with drums stored outside over
a lengthy period.
They both became dusty very quickly from blowing the dirt off with high pressure
air or brushing it off with a
hand brush. Once the drums were cleaned and gross
rust removed the drums were then spray painted by these two individuals, and the
colour of the paint was jet black. This was all performed outside, so they were
continually affected by spray drift and wind blowing
the dirt and dust
Cleaning in other parts of the factory generally involves copious quantities
of water and automatic cleaning, so people are not exposed
to dirt and grime
anywhere near as much as Steven Alexander and Stephen Smith at that time. Even
the maintenance people are not
exposed to this level of grime as predominantly
there work involves touching equipment and gaskets, which can rub off on your
but not usually over your entire clothes on such a regular
Mr Kerry Davy also gave evidence in the
proceeding.
had initially proposed to call Mr Davy but ultimately chose not to do so and he
was, in effect, a Commission witness. Mr Davy
had been a supervisor at the
Leeton site from 1985 to 1998 and from 2000 to 2010. Mr Davy was not involved in
the negotiations for
gave evidence as to his understanding of what had been agreed at that time:
‘But your understanding was that there was some bargain
agreed whereby the laundry allowance was to stop being paid, and that
of a deal that had been done with the union, is that right?---The laundry
allowance was to stop being paid to new employees
from the date of the signed
agreement. So any new employees coming on board were not to receive the
And that's because you think that was the agreement that the parties reached
in bargaining?---Correct.
So you stopped getting a laundry allowance?---No. I stopped getting a
laundry allowance when I left them in '98, and when I re-started
didn't get the allowance.
You didn't have a problem with that because that was part of the deal as you
understood it?---That's correct,
We comment on this aspect of Mr Davy’s evidence later.
As mentioned earlier, the Deputy President decided that the 2014
Agreement did
provide an entitlement to a laundry allowance and he
dismissed the AMWU’s application.
The Deputy President first confirmed the Commission’s
arbitration,
then characterised the dispute as we have set out earlier at [1]. The Deputy
President then turned to the interpretation of the
2014 Agreement and set out
the relevant principles, by reference to the Full Bench decision in
Australian Meat Industry Employees Union v Golden Cockerel Pty
Golden Cockerel
). In accordance with
Golden Cockerel,
Deputy President first considered whether the 2014 Agreement had a plain meaning
or contained an ambiguity.
The Deputy President was satisfied that the 2014 Agreement was
ambiguous in that it did not specify how the laundry allowance referenced
Attachment 3 ‘is to be paid’ and nor did it ‘explain the basis
of the payment’ or ‘who is entitled
identified ambiguity, the Deputy President turned to the evidence of surrounding
circumstances as an aid to the interpretation
of the 2014 Agreement, noting that
‘the evidence is sparse and
The Deputy President made a number of findings on the basis of the
evidence we have referred to earlier, relevantly for present purposes
• the explicit reference to an entitlement to a laundry allowance which
appeared in the 1996 Agreement was deleted from the
1999 Agreement and does not
appear in any subsequent agreement. Further, ‘employees ceased receiving
the [laundry] allowance
at about that
Deputy President notes at [59] and [63] that two employees continued to receive
the allowance);
the laundry
allowance was ‘bought out’ by Berri as part of a wages package for
the 1999 Agreement (at [65]); and
there was no
consideration of the laundry allowance during the negotiations for the 2014
agreement (at [66]).
It is also evident from the Deputy President’s decision that
he took into account the conduct of the AMWU and its officials
post the 1999
Agreement. At [62] of his decision, the Deputy President says:
‘Crucially, neither the AMWU officials nor delegates then
raised the non-payment of the allowance for some 16 years. It is clear
was not mentioned in the 2014 negotiations’.
The gravamen of the Deputy President’s conclusion is set out
at paragraphs [65] to [67]:
‘On the balance of probabilities, I accept Michael
Burton’s evidence that the Laundry Allowance was bought out by the
as part of a wages package for the 1999 EBA. Mr Davy’s evidence, although
confused about dates, is supportive of a
trade-off arrangement.
The 2014 Agreement needs to be read in the context of what went before it.
This is especially so because the evidence is that there
was no consideration of
the Laundry Allowance during the negotiations for the 2014 Agreement. I cannot
therefore accept the AMWU
submission that the 2014 Agreement should be
considered on its own merits.
I am therefore satisfied that the correct interpretation of the Agreement is
that there is no entitlement for employees to be paid
the Laundry
Allowance.’
We now turn to the grounds of appeal advanced by the AMWU.
An appeal of a decision is not as of right and permission to appeal
must first be
Subsection 604(2) of the FW Act
the Commission to grant
permission to appeal if satisfied that it is ‘
in the public interest to
’. The task of assessing whether the public interest test is met
is a discretionary one involving a broad value
Other than the special case in s.604(2), the grounds for granting
permission to appeal are not specified. Considerations which would
justify the grant of permission to appeal include that the decision is attended
with sufficient doubt to warrant its reconsideration
or that substantial
injustice may result if leave is
It is common ground that the decision subject to appeal relates to
the proper construction of the 2014 Agreement and accordingly the
issue for us
is whether the interpretation adopted by the Deputy President was
The AMWU advances three grounds of appeal:
1. The Deputy President erred in making the following findings
(a) that the laundry allowance was ‘bought off’ by Berri in 1999
‘as part of a wages package’;
(b) that the allowance was ‘not phased out for new
(c) that the two employees who continued to receive the allowance did so
because their jobs were ‘dirtier than the others’;
(d) that the allowance was not raised in bargaining for the Berri Pty Ltd
(Leeton) Enterprise Agreement 2014-2017 (the Agreement).
2. The Deputy President erred in determining that the correct interpretation
of the words ‘laundry allowance’ and associated
yearly rates in
Appendix 6 of the Agreement was that they did not give rise to any entitlement
for any employee to be paid a laundry
allowance under any circumstances.
(a) The Deputy President’s determination involved interpreting a term
of the Agreement. Accordingly, the decision under appeal
was non-discretionary.
The question for the Full Bench to determine is whether the Deputy
President’s determination was correct,
not whether it was reasonably open
to his Honour.
(b) The Deputy President’s interpretation is incorrect as:
(i) It is not consistent with the correct principles of enterprise agreement
interpretation; and
(ii) It is premised on the findings of fact the subject of appeal ground one.
Even if this ground fails, it is error to give primacy
to these factors over the
text of the Agreement.
Deputy President acted outside power in determining that no laundry allowance
was payable and dismissing the AMWU’s application,
as this decision was
inconsistent with a term of a fair work instrument that applied to the parties
and thus prohibited by s.739(5).
It is convenient to deal first with Grounds 2 and 3 which go to the
question of whether the Deputy President’s construction
of the 2014
Agreement was correct.
The principles relevant to the task of construing an enterprise
agreement were recently summarised in
‘1. The [Acts Interpretation] Act does not apply to the
construction of an enterprise agreement made under the [FW] Act.
construing an enterprise agreement it is first necessary to determine whether an
agreement has a plain meaning or contains an ambiguity.
may be had to evidence of surrounding circumstances to assist in determining
whether an ambiguity exists.
the agreement has a plain meaning, evidence of the surrounding circumstances
will not be admitted to contradict the plain language
of the agreement.
the language of the agreement is ambiguous or susceptible to more than one
meaning then evidence of the surrounding circumstance
will be admissible to aide
the interpretation of the agreement.
evidence of the surrounding circumstances is evidence of the objective framework
of fact and will include:
(a) evidence of prior negotiations to the
extent that the negotiations tend to establish objective background facts known
to all parties
and the subject matter of the agreement;
(b) notorious facts of which knowledge is to be presumed;
(c) evidence of matters in common contemplation and constituting a common
assumption.
resolution of a disputed construction of an agreement will turn on the language
of the Agreement understood having regard to its
context and
8. Context might appear from:
(a) the text of the agreement viewed as a whole;
(b) the disputed provision’s place and arrangement in the
(c) the legislative context under which the agreement was made and in which
it operates.
the common intention of the parties is sought to be identified, regard is not to
be had to the subjective intentions or expectations
of the parties. A common
intention is identified objectively, that is by reference to that which a
reasonable person would understand
by the language the parties have used to
express their agreement.
task of interpreting an agreement does not involve rewriting the agreement to
achieve what might be regarded as a fair or just
outcome. The task is always one
of interpreting the agreement produced by parties.’
Later we modify the above summary in light of the observations made
in the course of our decision.
The AMWU contends that, on its face, the ‘Allowance
Structure’ in Attachment 3 of the 2014 Agreement reflects the intention
the parties that a laundry allowance be paid, at least in some circumstances,
and that this intention is not displaced by the
absence of an express reference
to the allowance being payable elsewhere in the agreement. In support of this
contention the AMWU
submits that not all of the allowances in the Allowance
Schedule have a corresponding clause expressly requiring them to be paid
that the Allowance Schedule is not subservient to the text of the agreement, but
is itself a substantive term.
The construction of an enterprise agreement, like that of a statute
or a contract, begins with a consideration of the ordinary meaning
relevant words. The disputed words must be construed in the context of the
agreement as a whole. The process of interpretative
analysis focusses upon the
language of the agreement itself. In
Amcor Limited v
CJ and McHugh J described the process in the following terms: ‘[t]he
resolution of the issue turns upon the language
of the particular agreement,
understood in the light of its industrial context and purpose
Kirby J put it in the same case, ‘[i]nterpretation is always a text-based
As we have mentioned, Appendix 3 of the 2014 Agreement is titled
‘Allowance Structure’ and sets out the quantum to be
paid in respect
of the 10 nominated allowances. The text of direct relevance to these
proceedings is set out below:
‘Attachment 3 – Allowance structure
Laundry Allowance
The allowances set out in this attachment will be reviewed by the parties
subject to this agreement within 6 months of the variation
The number on the left (67) is a payroll code and the quantum of the
laundry allowance is subject to a number of increases over the
term of the 2014
Agreement, as are all of the other allowances in Attachment 3.
There is considerable force in the Appellant’s contention
that, as a general principle, all words in an enterprise agreement
facie be given some meaning and effect. It would seem to follow that the
inclusion of a laundry allowance in Appendix
3 of the 2014 Agreement should not
be regarded as superfluous or insignificant. Such an approach accords with the
principles of statutory
construction,
as a general proposition, the principles developed in the general law in the
context of the interpretation of statutes are applicable
to the interpretation
of enterprise agreements. As the Full Bench observed in
Paper Australia Pty
Ltd t/a Australian Paper v Australian Manufacturing Workers’
‘Australian Paper made the submission that no principle of
statutory construction has any application to the interpretation
of enterprise
agreements, and relied upon the proposition stated in
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) does not
apply to the construction of enterprise agreements in support of that
submission. The submission is rejected. It does
not follow from the fact that
enterprise agreements are not instruments to which the
Acts Interpretation
applies that modes of textual analysis developed in the general law in
the context of the interpretation of statutes are incapable
of application to
enterprise agreements. While it undoubtedly remains necessary in interpreting a
particular instrument to pay attention
to the peculiar characteristics of that
instrument, it is equally the case that there has been a convergence in the
approach taken
to the interpretation of statutes, agreements and other types of
instruments - in particular, in the emphasis on the objective ascertainment
the instrument’s purpose and the move from textual to contextual
interpretation. Additionally, many of the grammatical aides
interpretation of statutes are equally applicable to other types of instruments.
In the High Court decision in
Royal Botanic Gardens and Domain Trust v South
Sydney City Council
, Kirby J said “... it would be indefensible for
this Court, without good reason, to adopt a different approach in the
ascertainment
of the meaning of contested language in a
approach observed in respect of
legislation
”. We therefore do not
consider that
Golden Cockerel
should be taken as an exhaustive statement
of the means by which the text of an enterprise agreement might be
construed.’ (references
Berri does not dispute the proposition that the principles of
statutory construction can assist in the interpreting enterprise agreements,
submits that an overly technical approach to interpreting industrial
instruments, divorced from industrial realities, should
be avoided.
There is a long line of authority in support of the proposition that
a ‘narrow or pedantic’ approach to the interpretation
of industrial
instruments (such as enterprise agreements) is to be
‘fractured and illogical prose may be met by a generous and liberal
approach to
construction’.
A consequence of such an approach may be that some principles of statutory
construction have less force in the context of construing
an enterprise
agreement. For example, in
Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees’
Association v Woolworths
Gray ACJ held that the presumption that a word used in one provision of a
statute has the same meaning when it is used in another
provision of the same
statute, applied with less force in the context of an enterprise agreement:
‘Typically, such agreements are the product of hard
negotiation, in which wording of particular clauses is often agreed without
reference to other provisions of the same document. Provisions are commonly
transmitted from one agreement to the next in a series,
without regard to
whether their terminology sits well with the words used in newly adopted terms.
The use of other agreements, and
awards, as precedents can often result in the
borrowing of provisions, again without regard to whether the words used in them
consistent with the rest of the agreement under consideration. For these and
other reasons, consistency will often be absent. It
is easy to see that the same
word can be used in different provisions with different
We acknowledge that the fact that the instrument being construed is
an enterprise agreement is itself an important contextual consideration.
is also relevant that the instrument being interpreted in these proceedings is
an enterprise agreement made pursuant to Part
2-4 of the FW Act and, as observed
by White J in
National Tertiary Education Union v La Trobe
University,
it may be inferred that such agreements are intended to establish binding
obligations:
‘The manner of making such agreements is subject to
detailed prescription and their operation is contingent upon approval by
Fair Work Commission, the obtaining of which is itself a matter of detailed
prescription. In my opinion, it is natural to suppose
that parties engaging in
this detailed process intend that the result should be a binding and enforceable
agreement. To my mind,
that is an important matter of context when approaching
the construction of [the disputed clause in the
agreement]’.
Of course his Honour’s observation does not mean that an
enterprise agreement may not include ‘matters which are in the
statements of aspiration or commitment and not themselves intended to be
enforceable obligations or
entitlements’
– so much is clear from
Reeves v MaxiTRANS Australia Pty
that the 2014 Agreement is an enterprise agreement made pursuant to Part 2-4 of
the FW Act is also relevant to the weight
to be given to evidence of prior
negotiations, a point to which we shall return shortly.
There are other relevant contextual considerations in the 2014
The first is that for the most of the other
allowances in Attachment 3 there is a term elsewhere in the 2014 Agreement which
out the circumstances in which the particular allowance is
At first instance, and on appeal, Berri relied on the absence of any
such term stating that employees should be paid a laundry allowance
circumstances in which such a payment would arise) in support of its contention
that the reference to a laundry allowance
in Attachment 3 was ‘an
inadvertent error’.
If it were the case that the laundry allowance was the
allowance in Attachment 3 which was not referred to elsewhere in the 2014
Agreement, then there would be considerable force in Berri’s
submission.
In such circumstances, the laundry allowance would be an outlier. Its inclusion
in Attachment 3 would seem anomalous.
But that is not the case. The laundry
allowance is not the only allowance in Attachment 3 which is unaccompanied by
terms elsewhere
in the 2014 Agreement, which explains the circumstances in which
(and to whom) the allowance is payable.
There is no reference elsewhere in the 2014 Agreement to the PLC
allowance. In a submission filed on 12 May 2017, the Respondent submits
PLC allowance was paid to maintenance team employees who were electricians
performing duties associated with the operation
and maintenance of
‘programmable logic controls’ attached to various pieces of
machinery and equipment. The Respondent
also submits that save for one exception
(an employee who negotiated payment of a PLC allowance as a term of his contract
of employment)
the PLC ‘has not been paid to any employee in recent
memory’. The Respondent attached two affidavits (the Oakman and
Affidavits) in its 12 May 2017 submissions.
In a reply submission filed in 29 May 2017 the AMWU opposed the
admission of the Oakman and Harrison Affidavits on the basis that
Commission has a discretion to admit new evidence that discretion should not be
exercised lightly and should not be exercised
in this case.
We do not propose to admit the Oakman and Harrison Affidavits; nor
do we propose to seek further evidence from Mr Burton to clarify
any ambiguity
in relation to his evidence (as proposed by the Respondent in its submission of
12 May 2017 at para 2.15).
As will be seen, we have decided to uphold the appeal and remit the
AMWU’s s.739 application to Deputy President Gostencnik
for hearing and
determination. The parties will have an opportunity to lead whatever evidence
they deem appropriate in such a rehearing.
We are also conscious of the fact
that the admission of the new evidence – even if it was accepted –
would not alter
the outcome of the appeal and would not provide a complete
evidentiary picture such as would enable us to resolve the ambiguity in
Agreement and determine the AMWU’s s.739 application.
Returning to the terms of the 2014 Agreement we also note that,
while the ‘coolroom’ and ‘freezer’ allowances
Attachment 3 are referenced elsewhere in the 2014 Agreement – in clause 13
– that reference does not, in explicit
terms, establish an entitlement to
the payment of the specified allowances. Rather, clause 13 simply states:
13 COLD ROOM RATES
1°C to + 7°C – Coolroom (Refer Attachment 3 –
Allowances Structure)
Below 1°C – Freezer (Refer Attachment
3 – Allowances Structure)
A further contextual consideration is clause 26 – Protective
Clothing (see [6] above). Clause 26 provides, relevantly, that:
Berri is to
supply employees with suitable protective clothing and such clothing remains the
property of the company at all times;
clothing is to be worn at all times during an employees’ attendance at
responsibility of the employee to ensure that their protective clothing is kept
clean and in good repair.
As we have mentioned, it is common ground that all production and
maintenance employees are required to wear protective clothing supplied
and that there are no laundry facilities on site. Given the terms of clause 26
and the absence of onsite laundry facilities,
it would be understandable if the
agreement made provision for the payment of a laundry allowance to cover the
costs incurred by
employees in keeping their protective clothing clean. Of
course it may also be the case that employees are compensated for such costs
the minimum wage rates specified in the 2014 Agreement. But if that were the
case, why does Attachment 3 make reference to a laundry
It seems to us that there is an ambiguity in the 2014 Agreement
regarding the laundry allowance referred to in Attachment 3. In particular,
is unclear in what circumstances the amount specified is to be paid and to whom.
The frequency with which any such payment is
to be made is also unclear.
Having identified ambiguity it is permissible to consider evidence
of the surrounding circumstances as an aid to the task of interpreting
agreement. As Mason J observed in
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail
Authority (NSW)
‘... evidence of surrounding circumstances is admissible
to assist in the interpretation of the contract if the language is
ambiguous or
susceptible of more than one meaning. But it is not admissible to contradict the
language of the contract where it has
The admissibility of evidence of the surrounding circumstances is
limited to evidence tending to establish objective background facts
known to both parties and the subject matter of the contract. Evidence of such
facts is to be distinguished from evidence of the
intentions of the parties, such as statements and actions of
the parties which are reflective of their actual intentions and expectations.
Mason J observed in
‘... when the issue is which of two or more possible
meanings is to be given to a contractual provision we look, not to the
intentions, aspirations or expectations of the parties before or at the time of
contract, except insofar as they are expressed
in the contract, but to the
objective framework of facts within which the contract came into existence, and
to the parties’
presumed intention in this
As noted in
Golden Cockerel,
evidence of relevance to the
objective framework of facts will include:
(i) evidence of
prior negotiations to the extent that the negotiations tend to establish
objective background facts known to all parties
and the subject matter of the
(ii) notorious
facts of which knowledge is to be presumed; and
(iii) evidence
of matters in common contemplation and constituting a common assumption.
As to category (i), evidence of prior negotiations will be
admissible – but only for a defined purpose. As Mason J observed
‘Generally speaking facts existing when the contract was
made will not be receivable as part of the surrounding circumstances
to construction, unless they were known to both parties, although, as we have
seen, if the facts are notorious knowledge
of them will be presumed.
It is here that a difficulty arises with respect to the evidence of prior
negotiations. Obviously the prior negotiations will tend
to establish objective
background facts which were known to both parties and the subject matter of the
contract. To the extent to
which they have this tendency they are admissible.
But in so far as they consist of statements and actions of the parties which
reflective of their actual intentions and expectations they are not receivable.
The point is that such statements and actions
reveal the terms of the contract
which the parties intended or hoped to make. They are superseded by, and merged
in, the contract
itself. The object of the parole evidence rule is to exclude
them, the prior oral agreement of the parties being inadmissible in
construction, though admissible in an action for
rectification.’
Admissible extrinsic material may be used to aid the interpretation
of a provision in an enterprise agreement with a disputed meaning,
but it cannot
be used to disregard or rewrite the provision in order to give effect to an
externally derived conception of what the
parties’ intention or purpose
was. So much is clear from the oft-quoted statement of Madgwick J in
‘But the task remains one of interpreting a document
produced by another or others. A court is not free to give effect to some
anteriorly derived notion of what would be fair or just, regardless of what has
been written into the award. Deciding what an existing
award means is a process
quite different from deciding, as an arbitral body does, what might fairly be
put into an award. So, for
example, ordinary or well-understood words are in
general to be accorded their ordinary or usual meaning.’
In resolving the ambiguity in relation to the laundry allowance, the
AMWU submits that the following contextual factors indicate that
the allowance
is payable to production and maintenance employees:
Food, Beverage and Tobacco Manufacturing Award 2010
is incorporated into
the 2014 Agreement and clause 26.2(e) of the award provides for the
reimbursement of laundry costs:
‘It is likely
that the laundry allowance in Allowance Schedule is directed at addressing this
entitlement.’
(ii) While there is no corresponding entitlement in the
Manufacturing and
Associated Industries and Occupations Award 2010
, there is no indication
that maintenance employees were not intended to receive the allowance’.
It is submitted that the general
application of the 2014 Agreement indicates
that the parties intended the allowance to have general application.
(iii) Employees are required to bear the cost of laundering their uniforms,
which remain the property of Berri. It is submitted
that: ‘It is likely
that the laundry allowance was intended to compensate for this cost incidental
to employment, as otherwise
employees would be maintaining Berri’s
equipment for free.’
(iv) The two ‘grandfathered employees’ worked in general production
roles with the same uniform requirement and contaminant
exposure as anyone else.
This is said to indicate that ‘nothing additional is required to attract
the laundry allowance’.
(v) The 1996 Agreement – which expressly provided for the payment of a
laundry allowance – provided that the allowance
was payable ‘to all
permanent employees issued with company uniforms’. This is said to
indicate that ‘the laundry
allowance was intended to be generally payable
where uniforms are required’.
Contrary to the AMWU’s submission, we are not persuaded that
the contextual matters identified necessarily lead to the conclusion
is an entitlement to be paid a laundry allowance.
As to points (i) and (ii), the AMWU’s reliance on the
incorporation of the clothing reimbursement clause in the
Food, Beverage and
Tobacco Manufacturing Award 2010
is misconceived. The award clause
provides a right to seek reimbursement of the costs of laundering ‘special
clothing and equipment’,
which is entirely different in character to an
entitlement to the payment of an allowance. Further, not all employees covered
the 2014 Agreement are covered by the
Food, Beverage and Tobacco
Manufacturing Award 2010.
Some employees are covered by the
Manufacturing and Associated Industries and Occupations Award 2010
does not contain any right to a reimbursement of the cost of laundering special
clothing and equipment.
As to point (iii), the fact that employees bear the cost of
laundering their uniforms is a relevant consideration which is suggestive
entitlement to an allowance but, as mentioned earlier, it is not determinative.
The laundry allowance may have been ‘rolled
into’ the minimum wage
rate. If that were the case then the absence of a laundry allowance being
payable to employees who are
required to launder uniforms supplied by Berri
would be unremarkable.
As to point (iv), the fact that two
employees continued to receive the laundry allowance post-1999 is of little
relevance to the proper
construction of the 2014 Agreement. No party was able to
provide a definitive explanation as to why two employees continued to receive
the allowance
in such circumstances the fact that a laundry allowance was paid to those
employees supports neither party’s case.
Nor are we persuaded that the argument advanced in point (v) assists
the AMWU’s case.
Berri points to the antecedent industrial instruments and to the
evidence of Mr Burton to support its contention that the reference
to a laundry
allowance in the 2014 Agreement was ‘an inadvertent mistake’. Berri
submits that there was an agreement
(initially reflected in the 1999 Agreement)
on a package of measures, part of which was that employees traded their laundry
entitlement for a wage increase.
We propose to refer briefly to the antecedent industrial instruments
before turning to Mr Burton’s evidence.
There are a number of predecessor agreements to the 2014 Agreement
and an attachment in similar terms to Attachment 3 to the 2014
Agreement has
been included in the following predecessor enterprise/collective agreements:
Limited (Leeton Enterprise Agreement 2011- 2014;
Berri Limited
(Leeton) Enterprise Agreement 2005;
Limited/Berri (NSW) Limited (Leeton) Enterprise Bargaining Agreement 2002;
Berri Limited
(Leeton) Enterprise Bargaining Agreement 2001; and
National Foods
Juice Limited (Leeton) Enterprise Bargaining Agreement 1999 (the 1999
Agreement).
None of the above agreements contain an express term setting out the
circumstances in which (and to whom) the Laundry Allowance is
There was an explicit reference to an entitlement to a Laundry
Allowance in an earlier predecessor agreement - the Sunburst Foods
Leeton Certified Agreement 1996 (the 1996 Agreement). Clause 16 –
Protective Clothing – of the 1996 Agreement
included the following
‘A laundry allowance refer attachment per week will be
paid to all permanent employees issued with Company uniforms.’
Although the Protective Clothing Clause in the 1996 Agreement was
largely replicated in later agreements (including at clause 26 of
Agreement), the specific reference to a laundry allowance was removed following
the 1996 Agreement and was not reinserted
into any subsequent industrial
instrument.
As to the antecedent enterprise agreements, the AMWU acknowledges
that the protective clothing clause in the 1999 Agreement does not
express reference to the laundry allowance being payable but submits that the
change is not significant:
‘There are a number of other changes to the protective
clothing clause, including the deletion of an express requirement to
adequate personal hygiene standards. In these circumstances a deletion is not
itself sufficient to indicate a change to
a previously agreed position.
In any event, and more significantly, the 1999 Agreement still contains a
laundry allowance at Allowance Schedule, including changes
in rates. This is
wholly inconsistent with the abolition of the allowance.’
The AMWU submits that if the laundry allowance was ‘bought
out’ by a wage increase as part of the negotiations associated
1999 Agreement then that arrangement was a ‘side deal’ which was not
reflected in the 1999 Agreement. The AMWU
also submits that the non-payment of
the laundry allowance (to all but two employees) is insufficient to establish a
common intention.
The deletion of the express reference to the payment of a laundry
allowance to ‘all permanent employees issued with Company
from the 1999 Agreement provides some support for the contention that
there was an agreement to ‘trade off’ that entitlement for
a wage increase. Berri contends that there was such an agreement
and relies on
Mr Burton’s evidence regarding the negotiations for the 1999
There are two fundamental flaws in the argument advanced on behalf
of Berri. The first concerns the limitations to Mr Burton’s
evidence. In
short, that evidence does not carry Berri the required distance.
Properly analysed, Mr Burton’s evidence only supports a
finding that during the negotiation of the 1999 Agreement, Berri advanced
negotiation position proposing the removal of the laundry allowance in exchange
for a wage increase. There is no probative evidence
of the AMWU’s response
to the position put by Berri. Nor is there admissible evidence of the ultimate
agreement. Mr Burton’s
evidence that there was a package of matters that
were agreed and one of them was that employees gave up their laundry allowance,
is simply his subjective opinion of the ultimate result.
Mr Burton’s evidence establishes that during the negotiation
of the 1999 Agreement Berri proposed that the laundry allowance
be removed in
exchange for a wage increase and it may be inferred that the proposition
advanced was discussed by the parties to that
agreement. Even if we accept that
such evidence goes to establish the objective background facts (a proposition
not free from
that such a proposal was
does not mean it was
Plainly, not every claim advanced during the negotiation of an enterprise
agreement necessarily results in an agreement, so much is
clear from Mr
Hattenfels evidence about the negotiations for the 2014 Agreement. During the
course of those negotiations, Berri sought
to ‘roll the Cool Room rates
into the base rate of pay’. The proposal was discussed and
The second flaw in the argument put is that – at its highest
– it may explain the contextual background to the 1999 Agreement
assist in the construction of
agreement, but it is of very little
assistance in ascertaining the proper construction of the 2014 Agreement. The
parties to the 1999
and 2014 Agreements are quite different.
It is important to bear in mind that while the 2014 Agreement (and
indeed the antecedent agreements) may have been negotiated by Berri
AMWU, the agreement itself is ‘made’ when a majority of the
employees that will be covered by it cast a valid
vote to approve it.
The 2014 Agreement is a single enterprise agreement made pursuant to
Part 2-4 of the FW Act. Unlike times past, the ‘parties’
agreements are not an employer and an employee organisation. Indeed the FW Act
does not speak in terms of the ‘parties’
to such agreements, rather
it refers to the persons and organisations who are ‘covered by’ such
agreements. Relevantly
s.172(2)(a) provides that an employer may make an
enterprise agreement ‘with the employees who are employed at the time the
agreement is made and who will be covered by the agreement’. Section
182(1) provides that an agreement is ‘made’
if the employees to be
covered by the agreement ‘have been asked to approve the agreement and a
majority of those employees
who cast a valid vote approve the
agreement’.
It is also relevant to observe that an employee organisation that
was a bargaining representative for a proposed agreement may be
covered by the
agreement once it has been made (see ss.183 and 201(3)).
The diversity of interests involved in the negotiation and making of
enterprise agreements warrants the adoption of a cautious approach
admission and reliance upon evidence of positions advanced during the
negotiation process. As Rares J recently observed, in
International Air Pilots Association v Qantas Airways
‘Substantially, the Act provided that the agreement was a
tripartite document between a body of employees, a corporation with
officers and an industrial association. The involvement of so many individuals
in the formation of the agreement re-emphasises
the importance of approaching
the construction of that document in accordance with the principle of
objectivity. It is important,
in doing so, to be cautious and bear firmly in
mind the fact that the agreement was formed by a diversity of persons who had
to protect their differing interests by various formulations of words in
it. Those disparate intentions cannot be determinative
of the proper
construction to be given to the words chosen. In Health Services Union v
Ballarat Health Services
[2011] FCA 1256
, Gray J said:
“In the days when an award might be negotiated between a union and an
employer, and made by consent, the existence of a common
understanding between
the union and the employer as to the meaning of terms might have had some role
to play in their construction.
Whatever were the terms of such an agreement, and
whatever was their meaning, those terms were imposed upon the employees who
bound by the award. In the current era, most industrial instruments are
required to be put to a vote of the employees whose work
will be covered by
them, before they can be certified or approved so as to become enforceable by
statute. The union and the employer
who negotiated the terms might have had a
common understanding of the meaning of them, but that understanding might not
shared by all or some of the employees who voted for the operation of
the agreement. They may have been entirely ignorant of the
common understanding.
In those circumstances, the occasions on which it can be said that a party to an
agreement who entered into
it on a common understanding should not be allowed to
resile from that understanding will be rarer than they have been in the
We accept that different considerations arise in respect of
‘greenfields’ agreements as such agreements are ‘made’
between an employer(s) and a relevant employee organisation(s) (see
In any event the objective background facts which are of most
relevance are those which pertain directly to the 2014 Agreement. As
earlier, the Deputy President found (at [66]) that there was no consideration of
the laundry allowance during the negotiations
for the 2014 Agreement. The AMWU
challenges this finding of fact, contending that it is correct ‘in only a
limited sense’.
It is conceded that the laundry allowance was not
separately discussed, but submitted that Mr Hattenfels’ evidence is that
the Allowance Schedule as a whole was discussed (primarily in the context of
increases to the allowances). In these circumstances
it is submitted that it
cannot be said that there was no consideration of the laundry allowance
whatsoever in the negotiation of
the 2014 Agreement.
Contrary to the AMWU’s submission, it was plainly open to the
Deputy President to conclude that the laundry allowance was
subject of discussions during bargaining.
The AMWU’s assertion Mr Hattenfels considered the laundry
allowance to have been discussed during bargaining is inconsistent
Hattenfels’ evidence under cross examination. In particular:
(i) Mr Hattenfels conceded that the laundry allowance was not raised in any
documentation or
discussions;
(ii) Mr Hattenfels conceded that he only turned his mind to the existence of a
possible laundry allowance in December
We also note that Mr Olrick’s evidence corroborates this
aspect of Mr Hattenfels
No evidence was tendered in the proceedings at first instance to
suggest that during the negotiations for the 2014 Agreement any party
specifically turned their mind to whether a laundry allowance should be payable
to employees. The evidence in relation to the negotiations
for the 2014
Agreement was that:
(i) there was no claim to vary the laundry allowance in either the AMWU or
Berri’s logs of
(ii) the AMWU’s ‘comparison document’ comparing changes made
from the existing enterprise agreement to the new
2014 Agreement identifies a
number of allowances specifically, but makes no reference to a laundry
(iii) Messrs Olrick and Hattenfels (who both represented the AMWU in
negotiations for the 2014 Agreement) gave evidence that there
was no document
exchanged during negotiations that discussed a laundry
no person in the negotiations ever mentioned the laundry
(iv) Mr Wescombe, who represented Berri in the negotiations for the 2014
Agreement, gave evidence that there was no mention of the
laundry allowance in
negotiations and that Attachment 3 to the 2014 Agreement was simply
automatically updated to reflect the minimum
wage increase as had been done in
In circumstances where the parties to the 1999 and 2014 Agreements
are quite different, and where the laundry allowance (and its payment
non-payment) was not discussed during the negotiation of the 2014 Agreement, it
is difficult to see how an earlier agreement to
forego the laundry allowance as
part of the 1999 Agreement (assuming there was such an agreement) can reliably
inform the interpretation
of the 2014 Agreement.
Further, even if there had been evidence that the laundry allowance
had been discussed during the negotiations of the 2014 Agreement,
such evidence
would need to be approached with a degree of caution. As mentioned above, while
the 2014 Agreement was negotiated by
Berri and the AMWU, it was ultimately a
‘tripartite document between a body of employees, a corporation with
numerous officers
and an industrial association’. In these circumstances
evidence as to what, if anything, the employees covered by the 2014
were told about the laundry allowance (either during the course of the
negotiations or pursuant to s.180(5) of the FW Act)
may be of more assistance
than evidence of the bargaining positions taken by the employer or a bargaining
representative during the
negotiation of the agreement. This is so because an
enterprise agreement is ‘made’ when a majority of the employees
to approve the agreement cast a valid vote to approve the agreement.
So where does that leave us?
We agree with the Deputy President’s finding that the 2014
Agreement is ambiguous (see [28] above). However, the Deputy President’s
reasons for his ultimate conclusion (that there is no entitlement to a laundry
allowance) reveal two clear errors.
First, the Deputy President erroneously relies on Mr Burton’s
evidence of the agreement reached in 1999 and, in particular,
relies on Mr
Burton’s subjective opinion as to what was agreed. Such evidence does not
go to establishing the objective framework
of surrounding circumstances.
Further, Mr Burton’s evidence relates to what was agreed in the 1999
Agreement and, as we have
mentioned, the parties to the 1999 and 2014 Agreements
are quite different.
In addition to the Deputy President’s reliance on those
aspects of Mr Burton’s evidence which dealt with his subjective
the Deputy President also erred in his reliance on the post agreement conduct of
the AMWU officials and delegates.
The admissibility of the post-contractual conduct as an aid to the
construction of a contract is a somewhat vexed issue, in respect
of which no
clear line of authority has emerged.
Some early High Court authority permitted the admissibility of
post-contractual conduct as an aid to
construction.
obiter in more recent High Court judgements tends to support the view that such
evidence is
inadmissible.
Further, in
Agricultural and Rural Finance Pty Ltd v
a majority of the High Court adopted the ‘general principle’
that ‘it is not legitimate to use as an aid to the
construction of [a]
contract anything which the parties said or did after it was made’. Of
course, the expression ‘general
principle’ is itself somewhat
ambiguous, as Campbell JA observed in
Franklins Pty Ltd v Metcash Trading Ltd
‘It might mean that it is a principle that applies in all
cases, or that it is a principle that usually applies, though perhaps
subject to exceptions.’
As Allsop P observed in
(at [6]), ‘much ink
has been spilt over the last 30 years on this topic’. There is a daunting
array of intermediate appellate
court judgements on the admissibility of post
contractual
clear consensus appears to have emerged.
The judgement of Santow J in
Spunwill Pty Ltd v BAB Pty
gave detailed consideration to whether subsequent conduct may be used as an
aid to construction.
is a significant first instance judgement
that has been considered, and cited with approval, in some of the intermediate
court judgements which have dealt with this issue. After considering
the relevant authorities, Santow J concluded that the use of
subsequent conduct
as an aid to the construction of a contract:
‘... will be legitimate under the objective theory of
contract in the limited circumstances where conduct evidences a clear
subjective intention as to what the contract originally
In the industrial context it has been accepted that, in some
circumstances, subsequent conduct may be relevant to the interpretation
industrial instrument. But, consistent with the view expressed by Santow J in
the post-contractual conduct must be such as to found a common
understanding – a settled interpretation accepted by the parties.
We also note that in
Santow J observed that in deciding on the weight to be given to extrinsic
evidence of post contractual conduct as part of the surrounding
circumstances,
it was useful to refer to the following passage from the judgment of Lambert JA
in the Canadian case of
Re Canadian National Railways and Canadian Pacific
‘In the case of evidence of subsequent conduct the
evidence is likely to be most cogent where the parties to the agreement are
individuals, the acts considered are the acts of both parties, the acts can
relate only to the agreement, the acts are intentional
and the acts are
consistent only with one of the alternative interpretations. Where the parties
to the agreement are corporations
and the acts are the acts of employees of the
corporations, then evidence of subsequent conduct is much less likely to carry
In no case is it necessary that weight be given to evidence of
subsequent conduct.’
In the present case, one of the parties to the 2014 Agreement is a
corporation and, further, the post-agreement conduct amounted to
little more
than the absence of a complaint about the non-payment of a laundry allowance.
Such evidence is insufficient to establish
understanding.
Gray J observed in
ALHMWU v Prestige Property Services Pty
‘Care must be taken ... to distinguish a common
understanding from common inadvertence ... In order to have an understanding,
is necessary that there be a meeting of minds, a consensus. There can be no
meeting of minds, no consensus, if no one has thought
We note that in the appeal proceedings Berri did not advance a
submission to the contrary, and during the course of oral argument
eschewed any
suggestion that it was contending that there had been a course of conduct or
common understanding based on the non-payment
of the laundry allowance since
1999 and the absence of
Based on the errors in the Deputy President’s reasoning
process, we have decided to grant permission to appeal, uphold the appeal
quash the Decision.
We have given consideration to the resolution of the ambiguity in
the 2014 Agreement, having regard to the evidence before us. We
have not been
persuaded by the arguments advanced by either the AMWU or Berri. The admissible
extrinsic evidence of the surrounding
circumstances is of limited assistance.
There is a paucity of evidence regarding the negotiation of the 2014 Agreement
if anything, the employees covered by the agreement were told about
the laundry allowance. In particular, there is no evidence of
the explanation
provided to the relevant employees, (pursuant to s.180(5)), of the terms of the
2014 Agreement and the effect of
those terms.
In the circumstances we think the appropriate course is for the
matter to be remitted to a single member for further hearing.
As mentioned earlier we propose to modify the summary set out in
Golden Cockerel
in light of the observations made in the course of our
The principles relevant to the task of construing a single
enterprise agreement may be summarised as follows:
construction of an enterprise agreement, like that of a statute or contract,
begins with a consideration of the ordinary meaning
of the relevant words. The
resolution of a disputed construction of an agreement will turn on the language
of the agreement having
regard to its context and purpose. Context might appear
(i) the text of the agreement viewed as a
(ii) the disputed provision’s place and arrangement in the
(iii) the legislative context under which the agreement was made and in which
it operates.
The task of interpreting an agreement does not involve rewriting the agreement
to achieve what might be regarded as a fair or just
outcome. The task is always
one of interpreting the agreement produced by parties.
common intention of the parties is sought to be identified objectively, that is
by reference to that which a reasonable person
would understand by the language
the parties have used to express their agreement, without regard to the
subjective intentions or
expectations of the parties.
The fact that the instrument being construed is an enterprise agreement made
pursuant to Part 2-4 of the FW Act is itself an important
consideration. It may be inferred that such agreements are intended to
establish binding obligations.
FW Act does not speak in terms of the ‘parties’ to enterprise
agreements made pursuant to Part 2-4 agreements, rather
it refers to the persons
and organisations who are ‘covered by’ such agreements. Relevantly
s.172(2)(a) provides that
an employer may make an enterprise agreement
‘with the employees who are employed at the time the agreement is made and
will be covered by the agreement’. Section 182(1) provides that an
agreement is ‘made’ if the employees to be
covered by the agreement
‘have been asked to approve the agreement and a majority of those
employees who cast a valid vote
approve the agreement’. This is so because
an enterprise agreement is ‘made’ when a majority of the employees
to approve the agreement cast a valid vote to approve the agreement.
agreements are not instruments to which the
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
applies, however the modes of textual analysis developed in the
general law may assist in the interpretation of enterprise agreements.
technical approach to interpretation should be avoided and consequently some
general principles of statutory construction
may have less force in the context
of construing an enterprise agreement.
construing an enterprise agreement it is first necessary to determine whether an
agreement has a plain meaning or it is ambiguous
or susceptible of more than one
Regard may be had to evidence of surrounding circumstances to assist in
determining whether an ambiguity exists.
If the agreement has a plain meaning, evidence of the surrounding circumstances
will not be admitted to contradict the plain language
of the agreement.
the language of the agreement is ambiguous or susceptible of more than one
meaning then evidence of the surrounding circumstance
will be admissible to aide
the interpretation of the agreement.
admissibility of evidence of the surrounding circumstances is limited to
evidence tending to establish objective background facts
which were known to
both parties which inform and the subject matter of the agreement. Evidence of
facts is to be distinguished from evidence of the
intentions of the parties, such as statements and actions of
the parties which are reflective of their actual intentions and
expectations.
of objective background facts will include:
(i) evidence of prior
negotiations to the extent that the negotiations tend to establish objective
background facts known to all parties
and the subject matter of the
(ii) notorious facts of which knowledge is to be presumed; and
(iii) evidence of matters in common contemplation and constituting a common
assumption.
diversity of interests involved in the negotiation and making of enterprise
agreements (see point 4 above) warrants the adoption
of a cautious approach to
the admission and reliance upon the evidence of prior negotiations and the
positions advanced during the
negotiation process. Evidence as to what the
employees covered by the agreement were told (either during the course of the
negotiations
or pursuant to s.180(5) of the FW Act) may be of more assistance
than evidence of the bargaining positions taken by the employer
or a bargaining
representative during the negotiation of the agreement.
extrinsic material may be used to aid the interpretation of a provision in an
enterprise agreement with a disputed meaning,
but it cannot be used to disregard
or rewrite the provision in order to give effect to an externally derived
conception of what the
parties’ intention or purpose was.
the industrial context it has been accepted that, in some circumstances,
subsequent conduct may be relevant to the interpretation
of an industrial
instrument. But such post-agreement conduct must be such as to show that there
has been a meeting of minds, a consensus.
Post-agreement conduct which amounts
to little more than the absence of a complaint or common inadvertence is
insufficient to establish
a common understanding.
5. Conclusion
The Appellant has established an arguable case of error in relation
to the decision subject to appeal such as to warrant the granting
of permission
to appeal. Accordingly, permission to appeal is granted. An examination of the
Deputy President’s reasoning process
discloses error and on that basis we
have decided to uphold the appeal and quash the Decision. We remit the
AMWU’s s.739 application
to Deputy President Gostencnik for hearing and
determination.
We note that the parties are in the process of renegotiating the
2014 Agreement. We would encourage them to seek a resolution of the
raised in the AMWU’s s.739 application as part of those negotiations. The
Commission is available to assist the parties
in that regard, if they wish.
Appearances:
L. Saunders
for The Automotive, Food, Metals, Engineering, Printing
and Kindred Industries Union’ known as the Australian Manufacturing
Workers Union (AMWU)
for Berri Limited
Hearing details
Melbourne, Sydney (via video conference)
Final written submissions
Berri Limited: 12 May 2017
AMWU: 29 May 2017
Ibid at [49]
Ibid at [70]
[2014] FWCA
Transcript 8
November 2016 at [1019]-[1027] (Appeal Book 112)
Exhibit S2,
Transcript 8 November 2016 at [101]-[160]
Exhibit S3,
Transcript 8 November 2016 at [166]-[203]
Transcript 8
November 2016 at [148]-[151]
Exhibit I2,
Transcript 8 November 2016 at [208]-[270]
Exhibit I3,
Transcript 8 November 2016 at [274]-[505]
Exhibit I4,
Transcript 8 November 2016 at [512]-[609]
Exhibit I5,
Transcript 8 November 2016 at [679]-[725]
Exhibit I2 at
Transcript 8
November 2016 at [229]-[240]
[308]-[310] and [473]-[477]
[527]-[528]
Ibid at [567]
Exhibit I5, at
Commission 1, Transcript at [627]-[672]
Transcript 8
November 2016 at [640]-[641]
Transcript 8
November 2016 at [642]-[645]
[2014] FWCFB
Section 604(1)
Fair Work Act 2009
GlaxoSmithKline Australia Pty Ltd v Making
[2010] FWAFB
Lawrence v Coal & Allied Mining Services Pty Ltd
t/as Mt Thorley Operations/Warkworth
FWAFB 10089
, affirmed on judicial review;
Coal & Allied
Mining Services Pty Ltd v Lawler
[2011] FCAFC 54
Ferrymen Pty Ltd v
Maritime Union of Australia
[2013] FWCFB
NSW Bar Association v Brett McAuliffe
Commonwealth of
Australia represented by the Australian Taxation Office
[2014] FWCFB
CFMEU v AIRC
[1998] FCA 1404
(1998) 89 FCR 200
[2001] FCA 1803
(2001) 116 FCR 481.
Also see the Explanatory Memorandum to what is now
, at paragraph 2328.
Australian,
Administrative, Clerical and Services Union v Australian Tax Office (ATO)
[2013] FWCFB
[2014] FWCFB
[2005] HCA 10
(2005) 222 CLR
Blue Sky Inc v Australian Broadcasting Authority
(1998) 194 CLR 355 at 382
per McHugh, Gummow, Kirby and Jayne JJ
[2017] FWCFB
Kucks v CSR
[1996] IRCA 166
(1996) 66 IR 182
Wanneroo v Australian, Municipal, Administrative, Clerical and Services Union
[2006] FCA 813
(2006) 153 IR 426
at 440; See in general
Golden Cockerel
[2015] FCAFC
Trobe University
[2015] FCAFC 142
per White J
[2009] FCA 970
(2009) 188 IR
10.3: leading hand allowance; clause 10.6: boiler allowance; clause 13: cool
room and freezer allowances: clause 15.8.1:
meal allowance; clause 16: on call
allowance; clause 17: tool allowance; and first aid allowance: clause 29.2
(1982) 149 CLR
[1996] IRCA 166
(1996) 66 IR
Transcript 8
November 2016 at [1028]–[1032]
BP Australia
Pty Ltd v Nyran Pty Ltd
[2003] FCA 520
[8] and Attachment BH-2 to Exhibit
[2017] FCA 346
Transcript 8
November 2016 at [186]–[191] (Appeal Book 34) and [194] (Appeal Book
Ibid at [199]
(Appeal Book 35)
Ibid at [148]
and [151] (Appeal Book 31)
See Annexure
BH-1 at Appeal Book 170-172, Annexure BH-2 (Appeal Book 173-175)
See Annexure
BH-3 (Appeal Book 176)
Transcript at
[149] and [186] and [191]
Ibid at [151]
Statement of
Alan Wescombe, 3 November 2016 at [3], at Appeal Book 195
Smith and Co Ltd v Verawa
[1907] HCA 38
(1907) 5 CLR 68
Farmer v Hanon
[1919] HCA 13
(1919) 26 CLR 183
White v Australian and New Zealand Theatres
[1943] HCA 6
(1943) 67 CLR 266
at 275 and 281
Administration of Papua New Guinea v Daera
(1973) 130 CLR 353 at 446;
Codelfa Construction Pty Ltd v State Rail Authority of NSW
(1982) 149 CLR
(2008) 251 ALR
322 at [35] per Gummow, Hayne and Kiefel JJ, and at [163] per Heydon J
[2009] NSWCA
per Allsop P
(1978) 95 DLR
Davies Bros Limited
(1986) 18 IR 444
[2006] FCA 11
Transcript 19
April 2017at [541]–[543]
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR593399>
RTF format (1.36 MB)
Signed PDF/A format