1421054 [2015] MRTA 842 (9 June 2015)
[2015] MRTA 842
(9 June 2015)
DECISION RECORD
APPLICANTS:
Mr Mwape Makwaza
Mrs Songola
Miss Temwani Makwaza
Mr Mbita Mwape Makwaza
Miss Chinakila
Mooto Makwaza
MRT CASE NUMBER:
DIBP REFERENCE(S):
BCC2014/2460036
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Antonio Dronjic
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the
applicants Skilled Nominated (Permanent) visas.
Statement made on 09 June 2015 at 4:28pm
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
is an application for review of a decision made by a delegate of the Minister
for Immigration on 19 December 2014 to refuse to
grant the applicants Skilled -
Nominated (Permanent) (Class SN) Subclass 190 (Skilled - Nominated) visas under
Migration Act 1958
(the Act). This is a point’s based
visa designed for skilled applicants who have submitted an expression of
interest and received
an invitation to apply for the visa.
first named applicant (the applicant) was invited to apply for the visa on 7
August 2014 and applied for the visa on 28 September
2014. The criteria for the
grant of a Subclass 190 visa are set out in
of Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). The delegate refused to grant the
visa because the applicant did not satisfy the ‘points test’
in cl.190.214.
applicant appeared before the Tribunal via telephone conference on 9 June
2015 to give evidence and present arguments. I explained
the reasons why
delegate refused to award points for his overseas work experience and awarded 10
instead of 15 points the applicant
claimed for his Australian work experience. I
explained that the relevant period for overseas employment experience is from 7
2004 to 7 August 2014.
explained the requirement of working in a nominated or a closely related skilled
occupation. In his oral evidence he argued that
an occupation of an
Accountant/Auditor is closely related to his nominated occupation of a
Geologist. He stated that accountancy
and auditing skills are both required and
necessary for his current job as a geologist; that in his current job he is
required to
do budgeting, auditing and financial reporting to the board; that
these skills are giving him a competitive advantage in the workplace
many of his colleagues would like to acquire these skills.
noted that he had provided documentary evidence of being employed overseas as
Senior Auditor from May 2002 to December 2004 and
from August 2005 to April
2008. According to his resume, he worked as Audit Supervisor from May 2008 to
March 2010 and as an Internal
Auditor from July 2010 to September 2011.
asked the applicant to explain how was working for Digicel Pacific Group, which
is a telecommunication company and his employer
from July 2010 to September
2011, as an Auditor closely related to his nominated occupation of a Geologist.
The applicant suggested
that I should take a broader approach and that skills
acquired during this period were necessary for successful performance in his
current job.
indicated to the applicant that I am prepared to accept that his accounting
skills are beneficial to his current job but that I
do not accept that
accounting/auditing is a skilled occupation that is closely related to the
occupation of a Geologist. I noted
that he would have been able to work as an
auditor for telecommunication business or international charted accountancy firm
without having qualification as a Geologist.
the following reasons, the Tribunal has concluded that the decision under review
should be affirmed.
CONSIDERATION OF CLAIMS AND EVIDENCE
issue in the present case is whether the applicant satisfies the points test
criterion which requires that the applicant’s
score, when assessed in
relation to the visa under Subdivision B of Division 3 of
of the Act:
is not less than
the score stated in the invitation to apply for the visa and
is not less than
the ‘qualifying score’.
Subdivision
B of Division 3 of
of the Act provides for a points system under which an
applicant is given an assessed score based on a prescribed number of points
particular attributes. The qualifications and points applicable to this case are
prescribed in Schedule 6D to the Regulations
(r.2.26AC). An applicant achieves
the qualifying score if their assessed score is more than or equal to the
applicable pass mark
(s.94 of the Act), which is set by the Minister from time
to time under s.96(2). The Tribunal must consider the applicant against
qualifications and points prescribed in Schedule 6D, and the pass mark as in
force at the time of the delegate’s assessment
and as in force at the time
of this assessment, and apply whichever is more favourable to the applicant
(ss.93 and 350 of the Act).
elements of the points test relate to the nominated skilled occupation. An
occupation is a ‘skilled occupation’ if:
it is specified by the
ant instrument as a skilled occupation; and, if a number of points
are specified in the instrument as being available - for which
the number of
points are available; and that is applicable to the person in accordance with
the specification of the occupation (r.1.15I).
In the present case, the
applicant nominated the occupation of a Geologist (ANZSCO
Does the applicant have the qualifying score applying the law in force at the
time of the delegate’s assessment?
– Age qualifications
are available under this Part if the applicant was aged between 18 and 44 years
at the time of invitation to apply for the
the time of invitation the applicant was aged 43. Therefore, the applicant is
entitled to 15 points under this part.
– English language qualifications
are available under this Part on the basis of the applicant’s level of
English language proficiency at the time of invitation
to apply for the visa.
applicant provided the Department with a New Zealand passport issued on16
September 2013 to evidence the competent English requirement
on cl.190.213. No
points can be awarded for Competent English.
applicant has not provided evidence of having undertaken either of the two
specified English tests (IELTS or OET) in which he
has achieved the prescribed
score for either ‘proficient English’ (r..15D) or superior English
(r.1.15EA) at the time
of invitation to apply for the visa. The applicant is
therefore entitled to no points under this Part (item 6D22
of Schedule
– Overseas employment experience qualifications
may be available under this Part if, at the time of invitation to apply for the
visa, the applicant had been employed outside
Australia in the applicant’s
nominated skilled occupation or a closely related skilled occupation for at
least 36, 60, or 96
months in the 10 years immediately before that time.
his Resume, the applicant stated that:
from May 2002 to
December 2004 he worked as a senior Auditor at MT Ncube & Associates (New
from January
2005 to July 2005 he worked as an Accountant at Waipa District Council, New
Zealand; and
from August 2005
to April 2008 he was employed as a senior Auditor at UHY Haines Norton (New
departmental policy, which the Tribunal is not bound to follow, closely related
occupations are those that fall within one unit
group as classified under
ANZSCO. According to ANZSCO, Geologists and Accountants do not fall within one
unit group. In addition,
the tasks involved in the applicant’s actual
occupation are different from the tasks of an Accountant or Auditor.
tasks of a geologists, according to ANZSCO, is to study the composition,
structure and other physical attributes of the earth,
locate and advise on the
extraction of minerals, petroleum and ground water, and detect, monitor and
forecast seismic, magnetic,
electrical, thermal and oceanographic activity.
tasks of an Accountants and Auditors, according to ANZSCO, is plan and provide
accounting, financial auditing and treasury valuation
services and systems to
individuals and organisations, and plan and review legislative compliance
activities.
on the evidence before me, I am not satisfied that the services provided by the
applicant while employed overseas were substantially
the same as the services
ANZSCO stipulated a person must provide in order to be classified as a
on the evidence before me, I am not satisfied that the applicant’s
overseas work experience as an Accountant/Auditor can
be considered as
employment in the nominated skilled occupation or a closely related occupation.
For the reasons stated above I am
not satisfied that the occupations of an
Accountant/Auditor and Geologist are closely related occupations.
applicant is therefore entitled to no points under
– Australian employment qualifications
may be available under this Part if, at the time of invitation to apply for the
visa, the applicant had been employed in Australia
in the nominated occupation
or a closely related skilled occupation for at least 12, 36, 60 or 96 months in
the 10 years immediately
before that time.
applicant claimed 15 points under this part relying on the following employment
in Australia:
From May 2008 to
March 2010 he worked as an Audit Supervisor for WHK Horwath;
From July 2010
to September 2011 he worked as a Group Internal Auditor for Digicel Pacific
Group Limited; and
From September
2011 until lodgement of the visa application he worked as a Mine Geologist at
Iluka Resources Ltd.
the same reasons as stated above and in relation to the applicant’s
overseas work experience, I am not satisfied that the
services provided by the
applicant while employed at WHK Horwath and Digicel Pacific Group Limited were
substantially the same as
the services ANZSCO stipulated a person must provide
in order to be classified as a Geologist. It follows that I am not satisfied
that the applicant’s work experience as an Audit Supervisor and Group
Internal Auditor can be considered as employment in the
nominated skilled
occupation or a closely related occupation.
on the evidence before me, I am satisfied that the applicant has been employed
as a Geologist at Iluka Resources Ltd from September
2011 until 7 August 2014
(being the date when the applicant was invited to apply for subclass 190 visa).
Accordingly, he is entitled
to 10 points under this part of the
- Aggregating points for employment experience qualifications
this part, if an applicant has qualifications mentioned in both
and the combined number of points that would be awarded under those Parts
is more than 20 points, 20 points must be given under this
Part for the
qualifications and no points are to be given under
combined number of points that would be awarded under
points. As this is not more than 20 points, the applicant is entitled to no
points under this part.
– Australian professional year qualifications
points are available under this part if, at the time of invitation to apply for
the visa, the applicant had completed a professional
year (that is, a course
specified in an instrument) in Australia in the nominated occupation or a
closely related skilled occupation
for at least 12 months in the immediately
preceding 48 months.
applicant is not claiming to have completed a ‘professional year’ in
Australia in the 48 months before the time of
invitation to apply for the visa,
and the Tribunal finds that he is not entitled to points under this Part (item
– Educational qualifications
applicant may be entitled to points under this Part if, at the time of
invitation to apply for the visa, he or she had met the
requirements for the
award of a specified Australian qualification or overseas qualification of a
recognised standard. In determining
whether an overseas qualification is of a
‘recognised standard’ (items 6D71(b), 6D72(b)), regard must be had
to the matters
set out in r.2.26AC(5) which include recognition of the
qualification by the relevant assessing authority, recognition of the
qualification
by a specified body, duration of the study and any other relevant
applicant has provided evidence of the award of a degree in Science, Business or
Technology from the University of Southampton,
UK that is of a recognised
the applicant is entitled to 15 points under this part.
– Australian study qualifications
points may be awarded under this part if, at the time of invitation to apply for
the visa, the applicant met the Australian study
requirement, as defined in
r.1.15F of the Regulations. To meet the study requirement, the applicant must
satisfy the Minister that
they have completed 1 or more degrees, diplomas or
trade qualifications for award by an Australian educational institution as a
of a registered course or courses, for which all instruction was in
English. The applicant must have undertaken the courses in Australia
holding a visa authorising study, and completed them in a total of at least 16
calendar months as a result of a total of at
least 2 academic years study.
applicant has made no claims in relation to study in Australia and the Tribunal
finds that no points can be awarded under this
– Credentialed community language qualifications
points may be awarded under this part if, at the time of invitation to apply for
the visa, the applicant had a qualification
in a particular language awarded or
accredited by a specified body, and at a specified standard for the
claims have been made in relation to this part and the Tribunal finds that the
applicant is entitled to no
points under this
– Study in regional Australia or a low-population growth
metropolitan area qualifications
points may be awarded under this part if, at the time of invitation to apply for
the visa, the applicant met the Australian study
requirement (as defined in
r.1.15F), and that study was undertaken, and the applicant lived, in a specified
area of Australia. Distance
education does not qualify as study for these
claims have been made in relation to this part and the Tribunal finds that the
applicant is entitled to no
points under this
– Partner Skill Qualifications
points may be awarded under this Part if the applicant has a spouse or de facto
partner who is also an applicant for the same
visa subclass and is not an
Australian citizen or permanent resident. At the time the applicant was invited
to apply for the visa,
the spouse / partner must have been under 50 years of
age, have nominated a specified skilled occupation, been assessed as having
specified skills, and have competent English.
on the evidence before me, I am satisfied that the applicant’s partner was
under 50 years of age at the time of invitation
to apply for via; that she has
nominated a skilled occupation of a Registered Nurse at that time; that she has
been assessed by the
relevant assessing authority as having suitable skills for
her nominated occupations and that she has competent English.
the applicant is entitled to 5 points under this part.
– State or Territory nomination qualifications
are available under this Part for applicants who were invited to apply for a
Subclass 190 (Skilled - Nominated) visa, where
the relevant agency has not
withdrawn the nomination. The applicant in this case was invited to apply for a
Subclass 190 visa. The
Tribunal accordingly finds that the applicant is awarded
5 points under this part.
– Designated area sponsorship qualifications
are available under this Part in certain circumstances for applicants who were
invited to apply for a Subclass 489 (Skilled
- Regional) (Provisional) visa. The
applicant in this case has not been invited to apply for such a visa and is
therefore not entitled
to any points under this part.
Conclusion on points
on the above assessment, having regard to the legislation in effect at the time
of the delegate’s assessment, the number
of points to be awarded to the
applicant under Schedule 6D is:
6D.1 - Age 15 points
6D.2 - English language 0 points
6D.3 - Overseas employment experience 0 points
6D.4 - Australian employment experience 10 points
6D.5 - Aggregated employment 0 points
6D.6 - Australian professional year 0 points
6D.7 - Educational 15 points
6D.8 - Australian study 0 points
6D.9 - Credentialed community language 0 points
6D.10 - Study in regional / low-population area 0 points
6D.11 - Partner skill 5 points
6D.11 - State or Territory nomination 5 points
6D.12 - Designated area sponsorship 0 points
Total points
the time of the delegate’s assessment the pass mark was 60 points:
Legislative Instrument IMMI 12/017. The applicant has
therefore not achieved the
qualifying score to pass the points test. The Tribunal finds that the qualifying
score remains unchanged
at the time of the Tribunal’s assessment.
the above reasons, the applicant is entitled to a maximum of 50 points under the
points test. As the applicant’s score is
less than the score stated in the
invitation to apply for the visa, the applicant does not satisfy cl.190.214. As
this is a prescribed
criterion for the grant of the visa, the decision under
review will be affirmed.
are no claims or evidence before the Tribunal to indicate that the second, the
third and the fourth named applicants meet the
primary criteria for the grant of
the visa. Rather, their entitlement to a visa is initially dependent on whether
the primary applicant
is successful in obtaining the visa, and then on whether
they meet any additional visa criteria applicable. Given the Tribunal’s
finding that the applicant does not meet the criteria for the grant of the visa,
and given the lack of any claims or evidence to
show that the second, the third
and the fourth named applicants meet the primary criteria for the grant of the
visa, it follows that
they are not entitled to the
Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the visas.
Antonio Dronjic
RTF format (177 KB)
Signed PDF/A format