Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia - re s.576H - Commission may vary modern awards - application to vary the Electrical, Electronic and Communications Contracting Award 2010 [2009] AIRCFB 985 (30 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Commission may vary modern awards
Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia
(AM2009/133)
ELECTRICAL, ELECTRONIC AND COMMUNICATIONS CONTRACTING AWARD 2010
JUSTICE GIUDICE, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDENT LAWLER
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
COMMISSIONER SMITH
MELBOURNE, 30 DECEMBER 2009
This decision deals with an application by the Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal, Plumbing and
Allied Services Union of Australia (CEPU) to vary the
Electrical, Electronic and Communications Contracting Award 2010
(modern award) to introduce a special transitional provision in relation to apprentice wages. The provision would apply where the
pre-modern award apprentice rate is higher than the modern award rate and would provide for a rate of phasing down which differs
from the rate in the model phasing provisions.
The first element of the variation seeks to add to the start of cl.A.3.5, the word “Save as provided at cl.A.3.6”, so
that it would read:
“Save as provided at clause A.3.6, from the following dates the employer must pay no less than the minimum wage for the classification
in this award plus the specified proportion of the transitional amount:
First full pay period on or after
The second, and substantive, element of the variation is to add a new cl.3.6, dealing specifically with the transitioning of apprentice
“From the following dates the employer must pay no less than the minimum wage for apprentices in this award plus the specified
proportion of the transitional amount:
First full pay period on or after
The current cll.3.6 and 3.7 would need to be renumbered as cll.3.7 and 3.8 respectively.
In support of its application, the CEPU submitted that:
the modern award apprentice rates are substantially lower than the equivalent rates in transitional instruments;
contracting apprentices represent the most vulnerable class of employees within the industry, having little capacity to organise
industrially and scant basis on which to bargain with their employer and are routinely employed at minimum award rates;
unless the model transitional provisions are modified the will be a dramatic reduction in contracting apprentices’ wages which
will impact detrimentally upon the welfare of apprentices and lead to a decline in the uptake of contracting apprenticeships;
reductions in minimum wage rates are inconsistent with the consolidated request and
Workplace Relations Act 1996
due to the nature of apprenticeships, the application of “take home pay orders” to them is uncertain;
the contracting industry is vital to the future economic prosperity of Australia because critical industries, programs and infrastructure
projects are heavily dependent upon there being sufficient electrotechnology skills, skills found primarily within the contracting
examples of areas in which the contracting industry will prove critical include:
the implementation by both the public and private sector of the Carbon Pollution Reduction Scheme and related programs;
the development of “green skills” trades;
the construction of the National Broadband Network; and
a resurgent resources sector;
any decline in the uptake of contracting apprenticeships at this time will necessarily generate skills bottlenecks in the contracting
industry, creating the potential for consequential inflationary effects upon the broader economy; and
accordingly, a reduction in the wage rates for contracting apprentices is inconsistent with the objects of the
Fair Work Act 2009
, specifically
subsections 3(a)
In consultations on 14 December 2009, the Australian Federation of Employers and Industries (AFEI) opposed the variation on the following
in its decision dealing with transitional provisions for priority and Stage 2 modern awards
, the Full Bench determined that a reduction in minimum wages including some apprentices wages will be accommodated through the model
transitional provisions, including the phasing schedule, included in the modern awards;
the CEPU has not pointed to any evidence that the model transitional provisions are not appropriate to the circumstances of apprentices;
any reduction in take-home pay can be dealt with by take home pay orders; and
the variation sought would disturb the balance between cost increases and cost reductions determined by the Full Bench.
The major employer organisation, the National Electrical Contractors Association, did not appear on 14 December 2009 to either support
or oppose the variation.
The CEPU responded to the AFEI submissions as follows:
the variation is modest in its scope, directed to better transition the award pay reductions of apprentices only;
whilst take-home pay orders may be available, there is uncertainty as to whether they would be available in respect of apprentices
as they move through the years of their apprenticeship and take home orders will certainly not protect the take-home pay of future
apprentices;
a delay in award wage reductions for apprentices will allow for fuller review of apprentice provisions directed toward a unified
national system of training and employment conditions for apprentices foreshadowed by the Full Bench;
the variation will maintain current conditions for apprentices for a longer period than envisaged by the model transitional provision,
rather than impose additional costs on employers.
The CEPU application was supported by the Australian Government in a submission filed on 22 December 2009. It emphasised the size
of the wage differentials for apprentices, the importance of skills development and the prospect of a national review of wages and
conditions for apprentices.
In its decision of 2 September 2009 in relation to transitional provisions the Full Bench said:
…While the model provisions can be departed from to meet the circumstances of a particular case, departures should be limited.”
We deal next with the possibility of reductions in take-home pay. The provisions of
of Schedule 5 to the Transitional Act are concerned with the maintenance of take-home pay. They deal with what happens when an employee
suffers a reduction in take-home pay as a result of a modern award coming into operation. It is to be implied that the provisions
do not apply to employees who commence employment after the modern award has come into operation. So while the provisions are concerned
with what happens when the modern award comes into operation, they do not deal with the potential for reductions in take-home pay
resulting from the operation of the transitional provisions. As will be seen, the model provisions permit a phased reduction in pre-modern
award conditions if they were more beneficial for employees than the modern award. For that reason we think it is important to provide
protection for new employees from reductions in take-home pay which otherwise might result from the operation of the transitional
provisions. The model provision specifies that neither the making of the award nor the operation of the transitional provisions is
intended to result in a reduction in take-home pay. It also indicates that Fair Work Australia may make an order to remedy a reduction
in take-home pay. This provision will complement the power to make take-home pay orders in item 9 of Schedule 5 to the Transitional
Act. The model provision reads:
‘Neither the making of this award nor the operation of any transitional provision is intended to result in a reduction in the
take-home pay of employees covered by the award. On application by or on behalf of an employee who suffers a reduction in take-home
pay as a result of the making of this award or the operation of any transitional provision, Fair Work Australia may make any order
it considers appropriate to remedy the situation.’”
In the proceedings which led to the 2 September 2009 decision submissions were made that current apprenticeships should be permitted
to run to completion under pre-modern award wage arrangements. The Commission rejected those submissions, as the following passage
…….While this approach has the advantage of simplicity, problems are likely to arise if new apprentices receive different
wage treatment. We have decided that apprentice wages should be covered by the model phasing-in arrangements unless there are special
circumstances in a particular industry or occupation which warrant a different provision.”
Consistent with the 2 September 2009 decision, apprentices in employment on 1 January 2010 should not have a reduction in their take-home
pay when the phasing schedule starts to operate on 1 July 2010. In relation to apprentices who commence employment after 1 January
2010, their rate of pay will be determined by reference to the phasing schedule.
It is clear that apprentices are covered by the provision for take-home pay orders under item 9 of schedule 5 to the
Fair Work (Transitional Provisions and Consequential Amendments) Act 2009
. Whether such an application may be made depends upon whether the terms of item 8 of Schedule 5 apply. Item 8(3)(b) is as follows:
“(3) An employee suffers a modernisation-related reduction in take-home pay if, and only if:
(b) the employee is employed in the same position as (or a position that is comparable to) the position he or she was employed in
immediately before the modern award came into operation; …”
It has been suggested that there is some uncertainty whether an apprentice moving through the years of an apprenticeship is “employed
in the same position as (or a position that is comparable to) the position the apprentice was employed in immediately before the
modern award came into operation”. We wish to make it clear that, in formulating the transitional provisions, it was not intended
that the annual progression by an apprentice would alter their classification. Clause 2.4 of the model commencement and transitional
provision should be interpreted accordingly.
The issues raised by the CEPU and the Australian Government do not raise circumstances of a kind confined to the industry covered
by the modern award. Similar arguments for a departure from the model provisions could be advanced in a number of other industries,
not only in relation to apprentices but in relation to other classifications as well. We do not think this is an appropriate case
in which to depart from the model provisions. The application by the CEPU is rejected.
BY THE COMMISSION:
[2009] AIRCFB 800
, at para 121.
ibid at para 51.
[2009] AIRCFB 800
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, PR992138>
No downloadable files available