Isuzu Australia Ltd v Directed Electronics OE Pty Ltd [2025] FCAFC 150 (24 October 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Isuzu Australia Ltd v Directed
Electronics OE Pty Ltd
[2025] FCAFC 150
Appeal from:
Directed Electronics OE Pty Ltd v Isuzu Australia Limited (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1198
File number:
VID 1179 of 2024
Judgment of:
BURLEY, MCEVOY AND STELLIOS JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– application for leave to
appeal – where leave sought to appeal from interlocutory orders –
where orders are case
management orders – where primary judge dismissed
application for permanent stay of proceedings –where primary judge
accepted that respondent could have joined applicant to earlier proceeding but
that there were various reasons for not doing so –
where insufficient
material to say that respondent
have impleaded applicant in
earlier proceeding – where primary judge balanced competing private rights
and public interests
– leave to appeal refused
PRACTICE AND
– application for permanent stay of proceedings –
where sequential proceedings with overlapping issues – where
proceeding addressed predicate liability relevant to subsequent proceeding
– whether subsequent proceeding abuse of
process – whether
have joined applicant to earlier proceeding –
where respondent could have joined applicant to earlier proceedings –
primary judge accepted that there were “various reasons” for
not joining applicant – where primary judge accepted
one reason was that
respondent sought to maintain commercial relationship with applicant –
where primary judge considered than
any risk of abuse arising from overlap of
issues could be addressed by case management
PRACTICE AND
– whether application for leave an abuse of process –
where applicant challenged reasons in two judgments delivered by
primary judge
– where first judgment temporarily stayed underlying stay application
– where second judgment finally determined
stay application – where
only one application for permanent stay – application for leave not abuse
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Corporations Act 2001
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) r 26.01(d)
Wrongs Act 1958
Cases cited:
AZC20 v Minister for Immigration
278 CLR 512
AZO24 v Commonwealth
[2025] FCAFC 77
Brilliant Digital Entertainment Pty Ltd v Universal Music Australia Pty
[2004] FCAFC 270
Cement Australia Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and Consumer
[2010] FCAFC 101
187 FCR 261
Decor Corporation Pty Ltd v Dart Industries Inc
[1991] FCA 844
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Miraki
[2022] FCAFC 96
Directed Electronics OE Pty Ltd v Isuzu Australia Ltd
Directed Electronics OE Pty Ltd v Isuzu Australia Limited (No 2)
[2024] FCA 1198
Directed Electronics OE Pty Ltd v OE Solutions Pty Ltd (No 8)
Directed Electronics OE Pty Ltd v OE Solutions Pty Ltd (No 9)
Directed Electronics OE Pty Ltd v OE Solutions Pty Ltd (No 10)
[2023] FCA 1656
GLJ v Trustees of the Roman Catholic Church for the Diocese of
[2023] HCA 32
280 CLR 442
Hogan v Australian Crime Commission
[2010] HCA 21
(2010) 240 CLR 651
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
Johnson Tiles Pty Ltd v Esso
Australia Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 1572
104 FCR 564
Madden (Receiver) v Mining Standards International Pty
[2025] FCAFC 142
Melbourne City Investments Pty Ltd v Treasury Wines Estates Ltd
[2017] FCAFC 98
Oswal v Burrup Fertilisers Pty Ltd (Receivers and Managers
[2011] FCAFC 117
Queensland Nickel Sales Pty Ltd v Park (Liquidators of Queensland Nickel
Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2025] FCAFC 129
Re TG (A Child)
[2013] EWCA Civ 5
UBS AG v Tyne
[2018] HCA 45
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
142 CLR 531
Willmot v Queensland
[2024] HCA 42
General Division
National Practice Area:
Intellectual Property
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Date of last submissions:
Counsel for the Applicant:
B Walker AO SC with M Norton SC and F Shand
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Herbert Smith Freehills Kramer
Counsel for the Respondents:
T Cordiner KC with N Hickey
Solicitor for the Respondents:
VID 1179 of 2024
ISUZU AUSTRALIA LIMITED (ACN 006 962
DIRECTED ELECTRONICS OE PTY LTD (ACN 130 647
First Respondent
DIRECTED ELECTRONICS NZ LIMITED (NZCN
Second Respondent
BURLEY, MCEVOY AND STELLIOS JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
to appeal against the orders of the primary judge dated
17 October 2024 refusing an interlocutory application to permanently
stay or dismiss the proceeding be refused.
applicant to pay to the respondents the costs of the application for leave to
appeal to be agreed or assessed.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION
THE APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO
THE PRIMARY JUDGE’S
Further background to the
proceedings
Arguments in favour of a stay
The primary judge’s reasoning and
conclusions in Directed 1
Arguments in favour of a stay
The primary judge’s reasoning and
conclusions in Directed 2
CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION FOR
The applicable principles
Isuzu’s arguments on the leave
application
Leave to appeal should not be
Was there an abuse of process in Isuzu
relitigating the stay application?
1. INTRODUCTION
is an application for leave to appeal brought by the respondent, Isuzu
Australia Ltd (
), from an order of the primary judge dated
17 October 2024 refusing an interlocutory application to permanently
stay or dismiss the
substantive proceeding before her Honour pursuant to
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
r 26.01(d) of the
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth), or the
Court’s implied or inherent jurisdiction. The order was accompanied by
reasons cited as
Directed Electronics OE Pty Ltd v Isuzu Australia Limited
[2024] FCA 1198
followed an earlier order by the primary judge on 23 March 2022
staying the interlocutory application until 28 days after judgment
on liability
being handed down in related proceeding VID 1157 of 2017 heard by Beach J, or
until the determination of any appeal
from that judgment. Those orders were
accompanied by reasons cited as
Directed Electronics OE Pty Ltd v Isuzu
Australia Ltd
[2022] FCA 254
related proceeding before Beach J was referred to by the primary judge in
as the 2017 Proceeding:
at [2]. The
substantive proceeding the subject of the present interlocutory application was
referred to by the primary judge as the
2020 Proceeding:
the 2017 Proceeding, Directed Electronics OE Pty Ltd (
Australian automotive electronics products and solutions developer, made claims
against three sets of respondents. First, two
of its former employees, Messrs
Johnny Meneses and Craig Mills, and an entity owned by Mr Meneses being OE
at [2]. Secondly, its South Korean suppliers
and their related entities: Hanhwa Aus Pty Ltd (
Hightech Co Ltd (
Hanhwa Korea
), Mr Kichang (Ryan) Lee and Leemen Co Ltd,
referred to collectively by the primary judge as the Hanhwa Parties:
at [3]. Thirdly, Directed’s former business
associates and their related entities, referred to collectively by Beach J
Gridtraq Parties:
at [4]. Isuzu was not a party to
the 2017 Proceeding.
2020 Proceeding was commenced by Directed against Isuzu (based on related
impugned conduct) prior to liability being decided in
the 2017 Proceeding.
Isuzu filed a cross-claim against the Hanhwa Parties, and also against Mr
at [1]. Isuzu and the cross-respondents applied
for a permanent stay or summary dismissal on the basis that it was an abuse of
for Directed to conduct separate proceedings against Isuzu in the
2020 Proceeding when they could, and should, have been pursued
2017 Proceeding. In
Directed 1,
the primary judge in essence
decided that the permanent stay or summary dismissal application was premature,
instead making orders
to temporarily stay the interlocutory application until
after judgment was delivered in the 2017 Proceeding.
liability aspect of the 2017 Proceeding was listed before Beach J over
40 days before and during the COVID pandemic and heard
in several tranches from
9 December 2019 until 9 April 2021. The judgment in the
2017 Proceeding was delivered on 24 November 2022:
Electronics OE Pty Ltd v OE Solutions Pty Ltd (No 8)
[2022] FCA 1404
Liability Decision
reasons are extensive. In summary, Beach J found that the case against Mr
Meneses, Mr Mills and OE Solutions largely succeeded.
Each was found to be
involved in reprehensible conduct by appropriating the confidential information
and customers of Directed, ultimately
to the benefit of the Hanhwa Parties. Mr
Meneses’ behaviour was in part encouraged by the payment of secret
commissions by
Hanhwa Korea or its predecessor to Mr Meneses and/or OE Solutions
during his employment by Directed: Liability Decision at [5]. The
case against
most, but not all, of the Hanhwa Parties also largely succeeded by reason of
their knowing involvement and assistance
in the wrongful conduct of Mr Meneses
and Mr Mills, misuse of Directed’s confidential information and
appropriation of its
customers and products: Liability Decision at [6]. The case
against the Gridtraq Parties largely failed: Liability Decision at [7].
his Liability Decision, Beach J noted that, during the conduct of the
2017 Proceeding, Directed commenced the 2020 Proceeding against
and that no officer, employee or any other person associated with Isuzu was
called as a witness before him. His Honour noted
that the matter was allocated
to another docket judge so that there was no risk of him being contaminated by
material used or produced
in that separate hearing: Liability Decision at [13].
delivery of the Liability Decision, Beach J delivered two further
Directed Electronics OE Pty Ltd v OE Solutions Pty Ltd (No 9)
[2023] FCA 462
Directed Electronics OE Pty Ltd v OE Solutions Pty Ltd
[2023] FCA 1656.
interlocutory application to permanently stay (but not summarily dismiss) the
2020 Proceeding was renewed before the primary judge
following the delivery
by Beach J of the Liability Decision and the decisions referred to in the
previous paragraph. By the time
that it was argued, each of the
cross-respondents had entered into either insolvency, bankruptcy or formal
administration and did
not participate in the application. Isuzu had changed its
solicitors and indicated that it intended to discontinue its cross-claim.
Amended pleadings had been filed:
already indicated, the interlocutory application was dismissed by the primary
judge on 17 October 2024. The present application
for leave to appeal
arises from that decision.
the reasons that follow, leave to appeal should be refused.
2. THE APPLICATION FOR LEAVE TO APPEAL
application for leave to appeal is supported by an affidavit affirmed on
31 October 2024 by Ms Emma Lee-Anne Iles, a partner at
the solicitors
representing Isuzu. Directed and Isuzu each filed interlocutory applications for
leave to rely on further materials
in support of their respective positions.
Neither application was opposed, and the Court received into evidence:
(1) an affidavit sworn by Mr Anthony Brooke Watson, a partner at the solicitors
representing Directed, which annexed the transcript
of a case management hearing
heard on 12 December 2024 on the question of the nature of the
2020 Proceeding relative to the 2017
Proceeding; and
(2) a second affidavit affirmed by Ms Iles annexing “Lists of
Findings” from the Liability Decision which the parties
2020 Proceeding agree are binding upon Directed and those which the parties
do not agree are so binding.
draft amended notice of appeal advances a single proposed ground of appeal.
Isuzu contends that, having previously found in
that there were significant areas of overlap between the 2017 Proceeding
and the 2020 Proceeding
that create the possibility of substantially
re-litigating points in the 2017 Proceeding, or the possibility of
inconsistent findings
between the two proceedings, the primary judge ought to
have held that the public interest in the timely, cost effective and efficient
administration of justice would be adversely affected unless there was a
permanent stay of the 2020 Proceeding. It particularises
that single ground
in various ways, however, it is not necessary to set out those particulars. They
are considered in the course
of our reasons.
3. THE PRIMARY JUDGE’S DECISIONS
3.1 Further background to the proceedings
primary judge found that the alleged conduct in both the 2017 Proceeding
and the 2020 Proceeding relates to the supply and development
) products by Directed (the
) and the Hanhwa
). At the heart of the 2017 Proceeding was the
allegation that, while he was employed by Directed, Mr Meneses and the Hanhwa
improperly diverted the SuperDAVE project to themselves, renaming it to
HAU8000. Directed’s claims in the 2017 Proceeding variously
breach of employment contract, breach of fiduciary duties, breach of
Corporations Act 2001
(Cth), breach of confidence, payment
of secret commissions, copyright infringement, breach of a supply agreement,
Australian Consumer Law
and accessorial
primary judge found that in the 2020 Proceeding, Directed advanced claims
including for breach of contract, inducement of breach
of contract relating to
Isuzu’s dealings with Hanhwa Korea, misuse of confidential information,
involvement in Mr Meneses’ alleged dishonest
breaches of employment, fiduciary and statutory duties:
at [20]. The allegations in the 2020 Proceeding include that Isuzu was a
knowing participant in the unlawful activity of the cross-respondents
relation to the diversion of the SuperDAVE and the supply of the HAU8000 unit,
and also that Isuzu unlawfully entered negotiations
with the Hanhwa Parties for
the supply of a new AV unit, which was to become the LM18i unit, to replace the
SuperDAVE. This replacement
unit is said by Directed to be based on the HAU8000
unit with minor modifications.
primary judge observed that Isuzu’s cross-claim in the
2020 Proceeding was based on various alleged representations made
Meneses and Mr Lee, on behalf of the Hanhwa Parties, to Isuzu including
(1) Directed and Hanhwa Korea had agreed to transition the distribution of new
AV units from Directed to Hanhwa Aus; Directed was
aware of that transition
agreement; and Mr Meneses would be moving to Hanhwa Aus:
at [22(a)]; and
(2) The LM18i unit was newly developed and significantly different to the
SuperDAVE and the HAU8000, and that Directed, Mr Meneses
and Mr Mills had no
involvement in the development of the LM18i unit:
were five additional parties to the 2017 Proceeding who are not parties to
the 2020 Proceeding (
at [24]), and several claims in
the 2017 Proceeding did not relate to Isuzu (
[25]). Furthermore, although there is some common substratum of facts around
some issues, the primary judge found that the focus
of the 2020 Proceeding
is “very much on what Isuzu knew and what it did in light of that
knowledge”:
3.2 Directed 1
primary judge provided a detailed summary of the submissions advanced before her
Honour, which we summarise below.
3.2.1 Arguments in favour of a stay
submitted before the primary judge that several aspects of the
2020 Proceeding rendered it an abuse of process warranting a
, that there was considerable overlap between the
2017 Proceeding and the 2020 Proceeding. While some of the allegations
knowledge did not form part of the 2017 Proceeding, Isuzu
submitted that each of the key allegations and the substantive facts from
the inference of knowledge is to be drawn was contained in the
2017 Proceeding statement of claim:
[48]‍-‍[50].
that Directed had the requisite knowledge to join Isuzu to the
2017 Proceeding (or otherwise bring proceedings against it) no later
22 November 2018, and could have put on reasonable pleadings by
mid-2019. The failure to do so was a tactical decision by Directed
deliberate staging of the litigation for its commercial self-interest:
at [73]‍-‍[90].
response, Directed submitted that any delay was only from July 2019 to
August 2020, and sought to justify its decision not to commence
proceedings
at that time on the basis that (
(1) any joinder application may have been unsuccessful given the proximity to
the trial set down for December 2019;
(2) if leave were granted to join Isuzu, the hearing would likely be
significantly delayed in order to accommodate further steps
and it would not
have been in the public interest to put off a hearing in complex, long-running
and multi-party litigation just to
bring late-discovered claims against a new
(3) parties in the 2017 Proceeding not involved in the 2020 Proceeding
would face unreasonable and significant delay and expense;
(4) there was a question as to whether Mr Meneses or the Hanhwa parties should
have called Isuzu as witnesses in the 2017 Proceeding;
(5) there is a public interest in viewing litigation as a last, and not a first,
Isuzu submitted that there was a risk, if not a likelihood, of inconsistent
findings between the 2017 Proceeding and the 2020 Proceeding.
particular, a claim had been made in the 2017 Proceeding that Mr Meneses,
Hanhwa Aus and Mr Lee had made certain representations
to Isuzu that Mr Meneses
had ceased employment with Directed, had become a director of Hanhwa Aus and was
lawfully able to be involved
in the supply of the HAU8000 products to Isuzu. In
the 2020 Proceeding, the allegation is made that Isuzu engaged with the
cross-respondents
in circumstances where it knew or ought to have known that Mr
Meneses was not permitted to be involved in the supply of the HAU8000
to Isuzu and that Isuzu was a knowing participant:
[100]‍-‍[103].
that Mr Meneses and the Hanhwa Parties would face unjustified
oppression, having been parties to the 2017 Proceeding, including that
would be vexed by having to deal with claims that should have been resolved by
the 2017 Proceeding and the significant expense
in having to defend another
proceeding:
at [106]‍-‍[107].
3.2.2 The primary judge’s reasoning and conclusions in
primary judge concluded that Isuzu’s application should be stayed until 28
days after the delivery of the Liability Decision
in the 2017 Proceeding:
at [115]. The
step in reaching that
conclusion was to recognise that “[t]he very existence of the
2020 Proceedings [sic] at [that] point
[was] not sufficient to engage abuse
of process remedies, and it would be premature to dismiss the
2020 Proceedings at [that] point”:
With respect, the primary judge was undoubtedly correct in this regard.
the primary judge found that there had been delay in Directed bringing the
2020 Proceeding against Isuzu, that Directed was likely
sufficient facts by December 2018, and that Directed
pleaded the case against Isuzu by mid-2019:
However, her Honour considered that the question was whether Directed
have brought the proceeding or joined Isuzu to the
2017 Proceeding at that point. In this regard it is noteworthy that the
2017 Proceeding
was a very large case involving other parties and issues.
Putting off the hearing for a year would have created inconvenience, cost,
delay to other parties:
at [117]. Furthermore, her Honour
also acknowledge
the various reasons
provided by Directed for not joining
the Isuzu [sic] to the 2017 Proceeding and for bringing the
2020 Proceeding when it did, and
particularly observe that it was
understandable for Directed to try to preserve its commercial relationship with
Isuzu. While the
line may not always be clear as to what constitutes an
unjustifiable delay, in many cases there is a clear benefit in attempting
repair commercial relationships rather than jumping to litigation at the first
opportunity.
ideal world
, Isuzu would have been joined to the 2017 Proceeding,
however, I do not think it is appropriate that Directed could potentially have
no or limited recourse in the event that Isuzu is found to have engaged in any
wrongdoing. So, I consider it my role at this stage
to determine the best way
forward, with the least possibility for repetition and
oppression.
(Emphasis added.)
reference to “various reasons” in the reasons of the primary judge
at [118] was evidently a reference to the matters
set out at [70] of
and identified in these reasons at [22] above. The
reference to what might have occurred in an “ideal world” we take
be simply a reflection of the difference between what Directed could have done
and what it should have done. The fact her Honour
was not satisfied that
have joined Isuzu in mid‑2019 was enough, at least
at that point in time ahead of the 2017 Proceeding being determined, to
allow the proceeding to continue. It is evident that, in reaching that position,
her Honour at [119] was alert to the need to balance
the respective public
interests in, on the one hand, allowing Directed to vindicate its legal interest
and, on the other hand, protecting
against repetition and oppression.
her Honour addressed the possible consequences of overlapping issues:
terms of overlap, Isuzu and the cross-respondents have pointed to several
key areas of overlap between the 2017 Proceeding and
2020 Proceeding. While I do not consider it necessary to wholly consider
the intricacies of the overlap, I note that there are
significant areas of
overlap that create the possibility of substantially re-litigating points
in the 2017 Proceeding
the possibility of inconsistent
between the two proceedings.
this is not merely a re-run of the 2017 Proceeding. The
2017 Proceeding had many other parties and many other claims unrelated
Isuzu and the issues in the 2020 Proceeding.
This proceeding is a small
of the 2017 Proceeding and goes to Isuzu’s knowledge
of certain conduct. Different relief is sought.
the greatest danger for an abuse of process arises in the situation where
Directed is unsuccessful in the 2017 Proceeding
and seeks to re-litigate
the same issues in this proceeding, but with different and improved evidence and
finessed arguments. That
cannot be allowed. However,
this concern is still a
hypothetical
, so it would be premature to dismiss the 2020 Proceeding
on this basis.
Directed is successful in the 2017 Proceeding, it should not be denied a
claim against Isuzu. In that event, the 2020 Proceeding
can be run with
interventionist case management to reduce duplication and the scope for
oppression. For example, the case could be
run with limited evidence and
cross-examination directed squarely towards the knowledge of
(Emphasis added.)
is clear that the primary judge considered both the overlap in issues in the
case as pleaded
the forward-looking prospect of overlap arising from
Beach J’s determination of the issues in the 2017 Proceeding. The
judge did not consider that the overlapping issues in the respective
pleadings warranted a stay, albeit that the areas of overlap
were significant.
That was because her Honour took the view that the 2020 Proceeding was a
“small subset” of the 2017
Proceeding, and the earlier
proceeding had other parties and other claims unrelated to Isuzu. We will return
to Isuzu’s challenge
to the primary judge’s reasoning in these
is also evident from [122]‍-‍[123] that the primary judge considered
that a stay could only be justified in the event
that Directed were unsuccessful
in the 2017 Proceeding. That would give rise to unacceptable risk of abuse.
However, if Directed
were successful in the 2017 Proceeding, it should not
be denied the opportunity to recover from Isuzu.
primary judge recognised, nonetheless, that even if Directed were successful in
the 2017 Proceeding, steps would need to be taken,
under a broad umbrella
of case management, to reduce duplication and oppression. Furthermore, her
Honour recognised that Isuzu should
not be denied the opportunity to defend
itself on certain points of liability:
Isuzu was not present at the trial of the 2017 Proceeding, it may want to
fight findings as to the liability of Mr Meneses
rather than its
knowledge of his conduct. It would be unfair to deny Isuzu that
opportunity, so it is necessary to consider how best
to balance any
the 2017 Proceeding was yet to be determined, the evaluation of potential
abuse from overlapping issues and the risk of inconsistent
findings was
incomplete, somewhat speculative and, necessarily, premature. Her Honour
the course I order here, the possibility of inconsistent findings on the same
causes of action is removed: the 2020 Proceeding
will not be heard until
after judgment is handed down in the 2017 Proceeding. In the circumstances,
I think it is also appropriate
to say that at the hearing of the
2020 Proceeding:
(a) Directed will not be permitted to re-litigate any point on
which it did not succeed on in the 2017 Proceeding; and
(b) Should Mr Meneses or the Hanhwa Parties have to
seriously engage or be cross-examined, their costs should be recoverable.
the circumstances, it is appropriate to stay the strike-out application until at
least 28 days after the liability judgment is
handed down in the
2017 Proceeding. At that point, it will become evident whether or not there
is a case against the cross-respondents.
If there is no case, it will likely
follow that the 2020 case should fail. Instead of dealing with a hypothetical,
the Court will
know the result and be in a position to evaluate the likelihood
of any abuse of process, and case manage the 2020 Proceeding accordingly
ensure there is no abuse of process or oppression.
is clear from [126] and the primary judge’s order on
23 March 2022 that “the application for a permanent stay or
... be stayed”, that her Honour did not conclusively determine
the application in
3.3 Directed 2
Directed’s success in the 2017 Proceeding, and the primary judge
foreshadowing the consequences of such an eventuality,
Isuzu renewed its
application for a permanent stay in August 2024 after the delivery of the
Liability Decision and the other judgments
of Beach J referred to above at
[9]. As the primary judge said,
continuation of [the] interlocutory application”:
the time of the hearing, the former Hanhwa Parties and Mr Meneses were either
insolvent or bankrupt and did not participate:
[6]. The affidavit sworn by Ms Iles on 31 October 2024 deposes that,
on 12 July 2024, when providing a copy of Isuzu's proposed
she informed Directed's lawyers and the Associate to Justice Rofe that Isuzu
intended to discontinue its cross-claim against
the cross-respondents. Instead,
Isuzu intended to join the current cross-respondents as additional respondents
to the 2020 Proceeding,
on the basis that they are concurrent wrongdoers
including under the proportionate liability regime in
Wrongs Act 1958
(Vic). A new set of pleadings was prepared by Directed
and responded to by Isuzu:
3.3.1 Arguments in favour of a stay
written submissions, Isuzu again relied upon the same factors it had advanced in
: Directed’s delay, the overlap in claims, and the
prospect of inconsistent findings. In particular, Isuzu renewed its submissions
that Directed
have pleaded against Isuzu by
at [25]), and instead had staged separate
proceedings against it (
also submitted that witnesses for the Hanhwa Parties had given extensive
evidence in the 2017 Proceeding. Isuzu maintained that
had it been a party
to the earlier proceeding, it could have sought to rely on, clarify, test or
challenge that evidence, and that
it would now suffer prejudice because it faces
the prospect of defending allegations without the active involvement of the
Parties. Furthermore, Isuzu submitted that it would be impractical to
lead evidence from five key witnesses who are now employed
at Directed and based
in South Korea:
at [34]‍-‍[35].
3.3.2 The primary judge’s reasoning and conclusions in
primary judge rejected Isuzu’s case for a stay. The summary at [8]
captured her Honour’s conclusions:
For the reasons that follow, I consider that this Application should be
dismissed as the nature and extent of any abuse of process
or oppression may be
avoided or minimised by appropriate case management. Further, in the event that
despite such case management,
a material risk of prejudice to Isuzu may
materialise, it will remain open for it to file a fresh application for a
dismissal or
permanent stay of proceedings arising from any putative abuse of
process at that time.
Honour’s reasoning can be summarised in the following way.
in response to the repeated arguments going to “staging”, the
primary judge agreed with Directed’s submission
that Isuzu’s allegation of deliberate staging
was previously argued before me, and subsequently determined
against Isuzu in
the hearing of the application for leave to appeal, senior counsel for Isuzu
submitted that such an argument had not been dealt
. However, when that statement is read in the context of
the whole paragraph at [26], and when the
reasons are
read fairly and in their entirety (particularly
[30(m)] and [67]), it is sufficiently clear that the staging allegations were
considered and determined by the primary judge through
the lens of whether
have impleaded Isuzu in mid-2019. As Directed submitted
, and as recorded by the primary judge at [26],
“Isuzu now also seeks to reagitate the question of whether Directed should
proceeded against Isuzu in about mid-2019 in terms of overlap – a
matter which was already determined against Isuzu”.
the case management concerns were misplaced ahead of such steps being proposed
The case management concerns raised by Isuzu advance no prejudice against it in
the circumstance of this case. The crux of Isuzu’s
case in this respect is
that, because there is a possibility of inconsistent findings of fact, this
means that a stay of proceedings
should be granted as there is an abuse of
process on foot. This proposition cannot be entertained.
the hearing of the application for leave, senior counsel for Isuzu took issue
with the statement that the possibility of inconsistent
findings giving rise to
a stay of proceedings “cannot be entertained”. However, the primary
judge was not speaking at
the level of principle precluding consideration of the
application on that basis. It is clear that her Honour was dealing with its
application in the circumstances of this case, concluding that the submission
could not be regarded as correct.
the circumstances of the case, the primary judge observed that the stay
application was pressed at a time before leave was granted
for the filing of
amended pleadings and before any further opportunity for case management was
raised. Isuzu then sought at the hearing
of the interlocutory application,
without notice, case management orders:
at [40]. Her
Honour concluded that the interlocutory application was pressed
“prematurely” (
at [39]). Her Honour
this sense, Isuzu has pressed its Application prior to any
opportunity for either party to raise appropriate case management orders
which could have resulted in Directed being bound by findings of fact and
determinations of law common to both the 2017 Proceedings
2020 Proceedings. Had Isuzu pressed its Application
following such an opportunity, the Application could have proceeded on
a basis apparent to the parties and to the Court that an abuse of
process does arise.
Instead, apart
from the developments discussed at [6] above, the Application is brought in
circumstances where the Court is asked
to consider a hypothetical
situation where an abuse of process may arise, without an appropriate
opportunity to case manage the 2020
Proceeding.
this basis, it is again inappropriate to grant a
stay in the absence of any attempts to case manage this
matter. As such, I will
order that this matter be listed for case
management.
Consistently
with the conclusion that the application was premature, the primary judge had
earlier said at [8], which we have set
out above, that circumstances might arise
for a fresh application to be made:
the hearing of the application for leave, senior counsel for Isuzu submitted
that the primary judge’s approach at [42] was
mistaken in describing the
claimed abuse of process as based on a hypothetical situation. He submitted that
stay applications are
only hypothetical in the sense that they require the Court
to assess a prospect of something occurring in the proceeding. With respect,
see no error in what the primary judge said at [8] and [42]. Her Honour was
stating in simple terms that, ahead of the contemplated
case management process,
the prospective assessment of abuse was incapable of complete articulation. The
complaint by Isuzu is thereby
reduced to one about the effectiveness of case
management.
the primary judge reiterated the view that had been expressed at
[120]‍-‍[121] of
that “any overlap
would be appropriately case managed” and, accordingly, the arguments going
to overlap had “been
already addressed”. The only new area of
overlap that had been identified related to a discrete issue of quantum which
be case-managed:
as for the issues relating to the Hanhwa witnesses, they could be appropriately
accommodated by the Court’s processes. The
primary judge concluded:
necessity for these witnesses to give evidence is a matter which can
be considered at a later date. However, it is clear that
any potential
prejudice to Isuzu in relation to the fact that these
witnesses are now employed by Directed and are based in
Korea is unfounded. Directed has agreed to make those witnesses
available, and if these witnesses are required, they may
to give evidence by video-link.
some extent Isuzu already has more information about the South Korean
witnesses and their likely evidence available to it than
the case in ordinary litigation. Isuzu has the evidence that these
witnesses gave in the 2017 Proceeding and the transcript
cross-examination in that proceeding.
as Directed has submitted, Isuzu has already been provided with documents
from the 2017 Proceeding and has the capacity to
make forensic
assessments to press the issues it contends should be reheard in respect of
its liability and knowledge. Isuzu may,
if the witnesses are required, also test
this evidence in cross-examination at trial.
maintains the ability to test any potential overlap issues by cross-examining
the Hanhwa Witnesses. As such, no prejudice arises
which would require a
permanent stay of proceedings.
4. CONSIDERATION OF APPLICATION FOR LEAVE
4.1 The applicable principles
principles applicable to the granting of leave are set out in
Commissioner of Taxation v Miraki
[2022] FCAFC 96
(Perram, Moshinsky
and Hespe JJ);
Johnson Tiles Pty Ltd v Esso
Australia Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 1572
104 FCR 564
(French J, Beaumont and Finkelstein JJ agreeing); and
Corporation Pty Ltd v Dart Industries Inc
[1991] FCA 844
398‍-‍399 (Sheppard, Burchett and Heerey JJ)
). Those principles, and their application to the grant of
leave from interlocutory orders, were stated in
AZO24 v Commonwealth
[2025] FCAFC 77
‍-‍[33] (Raper J, with Wigney and Lee JJ
agreeing) (
The principles which govern the grant of leave to appeal are well established.
The Court’s discretion must be exercised judicially
in a way that best
promotes the overarching purpose in s 37M(3) of the Federal Court
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Rush
[2018] FCAFC 70
Corporation Pty Ltd v Dart Industries
[1991] FCA 844
at 398‍–‍99, this
Court identified the two primary considerations for determining the question of
leave to appeal:
(1) whether, in all the circumstances, the decision is attended
with sufficient doubt to warrant its being reconsidered by the Full
(2) whether substantial injustice would result if leave were refused, supposing
the decision to be wrong.
However, when considering whether to grant leave to appeal from interlocutory
orders, account is taken of the subject matter of those
orders and whether they
relate to points of procedure or determine substantive rights. In the latter
case, leave will be more readily
Tiles Pty Ltd v Esso Australia Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 1572
104 FCR 564
per French J, as he then was, (Beaumont and Finkelstein JJ agreeing).
However, an applicant seeking leave to appeal must still show
that the decision
below is attended by sufficient doubt, and that substantial injustice would flow
from the decision to refuse leave:
Sandhurst Trustees Ltd v
[2015] FCAFC 21
Wills v Australian
Broadcasting Company
[2009] FCAFC 6
173 FCR 284
Rares J (with whom Emmett J agreed).
Consideration
of each of the two primary matters identified in
“cumulative”; they are not to be “isolated in separate
compartments, as they bear upon each other, so that the
degree of doubt
sufficient for leave to be granted in one case may be insufficient in
another”. It is ultimately “a matter
of discretion, which is not
constrained by rigid rules”:
Queensland Nickel Sales Pty Ltd v Park
(Liquidators of Queensland Nickel Pty Ltd (in liq)
[2025] FCAFC 129
[57] (Markovic, Halley and Wheatley JJ).
applying that discretion to the circumstances in this case, four further
considerations should be emphasised.
, as was stated in
, the principles apply to procedural decisions, including decisions
relating to the management of a proceeding.
the degree of scrutiny that an appeal court will apply in deciding whether
to intervene will be calibrated to the character of a decision.
In substance,
the primary judge’s decision to deny the stay application is best
characterised as concerning a matter of practice
and procedure and one exercised
in the course of case managing the proceeding. As the Full Court said in
Melbourne City Investments Pty Ltd v Treasury Wines Estates Ltd
‍-‍[42] (Jagot, Yates and Murphy JJ)
Melbourne City Investments
It is well-established that appellate courts should exercise particular caution
in reviewing decisions pertaining to practice and
procedure: see
Australian Crime Commission
(2010) 240 CLR 651
[2010] HCA 21
(French CJ,
Gummow, Hayne, Heydon and Kiefel JJ). In
Adam P Brown Male Fashions
Pty Ltd v Phillip Morris
(1981) 148 CLR 170
[1981] HCA 39
Gibbs CJ, Aickin, Wilson and Brennan JJ cited with approval the
statement of Sir Frederick Jordon in
In re the Will of F.B. Gilbert
[1946] NSWStRp 24
(1946) 46 SR (NSW) 318
at 323 where his
Honour said:
...there is a material difference between an exercise of discretion on a point
of practice or procedure and an exercise of discretion
which determines
substantive rights. In the former class of case, if a tight rein were not kept
upon interference with the orders
of Judges of first instance, the result would
be disastrous to the proper administration of justice ...
The Full Court has often referred to the importance of keeping a short leash on
appeals relating to questions of practice or procedure:
Cement Australia Pty Ltd v ACCC
(2010) 187 FCR 261
[2010] FCAFC 101
Gilmour and Logan JJ);
Bufalo v Official Trustee in
[2011] FCAFC 111
(Mansfield, Besanko and Flick JJ).
A party who seeks leave to appeal in relation to an exercise of discretion on a
matter of practice and procedure, as in the present
case, faces a
“formidable task” and has a “heavy
Lenijamar Pty Ltd v AGC (Advances) Ltd
(1990) 27 FCR 388
[1990] FCA 520
at 393 (Wilcox and
Gummow JJ);
Oswal v Burrup Fertilisers Pty Ltd (Receivers and
Managers Appointed)
[2011] FCAFC 117
[11] (Mansfield and Foster JJ).
the passage in
Hogan v Australian Crime Commission
[2010] HCA 21
(2010) 240 CLR 651
referred to in
Melbourne City Investments,
French CJ, Gummow,
Hayne, Heydon and Kiefel JJ said that “[a]ppellate intervention in
matters of practice or procedure, where
no questions of general principle are at
stake, has been said to require the exercise of particular caution”.
Similar sentiments
were expressed in
Brilliant Digital Entertainment Pty Ltd
v Universal Music Australia Pty Ltd
[2004] FCAFC 270
Emmett and Stone JJ) that there is an “important policy of restraint
concerning the review of decisions regulating
the preparation of a case for
trial” and in
Cement Australia Pty Ltd v Australian Competition and
Consumer Commission
[2010] FCAFC 101
187 FCR 261
Gilmour and Logan JJ) that “[t]he long-standing statutory requirement
of leave to appeal confirms the desirability
of keeping appeals on matters of
practice and procedure on a short leash”.
underlying policy for “keeping a short leash” was also captured in
the observations of Sir James Munby in
Re TG (A Child)
[2013] EWCA
, when discussing basic principles governing the granting of permission to
appeal against a case management decision. His Lordship
... the Court of Appeal has recently re-emphasised the importance of supporting
first-instance judges who make robust but fair case-management
Deripaska v Cherney
[2012] EWCA Civ 1235
, paras [17], [30], and
Stokors SA v IG Markets Ltd
[2012] EWCA Civ 1706
, paras [25], [45], [46].
Of course, the Court of Appeal must and will intervene when it is proper to do
so. However, it must be understood
that in the case of appeals from case
management decisions the circumstances in which it can interfere are limited.
The Court of
Appeal can interfere only if satisfied that the judge erred in
principle, took into account irrelevant matters, failed to take into
relevant matters, or came to a decision so plainly wrong that it must be
regarded as outside the generous ambit of the discretion
entrusted to the judge:
Royal & Sun Alliance Insurance plc v T & N Limited
[2002] EWCA
, paras [37]‍–‍[38], [47],
Walbrook Trustee
(Jersey) Ltd v Fattal
[2008] EWCA Civ 427
, para [33], and
Stokors SA v IG
Markets Ltd
[2012] EWCA Civ 1706
, para [46]. This is not a question of
judicial comity; there are sound pragmatic reasons for this approach. First, as
Arden LJ pointed
Royal & Sun Alliance Insurance plc v T &
[2002] EWCA Civ 1964
, para [47]:
“Case management should not be interrupted by interim appeals as this will
lead to satellite litigation and delays in the litigation
Second, as she went on to observe:
“the judge dealing with case management is often better equipped to deal
with case management issues.”
The judge well acquainted with the proceedings because he or she has dealt with
previous interlocutory applications will have a knowledge
“feel” for the case superior to that of the Court of Appeal.
despite these statements of cautionary restraint
it must also be
recognised that the applicable standard of review for a decision on a stay
application is the correctness standard:
GLJ v Trustees of the Roman
Catholic Church for the Diocese of Lismore
[2023] HCA 32
, [23] (Kiefel CJ, Gageler and Jagot JJ)
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
142 CLR 531
rather than the standard applicable to discretionary decision-making as stated
House v The King
[1936] HCA 40
55 CLR 499:
Kiefel CJ, Gageler and Jagot JJ explained in
, the extreme
step of granting a permanent stay “demands recognition that the questions
whether a trial will be necessarily
unfair or so unfairly and unjustifiably
oppressive as to constitute an abuse of process each admit of but one uniquely
right answer”:
as was recognised in
consideration of whether to grant
leave to appeal from interlocutory orders must also take account of the subject
matter of those
orders. In this respect, the exceptional nature of a stay was
identified by Kiefel CJ, Gageler and Jagot JJ in
following way (at [3]):
the grant of a permanent stay to prevent an abuse of process involves an
ultimate decision that permitting a matter to go to trial
and the rendering of a
verdict following trial would be irreconcilable with the administration of
justice through the operation of
the adversarial system. That ultimate decision
must be one of last resort on the basis that no other option is available. This
why only an exceptional case justifies the exercise of the power of a court
to permanently stay proceedings. If a court refuses to
exercise its jurisdiction
to hear and decide cases in other than exceptional circumstances and as a last
resort to protect the administration
of justice through the operation of the
adversarial system, that refusal itself will both work injustice and bring the
administration
of justice into disrepute. ...
A trial which will be necessarily unfair or which acts as an instrument of
unfairness and oppression to a defendant cannot yield
a legitimate verdict
within that system and thereby the holding of the trial and rendering of a
verdict will bring the administration
of justice into disrepute. The doctrine of
abuse of process is one element in a court's armoury to protect the
administration of
justice, but it is to be understood as a measure of last
resort to be exercised only in exceptional circumstances.
the circumstances must be exceptional is further reflected in statements that:
“a mere risk that a trial might be unfair”
is not enough; the onus
on the party seeking the stay is a “heavy one”:
it is an “extreme step to deny a person the opportunity of recourse to a
court to have their case heard and decided”
Willmot v Queensland
[2024] HCA 42
(Gageler CJ, Gordon, Jagot and
Beech-Jones JJ) (
at [21]); the award of
a stay is a “last resort” (
at [26]); and “[a]n
exceptional case will remain one in which it is impossible for the irreducible
minimum necessary for a
fair trial to be satisfied” (
[26]). All of this is to say that Isuzu faces a high bar.
attention was drawn to
Madden (Receiver) v Mining Standards International Pty
[2025] FCAFC 142 (Banks-Smith
, Kennett and Wheatley JJ) after
the close of submissions, however nothing in that recent decision of the Full
Court affects the conclusions
we have reached on the present application.
4.2 Isuzu’s arguments on the leave application
arguments on the leave application were substantially the same as those run
before the primary judge:
(1) There is a significant degree of overlap in issues between the two
proceedings. In particular, as developed in oral submissions,
main argument against Isuzu in the 2020 Proceeding is predicated on the
successful claims in the 2017 Proceeding
that Mr Meneses and the Hanhwa
Parties had breached a number of obligations by their knowing involvement in
certain conduct. In other
words, the case against Mr Meneses and the Hanhwa
Parties, that was determined in the Liability Decision, is the predicate
for the accessorial liability claims against Isuzu in the
2020 Proceeding.
(2) There is the possibility, not hypothetical or theoretical in nature, of
different, and even opposite, material factual outcomes
on the predicate
liability question. But, even if the Court were to find, consistently with the
Liability Decision, that predicate
liability was established, there is still the
possibility of inconsistent findings on the question of Isuzu’s knowing
involvement.
(3) No case management techniques could be identified that could minimise the
possibility of inconsistent findings, nor ameliorate
the lost opportunity to
participate in the fact-finding in the 2017 Proceeding.
(4) Directed
have pleaded its case against Isuzu by mid-2019.
However, to advance its private, commercial interests, Directed chose not to do
so. While staged proceedings will not always be objectionable, when a party has
decision not to join a party to earlier proceedings,
that commercial decision has nothing to do with the administration of justice.
(5) By August 2024, at least five witnesses for the Hanhwa Parties had come
to be employed by Directed or entities controlled by
Directed. Because of the
staged conduct of the proceedings, Isuzu has been denied the opportunity to rely
on, clarify, test or challenge
the evidence given by those witnesses as it saw
fit. It now faces the prospect of defending the proceeding without the active
involvement
of those Hanhwa witnesses or with the forensic, practical and
procedural disadvantages of calling those witnesses in the
2020 Proceeding.
(6) The primary judge insufficiently considered the public interest
considerations and erred in placing weight on allowing Directed
the opportunity
to vindicate its entitlement against Isuzu.
4.3 Leave to appeal should not be given
our view, leave should not be given to appeal the primary judge’s decision
declining to grant the permanent stay. For the
following reasons, we do not
consider that there are sufficient grounds to doubt the correctness of her
Honour’s decision.
That is sufficient to deny leave.
there is no dispute that the primary judge applied the correct legal principles,
emphasising the high bar to be established:
[30]‍–‍[39];
at [3]. A stay will be
warranted where “any prospective trial will be unfair or so unfairly and
unjustifiably oppressive as
to constitute an abuse of process”. If
“a fair trial can be held and will not be so unfairly and unjustifiably
as to constitute an abuse of process, a court ordinarily has a duty
to hear and decide the case”:
at [16]. Relevantly, as
Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ stated in
UBS AG v Tyne
), “in some circumstances the
bringing of a claim which
have been litigated in an earlier
proceeding will be an abuse”.
in the application of those principles, the primary judge accepted that Directed
was likely armed with sufficient facts to have
pleaded a case against Isuzu by
at [116]. However, her Honour also considered
and accepted “the various reasons” advanced by Directed for not
Isuzu to the 2017 Proceeding and for commencing the
2020 Proceeding when it did:
at [118]. Those various
reasons, that were set out above at [22], had been identified by the primary
our view, Isuzu has not demonstrated error on the part of the primary judge in
making that evaluation. We accept Directed’s
submissions that any need to
join Isuzu to the 2017 Proceeding had to be weighed against the private
rights of the other parties,
Beach J’s busy docket and the availability of
counsel had the trial been vacated.
any event, we were taken during the leave application, without objection, to
additional aspects of the chronology of events leading
up to June 2019 at
which time Directed first obtained a sample of the LM18i unit and received
expert evidence concluding that it
was the HAU8000 with a new fascia. In
May 2018, Isuzu had disavowed implications of wrongdoing. Thereafter,
matters relevant to Isuzu’s
conduct were discovered incrementally in the
2017 Proceeding as the litigation landscape was unfolding. The
incompleteness of the
information available to Directed is well demonstrated by
the failed steps in the 2017 Proceeding to seek a restraining order against
Hanhwa on 5 June 2018 and to inspect the new Hanhwa AV unit on
14 January 2019. We accept Directed’s submissions that, in
circumstances
where Isuzu had told Directed that (a) the HAU8000 had been
quarantined with no further supply, and (b) the LM18i unit was not the
product as the HAU8000; it could not be said that it
have sought
to implead Isuzu in June 2019.
Furthermore,
once the discovery was made in June 2019 it was not unreasonable, given the
advanced stage of the 2017 Proceeding and
that the trial was to commence on
9 December 2019, for Directed to focus its attention on that
litigation rather than seek to implead
Isuzu at that time. That is particularly
the case because it was not until the Hanhwa Parties filed their evidence in
answer on 2
October 2019 in the 2017 Proceeding that the alleged
independent derivation of the HAU8000 and the LM18i unit was put in issue.
our view, and being mindful of the heavy burden on Isuzu and the restraint to be
applied by an appellate court when scrutinising
interlocutory case management
decisions, it could not be said that Directed
have sought to
implead Isuzu in the 2017 Proceeding in mid-2019.
Isuzu made much of the primary judge’s acceptance that it was
understandable that Directed tried to preserve its commercial
relationship with
Isuzu rather than seeking to implead it: at [118]. However, such a complaint
does not withstand closer scrutiny.
Insofar as Directed’s conduct supports
the conclusion that it wished to preserve its commercial relationship with
Isuzu, such
a motivation will not of itself impugn the decision not to sue at
that time if it was nevertheless not unreasonable in the circumstances
case. It could not plausibly be characterised as constituting an undertaking not
to the extent that there will be overlapping issues, the possibility of
inconsistent fact-finding and forensic disadvantages in cross-examining
Hanhwa witnesses, they are consequences of the commencement of a separate
proceeding against Isuzu. They would not have been
sufficient to justify a stay
if Directed had discovered potential wrongdoing after the trial for the
2017 Proceeding had commenced.
In our view, the outcome should be no
different in circumstances where we have concluded that it could not be said
that Directed
have sought to implead Isuzu in mid-2019.
our view, there is nothing to the argument that the 2020 Proceeding was
described as a “small subset” of the 2017 Proceeding.
2017 Proceeding involved other claims against different parties not
applicable to Isuzu. The primary overlap is the predicate
liability question.
That area of overlap between the proceedings might be described in different
qualitative or quantitative ways.
To describe the 2020 Proceeding as a
“small subset” of the 2017 Proceeding does not diminish the
significance of the
issues to be determined in it, or demonstrate that the
primary judge misunderstood the extent of the overlap between the proceedings
— which her Honour described as “significant” in
— or its relevance to the abuse analysis.
also see no error in the approach adopted by the primary judge to distil and
narrow the factual disputes and the issues for determination,
Honour’s broad description of that approach as case management. We
consider that the primary judge was correct to conclude
that any abuse of
process may be avoided or minimised by interventionist case management, and the
challenges of cross-examining the
Hanhwa parties could be accommodated within
the Court’s processes. The step taken so far in the proceeding to agree to
and non-binding findings by Beach J in the Liability Decision is an
example of a step that can be taken.
contrary to Isuzu’s submission, we find no error in the primary judge
leaving open the possibility of a further stay application
as the case
progresses to trial. There is no incoherence in the primary judge, on the one
hand, evaluating the stay application on
the basis of existing matters and a
prospective assessment based on future contingencies and, on the other hand,
recognising the
inherent limitations of that evaluation in the face of future
uncertainty. The Court should not be precluded from revisiting the
stay if unanticipated circumstances of prejudice, particularly from the conduct
of the parties, later materialise. For
example, if Directed were to retreat from
its willingness for the Hanhwa witnesses to be cross-examined, that might cause
to reconsider whether its processes are being abused.
we do not consider there to be anything in the submission that the primary
judge insufficiently accounted for the public interest.
It is evident in what we
have said that the primary judge carefully considered the competing interests
reflected in the tests for
whether there has been an abuse of process.
4.4 Was there an abuse of process in Isuzu relitigating the
stay application?
it is not necessary to decide the point, something should be said about a
submission advanced by Directed to the effect that
in the present application
for leave, Isuzu seeks to challenge
rather than
and that, as such, the present application for leave is
out of time
and an abuse of process insofar as it seeks to relitigate an
interlocutory matter that was determined in
reject these arguments which are based on the incorrect premise that Isuzu has
advanced two separate applications for a stay dealt
with, respectively, in
Isuzu submitted, there was only one application for a stay. That is plain from
the terms of the orders made in
that the stay application
“be stayed”; from the wording at [1] in
“[t]his is the continuation of an interlocutory application”; and
from the orders in
dismissing the original stay
application.
Consequently,
there is no foundation for the argument that the orders made in
should be characterised as quelling a controversy between
the parties in the sense explained by Kiefel CJ, Gordon and Steward JJ
AZC20 v Minister for Immigration
[2023] HCA 26
278 CLR 512
the foregoing reasons, we do not consider that Isuzu has established to the
requisite standard that the primary judge erred in
refusing the stay
application. Leave to appeal must be refused. Isuzu must pay Directed’s
costs of the application to be agreed
or assessed.
I certify that the preceding seventy-seven (77)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Justices Burley, McEvoy and
Dated: 24 October 2025
RTF format (800 KB)
Signed PDF/A format