URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/other/cth/AUBCPubInq/2024/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 16:24:45
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Transforming Aged Care for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People - Final Report [2024] AUBCPubInq 2 (10 February 2025)
Acknowledgements
Executive Summary
Key findings
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people entering the aged care system face additional barriers and challenges compared to other
Australians
Many aged care services are culturally unsafe for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
There is a lack of flexibility in the aged care system and services to respond to the needs of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people
There is a lack of culturally appropriate communications to support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people’s understanding
and access to the aged care system
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are often disconnected from Country as they age
Impacts on Stolen Generations survivors
Culturally unsafe complaints processes can be difficult to understand and navigate
There is a significant lack of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander specific data inhibiting informed policy and program decisions
There are positive examples of culturally safe, trauma-aware and healing informed aged care
National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Flexible Aged Care (NATSIFAC) Program
A permanent Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Aged Care Commissioner is a critical mechanism for transforming the aged care system
The Royal Commission and National Agreement provide a framework for transformational change
The experiences of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and the findings I present in this report compel urgent action from
governments
Recommendations
Recommendation 1
Publish this report
Recommendation 2
Commit to develop a 10-year transformation plan
Recommendation 3
Agree in-principle to the proposed model for an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commissioner
Recommendation 4
Progress time sensitive and urgent recommendations
National Consultations
Post Consultation Period
Community-Controlled Leadership Group
A Positive Aged Care Experience
National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Flexible Aged Care (NATSIFAC) Program
Elder Care Support and Aged Care Specialist Officers
Partnership arrangements between mainstream and community controlled
Systemic Challenges and Barriers
Stolen Generations Survivors
Facts and figures
What Stolen Generations survivors told me
How to support survivors, and their descendants as they age
Culturally unsafe aged care programs and services
Connection to Country
Cultural Safety Training
Complex and non-inclusive language and communications make the aged care system inaccessible for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people
The need for targeted information and consultation
My Aged Care
Assessments
Digital Platform and Contact Centre
Identity requirements that many older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people cannot meet
Fees and Co-Contributions
Lack of flexibility to respond to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures and ways of understanding health and ageing
Flexible funding
Lack of choice to use Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander service providers or staff
Thin Markets
Building the ACCO Sector
The need for a coordinated approach
A Call for Transformational Change
10-year transformation plan
Priority Reform 1 - Formal Partnerships and Shared Decision-Making
Priority Reform 2 -Building the Community-Controlled Sector
Priority Reform 3 - Transforming Government Organisations
Priority Reform 4 - Shared Access to Data and Information at a Regional Level
Model for a permanent Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Aged Care Commissioner
Overview of proposed permanent Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Aged Care Commissioner
Model Design Principles
Ways of working of the permanent Commissioner
Focus areas
Appointment and Term of the Commissioner
Independence of the Commissioner
Powers and resources of the Commissioner
Office of the Commissioner
Engagement with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
Operating at the systemic level
Handling of individual complaints and safety concerns
Model aspects for further development
Appendix 1: Urgent and Time Sensitive Recommendations
Appendix 2: Summary of consultations & organisational submissions
Submissions received (Organisations only)
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Community-controlled Leadership Group (Leadership Group)
Appendix 3: Understanding Older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People
Social and Cultural Determinants of Health
Social Determinants of Health
Cultural Determinants of Health
Priority Context Areas
Abuse of Older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people (Elder Abuse)
Intergenerational wealth creation / superannuation
Appendix 4: Acronyms
Transforming Aged Care for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Report from the Interim First Nations Aged Care Commissioner
Acknowledgements
Artwork attribution:
Artwork title:
“Koorliny on Boodja” meaning “Walking
on Country”
Miranda Davis (Aunty Mandy)
Aunty Mandy is a Noonga Yorga woman from the Western Australia Wheatbelt
region with family connection to Whadjuk, Wilman, Ballardong,
Yued and Wardandi
Aunty Mandy was born in Pingelly on Ballardong Country and has lived in
Mandurah on Binjareb Country for the past 25 years. She lives
with her husband
and has 4 children and 7 grandchildren.
Aunty Mandy has worked extensively in the Mandurah area with local agencies
to complete commissioned pieces and projects, including
the Noongar Six Seasons
signage for the local park in Cunderdin.
Aunty Mandy painted and gifted “Koorliny on Boodja” to the
Interim First Nations Aged Care Commissioner in recognition
of her visit to
Mandurah as part of her nationwide consultations.
Acknowledgement
I acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the
Traditional Owners of Country throughout what is now known as Australia,
recognise their continuing connection to land, sea, waters, and culture. I pay
my respects to their Elders past and present and
acknowledge sovereignty was
never ceded.
I particularly acknowledge the generous contributions of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples who shared their lived experiences
of the aged
care system. By sharing their experiences, they have provided the voice and
foundation for this report. Their contributions
are the evidence and momentum
for change.
A note on Terminology
Throughout my consultations, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
told me they would prefer that I use ‘Aboriginal and
Torres Strait
Islander’ instead of ‘First Nations’. For this reason, this
report refers to a future, permanent
Commissioner as an Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Aged Care Commissioner. Where the report is referencing my
current position
as Interim Commissioner, it continues to use the term First
This report, the findings and recommendations herein, are the culmination of
an intensive and extensive consultation process, and
an open call for
submissions on the design and functions of a permanent Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Aged Care Commissioner,
and on older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people’s experiences with the aged care system.
Consultations and submissions
have shown overwhelming support for the
establishment of an independent, statutory Commissioner. Communities have shared
that Government, through its commitment to this position, is truly
invested in listening and responding to the needs of older Aboriginal
Strait Islander people.
Between 5 February 2024 and 21 June 2024, I travelled over 70,000km to urban,
regional, remote and very remote communities, listening
to older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people, their families, peak bodies, representative
bodies, providers and advocacy
organisations. They shared their experiences with
the aged care system and provided their input into the design of this very
Sadly, the aged care system was never designed with older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people in mind. My consultations revealed
that not enough
has changed for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people since the Royal
Commission into Aged Care Quality and
Safety (Royal Commission) 4 years ago. The
aged care system has failed, and continues to fail, older Aboriginal and Torres
Islander people. The system is still not providing culturally safe care
and is poorly placed to meet projected growth in demand of
aged care services
for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Based on the feedback I received and available data, it is clear that to
adequately reform the system we need to ensure the future
model of Support at
need, the real cost of providing
that support is covered, and
community-controlled organisations are supported to enter the sector. To do this
we need a long-term
approach that lifts equity.
An equity-based approach is required to achieve equal access and outcomes for
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Equality will never be
realised if we do not address the systemic barriers faced by Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people
when accessing the aged care supports the need.
I heard many heartbreaking stories of Elders dying off Country and what it
means for their families when their loved ones’ ‘spirits
lost’. I also heard consistent accounts of issues commonly faced by older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
that, while not strictly the
responsibility of the aged care system, older people rely on for their health
and wellbeing. This highlights
the need for holistic system approaches to
accessing appropriate health care, renal dialysis support on Country, dementia
affordable and accessible housing, liveable housing conditions, access
to running water, and food security.
I witnessed culturally safe, trauma-aware and healing informed approaches to
care, however these were restricted to Aboriginal community-controlled
These services focused on the unique cultural needs and understanding of older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
The positive examples are limited,
and changes are required to transform the aged care system to adequately meet
the needs of older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
The true potential of my role - and that of a permanent Commissioner - is
realised in the opportunity I had to sit with community,
listen deeply and
understand, in their own words, the barriers and challenges they have and
continue to experience with the aged
care system, and how a permanent
Commissioner could facilitate and influence change across the system.
I met with more than a thousand people during my consultations and with every
visit I was welcomed with gratitude, warmth and hospitality.
Many people invited
me into their homes and workplaces and shared stories of what mattered to them:
family, community, connection
to Country and culture.
I am encouraged by the many messages I received following my consultations
from participants who spoke about feeling heard, understood
and hopeful.
While my formal consultations have concluded, as Interim First Nations Aged
Care Commissioner, I will continue my regular engagement
with older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people, the Aboriginal community-controlled sector
and mainstream aged care sector
to better understand, promote and advocate for
the changes needed to ensure older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
access to culturally safe, trauma-aware and healing informed aged care to
meet their unique needs.
While I am the author of this report, the words throughout reflect the many
voices of the people I got to spend time with. In recognition
of their courage
and generosity, my hope is that this report will be a vehicle to articulate the
many older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people and communities’
aspirations and insights to Government.
Andrea Kelly
Interim First Nations Aged Care Commissioner
November 2024
On 8 January 2024, I was appointed Interim First Nations Aged Care
Commissioner (Interim Commissioner) as a first step in addressing
Recommendation
49 of the Royal Commission into Aged Care Quality and Safety (Royal Commission):
to establish a statutory Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Aged Care
Commissioner (Commissioner) to ensure culturally safe, tailored and flexible
aged care services
for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. As
Interim Commissioner my mandate is to:
• lead extensive public consultations with Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander older people and communities, and other relevant
stakeholders, about
the design and functions of a permanent Commissioner
• contribute to changes necessary to improve Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people’s access to culturally safe
• promote culturally safe, trauma-aware and healing informed aged care
services for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people across
This report details what I heard from older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people, their families, communities and the Aboriginal
Strait Islander community-controlled sector about their aspirations for
culturally safe, accessible and responsive aged
care and the barriers and
challenges that need to be overcome to meet their aspirations. This report also
details what Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people told me they want from
a permanent Commissioner.
We are at a critical juncture of reform to the aged care system for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. The National Agreement
the Gap (National Agreement) Priority Reforms and the recommendations of the
Royal Commission provide a pathway toward
an aged care sector that is culturally
safe and has a positive impact on older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
ability to live and age well.
Recommendations to Government in this report are based on what Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people told me through my extensive
engagements across
the country, which will help to realise the ambitions articulated in the
National Agreement and through the Royal
Commission recommendations.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people described the current aged
care system as being largely culturally unsafe, not supportive
of their cultural
wellbeing and needs, alienating, difficult to understand and challenging to
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people entering the aged care system face additional barriers
and challenges compared to other
Australians
Ongoing trauma and exclusion caused by colonisation and dispossession,
compounded by institutionalised and systemic racism have made
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people the most disadvantaged in the country. All levels
of government recognised this disadvantage
through their commitment to the
National Agreement. This is an overarching national policy, which aims to enable
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people and governments to work together to
‘overcome the inequality experienced by Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people and achieve life outcomes equal to all Australians.’
The disparity in outcomes is particularly apparent in older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people who do not access aged care
at rates proportionate
to other Australians or commensurate with their needs, despite having a lower
life expectancy and higher likelihood
of requiring aged care services at a
younger age.
Many aged care services
are culturally unsafe for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
Many older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people spoke to me about
their first-hand experiences of interpersonal and structural
racism when
accessing aged care, where many mainstream organisations are culturally unsafe
and ill-equipped to meet their needs.
I listened to stories of older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people not being valued or respected across the
system, including
by assessors and the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission
(ACQSC). I heard consistently that the lack of cultural safety is the
deterrent for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people not accessing
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people often prefer to access aged
care, health and wellbeing services delivered by Aboriginal
Community Controlled
Organisations (ACCOs). ACCOs are services initiated by Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people, controlled,
and governed by and for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people. When ACCOs provide place-based, locally led and
safe services to Aboriginal Torres Strait Islander people, the
outcomes are far better. Services delivered by ACCOs are designed
to meet the
needs of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and protect their cultural
needs and safety.
While there is a commitment from government under the National Agreement to
build and strengthen the ACCO sector, there is a long
way to go before
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have a choice to access an ACCO for
aged care services. In the meantime,
there is a role for governments to support
and encourage partnerships between ACCOs and mainstream service providers and
efforts to build the cultural safety within mainstream services, but
not at the detriment of building the ACCO sector.
There is a lack of
flexibility in the aged care system and services to respond to the needs of
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people raised with me that aged care
services lack the flexibility to respond to their needs
and circumstances. This
sentiment was repeated many times by providers I met with. They talked about
inflexible funding arrangements
being a significant barrier in their ability to
support their participants’ needs. The success of funding arrangements
the emergency response to the COVID-19 pandemic provides an example for
what can be achieved when flexibility is provided.
There is a lack of
culturally appropriate communications to support Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people’s understanding
and access to the aged care
There was a lack of knowledge and information about aged care services,
eligibility requirements, entitlements, and access. I also
heard and witnessed
the language and processes used within the aged care system being described as
‘complex, confusing and
overwhelming’. The over-reliance by
governments on digital platforms, and the absence of face-to-face support,
further exacerbates
these challenges. This was especially true for older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and their families in remote
communities
for those whose first language is not English.
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people are often disconnected from Country as they age
A consistent theme throughout my engagements was the desire for older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to remain connected
Country as they age. With limited services in many parts of Australia, older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
are forced to leave their community
for aged care, disrupting their connection to Country and Island home, leading
to spiritual loss.
Many people spoke about older people passing away in places
far from their home and Country leading to ‘spirits getting lost.’
The loss of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people from communities
was also having a profound impact on community wellbeing
and cultural identity.
Elders play a significant role as community leaders and protectors of
cultural knowledge, lore and heritage. This involves passing
down knowledge and
stories, leadership, care-giving and safeguarding family, community and
intergenerational wellbeing. This disconnection
from Country was seen as deeply
traumatic, emphasising the need for aged care services that support ageing in
place or, where this
is not possible, programs that support regular connection
Impacts on Stolen
Generations survivors
My engagements highlighted the unique and complex needs of Stolen Generations
survivors, many of whom face significant challenges
in accessing aged care. The
trauma experienced by this group has had lasting effects, which are compounded
by the current aged care
system’s lack of trauma-aware, healing informed
care. Stolen Generations survivors often avoid mainstream services, due to
insensitive assessments and care environments that resemble institutions they
were placed in as children. Many survivors expressed
a strong preference for
possible. A dedicated aged care
response to the needs of Stolen Generation
survivors and their families is urgently needed.
Culturally unsafe
complaints processes can be difficult to understand and navigate
Many older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people told me that the
mechanisms and processes to raise complaints about individual
aged care services
or interactions with the aged care system were either culturally unsafe or
unresponsive. They often did not understand
how their complaints were being
handled and did not always understand the outcome or felt like their issue was
not being resolved.
I have assisted individuals as far as possible with their
concerns, including connecting them with appropriate supports or complaints
mechanisms, which at times I have struggled to navigate and have felt helpless
in assisting them to resolve their concerns.
For me, the experience of attempting to support individuals to navigate the
complaints process has highlighted the need for more information,
education and
awareness-raising about what supports are available and how they can be
accessed. The complaints mechanisms and processes
need to be reviewed and
strengthened so they are clear, safe and responsive to Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people.
There is a significant
lack of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander specific data inhibiting informed
policy and program decisions
A significant issue raised throughout my consultations was the lack of
available data and information on the needs and experiences
of older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people. This lack of information inhibits the ability
of governments and communities
to make informed, context-specific decisions.
Much of what is available is taken from Census data, which becomes quickly
and lacks the necessary nuance to inform community-level
decision-making.
I am also concerned that many Government decisions are being made for and
without proper
engagement and partnerships to gain community perspectives. This is particularly
important in the absence of overarching
Government effort is needed to boost the available data on Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people’s needs and experiences
relating to aged
care. Equally important is for governments, when collecting data, to adhere to
the principles of Priority Reform
4: Share data and information at a regional
There are positive
examples of culturally safe, trauma-aware and healing informed aged
I witnessed models of aged care services for older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people that were tailored, safe and culturally
responsive. Most
of these examples were services provided by ACCOs and demonstrate what is
I also witnessed strong partnerships between mainstream providers and ACCOs,
and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander families and
communities of culturally
safe care. Again, these examples provide a demonstration of what is possible.
This report highlights examples of models and ways of working that have
positive outcomes for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people. Where
possible, the Government should look to replicate and scale up these positive
An equity-based approach is needed to achieve equal access and outcomes for
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
We must recognise the unique barriers and adverse outcomes experienced by
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people - in
particular, Stolen
Generations survivors, veterans, and the LGBTIQ+ community - and how that
contributes to lower rates of accessing
aged care. It is imperative that an
equity-based approach is taken to ensure that appropriate aged care is available
to meet their
unique needs.
Taking an equity-based approach for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people means it is not enough to insist on equal access.
If we are to make meaningful progress on closing the gap and responding to
the needs of our older people, we must ensure that policies
and programs are
designed with and targeted at older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people, as the most vulnerable and disadvantaged
people in our country. An
intersectional approach to this work is important.
National Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Flexible Aged Care (NATSIFAC) Program
The NATSIFAC Program is highlighted as a positive model as it ensures
guaranteed funding for providers and has the inherent flexibility
to meet the
ageing and cultural needs of individuals and communities. However, it does have
limitations and there have been calls
for changes to the Program.
This report supports reforming the Program to better meet the needs of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. To be clear,
the NATSIFAC Program
should be retained, refined and for some communities adapted. The Government
must ensure that the Program’s
existing benefits are not lost in the aged
care reforms.
A permanent Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Aged Care Commissioner is a critical mechanism for
transforming the aged care system
There is overwhelming support for a permanent, statutory Commissioner that is
independent from Government and the Department of Health
and Aged Care (the
department). The permanent Commissioner should be a statutory office holder with
the necessary powers and resources
to partner and innovate with the Government,
ACCO sector, and mainstream aged care sector, as well as drive accountability
for delivering
on the commitments under the National Agreement and the systemic
reforms necessary to create a truly inclusive aged care system.
The drafting of the legislation to introduce a permanent Commissioner should
commence immediately.
The Royal Commission and
National Agreement provide a framework for transformational change
Not enough has changed for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people since
the findings of the Royal Commission, 4 years ago. The
National Agreement
provides a transformational framework to change the way governments work with
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people, organisations and communities to
deliver culturally safe and responsive aged care services.
I recognise the Government has made some important changes to the way it
works and its policies and programs relating to Aboriginal
and Torres Strait
Islander aged care. I also recognise that the department is one of the leading
Commonwealth departments in responding
to the National Agreement. However, I
heard the frustrations of communities and ACCOs that the promise of the National
is not translating fast enough to real improvements on the ground.
The experiences of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and the findings I present in this
report compel urgent action from
governments
This challenge is only becoming more pressing as the number of older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people increases. Between
2011 and 2021,
the number of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people aged 65 years
and over almost doubled. Over the following
decade, the number is expected to
increase by another 67%.3 Reforms to the aged care system must address current
barriers and become
a system for the future, not just for the now.
A wholescale new approach is required, demanding the development of a
long-term transformative plan, designed in full partnership
with Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander community-controlled representatives. A 10-year
transformation plan is needed to articulate
the aspirations of older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people, with a clear vision for what transformation
looks like, and
a strategy to achieve that vision. This plan should contain a
real dollar investment, as well as underpinning data to inform decision-making
and accountability for delivery.
Recommendations
Recommendation
Publish this
The Government agrees to publish this report in full.
I met with many individuals and communities who are often consulted as part
of the Government’s information gathering for policy
development or
program design but have no idea what information is being relayed to Government
decision-makers. The process of collecting,
drawing on and incorporating
publishing this report,
the many older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people I met with, who shared their stories and experiences, will see their
collective voices reflected in this report.
Recommendation
Commit to develop a
10-year transformation plan
The Government should commit to the development of a 10-year transformation
plan, co-designed in genuine partnership with Aboriginal
and Torres Strait
Islander people, which articulates an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander aged
care pathway. Consideration must
be given to 3 key areas. First, what I heard
through my consultations; second, the findings and recommendations of the Royal
Commission;
and third, clearly articulating a strategy that gives effect to the
commitments made under the National Agreement and supports older
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples’ self-determination.
Recommendation
Agree in-principle to
the proposed model for an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Commissioner
The Government gives in-principle agreement to the proposed model of a
permanent Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Aged Care Commissioner
2) and agrees to the Interim Commissioner moving to the next stage of
development and implementation.
The proposed model was developed in consultation with older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people, communities and community-controlled
leadership.
The model would establish an independent, permanent, statutory position. In line
with the recommendation of the Royal
Commission, the permanent Commissioner
would hold the aged care system to account for ensuring more equitable access to
high quality,
culturally safe and inclusive aged care services for older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Recommendation
Progress time sensitive
and urgent recommendations
The aged care system requires an overarching, systems-level transformation
plan to meet the current and anticipated needs of older
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people. However, the plan will take time to co-design, develop
and implement.
There are a range of time-sensitive and urgent actions to be taken in the
meantime to address the barriers that are exacerbating the
inequity of access to
aged care between older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and other
Australians.
A list of time sensitive and urgent recommendations that the Government
should commit to action as a priority, is provided at Appendix
Consultations
On 8 January 2024, I was appointed Interim First Nations Aged Care
Commissioner as a first step in addressing Recommendation 49 of
Commission: to establish a statutory Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Aged
Care Commissioner to ensure culturally
safe, tailored and flexible aged care
services for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. As Interim
Commissioner my
mandate is to:
• lead extensive public consultations with Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander older people and communities, and other relevant
stakeholders, about
the design and functions of the permanent Commissioner
• contribute to the changes necessary to bring improvements for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people across the aged
care system
• advocate for and promote culturally safe, trauma-aware and healing
informed aged care services for older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
people across Australia.
Between 5 February 2024 and 21 June 2024, I held extensive consultations with
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people,
their families and
communities, ACCOs, mainstream aged care providers, and key Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander and mainstream
peak bodies. I listened as they shared
their aged care experiences, what would make the biggest difference to them by
improving the
aged care system, and what value a permanent Commissioner would
bring. Consultations were focussed on 2 questions:
• Should there be a permanent, statutory First Nations Aged Care
Commissioner? If so, what should their functions and authority
• What changes are required to enable culturally safe, trauma-aware and
healing informed access to the aged care system for
older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people, carers, families and communities?
In the above period, I held more than 135 engagements and consultations
across all states and territories. The consultation map, at
Appendix 2, shows I
visited a mix of very remote, remote, regional and urban locations, as well as a
mix of aged care service types.
I consulted broadly and provided an opportunity
for less frequently visited communities to be heard.
To support my consultations, I worked closely with the department’s
State and Territory Local Network (Local Network) as the
stewards of local aged
care community and provider relationships. Staff from the Local Network were
effective in following up local
issues immediately and providing feedback to
individuals or providers. As my report will show, a high degree of information
and education
is required for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and
organisations to understand the complexities of aged care programs
and supports
available. The Local Network is best placed to provide this, in addition to
other aged care navigators.
It was not possible for me to get to every community, so to ensure the widest
possible engagement, a website and discussion paper
were developed. Individuals
and organisations were supported to have their say in whatever way worked for
them, including written
submissions, letters, emails, videos, audio messages or
through a phone call. At the close of the consultation period, I had received
submissions.
Since my commencement, I have met with a wide range of peaks and key bodies,
such as the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Ageing and Aged Care
Council (NATSIAACC), National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health
Organisation (NACCHO), The Healing Foundation,
National Aged Care Alliance, Aged
Care Council of Elders, National Aged Care Advisory Council, Older Persons
Advocacy Network (OPAN),
Stolen Generations organisations, and carers’
organisations.
A full list of my consultations and submissions received are at Appendix
Post Consultation
While my official consultation period concluded on 21 June 2024, I have
continued active engagement with individuals, communities
and the sector. This
has been important to allay concerns that were put to me during consultations
that this should not be a one-off
information gathering exercise. It was
important to honour the commitment I made to ensure all who wanted to share
their experiences
on the aged care system would have the opportunity to do so.
Ongoing community and sector engagement will be a key role for the permanent
Commissioner, to build and maintain trust and confidence and ensure the aged
care system is delivering as it should.
Since June, I have continued to accept feedback, and invitations to meet with
communities, representatives, and organisations in person
and virtually. I have
received feedback, provided information to community and helped them understand
what resources are available
as they battle to navigate the complex aged care
I have attended and presented at a range of forums and conferences,
including: the Elder Abuse Action Australia (EAAA) and Aged Rights
Service (ARAS) Elder Abuse Conference; the OPAN Annual Meeting; Mid North Coast
Koori Care Connections Forum; the Aged Care
Research & Industry Innovation
Australia (ARIIA) Conference; the National Aged Care Alliance; Better Health
Network Community
Yarns Consultation; National Ageing Research Institute;
Coalition of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peak Organisations; Closing
the Gap Partnership Working Group; and the Social and Emotional Wellbeing
(Mental Health) Policy Partnership, established under Priority
Reform One of the
National Agreement.
There have been positive engagements with non-government organisations
including NACCHO; Dementia Australia; Palliative Care Australia;
and researchers
at the National Centre for Epidemiology and Population Health, Australian
National University and James Cook University.
I have built strong and productive working relationships with key sector
stakeholders, including the Acting Inspector-General of Aged
Care, the ACQSC,
the Aged Care Complaints Commissioner, the Independent Health and Aged Care
Pricing Authority (IHACPA), OPAN and
the National Indigenous Australians Agency
the Exposure Draft of the new Aged Care Act; the Final
Report of the Aged Care
Taskforce; the Acting Inspector-General of Aged Care’s Review of the
Administration of My Aged Care;
the ACQSC’s Strengthened Quality Standards
and IHACPA consultations on the pricing of residential aged care services as
as Support at Home.
Community-Controlled
Leadership Group
I established a forum of respected Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
leaders and sector representatives from the Aboriginal community-controlled
sector (Leadership Group), to provide advice and guidance on the proposed model
for the permanent Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Aged Care Commissioner.
I held 2 formal workshops with the group in May and July seeking early feedback
on the proposed model. This
is an added accountability mechanism to community to
ensure the proposed model is not being designed in isolation of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people and that the nuances of feedback are properly
understood, and key considerations are not overlooked.
The Leadership Group were drawn from organisations who fought hard for the
appointment of a permanent Commissioner in the Royal Commission.
understand the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander aged care sector and the
value of a permanent Commissioner. While
the recommendations for the model
included in this report are mine, based on a consensus view of all who I
consulted with, I would
like to acknowledge the leadership, counsel and insights
shared by this group.
A list of organisations whose representatives made up the Leadership Group is
provided at Appendix 2.
A Positive Aged Care
Our Elders are guardians of our rich cultural heritage, imparting their
knowledge through stories, art, music, and language. Through
their resilience,
determination, and wisdom, they have fought hard for the privileges we
experience today. It is not only a commitment
but an inherent obligation for us
to ensure that our cherished Elders have everything they require during their
golden years, including
comprehensive aged care services –
for Urban Indigenous Health (IUIH) submission.
Many positive examples of culturally safe, trauma-aware and healing informed
aged care I witnessed were delivered by ACCOs. This is
not surprising as
evidence shows ACCOs achieve better outcomes due to their community-led
approach.4 Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people are more likely to
engage with services delivered through ACCOs, as they are accountable and
connected to their communities.
ACCOs often become the heartbeat of Aboriginal communities and are relied on
to provide necessary and sometimes life-saving services
they aren’t
appropriately funded for. ACCOs don’t exist as an organisation separate
from community, we are embedded in
Aboriginal Community
Aged care services delivered by ACCOs
I visited a range of services delivered by ACCOs who understand their
communities and tailor their services to meet community needs.
The ACCOs are
seeing positive results in engagement and increased access for older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people.
Three services I visited were particularly
One provider offers a ‘one-stop shop’ for its clients, including
general practice, allied health, dental, pathology, aged
care support and
pharmacy services. In practice, participants can access the health services they
need in one location with appointments
coordinated on the same day, meaning
older people do not need to seek multiple avenues of transport and coordinating
different appointments.
Another provider has seen a remarkable change in the rates of access through
small but meaningful adjustments in the language it uses
to be more inclusive
for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. For example, moving from a
focus on ‘respite’
to ‘wellbeing’ because the provider
understands that certain words have connotations or additional meanings that
to be considered.
A key benefit of the wellbeing model is that it is targeted at supporting
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people on their
own terms. This
includes a Wellness Centre located on a ten-acre property and surrounded by
well-kept gardens, which offers day respite.
Participants can access aged care
without needing to move into a residential facility or have care providers come
to their home.
There are culturally safe activities held at the centre, as well
as a range of visiting medical services, targeted at the needs of
the community,
including a fitness trainer and occupational therapist.
The third provider, which offers a mix of residential and in home care has a
designated Service Delivery Care Coordinator who works
with older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people to remain living independently within their own
them to plan services and meet individual goals
This residential aged care building is positioned with respect to earth, air,
fire, and water, and are designed to honour Ancestors.
The site features rammed
earth walls, open spaces, a pond, and Aboriginal art. Activities and events are
hosted around the fire pit
to celebrate friendships and cultural connections
while enjoying johnny cakes and damper. The service has a visiting hairdresser,
beauty salon, and wellness centre that offers a private place to enjoy cooking,
sewing, crafting, and barbecues with friends.
National Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander Flexible Aged Care (NATSIFAC) Program
The most referenced and positively received model for delivering aged care
services is the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Flexible Aged
Care (NATSIFAC) Program. Delivering a mix of residential and home care support,
the NATSIFAC Program allows providers
to deliver flexible, culturally safe aged
care to older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people close to their home
and/or community.
An advantage of the NATSIFAC Program is the flexible recurrent or
‘block’ funding. There is flexibility in how funding
can be used,
including pooling funds to tailor services to the collective cultural and
wellbeing needs of participants.
Under existing arrangements, NATSIFAC providers are not required to be
approved providers under the
Aged Care Act 1997
, and aged care participants are
not required to be assessed by an Aged Care Assessment Team prior to receiving
care services. However,
under the new
Aged Care Act
, NATSIFAC providers will be
regulated in the same way as other aged care providers. Under the new Act,
providers will need to meet
new obligations, such as the requirement to be
registered and have in place a grant agreement with the department to deliver
The greatest limitation of the NATSIFAC Program is the small proportion of
the total aged care services it delivers to older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait
Islander people. At June 2023, 44 services were funded under the NATSIFAC
Program, delivering 489 residential aged
care places and combined 895
Commonwealth Home Support Programme (CHSP) and Home Care Packages
The Program is not open to new providers, which limits ACCOs capacity to
enter the market. This is disappointing, given that many
of the culturally
strong services I visited were funded under NATSIFAC and/or delivered by ACCOs.
Under existing arrangements, the
NATSIFAC model would be an appropriate pathway
for those wanting to enter the market.
The vast majority of NATSIFAC places are in remote or very remote locations.
The model in its current form, while well received, does
not have the sufficient
reach to benefit many older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who
live in urban and regional locations.
The Royal Commission proposed taking (and building on) the best elements of
the NATSIFAC Program and incorporating them into an Aboriginal
and Torres Strait
Islander aged care pathway within the new aged care system.
Royal Commission suggested that this approach would provide more funding with
greater flexibility to meet the needs of the growing
numbers of vulnerable
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in rural, regional and urban areas.
I agree with this approach, which was almost universally called for by the
providers and ACCOs I met with. However, as welcome as
an expansion of the
NATSIFAC Program would be, it will not be enough in isolation. I recommend any
broader reforms being considered
now to the NATSIFAC Program should wait and be
incorporated into my proposed 10-year transformation plan.
2024 New South Wales Elders Olympics, Dunghutti country, Kempsey
In May 2024, I had the privilege of being invited to attend the 2024 NSW
Elders Olympics on beautiful Dunghutti Country, in Kempsey,
hosted by Booroongen
Djugun Limited. It was a pleasure to join the 406 Elders who attended the event,
representing over 25 nations
including Biripi, Birpai, Awabakal, Dakinjung,
Dunghutti, Gumbangir, Gandangar and Gamilaroi.
Established in 2001, the Elders Olympics event has gone from strength to
strength, with this year marking the 23rd Olympics. Each
year, the winning team
has the opportunity to host and organise the following year’s event. This
event is driven by community,
exists for community, and is reliant on the
efforts of volunteers. To date, the NSW Elders Olympics has not received
government investment.
Events such as these offer so many benefits for older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people. This includes the opportunity
to reconnect with extended
family, make new friends, share and celebrate culture and participate in a range
of activities that promote
their physical, social and spiritual wellbeing. These
events deserve to be highlighted for the positive impact they have for
participants
and attendees, bringing people and communities together to form
valuable connections and showcasing the strength and vital role Elders
our communities. They give older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
something to look forward to and be proud of.
‘The Elders Olympics is really important for the Elders. It’s
connect and it promotes healthy living. It’s also about connecting our
Elders with our younger generation and following
their leadership. It is the
modern-day Corrobboree and over the last 23 years it is safe to say it has grown
into one of the biggest
cultural events in NSW’
O’Bryan, CEO Booroon gen Djugun Limited
Elder Care Support and
Aged Care Specialist Officers
‘It’s a privilege to work with our Elders and hear their stories
and learn culture. We are their voice.’ –
Elder Care Support
Worker, Western Australia Consultation.
Acknowledging the
aged care system is complex and complicated to navigate for older Australians,
the Government introduced programs
to support older Australians as they interact
with and access the aged care system. These include Aged Care Specialist
Officers (ACSO),
the Care Finder Program, and Elder Care Support Program (ECSP).
The ECSP is specifically designed to support older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait
Islander people, their families, and carers to understand and navigate the aged
care system.
Older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people prefer being supported
through the aged care system with face-to-face supports.
consultations, concerns were raised with me about the current over reliance on
the digital portal and online guidance
materials. Contrary to that, positive
ACSOs have been
particularly useful in helping older people navigate the entire
My Aged Care process, as well as connect them with other Services
The ECSP, administered by NACCHO, also received positive feedback, but I
heard disappointment that the program only operates in a
small number of
communities. There were several calls by many ACCOs, in consultations and in
submissions, for an expansion of the
program. The Aged & Community Care
Providers Association (ACCPA) also noted in their submission the value of
funding cultural
liaison officers and navigators.
However, there was also some confusion about the functions carried out by
ECSP and Care Finders. This is an area that the department
needs to improve on
so that community are aware of the 3 levels of support available and what each
offer. In one regional consultation,
the ECSP and Care Finder were unaware that
both services were operating in the same community. I had the opportunity to
flag concerns
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people during consultations.
Partnership arrangements
between mainstream and community controlled
I genuinely want to understand the spiritual needs of First Nations and how
we can carefully and sympathetically bring that into the
facility’ –
Aged care service
St Bart’s and Moorditj Support Services Home Care service delivery
When I travelled to Western Australia, I saw the beginnings of a promising
partnership between a large mainstream provider and a local
community-controlled organisation.
St Bart’s is one of Perth’s key not-for-profit providers of
accommodation and outreach services for vulnerable Western
Australians
experiencing, or at risk of, homelessness, mental health challenges, trauma and
I was impressed that the provider had proactively identified the challenges
that exist in delivering home care services to older Aboriginal
Strait Islander people and taken steps to respond to this. St Bart’s noted
that the traditional home care model
leans towards a transactional approach to
care, with scheduled services set in a prescriptive agreed manner with limited
to be agile in the approach of care services for older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander clients.
In response, St Bart’s sought to work in close partnership with
Moorditj Support Services, an organisation that is experienced
in delivering
care support services and understands their community and cultural preferences
In this partnership arrangement, St Bart’s oversees the administration
and compliance of quality-of-care program, while the
partner organisation,
Moorditj Support Services, delivers the agreed home services and tailored care
plan in a culturally safe way.
In short, Aboriginal clients can receive care in
their home from Aboriginal care workers.
This was the first example I saw of a strategic partnership where a large
mainstream provider has a service agreement with a local
ACCO. It was also the
preference of Moorditj Support Services to do what they are best at and leave
the complex administrative work
to St Bart’s who are resourced and skilled
at this aspect of the business. Whilst in its initial stages of implementation,
I will be following the organisation’s journey closely given the potential
opportunity for scaling up this partnership approach
and adapting in other
I encourage the Government to support and incentivise partnerships such as
this, which enable more ACCOs to enter the aged care market.
Challenges and Barriers
By any objective measure, [Indigenous people] should be receiving
proportionately higher levels of aged and health care’ –
Commission, Final Report, Volume 3A p.239.
As a result of the impacts of colonisation and ongoing discrimination,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have higher rates
of disability,
lower life expectancy and an increased likelihood of requiring aged care
services at a younger age than non-Indigenous
people. In recognition of this,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people can access aged care at a younger
age than other population
Despite this, because of a range
of barriers that disproportionately affect older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people, they
do not access aged care at an equitable rate, or at a rate
commensurate with their level of need.
The challenges interacting with the system and barriers exacerbating poor
rates of access to aged care for older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
people highlight the need for additional investment. However, simply providing
additional funding is not sufficient.
Without understanding the barriers faced
by older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, efforts to improve
outcomes will
continue to draw on mainstream framing of policy solutions,
resulting in little change in outcomes and an increased likelihood of
government and community resources.
To date, the resources that governments have committed to the implementation
of the Agreement have fallen far short of the ambition
of the Agreement. Many of
the commitments in the Agreement cannot be achieved unless there is additional
investment’ –
2024 Productivity Commission: Review of the
National Agreement on Closing the Gap.
Throughout my
consultations and call for submissions, I sought to better understand the data
and hear from older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people, in their own
words, how they experienced the aged care system. Across all consultations, 5
key areas were
consistently raised as the most significant barriers to older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people accessing aged care:
1. The unique needs of Stolen Generations survivors
2. Culturally unsafe aged care programs and services
3. Complex and non-inclusive language and communications make the aged care
system inaccessible
4. A lack of flexibility to respond to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
cultures and ways of understanding health and ageing
5. A lack of choice to use an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander service
provider or staff member.
I note that some of the systemic challenges and barriers that were
consistently raised in consultations are experienced by many older
Australians
and are not unique to older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people (as
referenced in my May update). However, these
barriers affect older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people at higher rates or have a disproportionate
impact. Notwithstanding
this, I believe if we can improve the system to address
the challenges experienced by older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people, we can achieve positive outcomes for all Australians.
An example that clearly illustrates this point is the prevalence and impact
of dementia. The most recent studies show that dementia
is the second overall
leading cause of burden of disease and injury and second leading cause of death
in Australia.
Studies have consistently found that dementia prevalence rates are about
3–5 times as high for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people as the
rates for Australians overall. They are also more likely to develop dementia at
a younger age (in their 30s
A nationwide study of
mortality data between 2006–2014 showed that deaths due to dementia were
57% higher among First Nations
people compared to non-Indigenous Australians,
with the biggest difference occurring among men and those aged less than 75
It is predicted that the number of Australians with dementia
will more than double by 2058. The Australian Research Council Centre
Excellence in Population Ageing Research projected that by 2051, the growth in
the number of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people aged 50 years and
over with dementia will be 4.5 to 5.5 times the 2016 estimated
prevalence.
Evidence of high prevalence, younger onset, and high incidence of dementia,
suggests that without interventions to help moderate the
impact of dementia, its
burden among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people will continue to grow
in coming years.
This is attributed to important risk factors that
present at higher levels among First Nations people, such as head injury,
diabetes, high blood pressure, renal disease, cardiovascular disease,
obesity, hearing loss, childhood stress and trauma, and lower
socioeconomic
Similarly, other barriers identified and explored in more detail in this
report are felt by other older Australians, but disproportionately
impact older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. For example, thin markets that are
exacerbated in remote and very remote
locations have a greater proportionate
impact on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who make up 18.2% of
people in remote
locations and 47.2% of people living in very remote locations.
Additionally, challenges with the complex and digital-focused aged
care system,
including connectivity, language and identity requirements are faced by older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people at proportionately higher
Stolen Generations
’As Stolen Generations survivors age, the urgency grows.’ –
The Healing Foundation.
The forced removal of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander children from their families based on
their race was common government
policy and practice across Australia from the
19th century until the 1970s.
The scale and extent of removals means that very few Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander families are untouched by the impacts of
these policies.
Since 2022, all Stolen Generations survivors are aged 50 or older and
eligible for aged care.
As the Healing Foundation noted in the 2021 report ‘Make Healing
Happen’, Stolen Generations survivors have multiple complex
overlapping needs. Survivors carry a legacy of social and economic disadvantage,
which has a significantly higher impact compared
with Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples of a similar age who were not removed.
The exact numbers of children removed will never be known. As such, there are
limitations to the data available on Stolen Generations
survivors and their
descendants. Analysis conducted by the Australian Institute of Health and
Welfare in 2018–19 likely underrepresents
the number of survivors and
their descendants.
In 2018-19, there were an estimated 33,600 Stolen Generations survivors
nationally. About one in 5 (21%) of all Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
people born before 1972 and still living were removed from their
• Across the nation, a third of all Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander adults are descended from the Stolen Generations.
• In some states and territories, descendants make up more than half of
the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander population.
• New South Wales, Queensland and Western Australia have the largest
populations of Stolen Generations survivors.
• Stolen Generations survivors are more likely to be living in
non-remote areas (81%) reflecting that Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
people predominantly live in non-remote settings.
• Compared with the general non-Indigenous population aged 50 and over,
Stolen Generations survivors aged 50 and over are:
• 6.4 times as likely to live in an overcrowded house
• 4.1 times as likely not to be a homeowner
• 2.7 times as likely to have poor mental health
• 1.6 times as likely to live in a household that could not raise
$2,000 in an emergency.
What Stolen Generations
survivors told me
I heard directly from Stolen Generations survivors. Their stories underscore
the need to urgently train an aged care workforce that
can deliver trauma-aware,
healing informed care from assessment to entry and across the care continuum.
I heard consistently that the assessment process is not safe for survivors,
their descendants and families. Within the current process,
significant risk of further traumatising Stolen Generations survivors that must
be addressed.
Survivors may not have a birth certificate or may have been assigned a
birthday. In many cases they may not know their family’s
medical history.
The rigid identification document requirements for an aged care assessment are
compounded by the current assessment
process, which is largely reliant on a
one-off appointment and likely undertaken by a non-Indigenous assessment
officer. The process
of asking deeply personal questions can itself be
traumatic, and the current assessment process does not allow for more than one
visit to be scheduled. This transactional approach limits the opportunity for a
relationship of trust to be established.
Any reminders of childhood trauma are common triggers for Stolen Generations
survivors, including clinical settings resembling a dormitory
or institution
that they were placed in as a child.
The notion of entering residential aged care is terrifying to Stolen
Generations survivors who told me they would much prefer home
like settings or
support in the community where possible. For example, when I sat with survivors
from the Kinchela Boys Home, they
told me they want to live with their families
and community and be supported by Kinchela Boys Home Aboriginal Corporation
they know and understand me’).
Many Stolen Generations survivors live in urban and regional locations, where
there are few, if any, Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander
community controlled
aged care services and facilities.
In Perth and Canberra, there are
none. Western Australia has some of the highest numbers of survivors, after New
South Wales and
Queensland.
Many mainstream aged care providers are
faith-based, which is traumatic for many Stolen Generations survivors as these
are the very
institutions that played a significant part in their removal from
families as children.
Aged care providers may have Aboriginal residents/participants but not be
aware they are Aboriginal. It then follows that some employees
in mainstream
aged care services do not know the history of the Stolen Generations. Without
this understanding they are unable to
cater for the needs of, or care for,
Stolen Generations survivors, effectively impacting the quality-of-care
survivors receive. Survivors
I met with expressed fear of entering residential
care or allowing ‘strangers’ into their home. This is a significant
barrier and explains why uptake of in-home care supports are low among
I witnessed models of care that would be considered appropriate for
survivors. In nearly every example, these services are being delivered
many of whom receive funding through the NATSIFAC Program. For example, the Jack
Towney Hostel in Gilgandra, central western
New South Wales, provides older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people with access to semi-independent
living facilities resembling
villas or cottages. Assistance is provided with
daily living that allows residents to maintain their independence and age well
a connected, community setting.
I also met survivors residing within a culturally safe residential aged care
setting at Booroongen Djugun Limited. Importantly, this
organisation is
delivering culturally safe aged care in a setting that does not resemble an
institution, but instead feels like home
through its design and access to the
outdoors. While these models of care are encouraging, they were not designed
specifically with
Stolen Generations survivors in mind, but with the need to
support culturally safe care. There is an urgent need for investment in
centred care models including survivor designed residential solutions. This is
especially so for models of care that support
Stolen Generations survivors
living with dementia.
How to support
survivors, and their descendants as they age
Aged care policy and programs cannot afford to continue to take a sporadic
and siloed approach in responding to survivors ageing needs.
Not all survivors
have been able to access financial redress. I heard examples where those who
have received redress have experienced
issues where their redress payments have
been incorrectly included in income and assets means testing, impacting their
packages. According to The Healing Foundation, these situations are
attributed to a lack of clear policy direction available to support
My Aged Care
agents, Services Australia staff and other front-line workers who come into
This example underscores the recommendations I made in my May update, calling
on the Government to develop community facing materials
to assist older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people understand the aged care pathway.
In their 2023-24 pre-Budget submission, The Healing Foundation called for a
multi-year investment that examines culturally responsive
and survivor-led
ageing. The investment would address critical service gaps and identify what is
needed to support the aged care
sector in delivering appropriate trauma-aware,
healing informed aged care for Stolen Generations survivors.
Government should respond to The Healing Foundation, particularly given the
lack of available evidence to respond to this growing
policy challenge. However,
this is only a starting point.
For the current ‘once in a generation’ aged care reforms to
benefit all Australians, Government must consider immediate,
evidence-based
targeted investment in innovative models of care that respond to the aged care
needs of Stolen Generations survivors
and their descendants.
This will require reimagining where and how care is delivered, developed by
survivors in partnership with Stolen Generations organisations.
Generations organisations that have been supporting Stolen Generations survivors
and their descendants are best positioned
to help design and implement these
solutions and need to be resourced to do this.
Within this context, Government has the opportunity to respond to the
thousands of Australians entering the aged care system who are
survivors of
institutional child sexual abuse, as outlined in the Royal Commission into
Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse.
Often referred to as Forgotten
Australians or Care Leavers, these survivors will also benefit from a
trauma-aware, healing informed
aged care system.
The Government has committed to delivering reform that restores dignity to
aged care and ensures that older Australians are treated
with the respect they
deserve. If this stated intent is to be truly realised the new Support at Home
program will need to respond
to the history and experiences of Stolen
Generations survivors and their descendants particularly in the design of an
and Torres Strait Islander pathway.
Culturally unsafe aged
care programs and services
‘The aged care system is neither culturally safe nor is it adequate in
terms of the actual support it provides those who rely
on it as it is based on
an aggregated assessment of need for the entire Australian community and not the
specific social, economic,
health and historical needs of the older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander population’ –
submission.
One of the most disappointing aspects of my consultations was hearing the
number of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
who had first-hand
experiences with interpersonal and structural racism, which continues to be an
ongoing and persistent experience.
Many of the people I met with told me they do
not feel supported to maintain and fulfill their cultural role and
responsibilities.
It is too often the case where older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people do not have the choice to receive aged care through
ACCO, and mainstream organisations are culturally unsafe and ill-equipped to
meet their needs.
‘It’s always been there. The racism, but it’s like the
referendum gave them permission. It’s more visible
since the failed
Western Australia
consultation.
‘People try to disentangle structural racism from personal racism, but
structures are made up of people. People build structures...
individuals hold
racist views. They then embed them in those structures through policies [and]
procedures’ –
Professor Ray Lovett, ANU, evidence to Yoorrook
Justice Commission, 28 May 2024
I listened to stories of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
not being valued or respected across the system, including
by assessors and the
ACQSC. I heard consistently that the lack of cultural safety is the primary
deterrent for older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people not accessing
aged care. It is well established that culture is an important protective factor
the social and emotional wellbeing of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people. Connection to Country, kinship relationships
with community and family,
self-determination and cultural identity are associated with health benefits
– and importantly,
healthy ageing for older people.
Cultural safety is not an add on or something to be considered in addition to
the standard service offering for aged care. It is a
fundamental human right and
minimum standard, central to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people’s sense of self and informs
all aspects of their life experience.
There is no one size fits all approach to ensuring culturally safe care is
offered for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people. The care
provided needs to respond to the unique needs and lived experiences of older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people. For example, Stolen Generations
survivors, veterans and members of the LGBTQIA+ community have unique
experiences that determine
their personal cultural safety and impact on their
ability to age well.
During one of my consultations, I met with a veteran who told me he was not
able to find an aged care provider that could cater to
his needs as an
Aboriginal man and a veteran. He explained that he was made to feel like he
needed to ‘pick one’ and
there was inadequate care or understanding
of his unique needs as somebody who had lived experience of walking in 2 worlds.
Ensuring that all aspects of the aged care sector are culturally safe,
understanding of and responsive to the unique needs of all
people is crucial to
addressing the gap in access and healthy ageing that exists between older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people and the broader population.
The department engaged NATSIAACC in February 2023 to develop a definition of
cultural safety in the context of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander ageing
and aged care, as well as provide advice to the Government on the development of
cultural safety frameworks.
This is something that was positively received by
people I met with, so it is disappointing that this was not included in the new
Aged Care Bill. I will continue to work with NATSIAACC and the department to
progress this.
Connection to
‘Andrea, I want you to tell the Prime Minister that we want to die on
Traditional Owner, Kimberley Region Western Australia
consultation.
‘When they go from community their spirit gets lost’ –
Western Australia consultation.
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples’ connection to Country was the most common and
consistently emphasised theme across
all my consultations, in all locations. I
was asked to work with Government to assist them in understanding and
accommodating for
connection to Country in policies and programs designed for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, particularly older people,
ageing well as directly linked to living – and dying – in place.
‘Connection to Country is intertwined with Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander health and wellbeing and is a cultural determinant
We nurture our culture for our future, and our culture nurtures us,
Lowitja Institute, 2020.
Connection to Country was described to me as an
intrinsic part of ‘who we are’, core to their sense of self, purpose
being. For Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, there is a
fundamental, reciprocal relationship between culture and wellbeing.
‘Country’ represents more than the physical lands, seas or waterways
– it is a holistic concept based on the belief
that all things are
Identity, cultural practices, lore, social systems,
traditions and concepts of spirituality are all drawn from, and depend upon,
connection to Country.
Research shows that this is a powerful
determinant of health and is foundational to older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples’
ability to live, die and age well.
Understanding this, the Royal Commission specifically called for the
Government to ‘make funds available, on application, for
any residential
aged care provider that has Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander residents who
require assistance to retain connection
to their Country’ (Recommendation
53). The ability to offer flexible options to retain connection or reconnect
with Country
is a key strength of the NATSIFAC Program funding model. This same
opportunity should be available to all older Aboriginal and Torres
Islander people in residential care. I fully support the creation of a
designated funding stream to support connection to
Country. I also call on the
Government to deliver the flexible funding streams, outlined in Recommendation
53, as part of my proposed
10-year transformation plan.
Experts, researchers, and health leaders have established the need to
prioritise strengths-based, holistic approaches that reflect
the cultural and
social determinants of health in the design and implementation of aged care
reforms. Since commencing in my role
early this year, I have found that outside
of the NATSIFAC Program, the cultural determinants of health for Aboriginal and
Strait Islander people have not been consistently incorporated into aged
care policy design. This is not due to a lack of available
evidence to draw
upon. Beyond a health and ageing well perspective, everyone I met with
emphasised the importance of dying well,
or what they considered a good return
to the Dreamtime. For many older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people,
there is a strong
desire – if not a cultural imperative – to die on
Country. The thought of dying away from their family and Country can
traumatic and culturally undesirable. In different contexts, dying on Country
may mean refusing to travel for treatment (e.g.
dialysis); not travelling to
access palliative care services (where not available or sufficient locally);
wishing to return ‘home’
(either current or traditional), if not
already there.
‘People would rather live with pain and stress than leave country for
respite or residential care’
– Northern Territory
consultation.
While the choice for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to
die on Country is the ideal outcome for communities, there
are many practical
barriers, including local workforce (e.g. lack of skill and confidence in
providing palliative care), equipment,
facilities, transport, telephone service,
access to medicines, carer supports and access to specialised
It is imperative that governments better understand Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander ways of approaching health and ageing well
as a continuum that
encompasses dying well. This includes better understanding the end of life needs
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people, and how it can support greater
culturally safe palliative care to respond to those needs.
Cultural Safety Training
‘We have the right to be Aboriginal in this
Elder, South Australia consultations.
A review by the
Australian Commission on Safety and Quality in Health Care found one of the most
important factors for safe, high-quality
and culturally responsive aged care was
cultural safety and responsiveness training for all workers.24 The call for
education and
training to improve cultural safety was identified as an urgent
priority from First Nations and mainstream organisations including
ACCPA, Health
Services Union (HSU) and Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation (ANMF).
Consultations also highlighted the importance of intersecting systems being
able to deliver culturally safe care, particularly health
services. Submissions
from health-related organisations (Australian & New Zealand Society for
Geriatric Medicine, HSU, ANMF)
stressed the importance of improved cultural
competence for health professionals and trainees.
Despite the clearly understood need for culturally safe service delivery and
training, many individuals and organisations reported
that their providers were
not understanding or meeting the needs of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people. For example,
the Victorian Aboriginal Health Service (VAHS)
submitted that its clients ‘consistently advise VAHS that their current
do not provide culturally appropriate services, nor do they understand
the needs of our community. They do not recognise the importance
of returning to
Country as part of spiritual and emotional wellbeing.’
The new Aged Care Quality Standards create a higher level of accountability
for mainstream providers to understand and deliver on
the needs of older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and acknowledge the need for a
culturally responsive workforce. However,
there is still a long way to go.
The emphasis that the ACQSC is placing on the sector in improving cultural
safety is a step in the right direction. However, the ACQSC
must prioritise its
own cultural competency to ensure its own workforce are appropriately trained in
assessing the cultural safety
of providers. The ACQSC must also ensure its
workforce is representative of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. I
continue to hold the ACQSC accountable on its own cultural competency.
At a minimum, people working in aged care need training in how to deliver
trauma-aware, healing informed, culturally safe services.
Funding of $5.3
million over 4 years was committed in the 2023–24 Budget to embed cultural
safety, trauma-aware and healing-informed
care principles and training across
all aged care services. The 2024 Progress Report by the Office of the
Inspector-General of Aged
Care assessed progress against the Royal Commission
call for mandatory training for staff in cultural safety, dementia, palliative
and end of life care.
While training in each is being delivered, there are currently no
requirements for mandatory provision, although the Department has
advised that
the strengthened Aged Care Quality Standards (quality standards) will include
requirements for providers to provide
workers with training and supervision to
support their role
. – 2024 Progress Report by the Office of the
Inspector- General of Aged Care.
Publicly available data
staff that have completed cultural
safety training. However, it is noted that in
2023, only 36% of aged care services surveyed reported delivering any cultural
training in the previous twelve months.
Training must be mandated and rolled out as a matter of urgency for all
people working in the aged care system.
Complex and
non-inclusive language and communications make the aged care system inaccessible
for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people
‘The System is deaf to my needs’
– Northern Territory
Consultation.
The need for targeted
information and consultation
In many of the communities I visited, I found there was a lack of knowledge
or information about aged care services, eligibility requirements,
entitlements
and access. One group of Aboriginal women I met with were not aware they could
access aged care services from age 50.
I am concerned about the lack of readily
accessible and relatable information to older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people,
their families, carers and communities.
For many Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, the concept of aged
care is still one premised on ‘residential care’.
However, with the
emphasis on programs to support older people to stay at home or in their
community, residential care no longer
needs to be the only option. For many
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people I met with, residential care
is the predominant
or only care type available. The department must initiate a
community awareness program targeted to older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people, their families, and communities to increase awareness of the
aged care system, eligibility requirements, and the
This should include community facing materials that assist older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander
people to understand the aged care pathway and the
support available.
It is a known fact that older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
are not accessing aged care at a rate commensurate with
their need, but still
there is very little proactive engagement by the department to inform, educate
and encourage people to access
the care they are eligible for.
Where consultation is undertaken, I heard that this is often undertaken in a
way that feels rushed, insincere and tokenistic due to
a pre-determined outcome.
Further, communities rarely hear back about how their feedback has been
captured, interpreted or incorporated
into policy or program design.
Department’s insufficient consultation with communities
A particular example I received a lot of feedback on was the process for the
public consultation on the Exposure Draft of the new
Aged Care Act
. Consistent
to understand, review, or engage with
the Exposure Draft of the new
To illustrate, the Exposure Draft of the new
Aged Care Act
was released on 14
December 2023 and was initially open for feedback until 16 February 2024. The
timing of the release prior to Christmas/New
Year shutdown and during the school
holiday period did not consider the availability of organisations to review
lengthy, complex
legislative material.
The department organised and hosted a roundtable as part of the schedule of
consultation activities on the Exposure Draft of the new
Aged Care Act
to focus on the interest of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander advocates and
providers. The invitation for the roundtable
was sent 6 working days prior to
The feedback from stakeholders and consumers is that the department did not
sufficiently plan, communicate, or coordinate with the
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander aged care sector, its peak body NATSIAACC and other key
stakeholders, older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people, their families
or communities to empower communities to provide informed feedback on this
piece of legislation.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander specific engagements organised by the
department were not effectively promoted. Several ACCO
CEOs told me they were
not aware of consultation opportunities as these were only published on the
department’s website, therefore
were not accessed by the target audience.
The lack of communication was also evident in the low numbers of Aboriginal and
Strait Islander attendees at workshops, for example Bairnsdale, Victoria.
The department needs to actively promote programs available to support older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to age well,
and critically, make
sure that communities are made aware of any changes to aged care and its impact.
In the context of the significant
reforms that will come with the introduction
Aged Care Act
, it is the responsibility of the department to ensure
that communities are appropriately informed. I expect to see a suite of
communications
materials and a consultation strategy to ensure that older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and their families are aware
upcoming changes.
My Aged Care
People I met with consistently reported ‘giving up’ when
accessing My Aged Care because it is ‘complex, confusing
overwhelming’. The system was not designed with older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people in mind, with what feels
like no consideration
given to alternative pathways to engage with the system. There are critical gaps
in awareness of My Aged Care
and the services available to eligible older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. There is widespread confusion
older people are expected to do to access aged care and the role
played by different navigation supports. At a gathering of the OPAN
members, non-Indigenous members expressed their difficulties with My Aged Care,
reinforcing that this issue is not limited
to Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people.
I am pleased that the Office of the Inspector-General of Aged Care is
undertaking a Review of the Administration of My Aged Care.
I was grateful for
the opportunity to provide a response to this Review and for the Office of the
Inspector-General’s ongoing
engagement and interest in older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people’s experiences navigating the system. I
will continue
to work with the Inspector-General’s office to ensure
Challenges identified by an Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander outreach
officer in northeast New South Wales
I had the opportunity to listen to the experience of an Aboriginal Outreach
Worker, Ms Julie* who has extensive experience working
across the health,
disability and aged care sectors across the New South Wales region. Ms Julie
granted permission for her story
to be shared.
In her role, Ms Julie engages regularly with older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people who are eligible for aged care services.
Ms Julie advised
that older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in the region simply do
not know about or how to access
My Aged Care for aged care assessments until
they reach crisis point or when they are admitted to hospital. Then, due to the
of navigating the My Aged Care system, often, older people will
‘opt out’ of the process before they even access aged
care services.
Once the older person has disconnected from the process, they are often only
reconnected if they are re-admitted to
This inability to engage with the aged care system is due to the complexity,
inaccessibility and use of bureaucratic language of the
My Aged Care system.
Challenges identified by an Elder Care Support Coordinator
Ms Sarah* manages a team of Elder Care Support workers, funded under the
Elder Care Support Program. Ms Sarah also granted permission
for her story to be
Ms Sarah told me about the difficulties her staff experience as Elder Care
Support navigators in understanding and navigating the
My Aged Care digital
portal. As part of their daily role, navigators should be able to check on the
progress of an older person’s
aged care assessment through the My Aged
Care digital portal. However, Ms Sarah reported some of her staff were waiting
be granted access to the digital portal and were relying on calling
the My Aged Care contact centre to get information on their clients.
also advised that some Elder Care Support navigators have been incorrectly
advised that their Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander clients are not
eligible for services, incorrectly citing they need to be 65 and over.
Like my experiences, Ms Sarah also reported a stark lack of awareness of My
Aged Care and how to access the aged care system. Older
people, and their
families, are not aware of how the system works until they have an acute need
for aged care services. Many older
people supported by her staff are unaware of
what they are entitled to. Ms Sarah expressed a wish for better educational
that explained, in language or plain English, what My Aged Care can
offer older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Assessments
‘We are jumping through many hoops to access a simple aged care
– South Australia
Consultation.
I heard far too many examples of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people struggling with complex and lengthy processes
to access an assessment and
then aged care services. People are often unaware of their responsibilities to
navigate through the process,
further exacerbated by long wait times where the
older person can lose track of what they need to do. Wait times for assessments
in rural and remote areas routinely exceed 8 months. Even in metro areas, older
people can be waiting many months for an assessment
or to be connected to aged
care services.
Older Australians should not have to wait several months for an assessment or
package. We must prioritise this aspect of aged care
support to ensure that they
are able to get on with their everyday living without the stress of waiting and
hoping that support will
arrive at some stage; not after or when they are close
to passing.
The experience of many of the older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people I met with was one of perpetual waiting. At first,
they need to wait for
an assessment. Then, even after an assessment has been completed, the wait time
to receive a package is excessively
long. When a package has been granted, any
equipment that an older person requires needs to be assessed and approved by an
occupational
therapist (OT), even for very minor assistive equipment. I heard
personal stories from individuals who were waiting several months
for approval
of basic, essential equipment like a commode chair, walker, or tilt kettle. This
wait is exacerbated by the requirement
for an OT assessment that is compromised
by a limited OT workforce.
In my May update, I recommended that equipment of this nature should be
approved by a medical practitioner. I maintain this recommendation
and continue
to work with the department on this as it is unacceptable that there are such
long wait times for simple, low cost and
low risk equipment that is necessary
for older Australians to remain in the home and maintain independence and
Lengthy Assessment Processes
In Tasmania, I met a 93-year-old gentleman who at the time had been waiting
more than 6 months for an assessment to go from a level
2 to a level 3 package.
This gentleman said “Andrea, I will die before I get my assessment”.
This gentleman waited another
4 months for that assessment, and only in
September was he allocated a package. I have followed up regularly since we met
early April this year to see whether there had been any progress with
his case. During my most recent engagement, I learned he has
now entered the
end-of-life stage.
Loss of dignity in waiting for simple, necessary equipment
I met a lady who was on a home care package and required a toilet lift. She
was expected to wait an unreasonably long time for the
toilet lift and when she
asked what she was meant to do in the meantime, she was told simply that she
would need to wear nappies
until it arrives.
Many older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people expressed distress
and helplessness when relaying their experiences with the
aged care assessment
I was particularly concerned by the examples I heard of culturally
insensitive assessments. Assessments are conducted by the hour,
either face to
face or over the phone. Many older people feel vulnerable discussing their aged
care needs and it takes time to build
relationships and trust – this is
not restricted to older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. I heard
the same concerns
from non-Indigenous people that they felt that after waiting
so long to get an assessment done, the actual assessment was rushed,
enough time was taken to understand them and their needs. More time needs to be
factored for assessments for all older people,
with stronger emphasis given to
face to face interactions.
I was asked to raise the need to urgently introduce a dedicated Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander assessment workforce, improved
transitions from
hospital to aged care through timely, culturally safe assessments, and the
expansion of information and advocacy
supports to build relationships and
develop trust.
There is a significant disparity in wait times between hospital and
community-based assessments. Many people ask me if they could
get access to an
assessment so quickly in hospital, why should they be expected to wait so long
for an assessment at home. To realise
the new aged care reform ambition of
allowing older people to remain at home longer, priority needs to be given to
ensure timelier
community-based assessments are undertaken.
The impact of rushed and culturally unsafe assessments is felt deeply by
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. Due to
the ongoing impacts
of colonisation, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are mistrustful of
government and government services
and will often not divulge everything when
asked about their needs, for fear they will be put in a residential aged care
from family, community, and Country.
I understand there is a commitment to commence a staged roll-out of a
dedicated Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander assessment workforce
2025. This is a positive step, which has significant interest and support from
the sector. However, I will follow the progress
of this commitment with keen
interest as I understand it has already been delayed previously and details of
how this will be implemented
have not been made clear.
It was also recommended to me that ACCOs should be authorised to approve
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people’s
access to aged care
services and supports without a prior assessment, as is currently the case under
the NATSIFAC Program. I am supportive
of this recommendation given the
significant delays and impact of culturally unsafe assessment processes.
However, as I will detail
further below, there is a lack of ACCOs delivering
aged care, with uneven geographical coverage. Consideration should be given to
how older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, who do not have access
to an ACCO, could access the same services.
I am also concerned that there is currently no requirement for people using
specialist assessment tools to determine the needs of
older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people to be trained in how to use the tools sensitively
and accurately. I understand
the Good Spirit Good Life (GSGL) and the Kimberley
Indigenous Cognitive Assessment tool (KICA-COG) are culturally appropriate tools
available to assessors as part of the new Integrated Assessment Tool (IAT), it
remains unclear how the department has responded to
lessons learned from the
final report of the IAT live trial, released in 2023, which acknowledged that
assessors require additional
training for assessments with Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander clients.
I heard examples where assessors who have not received training have provided
inaccurate assessment results, requiring re-assessment
of the client. This
outcome impacts on older people, is an avoidable cost to the Government and
unnecessarily delays access to care.
Digital Platform and
A key barrier faced by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people accessing
My Aged Care to register for aged care services is the
overreliance on the
digital platform and contact centre. Limited mobile coverage and unreliable or
prohibitively expensive connections
make it significantly more difficult for
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to access the main points of
the aged care system, the My Aged Care digital platform and contact
Strong or consistent internet connection is not available in all communities
I had the opportunity to discuss the key barriers to accessing aged care for
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people with
the CEO of an aged care
facility in a remote far North Queensland community. This CEO explained that for
her and community, one of
the biggest concerns was the complex application
process and internet connectivity. In this community, it was common for internet
coverage to be so poor that even the health clinic would need to shut down. In
communities such as this – and others I visited
– where older people
are not IT savvy and have unreliable or unavailable internet connectivity, the
highly digitised aged care
system represents an almost insurmountable barrier.
Aged care entry points, particularly My Aged Care, assume English as a first
language and use complex and inaccessible language. Many
older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people and their families find the language on the My
Aged Care website too complex to
be useful in helping them navigate the system.
While some resources available on the My Aged Care website have been
translated to Arrernte, Pitjantjatjara, Torres Strait Creole
(Yumplatok) and
Warlpiri, these resources cover only a minority of the information available in
English. There are only 4 resources
translated into each of these Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander languages. However, there are 23 resources translated
other languages available on the My Aged Care website.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who speak one of 16 available
languages can also access an interpreting service when
they call My Aged Care.
However, the awareness of this translating service is minimal, and the
department advises that the uptake
of this service has been very low.
Identity requirements
that many older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people cannot meet
Another significant barrier I heard was of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people not having the necessary identification
documents to register
with My Aged Care. This is a particularly fraught issue for survivors of the
Stolen Generations, some of whom
have only received their birth certificate at
the age of 70.
Between 1996 and 2012, around 1 in 6 Aboriginal births in Western Australia
were not registered.
A 2014 report from Queensland Health reported
that 15-18% of Aboriginal children aged 2 to 4 years did not have their birth
registered.
Without being registered at birth, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people do not have the standard identification documentation
required to access
schooling, healthcare, government benefits, vote, or obtain a driver’s
‘At the age of 70, I just received my birth certificate’
– Elders Roundtable, University of Western Australia, 11 June
Co-Contributions
‘Our Elders...have no choice but to continue going without the help
they need to stay independent at home’
– Aged care worker
submission.
Many older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people continue to have caring responsibilities for family members and
have cultural
obligations that extend to sharing resources. Older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people can access aged care services from
an earlier age
but cannot access the Age Pension or their superannuation earlier, leaving
people aged under 65 years, who are reliant
on lower rate income support
payments, worse off financially.
One of the most frequently raised concerns related to fees and
co-contributions, which I heard are a significant barrier and deterrent
people accessing the aged care support they need.
The Final Report of the Aged Care Taskforce, released on 12 March 2024 made a
range of recommendations. As I wrote in my May update,
I am concerned with the
assumptions underpinning the final Taskforce report, which presume that the
majority of older people will
have access to wealth, superannuation and home
equity to ‘enable them to make contributions for services to enjoy a
experience in aged care’.
While this may be true for many of the of ‘Baby Boomer’
generation entering the aged care system, this does not reflect
the reality for
most older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, many of whom have
experienced limited opportunity for intergenerational
wealth creation due to the
ongoing impacts of colonisation and race-based policies that were in place until
The Taskforce recommended higher co-contributions for everyday living
supports, as outlined in the inclusion and exclusion principles
for Support at
and Torres Strait Islander people
who currently access lower-level services at a
high rate and are less likely to access the more highly subsidised clinical
Currently, 14% of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander aged care
service users access low-level services through the CHSP, compared
accessing coordinated HCPs.
In my May update, I recommended the Government implement tailored pathways
for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people that acknowledges
historic and
ongoing economic disadvantage. I maintain this position. The Government should
ensure that implementing the Taskforce’s
recommendations does not
exacerbate the current disparity in access rates. I am working with the
department to develop safety net
settings in response to the proposed
introduction of increased co-contributions.
It is unclear what modelling or economic impact analysis has been undertaken
on how the potential implementation of this recommendation
would impact older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. I am concerned with the overall
lack of Indigenous-specific data
and evidence available to inform the design of
practical policy approaches to support older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
people’s aged care needs.
More broadly, I have found that there is little publicly available
information about what evidence the Government is using to make
decisions about
the broader aged care reforms. For accountability and to better understand the
reforms, this should be available.
Lack of flexibility to
respond to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander cultures and ways of
understanding health and ageing
Aged care policies and programs need to take account of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander ways of knowing and being. This includes
communities’
collectivist approach, holistic approach, cultural lore, and protocols. For
example, intergenerational households,
cultural roles based on gender or
kinship, and the place of ceremony and Sorry Business.
Older people are knowledge holders, and often play active roles in their
communities as caregivers and leaders across a range of matters
relevant to the
aspirations of their communities. Aged care needs to support older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people to
continue playing this role. Culturally,
some roles cannot be carried out by others until the Elder and knowledge holder
pass to the
Dreamtime. Enabling Elders to continue to support their families and
communities benefits all. It benefits the many organisations,
governments, that rely on Elders to contribute to their activities.
Flexible funding
Many providers I met with raised the issue of inflexible funding not meeting
the needs of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people. There are many
issues with the current aged care funding arrangements, which limit the delivery
of aged care services to
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
This includes rigid and highly structured funding, inadequate funds to meet the
actual costs of delivering cultural care and high administrative burden.
Flexibility in program funding improves providers’ ability to meet
changing needs within existing funding envelopes. This was
demonstrated during
the COVID-19 pandemic response when CHSP rules were loosened. The resulting
flexibility supported improved localised
care, reflecting individual need. I was
told since the return to tighter funding to post-COVID arrangements, there is no
flexibility
to meet individual or community needs.
During the COVID-19 pandemic response, a provider could move 100% of their
funding between service types, with blanket approval given
from the Community
Grants Hub; there was no requirement to seek variations. This demonstrates that
more tailored service delivery
can be offered when providers have the
flexibility to do so. There was no increase in funding, and the arrangement
allowed flexibly
within the existing funding envelope to meet the older
person’s and community’s need.
From a provider perspective, a guaranteed flexible, block-funded model, such
as the current NATSIFAC Program would provide stability
for service provision,
older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people. This helps to strengthen the
ACCO sector, build the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander workforce and
culturally safe, person-centred care to older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people.
For older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, this means access to
care that reflects a holistic approach to health and
ageing, incorporating
culture, Country, family, community, language, emotional and physical health,
and spirituality. It includes
access to transport options to help those living
in rural, regional, and remote areas to travel to and from major towns for
appointments, or cultural/social activities to stay connected to
One of the most common comments made to me was that many of the issues
encountered by communities would be addressed if they had a
bus to transport
people to appointments or bring them together for activities. The current
funding structure and siloed funding for
services leads to illogical and
seemingly unintended perverse outcomes.
Inflexible and uncoordinated funding
In regional New South Wales, I met with a group who told me about various
streams of government funding going into their community,
which is not
coordinated. I was told that many of the issues for their older people related
to getting to appointments, or the hospital
which was a 3-hour drive away. In
this community, people could be taken to hospital by ambulance, but there would
be no way to get
hospital gown with no way of getting back to community. The community
that a bus would solve some of their problems, and they had received funding for
operational costs for a bus and salary for
a driver, but they were unable to
secure funding for the actual bus.
Another example that I continued to hear throughout my consultations, which
was highlighted further in many of the submissions I received,
was home care
packages excluding the purchase of essential whitegoods. In remote communities,
many older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people do not have a
refrigerator or washing machine. This impacts their ability to suitably store
medication, secure food
and have clean clothes.
I have been told that purchasing items such as these are not the
responsibility of governments and there is no scope to change that.
I have seen
first-hand the lack of flexibility detrimentally impacting on the health of
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people and their ability to age
All governments are signatories to the National Agreement, which commits
government to working differently with Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
people to improve outcomes. However, what I have observed is that outside of a
small number of NATSIFAC services,
a consistent, rigid, one size fits all
approach is applied. The example of purchasing a refrigerator or washing machine
from an existing
package would add no additional cost, but the flexibility would
make an enormous difference to the quality of life for older Aboriginal
Torres Strait Islander people.
I also heard specifically from older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people and providers, and in multiple submissions, that
the aged care system
should avoid replicating the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) model
of individualised, fee-for-service
‘The NDIS’s complicated, segmented nature contrasts with the
holistic approach of the Aboriginal Community Controlled
sector. This was
recognised in both the Royal Commission into Violence, Abuse, Neglect and
Exploitation of People and the Independent
Review into the National Disability
Insurance Scheme whereby recommendations included the need for alternative
funding models for
Aboriginal communities due to the current system’s
inadequacy.’
– AHCWA submission.
Lack of choice to use
Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander service providers or staff
‘[A] lack of culturally safe providers often means Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people need to choose between services
that are not
culturally safe or not accessing care and support at all’
NACCHO submission.
In its Final Report, the Royal
Commission emphasised the importance of providing Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people with
meaningful choice, between mainstream aged care providers
with improved cultural capability and awareness, and providers who are
predominantly Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander-run and staffed and whose
services are directed to Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people. Based on
the current service offering, there are several barriers that need to be
addressed to realise this ambition.
Thin Markets
‘Thin markets are particularly common in rural and remote areas where
there are fewer participants and distances are greater,
but can exist across
Australia, including metropolitan areas. Other factors that can cause a thin
market include a shortage of providers
able to meet specific health needs or
cultural needs, such as First Nations, homeless, LGBTQIA+, or culturally and
linguistically
diverse older people.
’ – 2024 Aged Care Taskforce:
Final report of the Aged Care Taskforce.
The thin market setting is a significant barrier to service delivery for aged
care. Thin markets are particularly evident in remote
and very remote
geographical locations, where there are smaller numbers of people accessing
services. The Government cannot rely
on mainstream competitive markets to
provide quality services in these environments. In thin market settings, where
service provision
is costly due to geographical challenges, issues of inadequate
funding are exacerbated. This is broadly understood by Government
and there are
initiatives designed to assist with this. These include, the Modified Monash
Model (MMM) to classify the remoteness
of a location, the NATSIFAC Program and
subsidies that are made available for certain remoteness levels under the
Australian National
Aged Care Classification (AN-ACC) in residential care and
the Viability Supplement in the HCP Program.
Providers expressed concerns that the MMM is a flawed application in
determining need and cost for aged care services. I heard several
examples of
rigid MMM classification attributed to locations based on resident population
and distance to towns and cities, which
do not account for nuance or local
circumstances, disadvantage some service providers.
The Aged Care Taskforce also identified that thin markets exist where there
is not the quality or choice of services to meet specific
needs. The aged care
system has been criticised for not adequately addressing the specific needs of
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander communities, which conceptualise
health at a community level rather than an individual one.
crucial that Government understands thin markets exist in urban and regional
areas, where older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people do not have
access to culturally safe services, or a meaningful choice between mainstream
and Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander service providers.
This can be even more concerning for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people who identify as LGBTQIA+. I heard examples
of people who felt
that they needed to go ’back into the closet’ because they did not
feel comfortable expressing their
full selves noting that many aged care
services are provided by faith-based organisations.
On the matter of the inadequacy of funding to meet actual costs, this was
raised at several consultations and in multiple submissions.
It was most
commonly raised in the context of the Government not understanding the true
costs of delivering culturally safe, trauma-aware
and healing informed aged care
services. I understand the Independent Health and Aged Care Pricing Authority
(IHACPA) is looking
into this and is seeking to better understand the true costs
of providing culturally safe aged care. It is important that IHACPA
context specific aged care services and does not conflate cultural safety and
remoteness, as many older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people live in
urban and regional locations and on the east coast.
At the time of writing, I am preparing a submission to the pricing inquiry
and working with IHACPA to relay what I am hearing from
the sector.
‘Where there are no primary health services, we know people become
sicker and frailer quicker.’
– Victoria consultation
Providers with more Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander employees deliver more culturally safe aged care that meets the
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. This is a crucial
factor in improving outcomes for older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
people and ensuring they are supported to age well. It follows that there is an
urgent need to significantly expand
the Aboriginal and Torres Strait aged care
workforce. The Government should pursue opportunities to facilitate, support and
incentivise
recruitment, training and retention of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander staff in all parts of the aged care system.
I understand there is a First Nations Aged Care Workforce Implementation Plan
being developed, which will sit under the Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander
Health Workforce Strategic Framework and Implementation Plan 2021-2031 as well
as the outcomes of the
National Care and Support Economy Strategy. I also
understand this workforce plan will identify and anticipate Aboriginal and
Strait Islander training and workforce needs in the aged care sector in
the immediate and long-term future and include targets for
training and
employment for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and avenues to
promote aged care employment pathways.
This is encouraging and I will continue to engage with the department as this
workforce plan is developed to ensure that it is also
informed by feedback I
received on workforce issues in the care economy. However, this should not be
undertaken as an internal process
without consultation from the sector and key
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander representatives.
Given the Government and department are fully aware of the workforce
challenges, I would encourage a conversation with the NIAA who
administer the
Remote Jobs and Economic Development (RJED) program. The purpose of RJED is to
create meaningful jobs with fair pay
and conditions. It is also intended to
support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to become job-ready to take
up positions
in community. Based on what I have heard, job creation in the aged
care sector would be ideal for this program. I will continue to
engage with NIAA
as RJED is developed, which will hopefully lead to job creation and additional
support and training to address,
in part, workforce issues.
Despite the clear understanding of the need to expand the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander aged care workforce, some of the key
concerns raised in
my consultations have related to the disproportionate impact of some workforce
initiatives on the ACCO sector,
NATSIFAC providers and/or remote
communities.
The lack of available workforce to provide sufficient care in both the
in-home and residential aged care settings has been raised
as a significant
factor in all regions visited to date. The sector reported concerns that the
requirement for NATSIFAC providers
to have a Registered Nurse on site 24/7 from
1 July 2024 will have a significant impact on the sustainability of many
services, particularly
those in remote and very remote communities. There are
current services paying exorbitant rates for agency nursing staff, which are
exacerbated in regional and remote areas.
Concerns were also raised about the introduction of a national worker
registration scheme that will apply consistent worker screening
checks across
both the aged care and National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) systems.
Whilst the national worker screening scheme
will bring consistency to the
variable aged care worker screening and enable worker mobility across aged care
and the NDIS, I heard
concerns this scheme will remove providers’ current
discretion to employ workers with low grade criminal convictions.
The introduction of this scheme could disproportionately and negatively
impact Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander providers and
potential workers
given the reality of over-incarceration and contact with the justice system. The
new system may inhibit the recruitment
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
workers and impact providers who have exercised discretion to employ workers
with low-grade
convictions. The Royal Commission proposed that providers retain
their discretion to employ Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people with
criminal records.
It is recognised that culturally safe care is more likely to be achieved when
aged care services are delivered to older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander
people by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander workers. However, it is likely
that adoption of the more
rigorous NDIS worker screening process will create new
barriers for the recruitment and retention of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander aged care workers.
The current aged care screening process allows for a level of discretion that
enables providers to employ Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people who
have an aptitude for aged care work and deploy mitigation strategies as needed.
This is crucial in tight labour
markets where an Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander aged care workforce is critical to culturally safe care. While
thresholds for automatic exclusion are desirable, a risk management
approach to less serious offences, such as that currently used
NATSIFAC Program, gives providers the scope they need to draw on the fullest
range of prospective workers from communities
they are seeking to work in.
The centralised worker screening processes will provide for some risk
assessment, but it will be dependent on the workers and providers
them to make the case. This is likely to be an alienating process and may not
translate to successful outcomes if centralised
decision makers based in capital
cities lack cultural capability and an understanding of the historical,
geographical and cultural
context in which applicants have lived their lives and
who wish to work in aged care.
As a strong and expanded Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander aged care
workforce is one of the most significant factors to ensuring
culturally safe,
trauma-aware and healing informed aged care, this should be a core element of my
proposed 10-year transformation
plan. Of course, it should cross reference and
work with existing strategies and frameworks but should be a fundamental
consideration
for how the system transforms to better meet the current and
future needs of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Supporting young people to work in aged care
I spoke with a young woman working at an aged care centre I visited to
understand why she sought a career in aged care, and how we
can get more young
people into caring roles. She told me she had a choice of working in aged care
or childcare, but she chose aged
care because she likes caring for the Elders
and talking to and learning from them. We talked about her aspirations, and she
that she wanted to move from a red shirt (environmental team) to a
blue shirt (personal care team), because she gets in trouble for
spending too
long with Elders, but if she gets a blue shirt, she will get to spend more time
with them, talking and learning. She
said being around Elders and learning from
them was so important to her and this is where she wanted to be, “here,
in this place”.
Building the ACCO Sector
‘Currently, it seems the Commonwealth would like ACCHS to deliver aged
care services, which we welcome, yet there have been
no practical changes that
– Aboriginal Health
Council of Western Australia (AHCWA) Submission
To feel secure and obtain culturally safe services, many Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people prefer to receive services from
ACCOs and from
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander staff. However, there are currently not
enough ACCO aged care providers, nor
enough Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander staff members working in the aged care sector.
As of March 2024, there were 110 ACCOs delivering aged care services across
Almost 75% of these services were in New South Wales (25
providers), Queensland (24) and Victoria (21). Western Australia has
comparatively
few ACCOs providing aged care services. Perth and Canberra are the
only 2 capital cities without an ACCO delivering aged care services.
‘There are insufficient incentives for Aboriginal community-controlled
organisations to become aged care providers’
In submissions, ACCOs commonly identified
factors that make it challenging for them to expand into aged care services.
These include
pricing models not reflective of the true costs of delivering
culturally safe care; there are no incentives; a lack of ongoing funding
capability development; and challenges recruiting a sufficiently qualified
workforce. These issues will likely be raised, and
I expect they will be
considered, as part of IHACPA’s pricing inquiry if thin markets in
regional and remote areas are to be
The additional obligations under the new
Aged Care Act
, such as the
requirement for NATSIFAC providers to be registered will likely impede the
ability for ACCOs to enter the market. The
significant cost of accreditation, in
addition to the time and resource implications to meet the accreditation
requirements, is a
significant barrier for ACCOs delivering aged care services.
Noting ACCOs already undergo accreditation for health services, a more
streamlined approach to accreditation may be more attractive to ACCOs
potentially entering the market.
The path for ACCOs to become aged care providers is long and expensive.
The Perth metropolitan area has around 7,800 Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait
Islander people aged over 50, but only 8.6% of this eligible
population access
aged care programs, which is the lowest rate of any capital
Bindjareb Elders Centre – Mandurah.
In 2023, the first (and currently only) Aboriginal Aged Care Service in the
south-west Western Australia region, Bindjareb Aged Care,
was launched in
Mandurah after the South-West Aboriginal Medical Service (SWAMS) became an
accredited aged care provider. Whilst
this is a critical, and celebrated
milestone, it is important to note that Bindjareb is not located in Perth, but
rather, in Mandurah,
approximately 72km south of Perth, or one hour drive by
car. Older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people who reside in Perth
unable to access culturally safe aged care services, despite the significant
eligible population and projected growth.
Established in 1997, SWAMS is an ACCO that has a strong, proven record of
accomplishment of delivering essential, high-quality, culturally
safe health
services. Its main headquarters and clinic are located in Bunbury with outreach
clinics throughout Wardandi Noongar Boodjar.
SWAMS is an organisation with
strong capacity and governance, deep experience and a proven track record of
delivering services that
have improved the health outcomes and lives of
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people living in the region.
Despite this, I heard from SWAMS during my consultation, that the process to
become an approved aged care provider was prohibitive.
Overall, the process took
12 months, with administrative processes that required dedicated resourcing.
They received and completed
3 separate requests for information from the ACQSC,
each taking 3 months to assess and were required to draft 157 policies to meet
the accreditation process.
The department acknowledges the critical role of growing the number of ACCOs
delivering aged care. However, there is a disconnect
between this policy
position and a strategic, evidence-based funding and governance support approach
to achieve this policy intent.
‘The transition towards aged care service delivery remains unfeasible
for many ACCHS, primarily due to insufficient funding
that fails to acknowledge
the genuine costs associated with expanding services beyond contemporary primary
healthcare. Without adequate
financial support and capacity-building assistance,
this endeavour remains out of reach for many’
– AHCWA Submission
Providing support to ACCO boards to manage risk and
progress with confidence will go some way to assist. NACCHO recommends a program
of support like that used to increase the number of ACCOs providing disability
services. The program could provide small grants,
information sharing, and
access to aged care business expertise. Other submissions called for greater
transparency in sector support
programs and for these to be developed in
partnership with the sector.
The need for continued and expanded government investment in infrastructure
was evident through consultations. The standard of infrastructure
and vehicles
in some areas I visited was extremely poor. Support is needed in metropolitan
and regional locations, where the majority
of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people live, and in remote and very remote areas where an ACCO may be
the only organisation
that is servicing the population. In remote communities, I
heard specific issues including the lack of staff accommodation, which
significant barrier to attracting a workforce, and funding rules that prohibit
the purchasing of vehicles. For many of these
areas, vehicles cannot be leased
so the only option is to purchase, but without operational support through
funding arrangements
this too is not an option.
The need for a
coordinated approach
Inflexible and uncoordinated funding
During one of my visits to a remote community, I was picked up from the
airport by the coordinator of an aged care centre in their
bus. On reaching for
the door of this bus, I noticed there was no door. I also noticed there were
mats on the floor, and after making
enquiries, I was told these were to hide the
fact the bus had no floor. In addition, the bus was turned on by a makeshift
short, the bus is extremely dangerous and un-road worthy. The aged care
worker is concerned that if they did not have the bus, they
would not have
access to a replacement and the service needed this bus to transport their
Elders to necessary appointments and services.
My concerns about the bus have been raised with the provider, who was very
aware of the bus situation, as are the department’s
Local Network and
First Nations Aged Care Branch, as well as the Regional Manager from the NIAA.
Attempts by the Local Network to
get support for a replacement bus have failed.
I have shared this story at several forums I have spoken at recently as an
of the circumstances some older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people experience. On every occasion the reaction has been
one of shock and
disbelief, with many individuals asking how they can help and offering to
fundraise for a new bus for the community.
This is extremely kind and generous
but should not be necessary. Governments, both Commonwealth and the
that this is unacceptable and intervene.
In the same community, the ladies at the centre told me that when community
floods during the wet season, they stand on the balcony
and fish, then the
crocodiles swim past. As the water rises, so too does the sewage. They told me
floorboards missing, so they put floor mats
down to make sure they do not walk that way and fall through. A question was put
by an Elder: ‘I bet your house isn’t like this?’. This
Elder is correct. My house is not like this and nor should
This community is also a well-known fishing location. Unfortunately for the
local community, the food from the community store and
fuel are often sold out
before community can get to it because visitors buy up. The cost of food was
outrageous, which was obvious
with the prominent sign reading ‘no photos
of food to be taken in the shop’. During times of increased tourism,
are further increased to a point that community struggle to afford simple
necessities, further exacerbating food insecurity in this
very remote community.
This was a memorable visit. Many of the stories Elders shared with me were
difficult to hear, but their resilience and ability to
still smile and share a
laugh about our footy teams showed how positive they are in the face of so many
challenges. The conditions
that this community face are unacceptable and
unsustainable. All levels of government have a role to play in ensuring that
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people in this community are
supported to access the supports and services they need to age
well, which
include safe transport, safe and liveable housing and food security.
‘I’m sick of good intentions, the slowness of the jurisdictions.
They just have to get much better at embracing change
and changing the way they
work with our people... There is too much slippage by the states and
territories, they need to step up
and take a greater leadership role in terms of
the whole of government‘
– Ms Pat Turner AM, Lead Convenor,
Coalition of Peaks; CEO, National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health
Organisation.
One of the primary objectives of the new
Aged Care Act
- helping older Australians live at home for longer - is
demonstrated through the introduction of Support at Home. This initiative
provides support to help Australians access health-related services, home
modifications and assistive technologies.
The housing circumstances of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander families
in Australia differ greatly from those of non-Indigenous
Australians. Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander households are larger in size, more likely to include
a lone parent and frequently
comprise multi-generational households that include
members of extended family and kinship families.
obligations to accommodate family and other visitors and maintaining connection
to Country are critically important for
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people.
During my consultations, the issue of stable housing was again one of the
most consistent concerns raised. Many people spoke to me
cultural obligations felt by older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
who are caring for grandchildren
or other extended family. The older persons
greatest fear was the loss of the family home if they were to move into
residential aged
care, their family would be evicted.
AIHW data shows that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people have
significantly less access to affordable, secure and quality
housing, which is
concerning as safe and secure housing is a key determinant of
Outcome area 9 under the National Agreement,
‘Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people can secure appropriate,
housing that is aligned with their priorities and needs’ is not
on track to be met.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are overrepresented in rates of
does not meet acceptable
standards. Alarmingly, for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander households:
• 1 in 5 (20%) were living in dwellings that did not meet an acceptable
standard – defined in the National Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander
Health Survey
• 1 in 3 (33% - 46% in remote areas and 31% non-remote areas) were
living in dwellings with at least one major structural problem
(for example,
major cracks in walls/floors, walls or windows that are not straight, or major
plumbing problems)
• 1 in 11 (9.1%) had no access to working facilities for food
preparation, 4.5% had no access to working facilities to wash
clothes and
bedding and 2.8% had no access to working facilities to wash household
The provision of essential services, including housing, emergency services,
public transport, the distribution of water, gas and electricity
services are the responsibility of the jurisdictions. The consistent, reliable
access to these services is also crucial
to ensuring older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people can age well at home.
‘My health is my health. If I need help, I should be able to get it.
Why should it matter if I’m old, or disabled, or
where I live?’
– New South Wales Consultation.
Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people and communities view health as a continuum that
continues as they age. Many people I
spoke to were perplexed by what they saw as
an arbitrary distinction between the healthcare, aged care and NDIS systems.
to navigate and understand different systems was a key frustration
raised with me, and it is entirely valid. Individuals with health
and aged care
needs should be able to transition seamlessly between systems to access the
supports they require. What was described
as complicated and burdensome
‘jumping through hoops’ should not be the norm.
Similarly, I heard from communities who lived close to state borders who
encountered issues with accessing supports they need based
on state lines. For
example, when they reside in New South Wales, but the nearest major township is
located in Victoria. Again, to
the older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people I spoke with, it felt arbitrary that rules were based on their
residential
address and not distance from the service they were trying to
Clearly, a holistic, whole of government approach is required if the aged
care system is going to meet the needs of the growing number
of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people eligible for aged care. Commonwealth departments
need to not operate in siloes, and
the Australian, state and territory
governments need to work more closely together to ensure that unintended and
arbitrary barriers
are not put in place for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people.
All governments are signatories to the National Agreement. These commitments
and good intentions need to translate into actions to
improve outcomes for our
most disadvantaged people.
Compounding Barriers
I was particularly struck by the experiences of one very remote community.
The stories shared with me by this community highlight
the unique challenges to
accessing quality aged care that responds to older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples’
needs when multiple barriers compound with devastating
In this community, aged care is funded under CHSP, where meals, nursing,
social support, personal care and domestic assistance is
provided to 13 clients.
In addition, complex aged and health care services are provided to 2 home care
package clients under a sub-contracting
arrangement with a provider based in a
capital city 1,300 km away.
I heard there is additional need in the community, so assessments are
required, and the CHSP clients are growing in their aged care
need. This is
consistent with the message I received repeatedly: that the number and
complexity of aged care needs are growing and
there are real concerns that the
system, even with the changes committed to, will not respond adequately.
The key issues identified through the experiences of this community include:
Inflexible funding and untimely response
There have been several failings under the current aged care programs.
Recently, an Elder on a home care package tragically passed
away, off Country,
after having to leave community to access more complex care that was not
available in community. Additional services
to keep them on Country were not
available, as their package was fully expended. Previously, the same client had
been left in community
when family attended Sorry Business, and the health
clinic provided 24/7 care on the clinic veranda. This was totally unfunded.
to charter the Elder from community, due to his rapid deterioration, were
not available. The only option available was to transport
the Elder via car. The
Elder spent days in the car, only to arrive in a community with no aged care
services and sadly passing away
a short time later.
Virtual partnership under a sub-contractor model
The approved provider has not visited this community – it is a truly
virtual model. The sub-contracting arrangement means the
provider is removed
from the consumer, the community and the reality of aged care delivery in remote
There is a risk that the provider could withdraw their service at any stage.
This creates uncertainty and disempowers the service
in the community.
In this circumstance, the provider controls the funds but remains at
arms-length from the services and does not understand the participants
community. There is no real partnership to tackle barriers on the ground, no
incentive to build community capability, and no funding
to support remote travel
via charter.
The aged care provider in this community has experienced major executive
changes, impacting on the employment of aged care managers,
and key medical
personnel. This has a significant impact on recruitment and retention. The only
way to incentivise experienced aged
care managers to this type of location is
salary. The current funding does not allow for this. As a result, aged care is
to personnel as an additional role.
Remote communities like this are often forced to use a FIFO model.
Administration tasks such as invoicing fall behind, which has an
impact on the ability to access funds to provide care. Of further concern is
that additional FIFO costs are not funded
within the CHSP/HCP funding models.
In the past 18 months, this community also experienced the termination of a
CEO/ aged care manager with no contingency plans, resulting
in nurses leaving
the community and the Medical Director resigning, revoking the pharmaceutical
licence for the community. The aged
care centre also burned down, and
significant floods impacting access to roads, food, supplies, and led to
community members being
locked out of community with no housing. The impacts of
these issues will continue through to 2025, with food security remaining
significant concern.
A lack of proactive action from government agencies, including Commonwealth
agencies and state and territory governments, as well
as a rigid aged care
system that is not designed to respond to the unique needs of communities such
as this one have exacerbated
the challenges of living and ageing in a remote
community. By taking a flexible and person-centred approach to the health and
of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, governments could
ensure people do not unnecessarily die away from their Country
and loved ones
simply to access the care they need.
Transformational Change
‘Progress in implementing the Agreement’s Priority Reforms has,
for the most part, been weak and reflects tweaks to, or
actions overlayed onto,
business as usual approaches. The disparate actions and ad hoc changes have not
led to improvements that
are noticeable and meaningful for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people.’
– 2024 Productivity Commission: Review
of the National Agreement on Closing the Gap.
The most recent data tells us that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people access aged care at lower rates than older non-Indigenous
older people,
despite having a greater burden of disease:
• Approximately 20% of eligible Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people access the aged care system compared to approximately
non-Indigenous Australians
• Only 1.6% of eligible Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
access residential aged care compared to 5.5% of eligible
non-Indigenous
Australians.
This is a statistic that is widely known, but it bears repeating because it
is an unacceptably low rate of access, which is representative
of a broader
reality that the aged care system is not designed with older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people in mind. The
system does not account for their
context or cater to their unique needs. It does not speak to the lived
experiences of older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people or operate in
ways to ensure they are specifically included.
The feedback I received across the country was as broad and diverse as the
communities themselves. However, while some community concerns
context-specific, there were broad themes that arose across all the
conversations. Primarily, there was disappointment with
the lack of a clearly
articulated strategy to realise the transformational change called for in the
National Agreement and the recommendations
of the Royal Commission. The
resounding message I heard was a version of “nothing will change for us
unless the Government
actions these recommendations and takes its own
commitments seriously.”
This is consistent with the assessment of the Productivity Commission’s
first review of the National Agreement and the Office
Inspector-General’s 2024 Progress Report. Both reports highlight that
government action has fallen short of the paradigm
shift that is needed.
In its Final Report, tabled in the Australian Parliament on 1 March 2021, the
Royal Commission provided a ‘blueprint for significant
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander aged care.’ This was in recognition
of the projected rapid growth of the Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander
population, an acknowledgement that the system does not currently cater to the
needs of older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people, and without
significant change, the system will be incapable of responding to the increasing
I call on the Government to commit to co-designing and developing in
partnership with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people,
transformation plan that articulates how it will:
• make the necessary transformational reform needed to the aged care
• embed Priority Reforms outlined in the National Agreement into the
• ensure the system can respond to the needs of older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people now and into the future.
10-year transformation
‘It is only through elevating self-determination that the factors
influencing Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people’s
reluctance to
seek care and support can be successful addressed.’
The goal of the National Agreement is to achieve self-determination for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
This requires an
ongoing process of ensuring that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
can make decisions about matters that
affect their lives. Vital to achieving
self-determination are the essential elements of choice, participation and
In short, this requires governments to include, listen to,
invest in and give power to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
decisions on systemic reform, policy design, service delivery, evaluation and
I recommend a 10-year transformation plan be developed immediately. The plan,
its commitments and activities, must be appropriately
resourced. A long-term
plan and commitment reflects the dedicated effort and time it will take to
transform the aged care system
from its current form, to a strong aged care
system led by the ACCO sector. The focus and priorities included in the plan
agreed between the Government and ACCO sector, be informed by relevant
data and evidence, and be guided by the ambitions and lived
experiences of older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Plan provides a useful
framework for how this plan should be developed, including
the collective
partnership approach and governance arrangements. The Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Health Plan is a significant
vehicle for promoting Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander interests relating to health, and the same ambition
can be realised for
Priority Reform 1 -
Formal Partnerships and Shared Decision-Making
The first of the 4 Priority Reforms is shared decision-making. This is a
commitment from governments to share decision-making authority
with Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people on the policies and programs that impact them.
This is a fundamental shift in the
way governments work with Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people and is crucial to achieving self-determination.
However, throughout my travels I heard consistent criticism of the way the
department engages with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people. I have
heard that the default approach is for reforms and policies to be internally
focused and department led. Engagement
feels limited, tokenistic and lacks
transparency. There is confusion around how feedback has been captured or
incorporated, and the
sense that consultations take place after decisions have
already been made. Rather than feeling empowered as equal partners, Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people spoke about a lack of trust from Government in
the ability of the sector to make decisions and
deliver services for their
communities.
There needs to be a fundamental change in the way Government partners and
shares decision-making powers with Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people.
The Government needs to relinquish some control to enable genuine partnerships
and shared decision-making.
The department must engage more transparently to
ensure it is clear how feedback is incorporated, and decisions are made, and
guaranteed, adequate and sustainable resourcing for partnerships,
including with the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander aged care
National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Aging and Aged Care Council
(NATSIAACC).
The strategy to improve the way Government partners and shares
decision-making authority should be clearly articulated in the 10-year
transformation plan. Furthermore, this commitment should be demonstrated in the
way Government partners to co-design and develop
the 10-year transformation plan
The Government must enter into formal partnerships with community-controlled
representatives on policies and programs. Mainstream
aged care providers with
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander residents or clients need to establish
partnerships with local ACCOs,
or Local Aboriginal Land Councils to enhance
culturally safe care and connection. I saw good examples of where these have
organically, however that is due to the people investing in those
community relationships.
At a minimum, the 10-year transformation plan should include tailored models,
resources, and supports to enhance the capacity of ACCOs
and mainstream
organisations to deliver high-quality, culturally responsive aged care services
for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people. To support this, the
Government should:
• Collaborate with experts in the ACCO and aged care fields to devise a
model that complements the existing ACCO structure
• Partner with relevant stakeholders to develop resources and supports
specifically designed for the ACCO sector to facilitate
financially sustainable
and compliant aged care operations
• Engage with the ACCO sector to assist in delivering a comprehensive
range of culturally sensitive support services to improve
access to appropriate
services for community members and create employment opportunities in the care
Priority Reform 2
-Building the Community-Controlled Sector
In its Review of the National Agreement, the Productivity Commission said
that ‘Governments are not adequately recognising that
knowledges, expertise and connection to community that governments do not have.
This means that ACCOs are often better
placed than governments to design and
deliver high quality, holistic and culturally safe services.’
I have written about the need for meaningful choice between mainstream aged
care providers and community-controlled providers and
the barriers faced by the
ACCO sector. This needs to be addressed in the 10-year transformation plan.
While it is promising that the department is developing a framework for
capacity building for the community-controlled sector, it
appears that this
project is being designed and led as an internal departmental process, rather
than partnering with the sector.
This is reflective of the need for more formal
partnerships and shared decision-making.
I am also concerned that the focus of building the ACCO sector is based
largely on building the capacity of the sector to deliver
aged care services
within existing settings. There are some initiatives that are being considered
to increase the Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander workforce and increase the
number of organisations delivering services to older Aboriginal and Torres
Islander people. However, this again is ad hoc and insufficient to
appropriately embed Priority Reform 2.
The crucial stronger community-controlled sector elements that are missing
are a dedicated funding model that is suitably flexible,
reliable and consistent
to ensure services are delivered to meet the unique needs of older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander
people. There is also insufficient opportunity for
ACCOs to use their knowledge and expertise in the design of aged care reforms,
policies and programs.
What sets ACCOs apart is that they are embedded in communities and have
strong cultural understanding and knowledge of how communities
Currently, even where services are shifted from mainstream providers to ACCOs,
governments still impose ‘generic,
pre-existing models of service and
program design, and require reporting against narrow KPIs, instead of allowing
ACCOs to design
services and measure outcomes in ways that are most meaningful
to communities.’
The 10-year transformation plan must focus on ensuring ACCOs are not only
involved in delivering services to older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander
people, but also play a role in designing services and informing government
policy and investment frameworks
that govern them.
To help build and strengthen the ACCO sector, the Government should seek to
bring ACCOs together, to share insights and best practice
and to foster a
cohesive approach among ACCOs delivering aged care services to:
• enhance collaboration among ACCOs involved in aged care, fostering a
unified approach to service delivery
• create a comprehensive dataset on the needs of ACCOs, to inform and
support the development of a tailored and effective aged
• have a collective and unified voice to advocate for policies and
resourcing that aligns with the community-controlled sector’s
ensuring services meet the community’s needs.
The Government should also support ACCOs to develop and strengthen their
understanding of aged care service delivery, and expand their
services through:
• simplifying access and utilisation of allocated packages, aligning
with ACCO’s ethos of providing comprehensive care
• developing and refining models for ACCOs new to aged care, including
building ACCO-specific frameworks
• providing training and resources to ensure effective costings and
alignment with existing programs
• valuing and investing in holistic ACCO models
• enhancing understanding of the aged care sector, compliance
requirements, and the financial implications of service delivery
• supporting ACCOs to access training and support to develop plans to
expand services, anticipate demand, plan for capital works,
and adapt to
legislative changes.
Priority Reform 3 -
Transforming Government Organisations
The National Agreement provides 6 transformation elements to deliver on
Priority Reform 3, these include: identify and eliminate racism;
practice meaningful cultural safety; deliver services in partnership with
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander organisations,
communities and people;
increase accountability through transparent funding allocations; support
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
cultures; and improve engagement with
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.1 To effectively deliver on these
elements, governments
need to move away from disparate, piecemeal changes and
funding for existing programs and commit to systems level reforms.
As part of the 10-year transformation plan, the Government should work with
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to articulate
a vision for
transformation, including a theory of change. This should inform a strategy to
realise that vision and commit to a series
of actions to achieve that strategy.
The plan should be outcomes focused with built in accountability mechanisms to
determine the
success of the plan.
The Royal Commission made 7 specific recommendations relating to aged care
for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, which
made up its blueprint
for transformational change. These included:
1. Recommendation 47: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander aged care
pathway within the new aged care system.
2. Recommendation 48: Cultural safety.
3. Recommendation 49: An Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Aged Care
Commissioner.
4. Recommendation 50: Prioritising Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
organisations as aged care providers.
5. Recommendation 51: Employment and training for Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander aged care.
6. Recommendation 52: Funding cycle.
7. Recommendation 53: Program streams.
The blueprint and recommendations provided by the Royal Commission should be
used to inform the outcomes and actions to be included
in the 10-year
transformation plan. It is now incumbent on the Government to engage with key
stakeholders across the community-controlled
sector, other levels of government,
and advisory groups to ensure there is a sustainable funding model that supports
ACCOs delivering
aged care services nationwide to be financially viable.
Priority Reform 4 -
Shared Access to Data and Information at a Regional Level
A significant issue raised throughout my consultations was the lack of
available data, which inhibits the ability of governments and
communities to
make informed, context-specific decisions. Much of what is available is taken
from census data, which means that it
becomes outdated and lacks the necessary
nuance to inform community-level decision-making.
As I have engaged with the department to understand and relay feedback on
policies and programs designed for older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander
people, I have observed a lack of data and evidence being used to inform
decision-making. This is brought
into stark focus when considering the lack of
Indigenous-specific data, which is necessary to appropriately inform policy and
design targeted at an underrepresented cohort of people.
I am concerned to see that so many decisions are being made for and about
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people without
proper consultation
to gain community perspectives and input, and without adequate data and evidence
to rely on. This means that
the Government applies non-Indigenous perspectives
to its policies, which results in Indigenous-specific programs being little more
than minor tweaks to broad mainstream programs, rather than being designed with
and for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Recommendation 30 of the Royal Commission’s Final Report called for the
department to undertake a national audit of the regional
and local variations in
levels of service from people of diverse backgrounds and then commission
arrangements to address deficits
in meeting these needs. The same recommendation
called for the formulation of a data collection mechanism and analysis of said
for the purpose of understanding the experiences of older people seeking or
receiving aged care to improve equity of access and use
of aged care. This
recommendation should be actioned as a priority, if the Government is to achieve
its policy intent of ensuring
older Australians can access aged care that meets
their specific needs, where and when they need it.
In addition to this, the 10-year transformation plan should prioritise and
adequately fund data collection that can be shared and
disaggregated to inform
decision-making by regions. This should include improving access to existing
data, investing in First Nations
data infrastructure and developing a strategy
for building data capability for ACCOs and Government. This must be guided by
the principles
of Indigenous Data Sovereignty and support the practice of
Indigenous Data Governance.
Model for a permanent
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Aged Care Commissioner
This section proposes a model for a permanent Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Aged Care Commissioner, based on the feedback
provided through
consultations, an open call for submissions and meetings with the
community-controlled Leadership Group. Feedback
was provided by older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people, their communities and the
community-controlled and mainstream
aged care sector, who shared their ambitions
and expectations for a permanent Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Aged Care
Commissioner.
The model centres on 3 key principles, that the Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Aged Care Commissioner should be: a permanent
position, enshrined in
legislation; to be filled for a specified term by statutory appointment; and
independent of the Government
and Department of Health and Aged Care.
Overview of proposed
permanent Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Aged Care Commissioner
The permanent Commissioner role should be:
• a permanent position, enshrined in legislation
• filled for a specified term by statutory appointment
• independent of the Government, Department of Health and Aged Care and
the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission.
The Permanent Commissioner’s functions would include:
• undertaking formal inquires
• requesting and sharing information specific to the
Commissioner’s role
• issuing public statements
• making recommendations to government
• making recommendations and reporting to Parliament.
The permanent Commissioner should focus on holding the Government and aged
care sector to account, to ensure:
• equitable access and outcomes for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people in the aged care system
• the aged care system is culturally safe and responsive to the needs
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, including
by supporting
• a strong and expanded Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander aged care
workforce and community-controlled aged care sector
• implementation of the 4 Priority Reforms under the National Agreement
as they relate to aged care
• improved outcomes across the policy spectrum that impact on social,
cultural and emotional wellbeing and aged care outcomes
• transformational change is embedded across the aged care system.
To guide and support its work, the permanent Commissioner should:
• have the authority and power to hold the Government and the aged care
system to account for the changes and reforms that are
• maintain a strong connection to community, being guided by and
accountable to the needs, priorities and aspirations of Aboriginal
Strait Islander people
• operate in a culturally safe and innovative way
• have support to undertake its functions, drive the scale of reforms
needed, and manage cultural and colonial load
• embed and reflect the 4 Priority Reforms under the National Agreement
• be underpinned by and champion the United Nations Declaration on the
Rights of In Indigenous Peoples.
and Torres Strait Islander people and organisations
There is overwhelming support for the establishment of a permanent,
independent, statutory Commissioner. A permanent Commissioner
is seen as a
critical mechanism to ensure older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people’s experiences with the aged care
system are heard and understood.
The Commissioner will play a key role in ensuring current and future reforms are
responsive to the
rights, needs and aspirations of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people, where culture is protected, and older people are supported
age with dignity and respect.
Model Design Principles
Permanent Commissioner design principles
The model and the work of the Commissioner should:
1. Reflect the aspirations, priorities and needs of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people.
2. Address the Royal Commission recommendations and intent of the proposed
Commissioner.
3. Support the implementation of and reflect the Priority Reforms of the
National Agreement on Closing the Gap.
4. Take an aged care systems-wide approach.
5. Have the authority, independence, power and resources needed to drive
transformative change and hold the system accountable for
the scale of reform
needed for culturally safe aged care and to close the gap in outcomes between
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people and other Australians within the
aged care system.
6. Complement other accountability, regulatory and complaints office holders
and bodies and organisations in the aged care system.
7. Work in a range of ways (collaborate, in partnership, influence) to drive
8. Be accessible, visible and safe to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
9. Be cost efficient whilst balancing the independence, aspirations and
priorities of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
Ways of working of the
permanent Commissioner
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and the community-controlled
Leadership Group expect the Commissioner to have a broad
lens and remit, where
the Commissioner considers the aged care system. The Commissioner should
consider matters that contribute to
ageing well for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people and the social and cultural determinants of health. Housing and
were specifically raised with me as examples.
‘There is also a need for the Commissioner to be able to understand and
advocate for the diverse issues affecting older Aboriginal
people. This
encompasses advocating for broader changes beyond aged care programs that
profoundly influence the well-being of older
Aboriginal individuals. This
includes addressing social determinants of health such as housing and access to
culturally appropriate
primary health services. Subsequently, cross-portfolio
influence and presence is crucial to address these multifaceted challenges
effectively.’
– AHCWA submission.
the Inspector-General of Aged Care, I propose that the Commissioner’s
remit includes all Australian Government funded aspects
of the aged care system
and all Australian Government policies and programs that contribute to, and
impact, on older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people ageing well. I
propose the permanent Commissioner’s remit would also include aged care
of state and territory governments that are funded by the
Commonwealth.
The permanent Commissioner will be responsible for fostering strong working
relationships with state and territory governments to
share insights and
concerns of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people as it relates to
their responsibilities.
The permanent Commissioner would also develop working relationships with
stakeholders within and outside the aged care sector, where
those relationships
could influence positive outcomes for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people, such as the Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander Social
Justice Commissioner.
Focus areas
The priorities identified by NATSIAACC members is consistent with the
community-controlled
Leadership Group. I propose these priorities form the basis of an annual
workplan for the permanent Commissioner.
They will inform and guide my work as
interim Commissioner for the months ahead.
NATSIAACC surveyed its members and identified the following priorities.
‘Our members ranked the priorities as follows:
1. Holding the aged care system accountable for achieving equitable outcomes
for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
and providing culturally
2. Supporting the strengthening of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
community-controlled aged care sector and workforce.
3. Ensuring the voices of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
accessing the aged care sector are shared with government.
4. Monitoring the transformation of government to ensure it is implementing
the 4 Priority Reforms of the National Agreement on Closing
the Gap in relation
to aged care.
5. Working with the mainstream aged care system to ensure the cultural needs
of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Elders and older
people are met.’
– NATSIAACC submission.
Appointment and Term of
the Commissioner
In line with the recommendation of the Royal Commission and the expectations
of community, the Commissioner must be an Aboriginal
and or Torres Strait
Islander person.
I propose that the permanent Commissioner be a statutory office holder,
appointed by the Governor General. This is consistent with
the appointment of
the Inspector-General of Aged Care and supports the Commissioner’s
independence and ability to hold the
Government to account.
The appointment would be made on the joint advice of the Minister for Aged
Care and Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community-controlled
representatives. This would represent an innovative appointment process that
would be in line with Priority Reform One of the National
Agreement, which
commits to shared decision- making by Government and Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander representatives on matters
of significance to Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people. This appointment process was supported by the
community-controlled
Leadership Group.
‘NACCHO strongly supports the transformative features of the
Commissioner’s role, particularly feedback that Aboriginal
Strait Islander representatives have input into the appointment of the
Commissioner’
– NACCHO submission.
propose the permanent Commissioner is appointed for a term of 5 years, and not
exceed 2 terms (10 years). A 5-year appointment provides
continuity of a
Commissioner, which will be important to drive and hold aged care system to
account through this long-term reform
and structural change.
As part of the conditions of appointment, I propose a mechanism for the
termination of the Commissioner’s appointment. Similar
Inspector-General of Aged Care, I propose the Governor General may terminate the
permanent Commissioner’s appointment
in the event of misbehaviour,
inability to perform duties, bankruptcy, unexplained absence, and failing to
disclose conflicts of
interest.38 I propose an additional cause for termination,
which is the loss of confidence by the community.
Independence of the
Commissioner
‘Members identified issues such as the need for independence to be able
to take action and influence change, and provide stronger
advocacy, coordination
and influence cultural safety across Government.’
– NATSIAACC
The independence of the Commissioner was a
primary concern raised during consultations. This took 2 main forms: the
location of the
Commissioner; and the decision-making of the Commissioner.
With respect to location, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people expect
the Commissioner to be in an independent office. This
is different to what the
Royal Commission recommended, where it was proposed that the Commissioner be
part of the system governor
(the department).
It is important to ensure cost-effective administrative arrangements, which
may include co-location (while maintaining independence)
with another entity,
and/or sharing some back of office functions. Ideally, to deliver cost
efficiencies, administrative functions
could be supported by the department.
Support from the Minister for Aged Care in determining the workplan of the
Commissioner, particularly the focus of formal inquiries,
would be important to
achieving reform outcomes. To that end, I propose the permanent Commissioner
would consult with the Minister
for Aged Care on determining their annual
workplan and priorities for formal inquires. The department should also be
consulted. This
is in addition to the Commissioner undertaking regular
engagements with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people on the
Commissioner’s
workplan and priorities.
I propose that the Minister for Aged Care could direct the Commissioner to
undertake a formal inquiry into matters where the Commissioner
determines it has
sufficient resources to do so, and the inquiry focus aligns with the priorities
of older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people. This ensures the
priorities of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people remain
forefront. I further
propose that it should be for the Commissioner only to
determine the scope and terms of reference for how it undertakes any inquiry
that is directed by the Minister.
Powers and resources of
the Commissioner
Community expects that the Commissioner has the necessary powers and
resources to undertake its role and drive accountability and
reform. It was
consistently emphasised that the Commissioner needed to have ‘teeth’
to do their job.
This was reiterated during my sessions with the community-controlled
Leadership Group that to achieve their intended aims, the Commissioner
• undertake formal inquires
• request and share information specific to the Commissioner’s
role – this would include the power to compel the
department and providers
to share information and documents, subject to confidentiality and privacy
considerations
• issue public statements
• make recommendations to Government
• make recommendations and report to Parliament.
The permanent Commissioner should have information-gathering powers that will
improve outcomes for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people in respect of
access, assessment, service delivery, design and funding arrangements,
culturally appropriate service providers,
and culturally appropriate and
qualified direct care workforce.
There will be obligations or responsibilities associated with these powers,
including ensuring fair and proper processes prior to
public statements and
reporting, like the Inspector-General, as well as obligations to engage and
consult as part of exercising any
powers. In addition to the powers and
resources outlined above, the permanent Commissioner should have a role in the
development
and monitoring of the 10-year transformation plan. This should
include a formal role in monitoring and reporting, including making
and publishing data and information as appropriate, on progress against
implementation of the 10-year transformation plan.
Office of the
Commissioner
‘The Office of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Aged Care
Commissioner must have a fully resourced team to support
the delivery of this
significant role... NATSIAACC recommends the Commissioner to be fully funded and
resourced to continue its current
engagement and advocacy, including the current
face-to-face consultations with Elders, older people, carers, families,
communities
and aged care providers. The Office of the Commissioner must also be
fully funded for expansion to continue to meet increasing needs
and fulfil its
functions.’
– NATSIAACC submission
concerns raised by the community-controlled Leadership Group regarding the
structure, included the Commissioner being supported
• undertake the scale of work needed to drive and hold the aged care
system accountable for the required reforms
• engage with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people across the
• manage cultural and colonial load.
I propose that the Commissioner be supported by a properly resourced
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander led engagement team. I
will explore what
the most appropriate arrangements are for employment of staff that work for the
permanent Commissioner to ensure
they are able to act with independence from the
system governor and can support the Commissioner in their accountability
Engagement with
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
I propose the Commissioner have obligations to engage with Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people as part of their role and
functions. This could
include engaging to determine an annual workplan or inquiry priorities, part of
any inquiries and in formulating
positions on the rights and wellbeing of older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to advance within the aged care
A legislative obligation to engage with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people will demonstrate and give confidence that this
is a key underpinning of
how the Commissioner will work. However, to enable the Commissioner to adapt
engagement methods as needed
to support reforms and issues, and as the
community-controlled sector grows, I propose that the legislation would not
specify how
engagements are undertaken.
NATSIAACC noted that, for its members: ‘engagement and partnership is
fostered through consultation, listening sessions, and
open communication with
the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community-controlled organisations and
representative groups’.
As interim arrangements are extended, it is important to continue a program
of deep engagement with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people across the
country. Establishing formal partnership arrangements with the
community-controlled sector is also important. These
arrangements will assist in
determining the Interim Commissioner’s work program, policy advocacy and
positions on aged care
reforms. A formal arrangement with the
community-controlled Leadership Group, through the development of agreed terms
of reference,
would continue to advance the commitment to Priority Reform One
under the National Agreement. These arrangements would also provide
in the transition to a permanent Commissioner.
Operating at the
systemic level
There is a strong view from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and
the community-controlled Leadership Group that the Commissioner
should operate
at the systemic level, driving strategic reform and focussed on addressing
systemic issues in aged care that directly
or disproportionately impact on the
care and experiences of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people,
their families and
communities. The Commissioner should not deliver programs or
be engaged in individual people or organisation matters.
‘the Commissioner should have a focus on high-level strategic
influence, rather than operational.’ – NATSIAACC submission.
Handling of individual
complaints and safety concerns
There is consensus that the Commissioner should not investigate individual
complaints (like the ACQSC and the Commonwealth Ombudsman)
or advocate for
individual cases (like the Australian Human Rights Commission).
Beyond legislation, it will be important for the Commissioner to develop
clear protocols with the ACQSC, the Commonwealth Ombudsman
and the Australian
Human Rights Commission on referral processes of individual complaints. These
protocols could be in the form of
a Memorandum of Understanding and should be
made public. I propose that, as part of the engagements with Aboriginal and
Torres Strait
Islander people, the Commissioner provides information on
complaints processes, access and what their rights are.
Whilst a relationship with bodies that handle individual complaints is
important, the Commissioner should also be able to undertake
a formal inquiry
into complaints processes and how responsive they are to the needs of Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people
and make any recommendations. To this end, the
Commissioner’s independence from these processes will be important.
The Commissioner may come across aged care services and organisations that
they reasonably suspect may not be acting ethically, or
meeting quality and
safety requirements and obligations to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people. I propose that the Commissioner
be obligated in legislation to refer
these aged care services to the appropriate body.
Model aspects for
further development
To progress the model development for the permanent Commissioner, and to
further support my impact whilst Interim Commissioner, I
will continue
engagement on and work to:
• design the Commissioner support and office structure and staffing
arrangements
• establish formalised partnership arrangements with the
community-controlled Leadership Group
• design community-controlled involvement in the recruitment process of
the permanent Commissioner
• develop protocols for the handling of individual complaints and
concerns, in partnership with relevant bodies
• enhance collaboration arrangements with the Inspector-General and
their office.
This work will be balanced with the policy advocacy priorities I will focus
on as Interim Commissioner.
Appendix 1: Urgent and
Time Sensitive Recommendations
1. Replicate and scale up the positive examples of culturally safe aged care
for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people
highlighted in this
2. Explicitly reference cultural safety as a fundamental human right and
minimum standard for care in the new
Aged Care Act
3. Mandate and urgently complete the roll out of minimum cultural safety
training for all workers in the aged care system. This should
include minimum
standards and timeframes.
4. Ensure cultural safety training addresses the specific needs of Stolen
Generations survivors. Training should be developed by Stolen
Generations
organisations.
5. Develop a designated funding stream, which on application, makes funds
available to support older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander requiring
assistance to retain connection to their Country.
6. Fund research into what is needed to support the aged care sector in
delivering appropriate trauma-aware, healing informed aged
care for Stolen
Generations survivors.
7. Ensure there is clear policy direction and appropriate training given to
support My Aged Care agents, Services Australia staff
and other front-line
employees who work with Stolen Generations survivors.
8. Develop and implement a community awareness program targeted to older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, their families,
and communities to
increase awareness of the aged care system, eligibility requirements, and the
9. Develop community facing materials that assist older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people to understand the aged care pathway
and the support they
can ask for from various generalist and aged care specific organisations
operating in aged care.
10. Develop a suite of communications materials and a consultation strategy
to ensure that older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people are made aware
of the upcoming changes to aged care through the new
Aged Care Act
specifically how they will be impacted.
11. Develop community facing materials that help older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people to understand the aged care pathway
and the support they
can ask for from various generalist and aged care specific organisations
operating in aged care.
12. Review government communications to make them culturally appropriate and
understandable to people with English as a second language.
13. Review government access channels to make them accessible to people who
have limited, unreliable or intermittent access to the
internet, communication
technology (including landlines), and computer hardware.
14. Review aged care entry point requirements to ensure that people are not
excluded from receiving support they are otherwise eligible
for because they
cannot meet the proof of identity requirements.
15. Develop appropriate safety net settings in response to the introduction
of co-contributions for older Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people to
ensure they do not exacerbate the current disparity in access rates.
16. Design, trial and implement an equitable pathway for older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people under the new Support
at Home model.
17. Reintroduce the flexible use of funding across service types into the
existing Commonwealth Home Support Programme funding agreements
to respond to
the needs of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and their
communities.
18. The new
Aged Care Act
should explicitly prioritise Aboriginal Community
Controlled Organisations as providers of aged care for older Aboriginal and
Strait Islander people.
19. Support and incentivise partnerships between mainstream and Aboriginal
Community Controlled Organisations to work together to
ensure older Aboriginal
and Torres Strait Islander people receive culturally safe, trauma-aware and
healing informed aged care services.
20. Urgently progress the First Nations Assessment Workforce project. In the
meantime, use the current mainstream assessment commissioning
process to address
the critical shortage of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander aged care
21. Allow Aboriginal Community Controlled Organisations to apply flexibility
and discretion when conducting worker screening to keep
older Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people safe while not inappropriately excluding
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people from employment.
22. Review the timeframe for the lifting of the exemption period for the
requirement to have 24/7 registered nurses in National Aboriginal
Strait Islander Flexible Aged Care facilities.
23. Ensure continuation of current arrangements for a workforce surge
capacity to help Aboriginal Community Controlled Organisations
to meet the 24/7
registered nurse requirement.
24. Expand the workforce authorised to approve essential equipment and home
modifications up to an agreed amount, for example $1,000.
25. Give older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people priority access
to assessments and aged care packages, including respite
26. Recognising the lack of Indigenous-specific data to inform
decision-making, the Government should develop a fund to support research
evidence-gathering specific to older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people’s access to aged care.
27. Introduce an ongoing capital round for providers funded under the
National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Flexible Aged
Care Program and
Aboriginal Community Controlled Organisations that operate aged care
Appendix 2: Summary of
consultations & organisational submissions
The Australian Regional and Remote Community Services (ARRCS)
WA Aged Care Collaboration Group
Aboriginal Health Council of WA (AHCWA)
Southern Cross Care – Bran Nue Dae CHSP Centre – Breakfast Club
& Day Centre
Bidyadanga Aboriginal Community La Grange
Integrated Care & Commissioning (ICC) Regional Working Group
Broome Regional Aboriginal Medical Service (BRAMS)
Kimberley Aged Care Collaborative (KACC)
Kimberley Aboriginal Medical Service (KAMS)
Yura Yungi Aboriginal Medical Service CEO - Halls Creek
Tour of Southern Cross Care Residential Service - Germanus Kent House
Kimberley Aged and Community Services (KACS)
Kimberley Stolen Generations Aboriginal Corporation (KSGAC)
Moorditj Koort Aboriginal Corporation (MKAC)
South West Aboriginal Medical Service (SWAMS)
Rumbalara Aged Care Facility
Shepparton North
Dubbo Elders Group
Jack Towney Hostel
Walgett Aboriginal AMS
Bourke Aboriginal Health Corporation Service
Bourke Tribal Council
Walgett Government Stakeholder Group
Dharriwaa Elders Group
Walgett Aboriginal Community Working Party
Benjamin Short Grove Aged Care Facility
Murdi Paaki Regional Assembly & Murdi Paaki Services Limited
Onsite visit to Indigenous Urban Institute of Health (IUIH)
Meeting with NACAC Member Ms Jody Currie
Pulkapulkka Kari Flexible Aged Care (PPK)
Tennant Creek
Julalikari Council Aboriginal Corporation
Tennant Creek
Central Australian Aboriginal Congress (Congress) Deadly Wobblers
Alice Springs
Western Desert Nganampa Walytja Palyantjaku Tjutaku Aboriginal Corporation
- Purple House
Alice Springs
Tangentyere Council
Alice Springs
Central Desert Regional Council and MacDonnell Regional Council
Alice Springs
Tjilpi Pampaku Ngura Flexible Aged Care (Docker River)
Kaltukatjara
Kaltukatjara Art Centre
Kaltukatjara
Hetti Perkins Home for the Aged
Alice Springs
ARRCS Community Care Alice Springs
Alice Springs
Ngaanyatjarra Pitjantjatjara Women’s Council (NPY Women’s
Alice Springs
Rocky Ridge Nursing Home (ARRCS)
Kalano Community Association
Victoria Daly Regional Council
Kalkarindji
Yutjuwala Djiwarr
Laynhapuy Homelands Aboriginal Corporation
Yothu Yindi Foundation
Anglicare Day Centre
Nhulunbuy Network Meeting
Carers NT Wulagi Wellbeing Centre (Wulagi/Anula/Urban Access Program
Participants)
Larrakia Nation CEO
Coconut Grove
Anglicare NT
Georgina Hostel
Morningside
Yulu-Burri-Ba Aboriginal Corporation for Community Health
Nareeba Moopi Moopi Pa
Kalwun Senior Services
Eagleby Jimbelunga Nursing Centre
Inala Wangarra Inc. Healthy Ageing Hub
Link Up Qld
Woolloongabba
Flinders Island Aboriginal Association (FIAAI)
Lady Barron
Tasmanian Aboriginal Health Reference Group (TAHRG) TAHRG includes FIAAI,
CBIAA, CHAC, Karadi, and SETAC
Tasmanian Aboriginal Centre
Karadi Aboriginal Corporation
South East Tasmania Aboriginal Corporation
Circular Head Aboriginal Corporation
Kirrae Health Services
Mullum Mullum Indigenous Gathering Place
Victorian Committee for Aboriginal Aged Care and Disability
Oonah Aboriginal Health and Community Services
Healesville
Victorian Aboriginal Health Service
Gippsland and East Gippsland Aboriginal Cooperative
Nairm Marr Djambana Community
Aboriginal Community Elders Services
Brunswick East
Wami Kata Old Folks Home.
Port Augusta
Arabana Aboriginal Corporation
Port Augusta
Nunyara Aboriginal Health Service
Whyalla Stuart
Bungala Aboriginal Corporation
Port Augusta
Kura Yerlo, lunch with the Senior Women’s Group
Port Adelaide
MEN’S SHED group
Port Adelaide
Moorundi Aboriginal Health Service - Elder Groups
Murray Bridge
Meeting with older community members and carers
Attend STO run First Nations Aged Care Yarning Session
Meeting with Werin AMS board chair and deputy chair
Port Macquarie
Meeting with older community members and carers
Booroongen Djugun Limited Residential Care
Greenhill Kempsey
Mutkin Residential and Aged Care
Gurriny Yealamucka Health Services
Kowanyama Council
North Cairns
Bluecare Star of the Sea
Thursday Island
Torres Strait Home for the Aged CHSP/HCP (inner Islands)
Thursday Island
Torres Strait Island Regional Council CHSP only (outer Islands)
Thursday Island
Wujul Wujul
Wujal Wujal
Hope Vale Aged Hostel
Aunty Lyn Cullinane and Andrea Kelly, Interim First Nations Aged Care
Commissioner
Baabayn Elders yarn with the First Nations Aged Care Commissioner
Stolen Generation Survivors yarn with the First Nations Aged Care
Commissioner
Toowoomba City
East Toowoomba
Dr Kate Smith and Prof Dawn Bessarab - UWA Elders event
Roundtable with Yokai; Yorghum and Aboriginal Health Council Western
Australia (AHCWA)
EPIS - Day respite centre
EPIS - Ishbell Reid - CEO
Nyabalee Respite Centre
EPIS - Elders Village
Puntukurnu Aboriginal Medical Services (PAMS)
St Barts Visit
Derbarl Yerrigan Health Service (DYHS)
WA Health/WA Country Health Service - Senior Officials
SWAMS - Elders yarning session (Stolen Generation focus)
Juniper Guwardi Ngadu
Fitzroy Crossing
Yura Yungi Medical Service Aboriginal Corporation (YYMS)
Halls Creek
Halls Creek Frail Aged
Halls Creek
Juniper Gerdewoonem
Juniper Kununurra Community Services
Submissions received
(Organisations only)
Aboriginal Community Elders Services
Aboriginal Health Council of Western Australia
Advocare’s Aboriginal People Solidarity Statement group
Aged & Community Care Providers Association
Aged Rights Advocacy Service
Ashburton Aboriginal Corporation
Australian & New Zealand Society for Geriatric Medicine
Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation
Carers NSW Australia
Central Dessert Regional Council
Dementia Australia
Health Services Union
Institute for Urban Indigenous Health
Kalwun Development Corporation Ltd
Kura Yerlo Incorporated
National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Ageing and Aged Care Council
National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisations
Older Persons Advocacy Network
Silverchain
Tullawon Health Service Inc
UnitingCare (Qld)
Victorian Aboriginal Health Service
and Torres Strait Islander Community-controlled Leadership Group (Leadership
The Leadership Group comprises representatives from the following
organisations:
The National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Ageing and Aged Care
National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation
The Healing Foundation
Institute for Urban Indigenous Health
First Peoples Disability Network
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Ageing Advisory Group of the Australian
Association of Gerontology
National Health Leadership Forum
Indigenous Allied Health Australia
Congress of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Nurses and Midwives
Services for Australian Rural and Remote Allied Health
Australian Indigenous Doctors Association
National Association of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Workers
and Practitioners
Gayaa Dhuwi (Proud Spirit) Australia
The Lowitja Institute
Victorian Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation
Rumbalara Aboriginal Co-operative
Aboriginal Community Elders Services Inc
Appendix 3:
Understanding Older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People
If we are to support Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people to achieve
life outcomes equal to other Australians, the Government
must take an
equity-centred approach that prioritises and specifically responds to their
unique and diverse needs. In an aged care
context, this means understanding who
older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are, including where and how
the experiences that have shaped the way they think and interact with
the aged care system, and what ageing well means to them and
their communities.
Social and Cultural
Determinants of Health
Social Determinants of
Social determinants of health are the conditions in which people are born,
grow, live, work and age, and these account for 35% of
the total health gap
between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander and non-Indigenous health
The social determinants of health are a broadly understood concept, with
international and domestic evidence to support the impact
they have on whole of
life health and wellbeing outcomes. The National Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Health Plan 2021–2031
(Health Plan) makes it clear that
addressing the social determinants of health is key to achieving health equity
for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people.
The social determinants that account for a majority of the health gap are
household income, employment and hours worked, and health
risk factors, such as
smoking and obesity.40 Furthermore, racism is identified as one of the most
impactful social determinants for
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people.
While this is a concept that is broadly accepted and incorporated into health
strategies and policies, the aged care sector must recognise the ongoing
impacts of the social determinants of health to provide
culturally safe,
trauma-aware and healing informed experiences for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander people receiving aged care.
Cultural Determinants
For Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, culture is a foundation for
health and wellbeing. It is a pathway to healing and
wellbeing, and in the
context of my report – healthy ageing.
The cultural determinants of health are the protective factors that enhance
resilience, strengthen identity and support good health
and wellbeing. These
include, but are not limited to, connection to Country, family, kinship and
community; beliefs and knowledge;
cultural expression and continuity; language;
self-determination and leadership.
Experts, researchers, and health leaders have already established the
rationale for embedding the cultural and social determinants
of health in policy
and programs for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. This is not a new
model of thinking.
The Mayi Kuwayi study, led by Indigenous academics has already provided
evidence-based domains and indicators that can define the
cultural determinants
within policy.
The 2021 Lowitja Institute report, ‘Culture is Key: Towards cultural
determinants-driven health policy’, provides a blueprint
for embedding the
cultural determinants of health in policy and practice.
Culture as a determinant of health is also articulated in key policy
frameworks, including:
• National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Plan 2021-2031
• National Strategic Framework for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander People’s Mental Health and Social and Emotional
• ‘My Life My Lead, Opportunities for strengthening approaches to
the social determinants and cultural determinants of
Indigenous health’
– Report on the national consultations
• National Agreement on Closing the Gap (2020)
In 2021, the Royal Commission acknowledged that ‘the aged care system
must reflect the fact that for many Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander
people, health is grounded in connection to Country, culture, family and
community. Each of these elements can affect
the social, emotional and physical
wellbeing of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and, in turn,
determining their
health outcomes.
There is a real opportunity to shift towards a strategic, connected model of
working together to prioritise strengths-based, holistic
approaches that reflect
the cultural and social determinants of health in the design and implementation
of aged care reforms. Not
only will this lead to improved outcomes, but it will
also ensure that the $2.2 billion dollar investment the government has committed
to improve Australia’s aged care system delivers these reforms for
Australia’s first people.
Embedding cultural determinants means recognising:
• The direct protective and strengthening impact that practising
culture has on health and wellbeing
• The impact of cultural determinants on the social determinants of
Policymaking does not occur in the absence of culture: it is very much
informed by the culture of predominantly non-Indigenous policymakers.
determinants approach must seek to balance this structural inequality by
centring Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
culture in policy mechanisms and
approaches. Such change requires a bureaucracy that is aware of their own
cultural limitations and
is willing to change the spaces where policy is made,
including ceding control to spaces and processes external of government.
– Lowitja Institute 2020, Culture is Key: Towards cultural
determinants-driven health policy.
Many of the solutions
to the barriers I outline in this report, whilst complex, can be addressed by
the application of systems thinking
and evidence, including the cultural
determinants of health into policy development for aged care for older
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people.
Priority Context Areas
Racism includes prejudice, discrimination or hatred directed at someone
because of their colour, ethnicity, or national origin. Racism
can be revealed
through people’s actions as well as their attitudes and beliefs. It
includes all the barriers that prevent
people from enjoying dignity and equality
because of their race.
Racism can cause long-term hurt and harm. Research undertaken by The Healing
Foundation has shown that the trauma of colonialism and
racism is generational
for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people with lifelong negative impacts
that are experienced by ongoing
generations.
The most recent 2022 Australian Reconciliation Barometer reports that 60% of
First Nations people have experienced at least one form
of racial prejudice in
the previous 6 months compared to 50% in 2020 and 43% in 2018.43 Data is not yet
available to understand the
impact of the failed 2023 Voice Referendum. However,
it has been described as a ‘lightning rod’ for the need for
to reaffirm its commitment to addressing racism against First Nations
(and all) communities.
Under Closing the Gap Priority Reform 3, all governments have an obligation
to identify and eliminate racism. Additionally, the Human
Rights Commission is
developing a National Anti-Racism Strategy, which will prioritise the lived
experiences of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people.
frameworks provide the best opportunity to combat racism and the devastating
impacts it has had, and continues to have, for
older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people.
Anti-racism is an active process, unlike the passive stance of
‘non-racism.’ Anti-racism work requires consistent, committed,
targeted action and attention. Racism operates at systemic, institutional,
interpersonal, and individual levels. Typically, individual,
and interpersonal
racism receive more focus than institutional and systemic racism, and as a
result deeper, systemic racial injustice
continues to flourish. Anti-racism
involves focusing on systemic racism.
Abuse of Older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people (Elder Abuse)
The National Plan to Respond to the Abuse of Older Australians (Elder Abuse)
2019–2023 uses the term ‘Abuse of Older Australians’
reference to cultural association in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
communities. It lists 5 commonly recognised forms of
abuse of older people:
physical abuse, sexual abuse, psychological abuse, financial abuse, and neglect.
Research indicates that,
as in the non-Indigenous context, the most common type
of abuse is financial but that other types of abuse also occur.
Culturally, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander norms in relation to
reciprocity, the expectation that resources will be shared,
and kinship (where a
wide variety of relationships are involved in familial and community networks),
are dimensions that complicate
understandings of whether and how elder abuse is
occurring. The extent to which calls on grandparent resources to care for
grandchildren
are culturally reasonable or unreasonable was also highlighted by
the research.
The topic of abuse of older Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people is a
sensitive one, which I approached cautiously in my consultations.
However, it
was raised on multiple occasions, with the suggestion that instances of abuse
are on the rise – the most common
example I heard about was financial
abuse, or ‘humbugging’.
More work is required to understand and conceptualise abuse of older
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people, especially among
different groups
in different circumstances, given the diversity among our communities. The
nuance and sensitivity of this issue
further highlights the need for aged care
providers to understand the communities that they are operating in, and to embed
safe and culturally informed practices into their services.
According to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, the most recent census data
from 2021, provides the following breakdown of where
Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander people live, by remoteness:
Estimated Indigenous resident population by Remoteness Areas 30 June
Percentage of Estimated Indigenous resident population by Remoteness Areas
30 June 2021
Major Cities of Australia
Inner Regional Australia
Outer Regional Australia
Remote Australia
Very Remote Australia
This means that the vast majority of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people live in capital cities, major regional cities, regional
and rural towns.
Only 15.4% of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people live in remote and
very remote locations.
Analysis from the Institute for Urban Indigenous Health shows that the rate
of access to aged care for older Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islanders is 10%
below the national average.
However, the rates of access in many
remote and very remote communities attained the national average or exceeded the
national average.
This demonstrates that to address these access barriers and
close the parity gap, investments in improving access must also focus
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people living in cities and towns.
During my consultations, I visited many remote and very remote areas and
heard from aged care recipients and providers that the reality
of living in
these locations presents specific logistical challenges, including distances
between services and communities, insecure
or overcrowded housing and food
security, and the ability to recruit and maintain a care workforce. This
requires greater Government
investment and flexibility in these locations,
including the National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Flexible Aged Care
In remote and very remote areas, care is provided exclusively by government
and not-for-profit providers, each working in partnership
with Aboriginal
community-controlled organisations such as local councils. In major cities and
inner regional areas, care is delivered
mainly by mainstream aged care
providers, very few of which have an Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander focus.
Intergenerational
wealth creation / superannuation
The Final Report of the Aged Care Taskforce assumes that most Australians
have access to superannuation to fund contributions to aged
care in their
retirement.
Yet Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people were
systemically excluded from the opportunity for intergenerational wealth
resulting in much lower levels of superannuation funds.
In jurisdictions such as Western Australia, policy and legislation in place
from 1936 to 1972 allowed the state government to withhold
up to 75% of an
Aboriginal person’s wage.
There is a known lack of research and evidence on the superannuation system
as it applies to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
communities. However, a
report by Bankwest Curtin Economics Centre released in 2020 estimated that
existing superannuation balances
of non-Indigenous Australians upon retirement
are, on average, more than double that of Indigenous
Australians.
Appendix 4:
AAG: Australian Association of Gerontology
ACES: Aboriginal Community Elders Services
ACCO: Aboriginal Community Controlled Organisation
ACCHO: Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation
ACCPA: Aged & Community Care Providers Association
ACQSC: Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission
ACSO: Aged Care Specialist Officer
AHCWA: Aboriginal Health Council of Western Australia
AIDA: Australian Indigenous Doctors Association
AIHW: Australian Institute of Health and Welfare
AN-ACC: Australian National Aged Care Classification
ANMF: Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation
ANU: Australian National University
ARAS: Aged Rights Advocacy Service
ARIIA: Aged Care Research & Industry Innovation Australia
ATSIAAG: Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Ageing Advisory Group
CATSINaM: Congress of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Nurses and
CEO: Chief Executive Officer
CHSP: Commonwealth Home Support Programme
EAAA: Elder Abuse Action Australia
ECSP: Elder Care Support Program
FIFO: Fly in, fly out
FPDN: First Peoples Disability Network
GSGL: Good Spirit Good Life
HCP: Home care packages
HSU: Health Services Union
IAHA: Indigenous Allied Health Australia
IAT: Integrated Assessment Tool
IHACPA: Independent Health and Aged Care Pricing Authority
IT: Information technology
IUIH: Institute for Urban Indigenous Health
KICA-COG: Kimberley Indigenous Cognitive Assessment tool
LGBTQIA+: Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transexual, queer, intersex, asexual plus
MMM: Modified Monash Model
NACCHO: National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisations
NAATSIHWP: National Association of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Health Workers
NATSIAACC: National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Ageing and Aged
Care Council
NATSIFAC: National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Flexible Aged Care
NDIS: National Disability Insurance Scheme
NHLF: National Health Leadership Forum
NIAA: National Indigenous Australians Agency
OPAN: Older Persons Advocacy Service
OT: Occupational therapist
RJED: Regional Jobs and Economic Development
SARRAH: Services for Australian Rural and Remote Allied Health
SWAMS: South-West Aboriginal Medical Service
THF: The Healing Foundation
VACCHO: Victorian Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation
VAHS: Victorian Aboriginal Health Service
1. Closing the Gap,
National Agreement on Closing the Gap
, Closing the
Gap website, 2020.
2. Commonwealth of Australia,
Royal Commissioner into Aged Care Quality
and Safety Final Report: Care, Dignity and Respect, Volume 2 The Current
, Australian Government, 2021.
3. Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS),
Estimates and projections,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians
, ABS website,
2011-to-2031.
4. Local Community Services Association (LCSA),
LCSA Statement in Support
of Transitioning Funding to ACCOs
[media release], LCSA, 15 July 2024.
5. Aboriginal Community Services (ACS),
ACCOs to the forefront and the
aged care gap: Aboriginal Community Services on the Closing the Gap Review
ACS website, 21 February 2024.
6. Department of Health and Aged Care,
National Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander Flexible Aged Care Program Manual
, Australian Government,
7. Department of Health and Aged Care,
New programs to be regulated
Department of Health and Aged Care website, 2024.
8. Department of Health and Aged Care,
2022–23 Report on the
Operation of the
Aged Care Act 1997
, Australian Government, 2023.
9. Commonwealth of Australia,
Royal Commissioner into Aged Care Quality
and Safety Final Report: Care, Dignity and Respect, Volume 3A The New
, Australian Government, 2021.
10. Productivity Commission,
Report on Government Services 2023 Part F
Aged care services
[data set], Productivity Commission website,
11. Productivity Commission,
Review of the National Agreement on Closing
the Gap Study Report Volume 1
, Australian Government, 2024.
12. Australian Institute of Health and Welfare (AIHW),
Dementia in
Australia: Burden of disease due to dementia
, AIHW website, 2024.
13. healthdirect,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and
, healthdirect website, 2024.
14. M Waller, RF Buckley, CL Masters, FR Nona, SJ Eades and AJ Dobson,
‘Deaths with dementia in Indigenous and Non-Indigenous
Australians: a
nationwide study’, Journal of Alzheimer’s Disease, 2021,
81(4):1589–1599, doi:10.3233/JAD-201175.
15. J Temple, T Wilson, K Radford, D LoGuidice, A Utomo, KJ Anstey and S
Eades, ‘Demographic drivers of the growth of the number
of Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander people living with dementia, 2016 – 2051’,
Australasian Journal on Ageing, 2022,
41(4):e320–e327,
doi:10.1111/ajag.13116.
Dementia in Australia Population health impacts of dementia
among First Nations people
, AIHW website, 2024.
17. K Radford, LM Lavrencic, K Delbaere, B Draper, R Cumming, G Daylight, HA
Mack, S Chalkey, H Bennett, G Garvey, TY Hill, D Lasschuit
and GA Broe,
‘Factors associated with the high prevalence of dementia in older
Aboriginal Australians’, Journal of Alzheimer’s
Disease, 2019,
70(s1):S75–S85, doi:10.3233/JAD-180573.
18. The Healing Foundation,
Make Healing Happen
, The Healing
Foundation, 2021.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Stolen Generations aged 50
and over: updated analyses for 2018–19
, AIHW, Australian Government,
20. The Healing Foundation,
Pre-Budget submission 2024-2025
Healing Foundation, 2024.
21. The Lowitja Institute,
We nurture our culture for our future, and our
culture nurtures us
, report to the Close the Gap Campaign Steering
Committee, 2020.
22. M Nursey-Bray and R Palmer, ‘Country, climate change adaptation and
colonisation: insights from an Indigenous adaptation
planning process’,
Heliyon, 2018, 14;4(3):e00565, doi:10.1016/j.heliyon.2018.e00565.
23. Australian Healthcare Associates (AHA),
Exploratory Analysis of
Barriers to Palliative Care: Issues Report on Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander Peoples
, report to the Australian Government Department of Health
and Aged Care, AHA, 2019.
24. L Lavrencic, R Mantell, A Withall, D Baldock, G Daylight, T Donovan, S
Wall, TY Hill, and K Radford, Clinical care for Aboriginal
and Torres Strait
Islander people using aged care services: A rapid review, Australian Commission
on Safety and Quality in Health
Care, Australian Government, 2024.
25. Office of the Inspector-General of Aged Care, 2024 progress report on the
implementation of the recommendations of the Royal Commission
into Aged Care
Quality and Safety, Office of the Inspector-General of Aged Care, Australian
Government, 2024.
26. AIHW, 2023 Aged Care Provider Workforce Survey: Summary Report, AIHW,
Australian Government, 2024.
27. Department of Health and Aged Care, Integrated Assessment Took (IAT) live
trial – Final Report, Australian Government, 2024.
28. AJ Gibberd, JM Simpson and SJ Eades, ‘No official identity: a data
linkage study of birth registration of Aboriginal children
Australia’, Australian and New Zealand Journal of Public Health, 2016,
40(4), 388–394, doi:10.1111/1753-6405.
29. T Endo, J van Schalkwijk, R Wills, T Johnston and D Zarate, An estimate
of the extent of under-registration of births in Queensland,
Health Statistics
Branch, Queensland Health, Queensland Government, 2014.
30. Australian Government, Final report of the Aged Care Taskforce,
Australian Government, 2024.
31. AIHW, Aged care for First Nations people, AIHW website, 2023.
32. Internal Department of Health and Aged Care data.
33. A Richards, ‘New Indigenous aged care hub in Mandurah to provide
service tailored to Aboriginal people’, ABC, 3 February
34. A Nikolof, SJ Brown, Y Clark, C Leane, K Glover and D Gartland,
‘Factors associated with housing stability for Aboriginal
families in
South Australia: a prospective cohort study’, Housing Studies, 2024,
1–23, doi:10.1080/02673037.2024.2366964.
35. AIHW, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people: a focus report on
housing and homelessness, AIHW, Australian Government, 2019.
36. AIHW, Housing circumstances of First Nations people, AIHW website, 2023.
37. Australian Human Rights Commission (AHRC), ‘Self-determination and
Indigenous peoples’, Voice Referendum: Understanding
the referendum from a
human rights perspective, AHRC, n.d.
Inspector-General of Aged Care Act 2023
https://www.legislation.gov.au/C2023A00055/ asmade/text.
39. National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Aging and Aged Care
Council (NATSIAACC) Submission to the Interim First Nations
Commissioner.
40. AIHW, Determinants of health for First Nations people, AIHW website,
41. Department of Health, National Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
Health Plan, 2021-2031, Australian Government, 2021.
42. AHRC, National Anti-Racism Framework: Conversation and Consultation
Guide, AHRC, 2021.
43. Polity Research & Consulting , Australian Reconciliation Barometer
2022: Full Research Report, Report to Reconciliation Australia,
44. AHRC, Mapping government anti-racism programs and policies, AHRC, 2024.
45. AHRC, Race Discrimination Commissioner welcomes National Anti-Racism
Strategy funding, AHRC website, 2022.
46. Attorney-General’s Department, National Plan to Respond to the
Abuse of Older Australians (Elder Abuse) 2019-2023, Australian
Government, 2019.
47. R Kaspiew, R Carson and H Rhoades, Elder abuse: Understanding issues,
frameworks and responses, Australian Institute of Family
Studies, Australian
Government, 2016.
48. ABS, Estimates of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians, ABS
website, 2021.
49. Institute of Urban Indigenous Health (IUIH) Submission to the Interim
First Nations Aged Care Commissioner.
50. M Dockery, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Australians and the
Superannuation System, Bankwest Curtin Economics Centre and
UniSuper, 2020.
Health.gov.au
All information in this publication is correct as at January
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (174 MB)
PDF format (3.94 MB)
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter