[2022] ACopyT 2
File number:
CT 4 of 2018
The Tribunal:
(DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
Date of decision:
Catchwords:
– equitable remuneration
for copying and communicating works under statutory licence – where
increase in digital reading
lists – whether reading list is
‘communication’ under s 31(1)(a)(iv) of
(Cth) – rate for digital use – whether per page rate appropriate
– judicial estimation of equitable remuneration
– mandatory
considerations under
(Cth) reg 73(2) –
whether equitable remuneration expressed globally, as rate per equivalent full
time student or as revenue
Legislation:
(Cth) reg 73(2)
Cases cited:
[1999] ACopyT 1
151 FLR 142
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Limited under
[2016] ACopyT 3
Telstra Corporation Limited v Australasian Performing Right Association
[1997] HCA 41
(1997) 191 CLR 140
Woolworths Ltd v Olson
[2004] NSWSC 849
184 FLR 121
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
7-11, 14-17, 21-22, 24-25 September 2020
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr N Murray SC and Ms E Bathurst
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Banki Haddock Fiora
Counsel for the Respondents:
Mr R Cobden SC, Ms L Thomas and Ms M Evetts
Solicitor for the Respondents:
Baker McKenzie
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
IN THE COPYRIGHT TRIBUNAL
CT 4 of 2018
THE UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE
THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
AUSTRALIAN CATHOLIC UNIVERSITY
(and others named in the
Third Respondent
PERRAM J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE TRIBUNAL ORDERS THAT:
1. The parties bring a short minute of order, within 21 days, giving effect
to these reasons.
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
PERRAM J (DEPUTY PRESIDENT):
THE QUESTION
1 The question for determination is how much
equitable remuneration the 39 Respondent universities (‘the
Universities’)
should pay to the Applicant, the Copyright Agency Ltd
(‘CAL’), for licensed copying or communication of works under Pt
(Cth) (‘the Act’). CAL seeks a
determination for the method of ascertaining the payable amount for the period 1
2019 to 31 December 2024.
2 The works involved are largely works contained in
university libraries that are copied or communicated for educational purposes.
The range of works is extremely varied and includes literary and artistic works
although it no longer includes sheet music. Some
of the works by nature tend to
be copied only as an extract, for example, a chapter of a book. Others,
especially artistic works,
are more commonly copied in their entirety. The
Tribunal is required to take the nature of the works into account by reg
(Cth) (‘the
Regulations’).
3 The Respondents are universities. As such they provide teaching services
to students. They are remunerated for this by the Commonwealth
but also from
other sources. They are not-for-profit organisations in a general sense but
some conduct substantial business operations
as well. Part of the services they
provide to students (and also academics) is access to library resources which
includes access
to the works in question. The Tribunal is required to take the
nature of the Universities into account by reg 73(2)(b) of the Regulations.
4 The copying and communicating taking place under the statutory licence may
be described as copy and communicating for educational
purposes. Most of the
copying involves digital use (by means of scanning and electronic transmission)
but there is a component of
hardcopy photocopying too. Much of the digital use
involves the use of digital reading lists and a considerable component of the
hardcopy copying concerns the use of course-packs. The Tribunal is required to
take these matters into account by reg 73(2)(d) of
the Regulations.
5 There is no doubt that the existence of the statutory licence exerts a
downward pressure on sales of some of the works. If students
were not given
access to the works under
of the Act, it is likely that at least some of
them might purchase the works. So viewed, the statutory licence is likely to
in a drop in the aggregate demand for the works and hence, all things
being equal, a drop in the value of the works. However, I
am not certain the
last step follows. A meaningful statement in this area would require close
attendance to the works in question,
the profile of the relevant students and
more general market effects. The most that can be said is that the existence of
the statutory
licence is likely to result in fewer sales of works. This matter
must be taken into account because of reg 73(2)(e) of the Regulations.
THE COMPETING METHODOLOGIES
6 The parties put forward competing methodologies
for the determination of the equitable remuneration.
7 CAL sought to determine the base rate of equitable remuneration by
reference to the amount which the parties had agreed for 2017-2018.
$32.5 million and, according to CAL, it was to be used as a comparable bargain
on top of which further adjustments were
to be made by way of judicial
estimation.
8 The Universities, by contrast, proposed the use of the page rates
previously determined by the Tribunal in
[1999] ACopyT 1
151 FLR 142
Determination’), to update those rates by reference to movements in the
consumer price index (‘the CPI’)
and, after factoring in the
‘actual access’ by students to the works, to determine by those
means a base rate of $7.24
million (according to what the Universities called
their ‘20% scenario’). The Universities accepted that a number of
matters should then be brought to account by way of judicial estimation. They
suggested that this could be achieved by rounding
up the $7.24 million figure to
$10 million.
9 The parties are therefore far apart. The Universities’ proposal
results in a drop of $22.5 million from the remuneration
they agreed to pay for
2017-2018. This is a drop of around 69%.
10 The Universities submitted that a substantial reduction in remuneration
was warranted because reliance on the statutory licence
had been declining since
2000. There were two elements to this contention.
11 First, the evidence suggested that the Universities now had commercial
arrangements with publishers and encouraged their staff
to use these commercial
licence materials in preference to the statutory licence materials.
Consequently, it was to be inferred
that these practices had led to a decrease
in the extent to which the statutory licence was being used. Secondly,
statistical evidence
collected through annual surveys showed directly that the
statutory licence was being used less.
12 I do not accept either argument. As to the first, it suffers from
theoretical, forensic and empirical problems. Theoretically,
it involves a
non-sequitur: it does not follow that an increase in the use of commercial
licence materials necessitates a decrease
in the use of the statutory licence.
Forensically, it is deficient because whilst the evidence suggests that the
Universities have
in place policies which encourage their staff to use
commercial licence materials in preference to statutory licence materials, the
Universities did not provide persuasive evidence showing how successful these
policies are in practice. Empirically, the submission
is concerned with the use
of commercial licence materials as part of digital reading lists. The evidence
of Dr Hughes, however,
shows that there has been no statistically significant
decline in the use of digital materials in the period 2002-2019. It follows
that I cannot accept the Universities’ submission that a 69% drop in
remuneration is justified by the mere fact that they have
entered into
commercial licencing arrangements.
13 As to the second argument, what the statistical evidence actually shows is
that there has been a statistically significant decline
in hardcopy
photocopying, no statistically significant decline in digital use and, overall,
a statistically significant decline in
all uses. Digital use now accounts for
90% of usage and hardcopy photocopying for only 10%. I do not think that one
can get from
this material anything concrete.
14 I do not think therefore that this material provides support for the idea
that the remuneration should now be reduced by 69% or
$22.5 million. A
submission that the statistically significant decline in overall use might
warrant a modest reduction in the remuneration
might have had its attractions,
but the submission that a 69% reduction was justified was not of that character.
THE COMPETING METHODOLOGIES: CHOICE
15 Turning then to the their actual methodologies,
CAL’s approach involves using the 2017-2018 agreed amount of $32.5 million
as a comparable bargain to determine a base rate which is then adjusted by
judicial estimation to take into account various factors.
Universities’ approach treats the 1999 Determination as a valuation of the
worth of the statutory licence at that time
and seeks to update it for movements
in the CPI and various other factors to be taken into account using judicial
estimation. Curiously,
although the Universities justified their proposed 69%
reduction by reference to the rise of commercial licence use, this was not
matter which was reflected in the methodology they proposed. Their methodology
was based on actual pages copied or communicated
pursuant to the statutory
licence. The design of the electronic use survey (‘the EUS’) from
which that data was obtained
was explicit in only capturing statutory licence
materials and in excluding any copying or communicating which took place
to a commercial licence.
16 This entails two matters. First, that the 69% decrease in remuneration
implied by the Universities’ methodology does not
come from an increase in
commercial licence use since that use is not captured in the EUS. Secondly,
that the 69% drop implied by
their methodology comes from somewhere else. In
fact, it is clear that the lion’s share of the 69% results from the
Universities’
contention that the Tribunal should abandon the
parties’ previous practice of treating a work on a digital reading list as
having been communicated to each student in the course. Instead, the
Universities submit that the Tribunal should proceed on the
basis that each item
on a digital reading list is communicated, according to Mr Velez’s
evidence, only to an average of 11%
of the students in each class that
access the course materials. Acknowledging that the 11% figure
should not be used for quantitative purposes, the Universities nevertheless
submit that the lower ‘actual access’ rate should be taken into
account by reducing the rate of digital copying and communicating
17 In my view, as a matter of law, both methodologies are open to the
Tribunal: cf.
Phonographic Performance Company of Australia Limited under
[2016] ACopyT 3
effect, both methodologies use comparable transactions to establish a base rate
which is then to be adjusted by judicial estimation.
The difference between the
parties’ methodologies is in the comparable transactions and the outcome
of the judicial estimation.
For CAL, the comparable transaction is the $32.5
million agreed by the parties for 2017-2018. For the Universities, it is the
rates determined by the Tribunal in the 1999 Determination updated to
reflect movements in the CPI. Both parties then seek to rely
upon judicial
estimation to adjust the base rate.
18 In my view, the Tribunal’s 1999 Determination of page rates is a
better comparable transaction than the $32.5 million figure
agreed by the
parties for 2017-2018. This is because the $32.5 million was not derived from
usage rates generated by the hardcopy
survey (‘the HCS’) and EUS.
Indeed, the various negotiated remuneration amounts have not used usage rates
since 2002.
I am prepared to assume, in favour of CAL, that it might be legally
permissible to seek to determine the equitable remuneration
due by reference to
some concept other than usage. For example, it may be possible to determine the
equitable remuneration by reference
to profits made from the use of the
statutory licence (I express no view on this issue). But assuming it can be
done, there is nothing
to suggest that the $32.5 million figure agreed for
2017-2018 was an agreement about that matter. The problem is that the $32.5
million is not self-evidently linked to any metric other than the fact that it
was agreed. I am disinclined to give the fact that
it was agreed much weight
where, apart from the role of this Tribunal, CAL and the Universities were,
respectively, a monopolist
and a group of monopsonists. In any case, the
parties’ agreement on this figure was only reached because: (a)
the Act forced them to deal with each other or face expensive and unpredictable
Tribunal litigation; (b) they had very different
views about the remuneration to
which CAL was entitled but were willing to submerge those views for a short
period of time to avoid
finding themselves before this Tribunal; and (c) they
expressly agreed that their agreement as to the $32.5 million for 2017-2018
not represent any agreement between them as to the actual value of the copying
which was taking place.
19 On the other hand, the Tribunal’s determination of page rates in
1999 concerns the same subject matter insofar as hardcopy
photocopying rates are
concerned. Although it does not deal with digital copying or communicating, the
hardcopy rates nevertheless
provide a surer foundation from which to work.
Accordingly, I prefer in principle the Universities’ proposed use of the
rates determined in the 1999 Determination.
ADJUSTMENTS
Hardcopy Copying and Communication
20 The Tribunal set a rate
of 4 cents per page in 1999. At the same time it set a course-pack rate of 5
cents per page. The Universities
suggested that if one made the assumption that
in a blended copying rate of 4.5 cents per page. CAL accepted, if its
own methodology were rejected, that a blended rate was appropriate.
the rate for hardcopy photocopying at 4.5 cents per page. The CPI index value
for 4.5 cents in 2019 was 7.6 cents per
page. According to the surveys, there
were 36,194,400 hardcopies done in 2019 (i.e. 10% of the total number of pages
copied or communicated
in 2019). This results in an equitable remuneration of
$2,750,774.40.
Digital Reading Lists
21 The Tribunal has not yet determined a rate for
digital copying or communicating. The bulk of digital copying and communicating
happens through digital reading lists. The previous hardcopy course-pack rate
was 5 cents per page. In my view, there are a number
of advantages which
digital reading lists have over course-packs. First, because they are not
limited in physical size, they may
be much larger than course-packs. Secondly,
they are portable since they are able to be used wherever a student uses a
access them. Thirdly, where a student downloads the material, it may
be permanently stored as opposed to a course-pack, which as
a physical item, is
likely to have a less definite future. Fourthly, the quality of the copying is
superior. Fifthly, the material
may be manipulated in ways which are more
extensive than can be done with a course-pack. For example, detailed marginal
be made and, if the materials are in a searchable format, they may be
from such a work,
perhaps for quotation in an essay. These matters persuade me that the amenity
of digital reading lists substantially
exceeds that of a course-pack. The
decline of the latter and the rise of the former is consistent with that
observation. Consequently,
I will fix the rate for digital copying and
communicating at 5.5 cents per page. Indexed by the CPI in 2019, this is 9.3
22 Until now, the EUS has treated each work on a digital reading list as
having been communicated to every member of the course to
whom that list
relates. CAL submits that this status quo should be maintained. The
Universities submit that the evidence shows
that not all students access the
materials on digital reading lists. They suggest that the Tribunal should
proceed on the basis
that 20% of students actually access the works linked in
the digital reading lists.
Section 113P(1)
of the Act provides a defence to an infringement action if
the statutory licence is engaged. This directs attention to the right
which, relevantly, is the right to communicate a work to the public:
31(1)(a)(iv).
The ‘public’, that is ‘the copyright
owner’s public’, involved is the body of students to whom a digital
reading list is made available:
Telstra Corporation Limited v Australasian
Performing Right Association Ltd
[1997] HCA 41
(1997) 191 CLR 140
at 157. A work will be
communicated to the relevant public either by making it available online or by
electronically transmitting
it to individual members of the course:
definition of ‘communicate’. The rights conferred by
Act on the Universities consist of an entitlement to do these two sets of acts
without being sued for infringement.
24 In assessing equitable remuneration it is appropriate to take account of
both sets of rights.
25 The Universities derive considerable amenity from the use of the right to
make the works available online. This amenity includes:
(a) being able to
communicate works to students without having to contact them directly; (b) being
able to update reading lists without
having to engage in fresh direct acts of
electronic communication (e.g. email); and (c) being able to provide to their
students the
considerable facility of a digital reading list.
26 The Universities also derive amenity from the electronic transmission to
students of the work after a student clicks on a link
in a digital reading list.
It is true that the student derives amenity from this too, but the Universities
derive their amenity in
being able to offer such a service to their students.
However, this is, in substance, the same amenity which arises in relation
right to make the works available online which I have considered above at (c).
It should not be counted twice.
27 CAL submitted that it should be remunerated on the basis that each work on
a digital reading list is treated as having been communicated
students as there were in each course, i.e. at a rate of 100% of the students in
the course. The Universities said that
CAL should be remunerated on the basis
that the works were communicated to 20% of the students in each course. This
was on the basis
of evidence which suggested that not all students in fact
accessed the works on the digital reading lists. Although I did not find
Velez’s evidence about this persuasive from a quantification perspective
(and it was not suggested that I should), I do
accept that it is likely that a
good number students never do the readings for their courses. This is not a new
phenomenon.
28 In any event, the two sets of rights should be valued in tandem since they
are interrelated. The interrelationship is partial
only, however. Where a work
is downloaded from an online location, each electronic transmission of the work
will necessarily be
preceded by the act of making the work available online.
The converse, however, is not true: electronic transmission of a work may
without an antecedent act of making the work available online as, for example,
occurs where a work is sent by one person to
another by email. In such cases,
however, there is less likely to be an act of communication ‘to the
public’ within
the meaning of
s 31(1)(a)(iv):
Woolworths Ltd v Olson
[2004] NSWSC 849
184 FLR 121
. This outcome will, of course,
depend on the particular factual circumstances of each case and generalities may
be dangerous. For
example, an academic who emails a work to a class is likely
to have communicated it to the public within the meaning of
s 31(1)(a)(iv)
light of the way the concept of the relevant public has been approached (as
discussed above).
29 In the case of the Universities (but perhaps not in every case), the value
of both rights may be seen in some ways as being related
to the number of
students. I think it therefore appropriate to fix the equitable remuneration by
reference to a percentage of the
number of students in a class. In doing so, I
accept that some of the amenities I have identified as flowing to the
Universities,
from the entitlement under the first limb of the communication
right to use digital reading lists, are, in a sense, somewhat difficult
measure. I also accept that it is important to avoid double compensation
arising from the overlap between the right to make a
work available online and
the subsequent electronic transmission of that work as a result of its having
been made available in the
first place.
30 I have concluded that an appropriate figure is 75% of the students in each
class. This recognises the amenities derived by the
Universities I have
identified above, whilst providing for some discount to reflect the likely
import of the tentative discoveries
of Mr Velez. It also seeks to accord
meaningful value to the right to make a work available online.
31 Consequently, the equitable remuneration in relation to digital reading
lists should be calculated on the basis that the statutory
licence works on them
are communicated to 75% of the students in a course. CAL should therefore be
remunerated at a rate of 9.3
cents per page on 244,312,200 pages (75% of 90% of
the total number of pages copied and communicated in 2019) which is
$22,721,034.60.
32 This results in a base remuneration of $25,471,809.00 for both hardcopy
and digital use. Before passing on from this topic, the
position of the
individual copy which is made for uploading should be noted. Where a work
exists in hardcopy, the process of placing
it on an electronic reading list
involves the making of an initial digital copy. This is a
‘reproduction’ of the work
s 31(1)(a)(i)
of the Act and is
therefore a remunerable copy. However, in many cases, where a work is placed on
an electronic reading list, the
copy has already been made. On the scheme of
the issues in this case, the role of these individual copies is de minimis. I
think it is appropriate to adjust these figures further to take account
Collection Costs, Non-Centralised Copying and Artistic and
Whole Works
33 The Universities submitted that the Tribunal
should account for collection costs, the use of artistic and whole works and the
of non-centralised copying or communication by means of a rounding up
on their base remuneration. CAL agreed that judicial estimation
was appropriate
for these matters although it did draw attention to some evidence of Mr Suckling
that CAL’s collection costs
were $4.75 million. I did not find this
evidence persuasive as the annual report upon which it was based was not in
34 I propose to adopt the Universities’ methodology to account for
these three matters by way of an adjustment to the base remuneration
$25,471,809. The Universities’ proposed base remuneration was $7.24
million for 2018 which they rounded up to $10 million.
This rounding up may be
viewed as the addition of a fixed amount – $2.76 million – to the
base remuneration. Alternatively,
it may be viewed as a 38% increase in the
base remuneration. I reject the Universities’ submission ([341]) that it
a 25% increase in the base remuneration for which they contend; the
arithmetic is wrong.
35 It is possible that some parts of the $2.76 million reflect fixed items
and some parts proportionate elements. The present question
is whether the
Universities’ methodology requires the Tribunal:
(a) to add $2.76 million to the base remuneration which has been determined,
$25,471,809.00, which would result in a rounding up
to $28,231,809.00;
(b) increase the base remuneration, $25,471,809.00, by 38% which would result in
a rounding up to $35,151,096.42; or
(c) some intermediate position.
36 I propose to take the second course. There are two reasons for this.
First, whilst it is possible to view the collection costs
as fixed, the
Universities contended that they had been included as part of the 4 cents per
page determination in 1999 (see [419])
which suggests that they are a
proportionate expense. Secondly, the Universities themselves referred to a
percentage rate for the
uplift rather than an absolute figure (see [341]).
37 I therefore determine that the global equitable remuneration for 2019 is
$35,151,096.42.
OTHER MATTERS
38 Regulation 73(2)(f) requires the Tribunal to take
into account the special circumstances of external students. Neither party
to put external students on a different footing except perhaps in
relation to the issue of COVID-19, in relation to which CAL submitted
external student use had increased. Accepting that to be true, however, neither
party suggested that the position of those
students who were external differed
in relation to the subject matter of this reference in any way which was
material. Consequently,
I will take this matter into account by concluding that
in this case it has no discernible impact on the figure in the preceding
39 Regulation 73(2)(g) requires the Tribunal to take into account
unremunerated contributions by the Universities to the creation
of the material
copied under the statutory licence. The Universities contended that their staff
worked for some of the journals
which produced works which were then subject to
the statutory licence. This appears likely to be the case. I will take it into
account by reducing the figure in [37] to $35,100,000.00.
40 The Universities submitted that the Tribunal should only make a
determination for the years 2019-2021. They contended that the
parties would
likely negotiate agreements based on the present determination and that the
impact of COVID-19 on copying and communication
practices would be better
understood and accounted for after 2021. I do not accept this submission. Even
if I did, the impact of
COVID-19 on copying and communication practices to date
provides little guidance on how works will be used going forward. A better
approach, as I outline below, is systemically to recalculate this figure every
five years based on actual copying and communication
41 The topic of non-centralised use should also be noted. CAL submitted that
there should be an increase in remuneration to reflect
the fact that
non-centralised use is not presently measured. As I have indicated above, the
Universities’ methodology supported
some upward adjustment for
non-centralised use to be reflected by way of judicial estimation. Consistent
with that concession, anecdotal
evidence from some of CAL’s solicitors, as
to their experiences as students with digital reading lists, suggests that
non-centralised
use is a real phenomenon.
42 Although I have used the Universities’ methodology to include the
effects of non-centralised use in rounding up the base
remuneration, I am sure
that it is something which may be much more accurately measured. The
difficulties which exist lie in the
current form of the survey methodology which
does not capture this kind of use. If the issue can be addressed by adjusting
method and/or by requiring the Universities to give access to a
broader range of teaching materials, this would provide a superior
mechanism for
approaching the task of judicial estimation. This would be preferable to the
approach which I have taken on the present
43 As I later explain, it is time for the survey method to be revisited and
this is one of the topics which can be examined in that
44 I have mentioned the Universities’ contention above that a reduction
is warranted because of the increase in commercial licence
use. Because the
methodology the Tribunal has adopted depends, for its efficacy, upon the output
of the survey process which is
explicit in only capturing statutory licence use,
this concern does not arise. CAL sought access to the reading lists themselves
and to a list of licensors so the effect of commercial licences could be
measured. That concern likewise falls away under the methodology
the Tribunal
has adopted.
45 Finally, there was a debate between the parties as to the extent of
copying which had taken place during the COVID-19 pandemic
pursuant to s 200AB.
The principal point of this debate appears to have been to allow the parties to
trade insults. Certainly,
nothing useful came from it from the Tribunal’s
perspective. Whether uses should be recorded as uses under s 200AB or instead
as statutory licence uses is more meaningfully considered, if it is to be
considered at all, at the level of survey design.
HOW SHOULD THE EQUITABLE REMUNERATION BE EXPRESSED: GLOBALLY,
AS AN EFTSU RATE OR AS A SHARE OF REVENUE?
46 The number of students at any one time has a
direct impact on the extent of the use of the statutory license materials; twice
many students will double the likelihood of reading materials being used.
This provides some reason to convert the global sum into
an ‘Equivalent
Full Time Student Unit’ (‘EFTSU’) rate using the number of
EFTSU in 2019. On the other hand,
one risk with an EFTSU rate is that it
becomes decoupled from actual usage over time. Another is that if the
Universities are being
charged on an EFTSU basis then this removes incentives
for them to keep copying to a minimum.
47 On balance, I accept that an EFTSU rate is a useful short term proxy for
the use of the statutory licence provided it is initially
calculated by
reference to actual use and so long as it is regularly recalculated by reference
to actual use.
48 The risks of using an EFTSU rate may therefore be adequately addressed by
requiring the EFTSU rate to be re-determined every four
years on the basis of
the data emerging from the HCS and EUS for the preceding four years. The
figures should continue to be prepared
as they have in the past on the basis of
three-year rolling averages.
49 Consequently, the sum of $35,100,000.00 for 2019 is to be converted into
an EFTSU rate which is to be increased in line with the
CPI for 2020, 2021 and
2022. At the end of 2022, a fresh EFTSU rate is to be calculated from the data
for 2019-2022 and this new
rate is to be applied in the final year, 2023, and
subsequent years until the next revaluation.
50 In terms of reg 73(2)(c), I am satisfied that this base rate will provide
an adequate incentive for the creation of educational
works. The previous
remuneration agreed by the parties for 2017-2018 was $32.5 million. This
determination therefore results in
a moderate increase from the previous amount.
I do not think that setting the remuneration at this moderately increased level
impact deleteriously on the incentives which exist for the production of
educational works.
51 I do not think it would be sensible to convert the global remuneration
into a revenue proportion. There are two reasons for this.
First, there may be
difficulties in defining revenue in a way which is sufficiently clear.
Secondly, revenue is not as good a proxy
for the degree to which the statutory
license is being used as is the number of students.
52 I do not accept CAL’s submission that the HCS and the EUS are no
longer fit for purpose. Whilst the process is certainly
clunky and expensive,
its deficiencies are not such as to mean that the data it provides is inaccurate
in the long term. More importantly,
there is no obvious replacement. A move to
a pure EFTSU rate or revenue share model, untethered to usage levels, would not
in the long term to changes in the way the statutory licence is used.
Consequently, their use will eventually give rise to disputation
when one party
eventually claims that the rates are no longer properly connected with usage.
On the other hand, this problem of
drift is not such a problem if a revaluation
of the EFTSU rate is carried out every five years.
53 I do in principle accept CAL’s submission that it is time that the
surveys were revisited. The Universities deny that the
Tribunal has the power
to vary the survey methodology as the proceeding is presently constituted. They
also deny that they have
been afforded an opportunity of being properly heard on
any changes to the survey methodology.
54 The appropriate course therefore is this. First, the parties are to bring
in a minute of order giving effect to these reasons.
If there needs to be any
further argument about those orders this can be arranged with my Associates.
Secondly, CAL should reformulate
its application so that the Universities’
procedural objection that there is presently no ‘question’ before
Tribunal, under reg 72(e), ceases to have any currency. Thirdly, both
parties should flag to each other what they would like to
see by way of
variation to the survey methodology. To that list should be added my concern to
gauge non-centralised use more precisely.
Fourthly, there should be timetabling
orders for the preparation of these survey methodology issues for hearing.
There should be
no more than 10 pages of submissions on either side.
I certify that the preceding fifty-four (54)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Determination of the
constituted by the Honourable Justice Perram (Deputy
Dated: 31 May 2022
CT 4 of 2018
Respondents
Fourth Respondent:
FEDERATION UNIVERSITY
Fifth Respondent:
BOND UNIVERSITY
Sixth Respondent:
UNIVERSITY OF CANBERRA
Seventh Respondent:
CENTRAL QUEENSLAND UNIVERSITY
Eighth Respondent:
CHARLES STURT UNIVERSITY
Ninth Respondent:
CURTIN UNIVERSITY
Tenth Respondent:
DEAKIN UNIVERSITY
Eleventh Respondent:
EDITH COWAN UNIVERSITY
Twelfth Respondent:
FLINDERS UNIVERSITY
Thirteenth Respondent:
GRIFFITH UNIVERSITY
Fourteenth Respondent:
JAMES COOK UNIVERSITY
Fifteenth Respondent:
LA TROBE UNIVERSITY
Sixteenth Respondent:
MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY
Seventeenth Respondent:
THE UNIVERSITY OF MELBOURNE
Eighteenth Respondent:
MONASH UNIVERSITY
Nineteenth Respondent:
MURDOCH UNIVERSITY
Twentieth Respondent:
THE UNIVERSITY OF NEW ENGLAND
Twenty-First Respondent:
UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Twenty-Second Respondent:
THE UNIVERSITY OF NEWCASTLE
Twenty-Third Respondent:
CHARLES DARWIN UNIVERSITY
Twenty-Fourth Respondent:
THE UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND
Twenty-Fifth Respondent:
QUEENSLAND UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY
Twenty-Sixth Respondent:
RMIT UNIVERSITY
Twenty-Seventh Respondent:
SOUTHERN CROSS UNIVERSITY
Twenty-Eighth Respondent:
SWINBURNE UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY
Twenty-Ninth Respondent:
THE UNIVERSITY OF SYDNEY
Thirtieth Respondent:
UNIVERSITY OF TASMANIA
Thirty-First Respondent:
UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
Thirty-Second Respondent:
UNIVERSITY OF THE SUNSHINE COAST
Thirty-Third Respondent:
UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY, SYDNEY
Thirty-Fourth Respondent:
VICTORIA UNIVERSITY
Thirty-Fifth Respondent:
THE UNIVERSITY OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
Thirty-Sixth Respondent:
WESTERN SYDNEY UNIVERSITY
Thirty-Seventh Respondent:
UNIVERSITY OF WOLLONGONG
Thirty-Eight Respondent:
UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN QUEENSLAND
Thirty-Ninth Respondent:
THE UNIVERSITY OF NOTRE DAME AUSTRALIA
RTF format (495 KB)
Signed PDF/A format