Department of Human Services: Own motion investigation report [2014] AICmrCN 6 (2 December 2014)
Department of Human Services
of an own motion investigation
December 2014
Prof John McMillan, Australian Information Commissioner
Executive summary
The Australian
Information Commissioner, Professor John McMillan, commenced this own motion
investigation in response to negative
trends identified in the outcome of
requests made to the Department of Human Services (the
recent years under the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
These trends were apparent after analysis of statistics reported by the
department under s 93 of the FOI Act, and in concerns raised
by complainants and
IC review applicants with the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
). The OAIC observed the following changes between 2011–12 and
an increase in
the department’s use of the FOI Act practical refusal mechanism, from 33
occasions in 2011–12 to 777 in
a decline in the
number of FOI requests to which access to documents was given in full, from 58%
of requests in 2011–12 to 26%
an increase in
the number of applications for Information Commissioner (IC) review of the
department’s access refusal decisions,
from 49 IC review applications in
2011–12 to 95 in 2013–14.
The OAIC has received
complaints about changes in the department’s FOI practices from individual
applicants and representative
organisations, in particular, members of the
National Welfare Rights Network (
). NWRN members complained that they
could no longer obtain Centrelink information about their clients that they had
routinely and
quickly received via FOI in the past. The NWRN members said this
was seriously impeding their ability to assist their clients, for
example, in
investigations initiated by the department or in querying or challenging adverse
departmental decisions.
The overall impressions arising from the above information and statistical
analysis were of increased complexity in the department’s
FOI practices
and less information being released under the FOI Act than previously. As a
consequence, the Commissioner decided to
commence an investigation on
7 October 2014 to explore those impressions and identify the cause of any
negative changes in FOI processing.
A more complex and balanced picture of FOI processing in the department has
emerged during the course of this own motion investigation.
The explanation in
part is that changes occurred in how the department handles FOI requests since
2011–12, particularly large
requests and requests involving third party
information.
While a lower proportion of FOI requests finalised by the department result
in information release than previously, the department’s
performance has
improved in other areas. For instance, in the 2014–15 reporting year to
date, the department says that it met
statutory processing deadlines for 97% of
FOI requests. This improved timeliness occurred in the context of an increasing
of requests and without a significant increase in staffing levels. The
department also says that its decisions and processes are
now more in line with
the terms of the FOI Act. Under its earlier approach, the department rarely
utilised the practical refusal
mechanism in the Act, and a consequence was that
a small number of requests consumed a large proportion of departmental FOI
The department has explained that the reduced proportion of FOI requests that
led to document release is a result of a conscious effort
to divert FOI requests
to informal ‘administrative access’ schemes where possible. Although
these requests are recorded
as ‘withdrawn’ in the department’s
reported statistics, in many of these cases the applicant has in fact received
some information, though not via FOI. The Information Commissioner has promoted
the use of administrative access arrangements by
Nonetheless, based on the information obtained during this investigation,
many of the concerns raised by the NWRN and other departmental
FOI stakeholders
are genuine. The department’s approach to FOI has caused an increasing
number of its FOI customers to seek
IC review of the department’s
decisions or to make a formal complaint to the OAIC.
The department’s focus on improving its technical compliance with the
procedural, exemption, and consultation provisions in
the FOI Act has, in the
Commissioner’s view, had unintended consequences which are inconsistent
with the pro-disclosure objectives
that lie at the heart of the FOI Act.
The department’s high reliance on the practical refusal mechanism in
the Act is also a concern, particularly when a practical
refusal decision may
preclude an individual from obtaining access to a high volume of information
collected by the department that
is relevant to a departmental decision that has
a significant adverse impact on that individual.
Under arrangements contained within the
Freedom of Information Amendment
(New Arrangements) Bill 2014
, which is currently before Parliament, the
exclusively
to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT). Current trends in the
department’s FOI processing could lead to one or more of
a number of
foreseeable outcomes:
a reduction in
access to information for applicants who are unwilling to appeal to the AAT
against an access refusal decision
an increase in
the number of department decisions that are appealed to the AAT, as many
department clients may be exempt from AAT
an increase in
requests to the department under the
(Cth) for access to
personal information, because of the simple request and complaint procedures in
an increase in
complaints to the Commonwealth Ombudsman about the department’s FOI
processing.
The Commissioner considers that the department could, by
addressing three key themes in this report, improve FOI processing by assisting
applicants to obtain information and reducing the rate at which its decisions
become subject to review. The three themes in the recommendations
aim to assist
the department to:
pro-disclosure culture amongst departmental staff, consistent with the objects
of the FOI Act and the personal information
access provisions of the
simplify the FOI
experience for the department’s customers and provide greater assistance
to prospective FOI applicants
improve the
administration of the practical refusal process, with the objective of using the
s 24AB consultation process to negotiate
a successful outcome to each FOI
The Commissioner is confident that the department can
implement these recommendations without losing the benefits gained by improving
the technical and legal capabilities of its FOI unit.
The analysis and findings in this report are relevant more generally to FOI
processing in Australian Government agencies. While the
department is in the
exceptional position that it receives more FOI requests than any other agency
(except the Department of Immigration
and Border Protection), the FOI
processing environment analysed in this report is not dissimilar to that in many
agencies. Circumstances
that have given rise to some of the FOI processing
challenges discussed in this report include: the increased volume of information
held by the department in a digital setting that may be relevant to an
individual customer; the importance of that information to
a customer when
querying adverse departmental action; a possible need for third party
consultation before information is released;
and the department’s
objective of striking an effective balance between encouraging administrative
access and FOI Act requests
for information.
The general findings of this investigation should be heeded by all agencies.
One is the importance of establishing an internal culture
and procedures that
(to quote the FOI Act objective) ‘facilitate and promote public access to
information, promptly and at
the lowest reasonable cost’ (s 3(4)).
Another is that small practical steps can make an important difference in
meeting that objective. The recommendations in this report
contain many specific
suggestions on how the department (and potentially other agencies) could improve
FOI Act processing.
A third general finding is that it is essential that agencies adopt
performance measures for gauging whether the reasonable expectations
applicants are being met. This report refers at many points to statistics about
FOI processing in the department and draws
comparisons with other agencies and
with the statutory benchmarks in the FOI Act. While these metrics can never
provide a full picture
of the challenges that face an agency in FOI
administration, they are an important starting point and can prompt a deeper and
The Commissioner and the OAIC acknowledge and appreciate the assistance to
this investigation provided by officers of the department’s
Information Release Branch. The investigation was conducted to a tight
timeframe, yet the department readily engaged with
the OAIC, and provided
comprehensive submissions and supporting material. That material displayed the
professional way the department
has approached its FOI Act responsibilities in
its internal manuals, staff training, procedures, correspondence, supervision
structures.
The investigation was also greatly assisted by submissions received (on
invitation) from some NWRN members and the Commonwealth Ombudsman.
submissions pointed to the practical difficulties some applicants faced in
making information access requests to the department
and the importance of the
information requested to the applicants.
Recommendations
Improvements suggested by the department
department informed the OAIC after the commencement of this own motion
investigation that it was in the process of implementing
three enhancements
which addressed some of the issues raised in the issues paper:
will add to our existing guidance provided to all department staff by developing
a training package and commencing an assistance
phone line manned by FOI staff
to ensure all departmental staff are confident in how to assist customers to
receive documents administratively
in a practical way thereby reducing, wherever
possible, the need for customers to make formal FOI requests.
will continue to analyse random samples of FOI matters to look at the way we
communicate with our clients and develop practical
improvements to our processes
(including template letters).
will work with the NWRN to assist them to develop practical guidance for members
of NWRN about how to make requests which do not
involve a practical refusal
The department
also advised the OAIC that it had recently amended its processes so that all
formal FOI correspondence is now cleared
by a senior (executive level) member of
the FOI team.
Those enhancements are a positive response, consistent with the statement
from the department that it is ‘committed to transforming
and improving
how we deliver services to our clients, including FOI services’. However,
the Commissioner’s observation
is that the proposed enhancements and
revised clearance processes are directed primarily to improving technical
compliance and decision
making consistency, rather than being directed towards
improving FOI outcomes.
The Commissioner’s central concern, reflected in the findings and
recommendations in this report, is that the department needs
to promote a
stronger prodisclosure culture within its FOI unit that is attuned to its
customer service commitments and the FOI Act
objective of providing prompt and
inexpensive access to information upon request. It is not apparent from this
investigation that
the department’s understanding and compliance with
formal FOI Act processing requirements is an area of significant concern.
problem, rather, is that a focus on formal compliance has, in the
Commissioner’s view, overshadowed other elements of a
pro-disclosure culture.
Increased internal compliance controls such as those suggested by the
department may improve the department’s success rate at
appeal. An equally
important objective is to improve customer service, thereby reducing the need
for FOI complaints and review applications.
This report contains the Commissioner’s suggestions and recommendations
to the department to promote that broader information
access culture, and to
further the objects of the FOI Act and the right of individuals to access their
own personal information under
Summary of recommendations
The Commissioner’s
recommendations in this report are grouped into three themes that aim to assist
the department to:
pro-disclosure culture among departmental staff, consistent with the objects of
the FOI Act and the personal information
access provisions of the
simplify the FOI
experience for the department’s customers and provide greater assistance
to prospective FOI applicants
improve the
administration of the practical refusal process, with the objective of using the
s 24AB consultation process to negotiate
a successful outcome to each FOI
Promote a pro-disclosure culture
Recommendation
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department take the
following action to promote a stronger pro-disclosure culture
in administering
FOI and information access requests:
• the Secretary, or relevant Deputy Secretary with responsibility for
FOI and information access, issue a statement to FOI
and information access
officers promoting the need for a strong pro-disclosure culture in the
department that is customer-focussed
and is guided by the objects of the FOI
• the department’s FOI Procedures Manual and FOI training
material be amended to refer to the objects of the Act and
the important role
that FOI can play in providing necessary information to customers of the
• the department track and analyse the outcome of FOI requests and
monitor rates of disclosure and refusal relative to other
Recommendation 2
The Information Commissioner recommends that the
department assess the feasibility of measuring customer-satisfaction with the
department’s
FOI service and using this as a measure of performance for
the FOI unit.
Simplify FOI customer experience
Recommendation
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department add a clear
statement to its FOI Procedures Manual that procedural requirements
(such as an
applicant giving a notice in writing, or responding within a specific timeframe)
can and should be adjusted for clients
who have difficulty complying with those
Recommendation 4
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department consider and
implement steps for improving communication with FOI applicants,
including by:
• providing training to FOI officers in plain-English writing
principles, and encouraging use of those principles in departmental
communications
• obtaining customer feedback on FOI communications and published
information to ensure it is accessible to the department’s
• incorporating early telephone contact into its FOI procedures,
particularly during any s 24AB request consultation process.
Recommendation 5
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department revise its FOI
web page, including by:
• reviewing the content of the web page
• making the FOI request form available on the web page.
Recommendation 6
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department take steps to
assist applicants to make clearer and more manageable requests,
• providing a telephone contact number on the website and in relevant
correspondence for prospective FOI applicants
• publishing a list of categories of frequently released documents
(and documents that are typically withheld from release);
this list could refer
applicants to administrative access channels where these are available for
particular categories of documents
• reviewing any published list every twelve months
• finalising the draft Consultation Request Process form and making it
available to prospective FOI applicants, including by
incorporating it in the
department's FOI request form.
Recommendation 7
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department review its FOI
and administrative access arrangements, and suggests that:
• an applicant who has made a straightforward FOI request for access
to a nonsensitive document is not redirected unnecessarily
to an administrative
access path
• the department adopt a ‘one request, one release’
approach where possible, rather than splitting requests into
administrative and
FOI components
• the department’s administrative access arrangements are
consistent with APP 12 requirements
• the administrative access arrangements are published on the
department’s website.
Improve the practical refusal process
Recommendation
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department monitor its
reliance on the practical refusal provisions in the FOI Act
in the following
• by including statistics on practical refusal actions in the
department’s Executive FOI Report
• aiming to bring its use of the practical refusal provisions
(currently 17% of all requests) closer to the rate seen across
the Commonwealth
(6% of all requests)
• continuously reviewing its methods for estimating processing times
for the purpose of s 24AA
• recording the outcome of practical refusal request consultation
processes and using this as a performance metric for the
Recommendation 9
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department provide better
assistance to applicants in a request consultation process
• amending its FOI Procedure Manual to include guidance for FOI
officers about how to assist applicants to revise the scope
of an FOI request so
that a practical refusal decision will not be made
• modifying its procedures to require telephone contact where possible
before a request consultation notice is formally issued,
so that an FOI officer
can better understand what information the applicant seeks access to and can
assist the applicant to make
a revised request.
Recommendation 10
The Information Commissioner recommends that when deciding whether a
particular FOI request would ‘unreasonably divert’
the resources of
the department from other operations, subject to s 24AA(3), the department have
regard to relevant surrounding circumstances,
such as the volume of material
that may form part of an individual’s case file, and whether disclosure of
the documents will
cast light on a decision that has a significant impact on an
Recommendation 11
Given the nature of the department’s work, the Information Commissioner
recommends that the department should expect and plan
for a small number of
large requests and should not expect that all requests can suitably be processed
within an estimated 40 hours.
Recommendation 12
The Commissioner recommends that the Serious Non-Compliance Branch and the
FOI and Information Access Branch of the department work
together to identify
the cause of substantial FOI processing times, and implement measures at the
time of information collection,
creation, and storage that will facilitate
efficient processing of requests.
Recommendation 13
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department continue to
consult with the NWRN to understand the information that it
requires to assist
its clients, and to develop responsive processes to help the NWRN obtain that
information.
Background to investigation
Decision to conduct investigation
Australian Information Commissioner decided to conduct this own motion
investigation to identify the cause of an apparent change
in FOI processing
standards at the Department of Human Services between the 2011–12 and
2013–14 reporting years.
The OAIC became aware of this change by observing issues that appeared in an
increasing number of IC review applications and complaints,
and through analysis
of statistics reported by the department under s 93 of the FOI Act.
Issues identified in complaint and review applications
A significant factor in the Commissioner’s decision to conduct this
investigation was an increase in the appeal rate of the
department’s FOI
decisions, and criticisms made of the department by IC review applicants and
complainants.
An increase in the department’s FOI review rate is apparent both in
absolute terms, and as a proportion of all IC review applications
received by
The OAIC received 49 applications for IC review regarding the department in
2011–12. This made up 11% of all requests for IC
review lodged in that
year. The number of IC review applications against departmental decisions rose
to 81 in 2012–13 (16%
of all applications), and 95 in 2013–14 (18%
of all applications). By comparison, the department made approximately 12% of
all FOI decisions in the Commonwealth in 2013–14.
From 2012–13 onwards, the OAIC received regular comments about
detrimental changes in the department’s FOI practice from
applicants and representative organisations. Most significantly, the OAIC
received a series of IC review applications
and complaints from members of the
NWRN, the peak community organisation in the area of social security law, policy
and administration.
Its members are community legal centres and organisations
whose role is to provide disadvantaged people with free information, advice,
education and representation in the areas of social security and family
assistance.
Members of the NWRN complained to that OAIC that requests they had previously
made on a regular basis to Centrelink to assist their
clients were no longer
being processed quickly nor successfully. NWRN members complained that many of
their requests were said by
the department to be too large, and to trigger the
FOI Act’s practical refusal mechanism, while in contrast prior to 2013
similar requests had been processed expeditiously.
Statistical trends
In 2011–12, the department finalised 3735 requests, 88% of which
released documents (in part or in full). In contrast, in 2013–14
department finalised 4445 requests, 62% of which released documents. This
compares unfavourably to other departments that receive
a large number of FOI
requests that predominately concern personal information (the Department of
Immigration and Border Protection,
and the Department of Veterans’
Table 1: Outcome of FOI requests finalised by DHS, DIBP and DVA in
Access granted in full
Access granted in part
Access refused
Transferred
Between 2011–12 and 2013–14, the department increased its use
of the practical refusal mechanism in s 24AB of the FOI
Act approximately
twenty-fold: from 33 occasions in 2011–12, to 777 occasions in
2013–14. This contributed significantly
to an increase in the use of s
24AB across all Australian Government agencies. Across the Australian
Government, s 24AB was used
314 times in 2011–12, and 1757 times in
The Commissioner’s decision to launch this investigation was also
influenced by the appearance of a growing ‘backlog’
of requests at
the department. However, the own motion investigation revealed that the
statistical information the department reported
in relation to request numbers
in 2013–14 under s 93 of the FOI Act was incorrect, and in fact there was
no backlog of requests.
Decision to investigate
The overall impression caused by the above issues was that since
2011–12, FOI outcomes at the department had changed, with less
information
being released under the FOI Act. This informed the Commissioner’s
decision to commence an investigation on 10
October 2014.
Although one of the issues (the appearance of a backlog) was discovered early
in the own motion investigation to be an error in the
department’s
reported statistics, the Commissioner decided to continue the investigation on
the basis that other issues warranted
investigation.
Investigation process
On 7 October 2014,
the Commissioner notified the department that he was commencing an own motion
investigation into the department’s
FOI handling under s 69(2) of the
FOI Act. The Commissioner provided an issues paper to the department which set
out preliminary
views and concerns about the department’s FOI practices,
and drew the department’s attention to a number of particular
and complaint case studies.
On 13 October 2014, officers of the OAIC met with the department to discuss
the investigation and to answer questions regarding the
issues paper. At this
meeting, the department advised that the statistical information submitted to
the OAIC for the 2013–14
reporting year was incorrect, and undertook to
provide corrected information as soon as possible. The OAIC agreed to send more
information about the IC review applications and complaints that had
informed the decision to commence an investigation.
On 20 October 2014, DHS provided corrected statistical information to the
OAIC, and the OAIC supplied more detailed information about
individual cases of
concern to the department.
To obtain input from departmental stakeholders, on 21 October 2014 the OAIC
wrote to each of the 5 organisations that in the last
18 months had made
multiple applications for review and complaints to the OAIC on behalf of
departmental clients. These organisations
were all members of the NWRN. The OAIC
also wrote to the Commonwealth Ombudsman to advise it of the own motion
investigation, and
to request the Ombudsman’s input. Submissions were
provided from the Ombudsman and three members of the NWRN:
North Australian
Aboriginal Justice Agency (
NSW Welfare
Rights Centre (
Welfare Rights
and Advocacy Service (
On 18 November 2014, the
department provided a response to the issues paper. The department provided
detailed commentary on each of
the case studies referred to in the issues paper,
and provided a range of supporting documents. The response described changes to
the department’s practices and organisational structures since
The Commissioner considered the information provided by the department, and
2 December 2014, provided these investigation results to the
department.
The department responded on 10 December 2014 and advised that it would
implement the Commissioner’s recommendations. A copy
department’s response is included at
The Commissioner notes the relatively short timeframe over which this
investigation has been conducted and appreciates the department’s
engagement with the process, its comprehensive response to the issues paper and
its assistance through compliance with relatively
short timeframes for
Material considered
The OAIC considered the
following material in the course of this own motion investigation:
Case studies of
59 IC review applications and 22 FOI complaints made to the OAIC about the
department’s response to each case study
department’s FOI Procedure Manual
Various template
Current and
historical organisational and FOI team organisational charts
department’s FOI training material
department’s FOI webpage
Internal contact
sheets used by FOI officers
provided by the department to NWRN members explaining administrative access
material about the department’s decision making process:
Departmental
decision making ‘trees’
E-reference
A submission
from the department
submissions from members of the National Welfare Rights Network
A submission
from the Commonwealth Ombudsman.
Investigation results
The issues paper grouped
the Commissioner’s concerns about FOI administration at the department
into three categories:
legal and technical formality in interpreting and processing FOI requests
Accessibility
of the department's FOI services, particularly to clients with specific
use of the FOI Act practical refusal mechanism.
The issues paper
also invited comment about changes to the department’s FOI processes and
organisational structure between 2011–12
and 2013–14.
The department cooperated with the Commissioner’s investigation and
provided a comprehensive response on each issue.
Promoting a pro-disclosure approach
The Commissioner’s
issues paper expressed a preliminary view that the department’s approach
to FOI was overly focused
on compliance with the exemption and procedural
provisions of the FOI Act, resulting in outcomes that were contrary to the
prodisclosure
objects of the Act.
Framework for evaluating the department’s
Better Practice
Guide for Commonwealth agencies administering the
Freedom of Information Act
was published as part of a review of the operation of the FOI Act
conducted by Dr Allan Hawke AC in 2013. The Guide was prepared
in consultation
with fourteen Australian Government agencies with significant FOI workloads. The
Better Practice Guide documents
three main approaches to administering the
FOI administration can be approached from a range of
perspectives. One approach is to focus on the intent of the FOI Act through its
objects which include providing access to documents at the lowest reasonable
cost. Taking this approach maximises provision of information,
but may lead to
overlooking mechanisms that support the agency in trying to balance competing
priorities, including competing FOI
requests - for example, practical refusal
processes (see Chapter 4) and the charges regime (see Chapter 7).
Second, FOI can also be approached in a technical way which focuses on the
letter of the law. This generally leads the agency to
take a firm stance on
things like charges and the exemption provisions. While this has the advantage
of creating greater certainty
around how FOI requests will be handled, it may
also lead to inflexibility and can be at odds with the spirit and objects of the
The third is to take a win-win attitude, or a 'give a little, get a little'
approach. There are many opportunities for negotiation
in processing an FOI
request, around issues like scope or size of the request, imposition of
processing charges, handling information
finalising the request, and timing and form of release and publication of
documents. Positive
relationships with FOI applicants can significantly enhance
an agency's experiences and lead to better overall outcomes for the FOI
Treating all applicants fairly and consistently is
The Guide notes that most agencies apply these approaches to differing
degrees, depending upon the circumstances of individual requests.
But culture,
leadership, agency processes, and even individual FOI decision makers’
preferences can result in one or more of
the approaches being favoured.
The approaches outlined in the Guide provide a useful framework for
considering the department’s approach to FOI.
Changes to organisational structure at the department
Prior to the
2012–13 reporting year, the Ombudsman, Privacy and FOI (
Branch in the department was responsible for the FOI function under the
leadership of a National Manager. During 2012–13,
the department
established a Strategic Information Management Legal Branch, under the
leadership of a General Counsel, staffed primarily
by legal officers. This
branch worked in tandem with the OPFOI Branch. The Strategic Information
Management Legal Branch was also
responsible for handling the bulk of the
department’s FOI review workload.
During 2013–14, these two branches were superseded by a dedicated FOI
and Information Release Branch under the leadership of
a General Counsel (the
department’s privacy and Ombudsman functions were moved to two other
branches within the department’s
legal division, each under the leadership
of a General Counsel).
The department provided the OAIC with a copy of its FOI team organisational
chart and staffing levels at 27 September 2012 and 13
November 2014. The
staffing level has remained relatively stable, although the composition of the
team now contains a higher proportion
of executive level staff. A small number
of legal officer positions in the FOI team are responsible for processing
complex and ‘nonpersonal
information’ FOI requests, and two of the
three EL2 positions in the team are legal positions.
Table 2: FOI team staffing profile
Comments from FOI users
Some of the
organisations consulted by the OAIC provided commentary suggesting a changed
approach to FOI by the department. NAAJA
described a changed experience using
FOI at the department:
NAAJA has been making FOI requests on behalf of our
clients to DHS since 2008. Before early 2013, we had no experience of an FOI
being refused. Third party information was redacted where necessary.
Documents were generally provided within or close to the 30
day period and if
FOI needed more time they would phone us and negotiate this. ...
FOI requests are now processed by lawyers rather than trained FOI staff with
experience of the Centrelink system. ... We are concerned
that the lawyers do
not have a good understanding of the DHS file/document management systems and
this impacts on the quality of
the decisions made under FOI. ...
Since 2013, we have received a number of responses in which the DHS states that
it intends to refuse the requests under s 24AB of
the FOI Act 'on the basis that
the work involved in processing the request would substantially and unreasonably
divert the resources
of the department from its other operations'. Often these
letters are sent after a request for a 30 day extension to process the
We have then been given the opportunity to 'revise the scope' of our FOI
request. After doing this, we receive a more limited
range of documents some
three or more months later.
[W]e received detailed letters, up to 10 pages in length, which are legalistic,
dense and not drafted in plain English. Considerable
resources have obviously
been expended by DHS in drafting, approving and finalizing these letters –
we consider that scarce
resources could be better spent by communicating with
the applicant to identify what information is required, and producing the
information
in a timely
WRAS commented on changes in the department’s decision letters:
Our centre has noticed that since April 2013 the
decision letters sent by DHS FOI officers have changed significantly. We have
to understand the meaning of some letters. There has been a marked
increase in length, complexity of language and use of what appears
to be chunks
of text that have been 'cut and pasted' and at the same time there has been a
marked reduction in the number of documents
released to a
The department’s current approach
Prior to 2012, the
department had a higher information release rate, made minimal practical refusal
decisions, and experienced lower
rates of FOI review. As noted in the background
section above, the overall outcome profile of the department’s FOI work
changed, expressed as lower rates of information release under FOI and
increased use of the FOI Act's practical refusal mechanism.
The Department’s FOI Procedures Manual states that legal obligations of
the department are the paramount consideration in FOI
processing. The following
introductory statement appears on page 1 of the department’s FOI
procedural manual (emphasis in original):
It may be appropriate in certain circumstances, to
diverge from the procedures in this Manual. This should only be done following
discussions with the relevant General Counsel. It is unacceptable to diverge
from the procedures in this Manual if this results in
the statutory requirements
Freedom of Information Act 1998
(FOI Act) (sic) not being met.
The department’s obligations under the FOI Act are the paramount
consideration in processing any FOI request.
The Procedures Manual does not refer to the objects of the Act. Similarly,
FOI training packages provided by the department to the
OAIC in the course of
this investigation consider in detail the procedural and exemption provisions of
the FOI Act. Only one (the
explicitly refers to the broader role of FOI and to the objects of the FOI Act,
providing necessary context for the procedural and exemptions provisions.
In its response to the issues paper, the department said:
The department is flexible and pragmatic in the way it
interprets and processes FOI requests. Below we explain our processes where
requests which are unclear or which may not be valid are escalated for
consideration by a more senior officer. However, given the
department’s
large FOI workload, it is not possible for every FOI matter to be considered by
a senior officer. As for any high
volume decision-making environment, we rely on
policies and procedures to assist junior officers to make decisions and process
We have considered OAIC’s concern that the department engages in undue
legal formality in the interpretation and processing
of FOI requests. The
department takes the view that FOI decision-making is a legal process and that
our decisions must comply with
the FOI Act.
FOI decisionmaking, like many functions of government, operates under
statute. And the FOI Act confers important information access
rights on members
of the community that are legally enforceable. But that is not the whole
The FOI Act operates within and complements a broader service culture within
government. Providing information upon request to members
of the public must be
informed by principles of legality, but it must also be guided by
customerservice principles and the objects
of the FOI Act that encourage public
participation, scrutiny, discussion, comment and review of government activity.
In a high volume
decisionmaking environment where senior officers cannot review
each action of every staff member, the principles expressed in policies,
procedures and training will have an important and guiding influence.
The Commissioner’s impression formed in this investigation is that the
department’s approach has moved from a predominately
prodisclosure and
outcome-based focus, towards an emphasis on technical and legal compliance. This
is indicated by:
the substantial
increase in the use of the practical refusal mechanism in the Act
the tone and
emphasis of training material and procedural documents
the increased
length, detail and technicality of decision letters and other FOI
communications
the overall
profile of finalised FOI requests: that is, less requests resulting in documents
being released in full
experienced and regular users of the department’s FOI processes.
Consequences of this approach
The department’s
compliance approach to FOI has benefits and disadvantages.
An evident benefit is improved compliance with statutory deadlines for FOI
decisionmaking. The department’s response to the
issues paper stated that
it finalised 97% of FOI requests in 2014–15 to date inside statutory
deadlines (including statutory
extensions and suspensions of the processing
clock), and 91% in 2013–14.
The department’s current approach also appears to involve greater
consideration of the interests of third parties whose information
is included in
departmental documents.
A disadvantage of the department's approach, compared to its earlier approach
focussing on the prodisclosure objects of the FOI Act,
is that less information
is released resulting in applicants increasingly complaining and seeking review
or making multiple requests.
As noted above, the number of IC review
applications made about decisions of the department almost doubled between
and 2013–14.
The department’s efforts to ensure maximum compliance with the
provisions of the FOI Act and its stated policy that its statutory
obligations
are the ‘paramount consideration in processing any FOI request’
appears at times to create additional work.
An example is a case study considered in the course of this investigation in
which an applicant sought access to recordings of phone
calls between him and
the department. This request was practically refused. The department’s
view was that due to the operation
of the child support secrecy provision, it
was required to redact from the phone recording any occasion on which the
applicant gave
the department information about a third party (his ex-partner).
In calculating the time it would take to process the request, the
decided that four separate officers would each need to listen to the entirety of
each recording for quality control purposes,
to ensure that no information about
third parties was inadvertently released.
This meant that listening to the 19 hours of recordings would take an
estimated 76 staffhours, which the department concluded amounted
substantial and unreasonable diversion of its resources. Assuming this estimate
reflects actual departmental practice, having
four staff members listen to the
entirety of each recording would appear to be a work intensive clearance process
to minimise an
inherently low risk (the accidental disclosure, to a customer, of
a recording of words said by that customer). While the Commissioner
acknowledges
that the department is of the view that a secrecy provision prohibits disclosure
of information about third parties
even where that information is provided by
the FOI applicant, the amount of effort the department expends to avoid a breach
provision should be proportionate to the actual risk.
In two other case studies, applicants made requests for information that was
not held by the department in the precise form requested:
One applicant
requested details of a call made by the department to a named organisation
within a stated date range, which 'apparently
infers that I was attempting to
extort money'. The request was refused because there was no call that inferred
An applicant
requested access to an ‘actual conversation’ between him and the
department. The request was refused because
no recording of the phone call
What the department did not advise the applicant in either
case was that it held documents that were similar but not identical to
requested. In relation to the first request, a record of a phone call with the
named organisation and within the stated date
range was held, but no reference
was made to ‘extortion’. In relation to the second request for an
‘actual conversation’,
no recording or transcript of the phone call
was held yet a written record of the call was.
As the department notes in its response, ‘[t]here is no obligation in
the FOI Act or the Guidelines that creates an onus for
the department to offer
an applicant documents that are not in scope of their request and to which they
do not specifically seek
That may be
technically correct from a legal standpoint, but does not reflect the customer
service ethos that should also inform
FOI administration. In both instances the
department’s choice not to advise the applicants of the existence of other
documents resulted in unnecessary review applications that were resolved
by the department providing the documents that it held to
the applicants.
Promoting a pro-disclosure culture
The Better Practice
Guide states:
Agencies typically combine elements of all three
approaches. Different emphases may be appropriate in different circumstances.
time to time, senior managers can reflect on the agency's approach to FOI
and provide guidance to agency staff where
appropriate.
As that guidance indicates, no single approach to FOI processing will be
appropriate for every agency and every circumstance.
The department’s response to the issues paper stated that ‘as an
organisation, the department is committed to transforming
and improving how we
deliver services to our clients, including FOI services’. The department
is the Commonwealth’s primary
service delivery agency, responsible for
providing access to social, health and other payments and services. The bulk of
FOI requests
to DHS are from people seeking access to their own personal or case
file information.
The NWRN members consulted in the course of this investigation commented on
the value of the department’s FOI service to their
clients. NAAJA said
that it sought information from the department for the following reasons:
to obtain an
understanding of why a decision has been made so that we can advise our clients
to advise our
clients on the merit of an appeal;
to identify
whether the law or policy has been appropriately followed in a particular
matter. ...
Centrelink documentation is often the only record of
time frames and key events relevant to the decision that a client is seeking
advice about. Overcrowding, mail insecurity, low literacy rates and cultural
factors mean that clients are often unable to retain
written records of their
interactions with DHS.
NAAJA also provided two case studies of how it had used the FOI Act to assist
its clients.
NAAJA sought information regarding DHS's refusal to
grant a woman caring for her elderly mother a carer payment for a three month
period. NAAJA obtained documents under FOI (before the change in FOI process)
and was able to advise the woman that she was entitled
to claim carer payment
for the 3 month period prior to making her claim.
A woman from a remote community sought NAAJA's assistance to be paid Parenting
Payment. NAAJA assisted her to get on a payment and
advised her that we could
obtain documents regarding the cancellation of her parenting payment and then
advise her on the merits
of requesting a review of the decision. The documents
were released under FOI (before the change in the FOI process) and revealed
- DHS was on notice of the breakdown of the relationship and should not have
insisted that she provide her partner's payslips after
their effective
separation;
- DHS had not notified her of its decision to cancel her payment;
- she had contacted Centrelink a number of times during the 13 weeks following
the cancellation of her payment.
NAAJA made detailed submissions to the Authorised Review
Officer who overturned the decision to cancel her payment and she was paid
WRAS said that FOI releases are essential for it to properly advise its
Welfare Rights centres (including our centre) provide
free legal advice and assistance to clients about many aspects of social
law. In order to do this it is frequently necessary to obtain copies of
the relevant parts of a client's file from DHS. Without these
documents the
clients cannot obtain proper legal
WRC said that FOI provides the only independent check on the material that
the department lodges with tribunals that are reviewing
its decisions:
In the SSAT and AAT, DHS is under a statutory obligation
to provide relevant documents. However, its officers decided what documents
provide. In our experience, there are often serious deficiencies in the
documents provided to the person through the tribunal
process. These
deficiencies are more likely to go undetected and unremedied in the case of
self-represented litigants, the vast majority
of appellants. For example, in
one case our client appealed a debt on the ground of error, saying that he had
provided payslips
and told Centrelink he was working. We obtained documents
under FOI which included a record of the conversation with Centrelink and
payslips. These documents were not on the papers. Once we provided them to the
SSAT, the whole debt was waived due to Centrelink
The only independent check on documents provided to these tribunals is via the
FOI Act. The proper administration of the FOI Act
by DHS is therefore critical
to the effective and fair operation of the system of review of its
The Commonwealth Ombudsman made a similar observation:
Reviews of member of a couple decisions and debts are
usually conducted through administrative appeals mechanisms such as the Social
Security Appeals Tribunal and Administrative Appeals Tribunal (AAT). While s 37
AAT Act 1975
requires an agency to provide all documents relevant
to the decision under review, in practice the documents are compiled from those
on which the agency based its decision that a person
a member of a
owe a debt and may not include documents that support an
alternate view of the facts, but which were overlooked or misinterpreted
making of a decision. The existence of such critical documents can only be
ascertained with certainty by way of an FOI request
Those comments illustrate the value of FOI to the department and its
The Information Commissioner’s view is that a pro-disclosure culture is
both necessary and valuable for all agencies that are
subject to the FOI Act. A
pro-disclosure approach is required by the objects of the FOI Act, the
information release provisions of
, and the Commissioner’s
Guidelines made under s 93A of the FOI Act.
A pro-disclosure approach is particularly important for the Department of
Human Services, given that the majority of requests it receives
applicants seeking access to their own personal information.
A central purpose of FOI legislation is to facilitate prompt and inexpensive
public access to government held information. The Commissioner
is concerned that
a legal and technical approach to FOI can be counterproductive by inhibiting the
release of nonsensitive information,
creating or extending disputes with
clients, and increasing the cost of FOI administration.
The department's focus on technical and legal compliance appears to be a
significant cause of the rising review rate the department
has experienced over
the last three years. While a compliance focus may make decisions more
defensible on review, combining it with
an outcome-based focus is likely to
reduce review rates.
The Commissioner acknowledges that the department has achieved benefits from
improving technical and legal capabilities within its
FOI unit. However, the
Commissioner believes the department could benefit from promoting a stronger
prodisclosure culture, in line
with the following recommendations.
Recommendation 1
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department take the
following action to promote a stronger pro-disclosure culture
in administering
FOI and information access requests:
• the Secretary, or relevant Deputy Secretary with responsibility for
FOI and information access, issue a statement to FOI
and information access
officers promoting the need for a strong pro-disclosure culture in the
department that is customer-focussed
and is guided by the objects of the FOI
• the department’s FOI Procedures Manual and FOI training
material be amended to refer to the objects of the Act and
the important role
that FOI can play in providing necessary information to customers of the
• the department track and analyse the outcome of FOI requests and
monitor rates of disclosure and refusal relative to other
Recommendation 2
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department assess the
feasibility of measuring customer-satisfaction with the department’s
service and using this as a measure of performance for the FOI unit.
Accessibility of FOI and information access
Approximately
97% of FOI requests received by the department in 2013–14 were for access
to an applicant’s own personal
information. The department holds a
significant amount of personal information about most members of the Australian
community, including
many of the community’s most vulnerable. The
efficient and effective operation of FOI and information access arrangements is
an important responsibility of the department in its role as the
Commonwealth’s primary service delivery agency.
The issues paper expressed the Commissioner’s preliminary view that the
department’s FOI service was not accessible for
some vulnerable clients.
The department’s response demonstrated that it does take steps to assist
clients with specific needs.
Nevertheless, the Commissioner has lingering
concerns about the ease of use of the department’s FOI service generally,
makes recommendations for improvement.
Accessibility for vulnerable clients
applicants to the department may face barriers associated with
disadvantage—such as limited education, disability, or restricted
and economic resources. This can impact on the ability of those applicants to
utilise the FOI Act. The department, as a client-focussed
agency, can be
expected to adjust its processes and communications to remove barriers to
accessibility of information.
The OAIC frequently receives applications for review and complaints from
vulnerable clients who are frustrated by the complexity and
inaccessibility of
FOI processes at the department, and at other agencies covered by the FOI Act.
In the Commissioner’s experience,
these matters can often be resolved by
an OAIC officer explaining the reasons behind an unclear decision letter or
complex statutory
procedure to the applicant, typically over the phone.
In the issues paper, the OAIC identified a number of possible barriers to FOI
accessibility for vulnerable client groups of the department,
and drew its
attention to some cases of concern. The department made the following comment in
Supporting vulnerable people is central to the
department’s business. Our staff, including our FOI staff, are very
experienced
at supporting vulnerable people in their interactions with the
department. We undertake research and analysis activities to further
develop our
core role in the community as well as our role in supporting vulnerable and
disadvantaged customers.
The FOI Team seeks to assist applicants by liaising with them via telephone
where a request is unclear or voluminous. Team members
seek to call applicants
within 24 hours of the request being allocated to them and will discuss with the
applicant what they are
trying to achieve in order to narrow down the documents
that will assist the applicant.
If there are language or literacy barriers, team members will often draft a
suggested scope that could be processed by the department
and email the
suggested scope to the applicant and seek agreement by return email. This
process is undertaken informally and not
as part of the practical refusal
The department also drew the OAIC’s attention to numerous instances in
which it had adjusted its processes to assist vulnerable
clients. It also
provided context for each of the individual case studies identified in the
issues paper.
While concerned about a small number of incidents in which applicants with
specific needs were ‘caught out’ by the department’s
processes, the Commissioner accepts the department’s comment that
‘policies and processes are not
infallible’.
In most cases
the OAIC analysed in which a particular FOI applicant may have needed special
assistance, it appears the department
was aware and adjusted its processes.
There were several FOI cases too in which departmental staff went beyond the
bare requirements
of the FOI Act to assist vulnerable clients.
A remaining shortcoming nevertheless is that the department’s
Procedures Manual, which emphasises formal legal compliance, does
not reflect as
clearly the values articulated in the department’s response to the
Recommendation 3
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department add a clear
statement to its FOI Procedures Manual that procedural requirements
(such as an
applicant giving a notice in writing, or responding within a specific timeframe)
can and should be adjusted for clients
who have difficulty complying with those
Ease of use of FOI service generally
the department has demonstrated that it makes appropriate adjustments on a case
by case basis to assist vulnerable clients,
the Commissioner has continuing
concerns about the general accessibility and ease of use of the
department’s FOI service.
The OAIC has received complaints from applicants (including experienced FOI
applicants and solicitors) about difficulties they have
had making FOI requests
to the department, particularly when the practical refusal mechanisms in the FOI
Act are involved. This was
commented on by NWRN members consulted during this
investigation. NAAJA stated that even its experienced solicitors had trouble
navigating the department’s FOI procedures:
Our concerns with FOI processes go beyond accessibility
for vulnerable clients. We consider the current approach limits the
accessibility
of FOI services to the general public, which is obviously
exacerbated when vulnerable people are involved. NAAJA solicitors have
new processes frustrating, time consuming and overly
The WRAS submission (quoted earlier in this report) also commented that
decision letters from the department had become more complex
and lengthy since
April 2013, and that some letters were difficult to understand and contained
‘cut and pasted’ chunks
WRAS also raised concerns
that some requests were literally construed by departmental officers, which
resulted in clarifying correspondence
that delayed information access:
I have noticed an increased requirement imposed by some
FOI decision makers for us to correctly identify the types of documents sought
using DHS terminology. ... Example: I made a request which included 'any
computer document between x date and y date'. It was refused
as it did not
'satisfy the requirements in paragraph 15(5)(b) of the FOI Act'. Our agency had
previously used this shorthand for
many years in our FOI requests to refer to
ODR documents and this had never before caused an FOI officer any concern. In
I was able to specify that I wanted the 'ODR documents' but a client
would not be able
Length and complexity in FOI communication
common complaint to the OAIC is that communication from the department regarding
FOI can be difficult to understand.
In the issues paper, the Commissioner observed two changes in FOI decision
letters from the department over the last few years: decision
letters have
increased in length, and are also more likely to cite judicial and
administrative precedent, even when addressed to
an FOI applicant who is not a
lawyer or experienced in FOI. An audit of decision letters in IC review
applications received in 2013
and 2014 found that the average length of
departmental FOI decision letters (excluding review rights, document schedules
attachments) had increased from 3 to 5 pages.
NAAJA remarked:
... often our clients need assistance to understand DHS
decisions because of the unintelligibility of DHS letters. ... letters about
are more legalistic than those about income
management.
While it can benefit an applicant to receive a longer and specialist
response, the downside can be confusion, particularly if the
recipient is a
self-represented applicant with limited knowledge of the law.
In response to this concern, the department said:
Our decision letters address the requirements of s 26(1)
of the FOI Act. The department does not consider that the length of decision
necessarily an indicator of the quality or comprehensibility of a decision. In
this regard, the department considers that the
quality of our decision letters
has improved by providing better reasons. In the past, the brevity of our
decision letters may have
been an indicator that less comprehensive reasons were
The department does regularly contact FOI applicants by telephone to explain the
reasons for decisions. While OAIC has been able
to resolve some complaints and
reviews by explaining the reasons for a decision to an applicant, this does not
mean that the department
has failed in its task. In many cases, having a
decision explained by a person who the FOI applicant believes is independent
the department satisfies the FOI applicant. The department considers that
one of the great benefits of OAIC is the fact that your
office gives applicants
an independent agency to talk to before the applicant decides whether to pursue
appeal rights.
However, the department as a whole is committed to striving for continuous
improvement in the way we deliver services. In this regard,
we believe there is
always room for improvement in the way we communicate with our FOI clients. We
will continue to analyse random
samples of FOI matters to look at the way we
communicated with our clients and develop practical improvements to our
processes (including
The Commissioner acknowledges that lengthy decision letters will sometimes be
required because of the requirements of s 26 of the
but is of the view that
there is scope to simplify departmental FOI communications. Other agencies
appear able to communicate more
concisely and directly than the department. The
NWRN members consulted as part of this investigation indicated that in the past
communications from the department were easier to understand.
The OAIC has noted improvements on this front in the department since
mid-2014, observing reductions in the length and complexity
of decision letters
that have come to the OAIC for review. It appears the department is working to
improve the readability of its
The Commissioner also notes with approval that the department has modified
its procedures in recent months to ensure earlier and more
frequent telephone
effective than detailed written correspondence.
WRAS commented that this change
is a positive development:
On a positive note I have noticed that in recent months
FOI decision makers are prepared to phone me to discuss concerns they have
requests and to genuinely consult about the documents we require and whether it
is appropriate to split a request or the order
in which they can provide them.
If they need more time they will let me know and I agree to the further time.
This is a welcome change
from the practice that commenced in about May 2013
where we would receive an unduly formal legal letter which was stated to be a
'consultation letter' and was then followed by the decision letter refusing
The Commissioner encourages the department to continue to review the way it
communicates with clients, to use phone contact when appropriate,
and to apply
plain-English drafting principles in written correspondence. The department is
encouraged to seek customer feedback
when developing letter templates.
Recommendation 4
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department consider and
implement steps for improving communication with FOI applicants,
• providing training to FOI officers in plain-English writing
principles, and encouraging use of those principles in departmental
communications
• obtaining customer feedback on FOI communications and published
information to ensure it is accessible to the department’s
• incorporating early telephone contact into its FOI procedures,
particularly during any s 24AB request consultation process.
FOI web page and request forms
department’s FOI web page provides basic information about how to make an
FOI request, and restates the requirements of
s 15 of the FOI Act. The web page
provides postal and email addresses for lodging requests.
The OAIC was unable to locate on the department’s web page a copy of
the FOI request form that was provided to the OAIC in the
department’s
response to the issues paper. This form should be easily available on the
website, as the form is well designed
and comprehensive.
The Commissioner’s view is that there is scope to simplify the
department’s web page. While this is to some degree a subjective
assessment, the web page is difficult to understand compared to other
departmental FOI web pages, and the content could be reviewed
generally, drawing
on best practice in other Australian Government agencies and in other areas of
the department.
Recommendation 5
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department revise its FOI
web page, including by:
• reviewing the content of the web page
• making the FOI request form available on the web page.
Assistance to applicants prior to the FOI process
noted by WRAS, the department sometimes expects applicants to precisely frame
the terms of a request in accordance with departmental
terminology. This places
applicants in a difficult position if they do not know the categories of
documents the department holds,
or how those documents are referred to by the
department.
There is limited guidance on the department’s FOI web page about how to
frame a successful request, or about the information
the department holds. This
is exacerbated by the lack of a telephone contact number for prospective
applicants. Both the Department
of Veterans’ Affairs and the Department of
Immigration and Border
provide a contact
number for prospective applicants to call if they need assistance when making a
The department’s heavy use of s 24AB suggests that it often receives
requests that it has difficulty processing due to the volume
of information that
it holds, or because of a lack of clarity provided by the FOI applicant about
the information that is sought.
This could be addressed by providing guidance
for applicants to consider before a request is made.
One issue that commonly arises relates to requests for ‘whole
files’. These requests are often practically refused. The
difficulty the
department has in processing such requests is unsurprising, due to the wide
range of government programs that it administers
and the numerous information
systems it maintains. This problem could be addressed by publishing guidance
material on the department’s
website about the categories of information
that the department holds relating to individuals. This guidance material could
direct applicants to administrative access arrangements that are available
for particular categories of document.
There is currently information about some categories of information that can
be accessed administratively on the department’s
web page; for example,
there is guidance on the FOI web page about how to request Medicare and
Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme (PBS)
claims information. A more comprehensive
approach could be adopted by the department, by reviewing historical requests to
the most frequently released categories of information. Based on this
review, the department could prepare guidance for applicants
a successful request.
The department provided the OAIC with a draft form it has created to assist
applicants to clarify the scope of their requests for
whole files. The
Commissioner suggests that once this form is finalised, it be given to
prospective applicants as well as those whose
requests become subject to a
practical refusal reason, to improve the quality of initial requests.
Recommendation 6
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department take steps to
assist applicants to make clearer and more manageable requests,
• providing a telephone contact number on the website and in relevant
correspondence for prospective FOI applicants
• publishing a list of categories of frequently released documents
(and documents that are typically withheld from release);
this list could refer
applicants to administrative access channels where these are available for
particular categories of documents
• reviewing any published list every twelve months
• finalising the draft Consultation Request Process form and making it
available to prospective FOI applicants, including by
incorporating it in the
department's FOI request form.
Administrative access for straightforward requests
noted in the background section above, one reason for this own motion
investigation was a decrease in the proportion of FOI requests
that resulted in
a decision providing access to information.
The department indicated that the primary cause for this reduction was an
effort to divert FOI requests to administrative access.
The department said:
As the OAIC has identified in the paper, the department
receives a large number of requests from applicants requesting their own
information. Many of the requests are for information which is not
sensitive and which can be released outside of FOI (for example,
requests for
letters which were sent to the FOI applicant but have been misplaced).
Sometimes, the department has self-service options
(such as online services)
which allow individuals to access the information that they seek.
For every request the department's FOI officers consider whether the request is
for non-sensitive information which could be released
outside the FOI Act
process. ... The FOI officer will often liaise with the relevant single point of
to discuss the request and whether access could be
given administratively.
Although the emphasis on giving access to documents has been termed the
'withdrawal project', the desired outcome is a successful
information release
rather than withdrawal of the FOI request per se. The withdrawal of the FOI
request necessarily follows a successful
information release because the
department takes the view that, unless a request is withdrawn, the obligation to
make a decision
in accordance with s 15(5) of the FOI Act remains.
An analysis of the data for the 2013–14 financial year indicates that
1,176 FOI applications were coded as ‘withdrawn’.
Of those, 402 were
attributable to withdrawal following the request consultation process under s
24AB of the FOI Act. 651 cases (or
approximately 55% of all withdrawals) were
withdrawn on the basis that information was released informally through
administrative
access arrangements. It is also possible that some of the
remaining 123 cases were withdrawn due to access being provided by an
alternative
means (because it is rare for the department to receive an
unsolicited withdrawal of a request and very few withdrawals are made
basis of charges under s 29(2) of the FOI Act). However the department’s
coding for these requests was not fully implemented
when this process commenced
therefore we cannot assess the 123 matters without reviewing each matter
individually.
The department’s approach of striving to implement comprehensive
administrative access arrangements is reflective of your submission
to the Hawke
Review wherein discussing the challenges of open government you noted ‘in
our view, embedding a strong administrative
access framework to complement
formal FOI access rights is part of the
The department correctly notes that the OAIC has promoted the adoption by
agencies of administrative access arrangements that can
operate alongside the
formal FOI process.
underlying message is that administrative access is an essential channel that
can provide quicker, flexible and inexpensive information
That principle should be uppermost. If an applicant has made an FOI request
that is straightforward and can be processed quickly,
the better option may be
for an agency to follow that path. It may be no more cumbersome to release
information under the FOI Act
than by an administrative release. In particular,
if access is given to a requested document in full, there is no need for a
statement of reasons under s 26 of the FOI Act and the request can be
finalised by providing access to the requested document.
The Commissioner suggests that the department review its processes so that it
can respond to information access requests – administratively
or under the
FOI Act – in the most efficient manner possible. In particular, an
applicant who has made a straightforward access
request should not be referred
to another area of the department to make an administrative request and to
withdraw their FOI request
if that is unproductive and will impede efficient
Administrative access for complex requests
NWRN member organisations consulted in the course of this investigation
commented on their experience utilising administrative
access at the department.
Their comments were about access requests for lengthy investigation files and
may not therefore be representative
of typical information access requests to
the department.
WRAS described its experience utilising the department’s administrative
access process in tandem with FOI:
Recently and following discussions with DHS, we have
been told to obtain the documents we can administratively thereby 'reducing the
scope of our FOI requests'. ... DHS have advised me to request documents outside
the FOI process ... and then the balance from FOI.
From my perspective this has resulted in more work for me and presumably
I have to send two requests and try to make sure each section within DHS knows
what I have requested form the other. Even so, I am
almost always provided with
duplicates of many of the requested documents (which is inefficient and
wasteful). In relation to the
documents provided outside FOI there is often no
way of knowing whether everything I have requested has been provided to me or
anything has been overlooked or excluded in this 'administrative
The WRC reported a similar experience:
Quite properly, and in accordance with OAIC guidelines,
it appears that DHS has been implementing an administrative access policy
often leads to the release of some of the documents we request. Broadly, the
policy is to direct us to obtain certain documents
directly from the
department’s serious non-compliance area.
But on the whole, the process is wasteful and inefficient. There is excessive
formality – we are required to engage in correspondence
formally altering
our FOI request to exclude what is to be released outside
FOI/administratively.
Second, there does not seem to be clear guidance ... as to what they can, and
cannot, release to us administratively or they understandably
are not familiar
with how to locate the documents we request. There is also a general reluctance
on the part of many officers, who
do not see responding to our request as part
of their role and as taking time away from it.
The end result is frequent back and forth between our caseworkers, the FOI
officer and the serious non-compliance officer, resulting
in inefficiency and
delay. In one case, we have just received [in October 2014] a very common
document created by Centrelink when
raising a debt, after lodging an FOI request
on 29 July 2014. In the meantime, there have been multiple emails and phone
myself and the caseworker responsible for the case. This delay of
months has occurred in the context where our client has been referred
possible charge and prosecution.
NAAJA raised a number of concerns with administrative access as opposed to
FOI release:
Our concerns with information provided administratively
- there is no central point to request documents;
- there is no time frame for the provision of documents;
- there is no way to compel DHS to provide the documents requested;
- documents are not always provided as requested; and
- the documents that can be provided under administrative access often do not
provide detail around the reasons for a Centrelink
decision, for example online
evaluating those observations, it is important to bear in mind that the
development by agencies of administrative access procedures
that operate
alongside but in an FOI context is a relatively recent trend. Practice is
evolving. The concerns expressed by NWRN members
point to matters that can be
considered by agencies, particularly in applying administrative access to
complex information requests.
This is emphasised in the OAIC agency resource factsheet No 14,
government information – administrative
The factsheet
explains that administrative access can often be provided on an informal,
flexible and unstructured basis. In other
circumstances it may be better to
establish a more structured administrative arrangement that is tailored to the
information requests
received by an agency and that is explained on its website.
Matters that can be addressed in the arrangements include those raised
members about processing timeframes, the types of information or documents that
can be requested, interaction with FOI Act
processes, recording requests,
collecting statistics, and review or accountability of access request
The central objective, in whatever arrangements are adopted, is to deal with
information access requests in the most efficient and
prompt manner
The OAIC factsheet also emphasises the need to align FOI and administrative
access procedures with those applying to personal information
access requests
that fall under Australian Privacy Principle 12 (APP 12), which deals with
‘Access to personal information’.
This is particularly important for
the department, given that 97% of its FOI requests are for personal
information.
OAIC guidance on APP 12 explains that an individual has the right to request
personal information by that route, and this may indeed
be a simpler or more
attractive option for individuals to
APP 12 requires that personal information be given to an individual ‘on
request’. This may be either an oral or written
request. APP 12 stipulates
minimum access requirements that match those in the FOI Act:
an agency must
respond to a request for access within 30 calendar days
access must
generally be given in the manner requested by an individual
no charge can be
imposed for providing access
access can only
be refused on the same grounds set out in the FOI Act, and
statement of reasons must be provided if access is either not given or not given
in the manner requested.
Some of the procedural features of the FOI
Act that enable agencies to regulate the processing burden of FOI requests are
contained in the
or not expressly stated. For example,
there is no mechanism to extend the statutory timeframe for processing a
request; and there
is no request consultation process for requests that may be
refused on practical refusal grounds.
An individual may complain to the OAIC about an agency’s failure to
comply with APP 12 requirements. The OAIC can investigate
the complaint and
exercise any of the remedy powers contained in the
. Though it would
likely be an exceptional case, those powers include the Commissioner’s
power to make a determination that
a complainant be paid compensation for any
loss or damage arising from an APP breach (Privacy Act
s 52(1)(b)(iii)).
In summary, it is important that information access procedures and practices
in agencies align with both the FOI Act and the
. Agencies should
minimise the risk of complexity or confusion that may be caused by administering
overlapping but different statutory
and administrative access mechanisms.
To address the concerns of NWRN members about the department’s
administrative access arrangements, the department should document
administrative access procedures and make information about those procedures
available on its website. The Commissioner acknowledges
that the department has
provided guidance to NWRN members about the administrative access process.
However, there is an apparent
need for this guidance to be formalised and made
publicly available.
The Commissioner further suggests that the department endeavour, wherever
possible, to adopt a ‘one request one response’
approach to
information release to reduce the burden of its FOI processes on applicants.
Recommendation 7
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department review its FOI
and administrative access arrangements, taking the following
matters into
• an applicant who has made a straightforward FOI request for access
to a nonsensitive document is not redirected unnecessarily
to an administrative
access path
• the department adopt a ‘one request, one release’
approach where possible, rather than splitting requests into
administrative and
FOI components
• the department’s administrative access arrangements are
consistent with APP 12 requirements
• the administrative access arrangements are published on the
department’s website.
Use of practical refusal mechanism
practical refusal mechanism in the FOI Act is an important tool to assist
agencies to manage unreasonably large or poorly framed
FOI requests. This is a
foreseeable occurrence, as applicants may not know what documents an agency
holds or how information is recorded.
A request can be refused if a ‘practical refusal reason’ exists.
Such a reason exists if processing a request would impose
a ‘substantial
and unreasonable’ processing burden on an agency, or a request fails to
include ‘such information
concerning the [requested] document as is
reasonably necessary to enable a responsible officer ... to identify
An agency relying on this ground of refusal must first follow a
‘request consultation process’ under s 24AB of the FOI
includes an obligation to assist an FOI applicant to revise their request so
that the practical refusal reason no longer
Increased use of the practical refusal mechanism
department commenced a request consultation process in 17% of all finalised FOI
requests in 2013–14. This is a high figure
compared to the average of all
agencies, in which 6% of requests were subject to a practical refusal process in
the same period.
It is a particularly high figure compared to other agencies
that receive FOI requests primarily for access to customer information.
of comparison, the Department of Veterans’ Affairs used a request
consultation process in less than 1% of requests and
the Department of
Immigration and Border Protection in 3% of requests.
The department’s increased reliance on the practical refusal mechanism
in the FOI Act is both a reflection of, and a significant
contributor to, a
broader trend across the Australian Government. In 2011–12, only 314
practical refusal notices were issued
by all Commonwealth agencies. That figure
rose to 782 in 2012–13, and to 1828 in 2013–14. The department
issued 777 of
the notices sent in 2013–14, which is more than twice the
number sent by all Australian Government agencies in 2011–12.
Table 3 below sets out the use of s 24AB processes by the department over the
last three reporting years, and the outcome of those
processes. Of the 777
request consultation processes finalised by the department in 2013–14,
only 292 (38%) resulted in a revised
request scope that was able to be
Table 3: Number and outcome of s 24AB processes finalised by DHS, by
reporting year
Number of 24AB request consultation processes
Outcome: request revised and processed
Outcome: request refused or withdrawn
The rising proportion of the department's FOI decisions that are subject
to a request consultation process should be carefully monitored
department and compared to similar agencies.
It is beyond the scope of this investigation to consider whether particular
practical refusal decisions of the department are correct
or incorrect in
individual matters. This is something that is properly considered via review
processes. Of the two applications for
IC review of practical refusal decisions
of the department that have proceeded to decision, one affirmed the
department’s practical
refusal decision (
Department of Human Services
[2014] AICmr 106)
and one set aside the
practical refusal decision (
'AP' and Department of Human Services
Both decisions found that the department’s estimate of its
processing time was too high. The department has adjusted its procedures
estimating the processing burden of individual requests in response to those
decisions and the Commissioner expects the department
will continue to refine
its estimation processes as more of its decisions are reviewed.
Recommendation 8
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department monitor its
reliance on the practical refusal provisions in the FOI Act
in the following
• by including statistics on practical refusal actions in the
department’s Executive FOI Report
• aiming to bring its use of the practical refusal provisions
(currently 17% of all requests) closer to the rate seen across
the Commonwealth
(6% of all requests)
• continuously reviewing its methods for estimating processing times
for the purpose of s 24AA
• recording the outcome of practical refusal request consultation
processes and using this as a performance metric for the
Purpose of the request consultation process
noted above, 38% of request consultation processes conducted by the department
resulted in a revised request scope that was able
to be processed. It appears
that this figure is low because of a lack of internal guidance about the purpose
of a request consultation
process, and about how to assist an applicant to make
a revised request.
In the Commissioner’s view, a successful request consultation process
should aim at reaching agreement on a modified request
with a revised or
clarified scope that an agency can process. A practical refusal decision is
nevertheless a foreseeable outcome,
for one of a number of reasons that could
include: an applicant withdrawing or deciding not to pursue the request; the
not responding within 14 days to the request consultation notice
(perhaps because the applicant does not understand the process or
the need for a
formal written response); or the applicant not modifying or clarifying the
request in a way that removes the practical
refusal reason to the satisfaction
of the agency.
The department said that it considers the purpose of ss 24 and 24AB to be to
strike the balance between an individual’s right
to information and the
imposition that their FOI request may impose on an agency’s resources:
We note that the premise of the paper is that a
successful request consultation process will result in a modified request such
there is no longer a practical refusal reason (and, conversely, an
unsuccessful process is one where the outcome is a practical refusal
decision or
the application is withdrawn). The department does not consider that this
characterisation is helpful. In the department’s
view, ss 24 and 24AB are
intended to strike a balance between the imposition of a request on an
agency’s resources and an individual’s
right of access to
information. In the department’s experience, some FOI applicants are
unwilling to engage constructively
in the request consultation process. In those
circumstances, if a practical refusal decision is made under s 24, the
department does
not consider the process to have been a
The Commissioner does not disagree with that analysis, and agrees that an
individual may not participate constructively in a request
consultation process.
However, agency assistance to the applicant may be necessary for this to occur.
An applicant typically does
what documents
or how many documents an agency holds
how long it will
take to provide access to those documents and
how many hours
of processing time the agency regards to be a ‘reasonable’ diversion
of resources in the context of the
particular request.
information imbalance between an agency and an FOI applicant, the agency needs
to take the lead in any request consultation
process if it is to result in a
revised scope. It is therefore important that an agency officer conducting a
consultation process
should aim to assist the applicant to frame a request that
can be processed.
Currently, the chapter of the department’s FOI Processing Guide that
relates to s 24AB does not provide any encouragement or
guidance to officers to
assist an applicant to make a revised request. Often, the department’s
practical refusal notices make
general suggestions, such as restricting the
request to a 'narrower date range' or to 'specific categories of documents'.
More practical
advice could be provided, for example, by including a specific
suggested scope that the department could process (if the FOI officer
idea of what the applicant is trying to find out), or by listing the documents
or categories of documents within the scope
of the request so that an applicant
could choose what they want access to.
The processing guide does not suggest telephone contact as a means to obtain
a revised scope, or provide suggestions about how an
FOI officer can assist an
applicant to successfully revise the scope of a request.
The Commissioner makes a number of recommendations to improve the
department's request consultation processes.
Recommendation 9
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department provide better
assistance to applicants in a request consultation process
• amending its FOI Procedure Manual to include guidance for FOI
officers about how to assist applicants to revise the scope
of an FOI request so
that a practical refusal decision will not be made
• modifying its procedures to require telephone contact where possible
before a request consultation notice is formally issued,
so that an FOI officer
can better understand what information the applicant seeks access to and can
assist the applicant to make
a revised request.
Applying the practical refusal mechanism flexibly
of the department’s early decisions expressed a set policy of not
processing matters that would take longer than an estimated
The NWRN members consulted by the OAIC in the course of this investigation
stated that from mid-2013, the department had told them
that it would be unable
to satisfy any FOI request that would take longer than 40 hours to process. The
I do not see that DHS can apply a uniform 40 hour limit
in cases so that, on the one hand, it can raise a substantial debt and possibly
refer a person for prosecution, but on the other hand tell a person seeking to
look at the basis for the decision that their request
In a report on the
Review of charges under the
Freedom of Information Act
Information Commissioner recommended the imposition of a 40 hour processing
limit, as part of a broader set of changes to the
FOI regime. This
recommendation has not been implemented by Government. The Guidelines issued by
the Commissioner under
note: ‘Whether a practical refusal reason
exists will be a question of fact in the individual case. Bearing in mind the
of matters that must and can be considered, it is not possible to specify
an indicative number of hours of processing time that would
constitute a
practical refusal
In its response to the issues paper, the department said:
The department does not apply a 40 hour processing cap
as a blanket rule. Much depends on the circumstances of the case (for example,
the volume and complexity of the documents involved). However, the department
does regard 40 hours of processing time to be a substantial
processing, amounting to over one week of full-time work for one staff member.
The Commissioner has observed that recent decisions of the department do not
refer explicitly to 40 hours, but that still appears
to act in practice as a
'soft cap' for the department when considering if a practical refusal reason
The Commonwealth Ombudsman's Office submission to this investigation
suggested the department adopt a more flexible approach:
... in our view, a more flexible approach should be
taken to deciding whether any diversion of resources is
‘unreasonable’
in circumstances where the agency has made a decision
with significant impact on a customer and has itself devoted resources to the
collection of a large volume of material about that person. It would seem that
the actual number of larger requests in proportion
to the overall number of
requests received by the agency ought to also be considered in deciding whether
or not there is in fact
an unreasonable diversion of resources. Given the nature
of the work of DHS, it may be that a small number of large requests is to
expected and planned
Similarly, WRAS said:
It is DHS who decide how large a file will be by
deciding how far back an investigation will go or how much information they will
gather and then it is DHS who have decided that if (in their opinion) it will
take them more than 40 hours to process a request for
access to documents they
will refuse to do
It is an undesirable outcome if individuals cannot obtain access to documents
on a departmental file recording a departmental investigation
individual’s affairs, simply because the department has itself gathered a
large volume of material about the individual.
The Commissioner is of the view that the department should consider
individual circumstances when applying the test in s 24AA of the
Section 24AA(3) states that an agency cannot have regard to the reason why the
applicant has made the request. However,
an agency is to consider whether
processing a request would ‘unreasonably divert’ its resources from
other operations
(s 24AA(1)(a)), which allows consideration of circumstances in
addition to the estimated processing time. For example, it may be
relevant to
consider that the documents requested relate to prosecution or significant debt
enforcement action against the applicant,
or that there is a complex volume of
documents that cannot meaningfully be disaggregated into smaller parcels.
The Commissioner agrees with the Commonwealth Ombudsman that the department
should plan for a small number of very large FOI requests,
rather than
anticipating that all requests be of a certain size. If the department gathers a
large amount of information about clients,
a consequence may be that it will
need to expend additional resources to provide that information to clients upon
request, or find
ways to process requests more efficiently.
In that context the department should examine options for improved and
speedier FOI processing. A significant proportion of processing
time estimates
in practical refusal decisions relate to third party consultation. The need for
third party consultation could be
minimised by allowing third parties an
opportunity to raise concerns about the disclosure of material at the time of
collection.
‘CX’ and Department of Human Services
, the Acting Freedom of Information Commissioner considered documents
that were contained on a Centrelink investigation file containing
responses to
inquiries directed at former employers of the applicant. Each of the inquiry
letters sent to the former employers included
a notice that the document might
be disclosed under FOI, and asked the former employers to advise if they had
concerns about the
disclosure of the information. Including such notices when
collecting third party information would remove the need to conduct
consultations
once an FOI request is received.
Recommendation 10
The Information Commissioner recommends that when deciding whether a
particular FOI request would ‘unreasonably divert’
the resources of
the department from other operations, subject to s 24AA(3), the department have
regard to relevant surrounding circumstances,
such as the volume of material
that may form part of an individual’s case file, and whether disclosure of
the documents will
cast light on a decision that has a significant impact on an
Recommendation 11
Given the nature of the department’s work, the Information Commissioner
recommends that the department should expect and plan
for a small number of
large requests and should not expect that all requests can suitably be processed
within an estimated 40 hours.
Recommendation 12
The Commissioner recommends that the Serious Non-Compliance Branch and the
FOI and Information Access Branch of the department work
together to identify
the cause of substantial FOI processing times, and implement measures at the
time of information collection,
creation, and storage that will facilitate
efficient processing of requests.
Liaison with WRAS
Commissioner acknowledges that the department has been assisting members of the
NWRN work within its revised processes. The department
provided the following
background behind its changed approach to requests for investigation files:
Underlying this issue is an apparent concern about
access to investigation files by Centrelink clients (or those advising
clients). In this regard, we note that of the six external
stakeholders consulted by OAIC in the preparation of the paper, five are
of the National Welfare Rights Network (NWRN). The major concern of these
stakeholders is a change in approach to access
to investigation files held by
Centrelink.
In the past, investigation files were, on occasion, provided to the individuals
concerned or their lawyers without a proper consideration
of the consequences of
release or any applicable exemptions. The department no longer considers that
approach to be acceptable. Aside
from the possibility that disclosure of
investigation files could prejudice the effectiveness of an investigation,
investigation
files often contain information about the identity of confidential
sources or contact details of other individuals. There is a very
real risk that
inappropriate release of material on an investigation file could endanger the
safety and privacy of other people.
For this reason, the department has deliberately adopted a much more rigorous
approach to considering release of investigation files
under the FOI Act. While
we have been working with the NWRN in relation to the department's approach to
investigation files (including
by having regular liaison meetings during which
this issue has been discussed), we are committed to continuing to find better
of explaining the approach and assisting NWRN members to make requests
which do not involve a practical refusal reason.
The department respectfully disagrees with the stakeholder comments that access
to an investigation file through FOI is necessary
to successfully challenge a
decision in relation to a debt or defend a prosecution. Appeals and review
mechanisms already provide
avenues for release of relevant documents to the
individual concerned (for example,
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth)). The department is not aware of any other merits
review jurisdiction where an FOI request is routinely used in tandem with
mechanisms for the provision of relevant
The department has held meetings with NWRN to explain its processes and
changed approach, and to help NWRN members utilise administrative
mechanisms. The department explained the assistance it had provided:
We have provided NWRN the attached documents. As
reflected in that guidance material we suggest that the NWRN contact the Serious
Non-Compliance area of the department in the first instance. That area is in the
best position to release documents administratively.
It also provides an avenue
for communication if an individual is concerned about documents or missing
evidence in an administrative
decision concerning a debt.
Although we have conducted face-to-face meetings with the NWRN and provided them
written guidance material, we accept that there
is more that we could do to
inform NWRN about our approach to handling requests for files. In particular, we
will continue to assist
them to develop practical guidance for members of NWRN
This has allowed applicants to make successful requests for investigation
information to the department (albeit by greatly reducing
the size of requests).
NAAHA said:
Recent requests for information have largely been
granted – we are reducing the size of our FOI requests radically and
is being granted to a limited number of documents, however this
undermines our ability to do our job properly and thoroughly assess
our client's
administrative review
WRC similarly said that it has reduced the size of its requests to avoid
practical refusal decisions:
There have been discussions between DHS and this Centre
welcome DHS's willingness to engage with us on this issue, this has not resulted
in any real change in approach from our perspective.
From our side, we have
engaged in our own review of the drafting of our requests and this has resulted
in significantly more focussed
requests in many cases. However, narrower
requests are not possible in all cases
The Commissioner considers that the department's efforts to assist NWRN make
requests within the department’s changed practical
refusal framework have
been valuable, and encourages the department to continue to work with NWRN on
this issue.
Recommendation 13
The Information Commissioner recommends that the department continue to
consult with the NWRN to understand the information that it
requires to assist
its clients, and to develop responsive processes to help the NWRN obtain that
information.
Appendix A – Department response
Kathryn Campbell
Ref: EBI4/1035
Professor John McMillan AO
Australian Information Commissioner
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
GPO Box 2999
Dear Professor McMillan
Thank you for your email of 2 December 2014, providing the department with an
opportunity to respond to your draft report titled FOI
at the Department of
Human Services: Report of an own motion investigation.
The department has a whole-of-organisation approach to FOI and is committed
to continually improving service delivery in all areas
of our business,
including in providing access to information. The department is focused on
improving the customer experience, particularly
for our vulnerable and special
needs customers.
In this context, we were pleased to have the opportunity to work with your
office and receive independent feedback about our policies
and processes. The
department is proud of its track record in information release—in the last
financial year, the department
processed 4,500 freedom of information requests
and administratively processed 132,663 requests for personal information from
Your report highlights that agencies can always seek to improve their service
delivery. The department consistently strives for innovation
in the delivery of
services to the Australian community. The department notes the recommendations
in your report and will, over the
coming months, develop a plan for implementing
I acknowledge the constructive approach taken by you and your office during
the own motion investigation, and thank you for giving
the department the
opportunity to comment on the draft report.
Yours sincerely
Kathryn Campbell
Appendix B – Acronyms and abbreviations
Australian Privacy Principle
– the Department of Human Services
– the Department of Immigration and Citizenship
– the Department of Veterans’ Affairs
Commissioner
– the Australian Information Commissioner
– freedom of information
Freedom of Information Act 1982
– North Australian Aboriginal Justice Agency
– National Welfare Rights Network
– Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
– Welfare Rights and Advocacy Service
– NSW Welfare Rights Centre
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal Regulations 1976
(Cth), reg 19(2)(b).
Department of Human Services,
Response to OAIC Own Motion Issues Paper
The ‘withdrawn’
figure includes ‘deemed withdrawals’ and requests that were
withdrawn following the applicant’s
agreement to use an administrative
access scheme instead of FOI.
Attorney-General’s
Department,
FOI Better Practice Guide
North Australian Aboriginal
Justice Agency,
Submission to own motion investigation
Welfare Rights and Advocacy
Submission to own motion investigation
Department of Human Services,
Response to Own Motion Investigation case studies
Attorney-General’s
Department,
FOI Better Practice Guide
North Australian Aboriginal
Justice Agency,
Submission to own motion investigation
North Australian Aboriginal
Justice Agency,
Submission to own motion investigation
Welfare Rights and Advocacy
Submission to own motion investigation
Welfare Rights Centre,
Submission to own motion investigation
Commonwealth Ombudsman,
Submission to own motion investigation
Department of Human
Response to OAIC Own Motion Issues Paper
Department of Human
Response to OAIC Own Motion Issues Paper
North Australian Aboriginal
Justice Agency,
Submission to own motion investigation
Welfare Rights and Advocacy
Submission to own motion investigation
Welfare Rights and Advocacy
Submission to own motion investigation
North Australian Aboriginal
Justice Agency,
Submission to own motion investigation
Department of Human
Response to OAIC Own Motion Issues Paper
Section 26 of the FOI Act
requires, where a decision is made refusing to grant access to a document in
accordance with a request,
that the FOI applicant be given a notice in writing
setting out the decision maker’s findings on any material questions of
fact, referring to the material on which those findings were based, and state
the reasons for decision (including relevant public
interest considerations).
Section 26 also requires the inclusion of details of the decision maker’s
identity and the applicant’s
right of review.
Welfare Rights and Advocacy
Submission to own motion investigation
Along with the department,
these agencies each received more FOI requests than any other Australian
Government agency in 2013–14.
Department of Human
Response to OAIC Own Motion Issues Paper
See, e.g., Office of the
Australian Information Commissioner,
FOI agency resource 14: Administrative
Welfare Rights and Advocacy
Submission to own motion investigation
North Australian Aboriginal
Justice Agency,
Submission to own motion investigation
Available online at
www.oaic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-resources/freedom-of-information-agency-resources/foi-agency-resource-14-administrative-access
See Office of the
Australian Information Commissioner,
Australian Privacy Principle
, Chapter 12.
Sections 24AA(1) and
15(2)(b) of the FOI Act.
Welfare Rights and Advocacy
Submission to own motion investigation
Available online at
www.oaic.gov.au/freedom-of-information/foi-resources/freedom-of-information-reports/review-of-charges-under-the-freedom-of-information-act-1982
Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner,
Guidelines issued by the Australian Information
Commissioner under
Freedom of Information Act 1982
Office of the Commonwealth
Submission to OMI
Welfare Rights and Advocacy
Submission to own motion investigation
Department of Human
Response to OAIC Own Motion Issues Paper
North Australian Aboriginal
Justice Agency,
Submission to own motion investigation
Welfare Rights Centre,
Submission to own motion investigation
RTF format (469 KB)
Signed PDF/A format