Zan & Nimkar [2025] FedCFamC2F 1128 (14 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA (DIVISION
Zan & Nimkar
[2025] FedCFamC2F 1128
File number(s):
MLC 1732 of 2025
Judgment of:
JUDGE BLAKE
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
FAMILY LAW –
Application to review
decision of Senior Judicial Registrar – application for review partially
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Cases cited:
Eaby & Speelman
[2015] FamCAFC
Franklyn v Franklyn
[2019] FamCAFC 256
Salah & Salah
(2016) FLC 93-713
Division 2 Family Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Appearing in-person
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Mr G Kuek of Access Law
Counsel for the Independent Children’s Lawyer
Mr P O’Connell
Solicitor for the Independent Children’s Lawyer
Robert Halliday & Associates
MLC 1732 of 2025
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN’S LAWYER
JUDGE BLAKE
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
2 of the Interim Orders made on 24 July 2025 be suspended pending the outcome of
the Victoria Police Sexual Offences and Child
Abuse Investigation Teams
) investigation.
Until further
father spend time with the child,
born in 2014
), supervised by B Contact Service or such other
supervision service as nominated by the Independent Children’s Lawyer
‘the Supervision Service’
) on such days and at such times as
can be accommodated by the Supervision Service, and for the purposes of such
(a) the sessions shall occur on a fortnightly basis for a period of not less
than four hours;
(b) the father shall pay for the costs associated with the supervision at first
(c) within 48 hours of the date of these Orders, each of the parents shall do
all things necessary to apply to the Supervision Service
for the purpose of
arranging intake to commence the father’s supervised time with X;
(d) each of the parents shall do all things reasonably requested of them by the
Supervision Service for the purpose of facilitating
the father’s time
spent with X; and
(e) the child
, born in 2010 (‘
), be permitted to
attend during all times the father spends supervised time with X.
later than 14 days prior to the next Court date, the father shall obtain a
report from the Supervision Service at his sole expense
at first instance in
relation to his supervised time with X and the father shall file such report on
Affidavit within seven days
of receipt of same.
Information
section 67ZBE
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) the Department of
Families, Fairness and Housing (VIC) (
‘the Department’
provide to the Court any documents and/or any information in its possession or
control relating to the matters in
section 67ZBE(2)
in relation to:
born in 1984 (the mother of the children);
born in 1985 (the father of the children);
born in 2010 (child); and
born in 2014 (child)
for the period from
25 March 2025 to present,
section 67ZBE
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) Victoria Police
) is to provide to the Court any documents and/or
any information in its possession or control relating to the matters in
in relation to:
born in 1984 (the mother of the children);
born in 1985 (the father of the children);
born in 2010 (child); and
born in 2014 (child).
15 and 16 of the Interim Orders made on 24 July 2025 be
discharged.
AND THE COURT NOTES THAT:
matter remains listed to the Judicial Registrar’s List (by Webex) on
November 2025
for a procedural hearing.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identifies
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
REASONS FOR
ex tempore,
revised from
transcript)
JUDGE BLAKE:
is an application to review a decision of a Senior Judicial Registrar of this
Court made on 24 July 2025. This application is
made by the mother.
proceedings relate to the children, Y, born in 2010 (‘
), born in 2014.
10 December 2018, Final Parenting Orders were made by the parties in respect of
the children. On 3 May 2024, the parties entered
into a Parenting Plan which had
the effect of varying the Final Orders.
Approximately
two years ago, Y decided to voluntarily live with her father, and the parties
appear to have accepted that outcome.
January 2025, it was reported by the mother that X had disclosed to his
psychologist that the father had tickled him on his genitals
and buttocks area.
This was duly reported by the medical treaters to the relevant authorities, but
no further action was taken, the
mother says because X refused to provide the
relevant statement.
mother commenced proceedings in this Court on 16 February 2025. In that
application, she sought final orders that the father have
no contact with X and
she have sole parental responsibility for him. The father filed a response on 17
March 2025. He sought final
orders that the previous parenting orders be
discharged, that he have sole parental responsibility for the children, that the
live with him and spend time with the mother as determined by the
to the present application, on 24 July 2025, the matter came before a Senior
Judicial Registrar. By consent, the Senior
Judicial Registrar made a number of
orders, including the following:
(a) that the Final Parenting Orders and Parenting Plan be suspended (order
(b) that the father spend time with X, initially in a public place with others
present but ultimately progressing from Saturday,
4 October 2025 to alternate
weekend time, being consecutive Saturdays and Sundays from 10.00 am to 5.00 pm,
as well as each Wednesday
from 3:30 pm to 6:30 pm (order two)
(c) that X spend time with Y from 1.00 pm to 5.00 pm commencing Saturday two
August (order three);
(d) that all changeovers take place at X’s school and otherwise at the
father’s residence (order four); and
(e) that the parents be restrained from allowing or permitting X to be engaged
in any counselling or therapy for trauma consequent
to alleged sexual abuse and
are restrained from continuing to allow his attendance at C Medical Centre
(order 11).
mother came before me today and confirmed that she was seeking to review orders
2 and 11 of the Orders made by the Senior Judicial
her supporting affidavit, the mother says that on 6 August 2025, X decided to
file a formal complaint about the father’s
behaviour towards him in light
of the latest unwanted interaction with the father that occurred in July 2025.
The mother deposes
that this has led to the commencement of an investigation
being conducted by the Victoria Police Sexual Offences and Child Abuse
Investigations Teams (
) at Suburb D. She also raises
other issues about a visit that X had with the father in August 2025.
father deposes in his affidavit of 13 August 2025 that he has not been contacted
by the Victoria Police with respect to any police
investigation. For his part,
he denies any inappropriate behaviour.
am grateful to the Independent Children’s Lawyer
) for taking a proactive role in this case. The ICL
indicated that he had spoken to the officer conducting the investigation on
August 2025. The officer confirmed that X had made disclosures that the
police are investigating. The ICL also provided the following
information to the
Court that:
(a) on 25 July 2025, the ICL met with X and Y to explain the interim parenting
arrangements that had been made. On that day, X had
said he would like to go
with his father, among others, to the movies at Suburb E to watch a new movie. X
had requested that his
mother remain inside the shopping centre for the duration
of the visit;
(b) the ICL met with Y on 11 August 2025. Y did not raise any concerns in
relation to time spent between X and the father at Suburb
E. Y said that X
hugged the father and said ‘I love you’ when he was saying goodbye;
(c) Y told the ICL that on 2 August 2025, she and X were enjoying their time
together at the father’s home until such time
asked the mother what orders she wished me to make today. She confirmed that she
wanted the following:
(a) order 2 made by the Senior Judicial Registrar, that is, time between X and
the father, be suspended; and
(b) discharge of order 11, being the restraint on taking X for treatment to C
Medical Centre.
father’s representative told me that the orders he sought were as
(a) X live with the father; and
(b) X spend such time with the mother as determined by the Court.
alternative position put by the father was that the Senior Judicial
Registrar’s orders as made remain in place.
ICL proposed orders set out in a Minute that was handed to me prior to Court
commencing (
‘ICL Minute’
). Those orders provide, among other
things, as follows:
(a) that order 2 of the orders made on 24 July 2025 be suspended and the father
to commence supervised time with X on a fortnightly
basis, with such supervised
time to occur under the supervision of B Contact Service and for him to pay the
costs of the supervision;
(b) 14 days prior to the next hearing, the father obtain a report from the
supervision service at his sole expense and file that
report; and
(c) orders under
section 67ZBE
Family Law Act 1975
) directed to the Department of Fairness Families and
) and Victoria Police
) for the provision of relevant information in their
went through with each of the parties the documents they relied on, being as
(a) the mother relied on her application for review filed 8 August 2025 and her
supporting affidavit filed 11 August 2025;
(b) the father relied on his affidavit and case outline filed 13 August 2025;
(c) the ICL relied on his case outline.
RELEVANT PRINCIPLES
being an application for review, it is conducted under
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
) and I am required to conduct the review
as an original hearing.
is an interim parenting matter. In determining interim parenting matters,
section 60CA of the Act provides that I must regard
the best interests of the
children as the paramount consideration.
60CC of the Act sets out the factors that the Court must consider in determining
what is in a child’s best interests.
Franklyn v Franklyn
[2019] FamCAFC 256
), a Full Court discussed both the approach
to interim hearings, and the way in which risk is to be assessed in interim
Those paragraphs, [72] and [73] of
, provide as
Serious allegations cannot be ignored at interlocutory events simply because
they have been put in issue (see
Salah & Salah
(2016) FLC 93-713 at
Eaby & Speelman
[2015] FamCAFC 104
(2015) FLC 93-654
remaining astute to potential risk is not the same thing as assuming the truth
of and reacting impulsively to everything the
[party] alleged without regard for
other evidence and the wider context.
In interlocutory hearings, to the extent it is possible, judges are enjoined to
make decisions about interim orders based on agreed
facts, less contentious
evidence, and inferences which fairly arise [citation omitted], but decisions
must still be made despite
contentious evidence. Judges are obliged to act on
the strength of the evidence presented and, if it is relatively weak, are
to treat it so. Contrary to the inherent premise of [one parties]
submissions... judges are not required to treat all untested evidence
the same weight.
THE EVIDENCE FROM PROFESSIONALS
is evidence from the professionals in the form of a Child Impact Report that was
prepared for these parties on 16 June 2025.
That report relevantly provides as
(a) based on her experiences, Y expressed concern for X in the care of the
(b) the mother has been in close proximity to X during visits to the shopping
centre and when this has occurred, Y has observed a
change in X’s
demeanour as a consequence;
(c) Y did not identify any behaviours of concern between X and father and
reported no concerns herself;
(d) X presented with a low mood, switching between a longing to see his father
and his desire to return to the way things were. He
provided a narrative of once
enjoying his time with his father and sister, and is now worried about his
father’s behaviour
towards him. He disclosed that his father had tickled
his private parts;
(e) he described his mother as nice and positive and someone who helps him;
(f) there have been four reports to child protection with no further action
being taken in respect of any of them;
(g) the children appear to have been exposed to ongoing parental conflict and
family violence; and
(h) X may benefit from the opportunity to reconnect with his father in a safe
and supported setting.
note also the evidence of Mr F, which was not formally tendered before me and
therefore which I have not relied on.
CONSIDERATION
Senior Judicial Registrar made orders on 24 July 2025. It is clear to me that
since those orders were made, a significant intervening
event has occurred, that
being that X has made a complaint to SOCIT about the behaviour he alleges he
experiences from his father.
would appear, on the material, that the allegations X makes relate to what might
be described as the most serious form of child
abuse or child sexual abuse.
SOCIT are, as matters presently stand, actively investigating X's disclosures.
At the present time,
it is not known when SOCIT will conclude its investigation.
However, it is plain that these are very serious allegations about the
and welfare of a young child.
such a serious case, with an ongoing investigation, the only option available to
the Court is to suspend the father's time as contemplated
by the orders of the
Senior Judicial Registrar, pending confirmation from SOCIT as to the outcome of
its investigation.
note that SOCIT is investigating. They have not simply dismissed this complaint
out of hand. This is clearly a case, at least as
matters presently stand, in
which unacceptable risk to the child is present.
question that then arises is whether that unacceptable risk can be mitigated in
some way so as to preserve any relationship between
father and son. On that
issue, I note that it appears from the material that time between X and his
father has only recently recommenced.
I note that the ICL has spoken to X's
16-year-old sibling, Y, who has provided positive reports of time between the
father and X.
I note that there is photographic evidence that shows X apparently
happy around the home of his father.
note that the mother opposes supervised time, which is one answer to dealing
with risk. She does so, she says, on the basis of X's
stated wish not to see his
father. Questioned further, she said, dramatically, that if forced to see his
father, he will kill himself
or kill his father.
mother is unrepresented, and I explained to her the way in which professional
supervision by professional trained supervisors
works and how it would protect X
from any physical or emotional harm. The mother did not articulate any
reasonable explanation as
to why supervision from a professionally trained
supervisor would not adequately protect X. In my view, given all of the evidence
currently before the Court to which I have referred, supervised time between the
father and X should occur. I will, therefore, make
orders 1 to 3 in the ICL
will also make orders 4 to 5 in the ICL minute, which are directed to DFFH and
the Police, to provide relevant information from
their files. No party actively
opposed that, but even if they had, I would make the order. It is necessary to
obtain information
from those agencies, given the serious nature of the
allegations the Court is confronted with.
to the question of the discharge of order 11. In short, I agree with the
submissions put by Mr O'Connell for the ICL. X has
a psychologist. He has seen a
Child Impact Report writer. He is presently being spoken to by who knows how
many people at SOCIT.
By the time these proceedings conclude, he will be
subjected to a Family Report interview, in all likelihood.
has enough external intervention and people interviewing him as matters
presently stand. To subject him to a further round professional
intervention is
not in his best interests.
also note, for completeness, that the Child Impact Report did not make any
recommendation that X continue to see someone for alleged
exposure to sexual
abuse. I also observe that the question of whether there has been abuse that
requires treatment by a specialist
counsellor is something that is under active
consideration and is yet to be determined.
such circumstances, discharging order 11 at this stage would appear to be
premature and not warranted.
also seems to me that I should discharge orders 15 and 16 of the Senior Judicial
Registrar’s orders, which provides for the
parties to attend a court-based
Family Dispute Resolution (
) Conference before a
Registrar on a date to be fixed. In my view, this cannot occur until after SOCIT
completes its investigation,
and the supervision report comes back. I therefore
will make orders discharging orders 15 and 16 of the Senior Judicial
Registrar’s
matter will remain listed for a procedural hearing on 13 November 2025.
have stepped back to consider these orders. I consider them to be in the best
interests of X.
I certify that the preceding thirty-seven (37)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge
Dated: 14 August 2025
RTF format (440 KB)
Signed PDF/A format