D20-21\086 [2020] SCTA 194 (20 November 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\086
FILE NUMBER : 18-452
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
JOINED PARTY
The Insurer
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Employer
The Former Fund
The Former Trustee
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(the Complaints Act) and held on 18 September 2020
Jane Abbott,
Presiding Member
Jocelyn Furlan,
DECISIONS UNDER REVIEW
decisions under review are as follows:
That of the
Trustee that the Complainant’s insurance had been cancelled and that he
was therefore not entitled to a Total and
Permanent Disablement (TPD)
That of the
Insurer that, as the insurance policy was not in force in respect of the
Complainant at the date of claim, a TPD benefit
is not payable.
Trustee notified the Complainant by email dated 14 December 2017 and, following
review, by letter dated 19 January 2018 of its
decision to reject the
Complainant’s claim.
Insurer notified the Tribunal of its decision on 28 April 2020.
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal affirms the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
Complainant sought to be legally represented and the Tribunal granted the
request in accordance with its discretion under s23
of the Complaints Act.
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
of the Parties declined to lodge a submission, choosing instead to rely on
information previously submitted to the Tribunal.
emails from the Parties were exchanged and responses were invited. No responses
were received.
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
papers provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant commenced employment with the Employer and joined the Former Fund on
24 May 2016. He was provided with automatic death
and TPD cover of $250,000.
22 June 2016 the Former Trustee sent the Complainant a welcome letter confirming
his account details, including the applicable
monthly administration fees and
insurance premiums to be deducted from the account, which consisted of monthly
premiums of $155.25
for death cover and $284.54 for TPD cover.
1 July 2016 all the assets and members of the Former Fund were transferred to
the Fund on a successor fund basis.
7 December 2016 the Trustee wrote to the Complainant advising that a minimum
contribution of $2,721.57 was required by 6 January
2017 to ensure his insurance
cover continued.
23 January 2017 the Trustee sent a letter to the Complainant confirming that due
to insufficient funds in his account his insurance
cover had ceased with an
effective date of 19 January 2017.
Complainant was diagnosed with dementia in August 2017.
result of his dementia, he ceased employment with the Employer on 20 November
December 2017, a call was made to the Fund on the Complainant’s behalf
enquiring about his insurance. By email on 14 December
2017, the Trustee advised
that the Complainant’s cover had been cancelled effective 19 January 2017
due to insufficient funds
in his account to maintain insurance.
a complaint by the Complainant, the Trustee responded on 19 January 2018
explaining that, as the Complainant’s TPD
premiums had gone unpaid for 6
months, the outstanding amount exceeded the available account balance and, in
absence of additional
contributions being received, his insurance cover had
ceased. In that letter, the Trustee made an offer of an ex-gratia payment
$500 to the Complainant which remains open. The Complainant has not accepted the
Complainant lodged a complaint with the Tribunal on 9 March 2018 regarding the
cancellation of his insurance cover.
complained that the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer were unfair or
unreasonable for the reasons summarised in this determination.
resolution sought by the Complainant is to be paid a TPD benefit of
Benefit in dispute
to the Trustee, the amount of the benefit in dispute is the TPD insured sum of
Events not in dispute:
− the Complainant’s date of birth.
− the date the Complainant commenced employment
with the Employer and joined the Fund.
− the date the assets and members of the Former Fund
were transferred to the Fund on a successor fund basis.
− the date of the Trustee’s letter to the
Complainant advising that a minimum contribution of $2,721.57 was required
January 2017 to prevent the cessation of his insurance cover.
− the effective date the Complainant’s
insurance cover ceased.
− the date of the Trustee’s letter to the
Complainant confirming that due to insufficient funds in his account his
cover had ceased on 19 January 2017.
the date of general correspondence from the Trustee to the Complainant about making additional contributions to superannuation prior
to the financial year end.
the Complainant’s benefit statement
of this date showed an account balance of $3,431.77 and no insurance.
August 2017
− the Complainant was diagnosed with dementia.
− the date the Complainant was last physically
at work and the date his employment with the Employer ceased because of his
− the date the Complainant attempted to lodge a
TPD claim but was told he no longer held TPD cover.
the date the Trustee received the
Complainant’s complaint.
− the date the Trustee responded to the
Complainant’s complaint.
− the date the Complainant lodged his complaint
with the Tribunal.
Tribunal considers that the trust deed of the Fund relevant to this complaint is
that in effect on the date when the Complainant’s
cover was cancelled
(i.e. 19 January 2017), being the trust deed of the Fund dated 27 June 2016 (the
Trust Deed).
Trust Deed provisions relevant to the complaint are:
4.1 General Powers
Except as otherwise provided in this deed the Trustee has complete management
and control of the Fund and may, without limitation,
exercise all the Powers of
a natural person beneficially owning the Fund assets in order to:
(a) properly administer and maintain the Fund;
(b) exercise any Power; and
(c) perform its duties.
4.2 Specific Powers
The Trustee's Powers under clause 4.1 include the following Powers:
to obtain insurance in respect of the Fund, a
Beneficiary, the Trustee or a director of the Trustee;
Proceedings
to be involved in or compromise proceedings,
disputes, claims or any other action by any person in relation to the Fund or
the Trustee
(a) The Trustee may acquire, hold, vary or dispose of one or more
Policies to provide insured benefits for one or more Beneficiaries.
(b) The component of the Member's benefit that relates to cover provided
under a Policy is:
(1) subject to the terms of the Policy under which it is provided;
(2) limited to the extent that the Member is covered under the Policy;
(3) only payable if; and to the extent that, the Trustee receives payment from
the insurer under the Policy.
(c) If an insurer refuses to provide cover for a Member (or a
Member’s cover ceases) under a Policy, the Trustee is not required
arrange any other cover for the Member.
INSURANCE POLICY
Tribunal considers that the insurance policy relevant to the complaint is that
in force on the date when the Complainant’s
cover was cancelled (i.e. 19
January 2017) being that executed by the Former Trustee and the Insurer,
effective from 1 July 2016
(the Policy).
Policy provision relevant to the complaint is:
10.2 Cessation of Cover after 130 days if Premium not
(a) This clause applies where Cover commences for an Eligible Member under
clause 7.2, 7.3, 7.4 or 7.6.
(i) the superannuation contributions received by the Fund for the Insured Member
are not sufficient to meet the accrued Premium due
in respect of the Insured
Member as at the first Premium Due Date to occur after 130 days from the
Eligible Member’s Member
Commencement Date (
Premium Due
(ii) the Policy Holder has not paid Premiums due in respect of the Insured
Member within 30 days of the 130 Day Premium Due Date,
the Insured Member's Cover will cease 30 days after the 130 Day
Premium Due Date.
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
main points made by the Complainant are as follows:
Upon perusal of
his statement from June 2016 ‘it is clear’ that, despite being
advised that he was covered for TPD, no
premiums were paid:
It took [the Trustee] six months at which stage, the
arrears was [sic] in excess of $2,000.00 for our client to be made aware, that
premiums had not been paid and that a sum of $2,721.57 was needed to be paid for
coverage to continue.
If the matter
had been properly addressed and he had been told within the first month or
second month that there were insufficient
funds, he could have made alternative
arrangements including enquiring about a reduction in the sum insured.
At the time the
Complainant became aware of the arrears of payments he was not in a financial
position to cover that sum. The Complainant
It should not have got to that stage.
opportunity to negotiate a reduction in the sum insured and/or a reduction of
the premiums so that he could have been covered
for both TPD and death.
The Complainant
queried why his death cover was cancelled, as a cursory assessment of his
statements shows there were sufficient funds
for it to continue.
The decision by
the Trustee to cancel all his insurance including death cover was
‘unconscionable’ in the circumstances.
The Complainant
did receive the Trustee’s letter of 7 December 2016. He also received the
letter of 23 January 2017, however:
... at this point his condition was already worsting [sic] but we
thought it was something more pressing like a brain tumour or brain
causing the memory loss and were still in the midst of seeing doctors and on
waiting lists to see specialist [sic] to find
out further what was going on. And
still not having enough money at the time then getting this letter on top
causing more stress
not knowing where this deficit has come from all of a sudden
whether it was the employer or [the Trustee] for this to happen so being
frustrated and worked up over it he never brought himself to contact [the
Trustee] over the incident. If more information was
provided as to why there was
money owed and not just pay this lump sum you had no idea about or you’re
not insured if anything
happens to you while something was happening to him (his
condition) that he didn’t understand at the time this would have been
dealt with a lot better and faster.
The Complainant
As shown the “Your 30 June 2016 annual statement” in
the section of “Your insurance benefits” the types of
death and TPD are different premium per month payments;
Death: $155.25 premium per month
TPD: $285.54 premium per month
Totalling $440.79 per month
I bring this up because as I was going through the transaction statement I
noticed that every time a payment came out it would strictly
state “Death
insurance premium” and nothing about “TPD insurance premium”
the first deduction was $515.51
on the 1st of sept 2016 around 3-4 months after
the “opening balance” date 24th of may [sic] 2016(which $515.51 is
or around 3-4 times the $155.25 Premium per month for death) then each
payment after for death was slightly above the stated $155.25.
This brought to my attention why was there no “TPD insurance
premium” deducted and If it was under some other name or
anything of the
sought why was there no deduction of anything near the TPD $285.54 premium per
month or for that fact consistent
deductions for the total sum of $440.79 or a
sum close to this. After realising this I did rough estimate of the total
amount that
would be owed if [the Trustee] tried to brush a mistake like this
under the rug and for the time between the 24th of May 2016 and
the 19th of Jan
2017 so about 8 months of payments at $285.54 per month it came to $2,284.32 as
a lump sum and as shown from the
transaction statement payments were always
higher than the original premium per month for death it isn’t unreasonable
when they suddenly ask for $2,721.57 which is only $437.25 that
someone may have messed up on their end and didn’t deduct the
total amount in the first place which created an unforeseen deficit in the
account which this account should have been watched
and notified sooner that
such an obvious mistake was made and that as a consumer it is not my job to make
sure that [the Trustee]
does their job correctly and just pass off the easily
avoidable mistake to the consumer like they did nothing wrong.
The Trustee
main points made by the Trustee are as follows:
The Welcome
Letter to the Complainant detailed his insurance cover and the associated costs.
The insurance premiums disclosed were
$155.25 per month for death cover and
$285.54 per month for TPD cover.
The Trustee
referred to the Insurance guide which on page 6 under the heading
Making sure you’re eligible’
, provides:
If you don’t have enough money in your super
account to deduct your insurance premiums within 130 days of you joining,
cancel your, [sic] insurance.
The Trustee
allows a 130 days insurance premium grace period from inception of the
This is done as employers have the option to make contributions
quarterly, and the grace period is to ensure we have allowed ample
opportunity
for those contributions to be received. Furthermore, an additional month is
allowed for any pending contributions to
be finalised.
In the event
that the contributions received do not cover the total cost of both death and
TPD cover, the Trustee will only deduct
death cover premiums as a member cannot
have TPD cover alone. In this instance the TPD premiums will continue to
contributions received were insufficient to cover both death and TPD premiums,
only the premiums for the Complainant’s
death insurance cover were
The Trustee
notifies members when there are insufficient funds in their account to continue
deducting insurance premiums. This notification
is posted to the address held on
the member’s file.
A notification
was sent to the Complainant’s address on file.
The Trustee
The Trustee’s “
We’d like you to stay
” letter of 7 December 2016
which served as the
first notification to the Complainant advised the member that should the amount
of $2,721.57 not be received by
6 January 2017 the insurance would be
The amount requested was not an Annual premium amount, but rather the owing
TPD premiums from inception and an additional two months
of insurance
In addition this letter under the heading “
Your regular
contributions
” went on to invite the Complainant to contact us to make
arrangements with regard to increasing his contribution amount in
maintain the insurance cover:
“Your current annual insurance cost is $5,289.50. To make sure your
insurance is maintained, you may want to look at increasing
your regular
contributions to your account.
Please call us and we’ll help arrange
this for you.”
*underlined for emphasis
As the TPD premiums were unpaid for approximately 6 months, the outstanding
amount exceeded the available balance in the Account,
in the absence of the
requested additional contribution being received the insurance cover ceased.
The Trustee further notified the complainant with the “
longer insured
” letter of 23 January 2017
which confirmed
the insurance had ceased on 19 January 2017 due to inadequate funds being
available in the Account and the previously
requested amount not being
contributed.
In this letter, under the heading “
Would you still like to be
” the Trustee advised the Complainant to contact us by 22
February 2017, should he wish to restart his insurance.
“As you know being adequately insured is important for you and your
family and we’d like to help with this.
If you’d like to start up
your insurance again, please call us by 22 February 2017
. You may have to
reapply and go through the standard health checks, but we can help make this
easy for you.”
Complainant’s 2017 Annual Statement shows only death insurance premiums
being deducted.
The Complainant
made no attempt to contact the Trustee until 17 November 2017 after his
insurance had been cancelled for more than
The Trustee
summarised its position as follows:
the Account has
been administered according to the terms and conditions of the product with
appropriate disclosure provided to the
Complainant with regard to the Insurance
premiums both at commencement of the Account and prior to the Insurance
The Complainant
did not pay any TPD insurance premiums from the commencement of the Account due
to insufficient funds;
the complainants
[sic] insurance cover in its entirety ceased on 16 December 2016 [sic –
should be 19 January 2017] prior to
his last day at work, therefore the
insurance was not in place on the date he last worked;
The Insurer
main points made by the Insurer are as follows:
It has never
received a claim for the Complainant, whether TPD or otherwise, and therefore a
claim has not been assessed.
previously received a complaint from the Complainant in relation to any
Complainant’s death and TPD cover was cancelled on 19 January 2017 due to
the non-payment of premiums. As such, the Policy
was not in force at the date he
last worked, 20 November 2017, and a TPD benefit was not payable.
Whilst it can
appreciate the Complainant’s desired outcome is the admittance of a TPD
claim and payment of a TPD benefit, the
nature of the complaint relates to the
collection of premiums and insurance cover which is managed by the Trustee.
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(2)(a) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must review the decisions of both
the Trustee and the Insurer.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must determine whether the decisions
of the Trustee that the Complainant’s insurance
had been cancelled and
that he was therefore not entitled to a TPD benefit and that of the Insurer
that, as the Policy was not in
force in respect of the Complainant at the date
of claim, a TPD benefit is not payable, were fair and reasonable in their
in relation to the Complainant in the circumstances.
issue is not what decisions the Tribunal would have made on the material before
the Trustee and the Insurer but whether the decisions
were fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal has taken into account all the material
provided by the Parties, the provisions of the
Trust Deed and the Policy and the
relevant law. The Tribunal is satisfied that the material it has relied on has
been provided to
all Parties.
Tribunal reviewed the relevant provisions of the Trust Deed and the Policy. It
is satisfied the Complainant’s insurance
was cancelled in January 2017, in
accordance with these documents, as he did not have sufficient funds in his
account at the relevant
time to support the insurance premiums. Therefore, as
the Complainant held no TPD insurance at his date of claim, the Insurer’s
decision to consider a TPD benefit was not payable was fair and reasonable in
its operation in relation to the Complainant in all
the circumstances.
Tribunal noted that it is not in dispute that the Complainant received the
Trustee’s correspondence advising him that his
death and TPD cover would
be cancelled unless he made additional contributions to his account. The basis
of the Complainant’s
claim appears to the Tribunal to be that he should
have been advised earlier of the requirement to make additional contributions
and that his health was such that, at the time the correspondence was received,
he never brought himself to contact the Trustee at
considered all of the material before it, the Tribunal is of the view that the
Trustee’s decision that no TPD benefit
is payable because the
Complainant’s insurance had been cancelled is fair and reasonable in the
circumstances for the following
As noted above,
the Complainant does not dispute that he received the correspondence from the
Trustee of 7 December 2016 that his
insurance would be cancelled without
additional contributions, or the correspondence dated 23 January 2017 advising
him that his
cover had been cancelled.
Insurance guide states that insurance cover ends when there are insufficient
funds in a member’s account.
correspondence to the Complainant dated 7 December 2016 does not mention any
distinction between death and TPD premiums or explain
to the Complainant that
only premiums in respect of his death cover had been deducted from his account.
It also does not set out
the monthly premium amount. Notwithstanding these
issues, the Tribunal is not persuaded that the Complainant would have done
differently had these details been provided to him.
The Complainant
did not take any action at the time of receipt of the correspondence of 7
December 2016. Similarly, he did not take
any action after receipt of the
correspondence confirming that his cover had ceased. The Complainant submitted
that he may have taken
some action in relation to reducing his cover had he been
advised earlier than 7 December 2016 of the impending cancellation of his
but he did not take any action when the correspondence was actually received.
Further, he submitted that he was struggling
financially at the time. The
Complainant stated that his energies at the time of the correspondence were
focused on his health, but
in the Tribunal’s view these circumstances did
not make the Trustee’s cancellation of the cover unfair or
unreasonable.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decisions under review
if it is satisfied that the decisions, in their
operation in relation to the
Complainant, were fair and reasonable in the circumstances. For the reasons
stated above the Tribunal
is so satisfied.
Tribunal affirms the decisions of the Trustee and the Insurer.
Jane Abbott, Presiding Member
Date of Tribunal signature: 20 November 2020
RTF format (309 KB)
Signed PDF/A format