URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/FCA/2018/426.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:49:04
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Vautin v BY Winddown, Inc. (formerly Bertram Yachts) (No 4) [2018] FCA 426 (10 April 2018)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Vautin v BY Winddown, Inc. (formerly
Bertram Yachts) (No 4)
[2018] FCA 426
File number(s):
NSD 546 of 2016
DERRINGTON J
Date of judgment:
10 April 2018
Catchwords:
CONSUMER LAW
- Sale of goods –
Acceptable quality – Motor vessel – Defective construction of hull
and superstructure –
Goods with latent risk not of an acceptable
CONSUMER LAW
- Sale of goods – Acceptable quality
– Right to reject – Whether rejection period expired – Whether
and extent of breach of warranty had become “apparent”
– Complexity of nature of defect
CONSUMER LAW
goods – Fitness for purpose – Defects generating risk in the use of
a vessel – Not fit for purpose
CONSUMER LAW
- Sale of goods
– Manufacturer’s warranty – Statutory guarantee –
Non-compliance
– Value of vessel at date of supply
– Adequacy of evidence – Sale price less cost of
– Loss of use of a vessel as part of general
damages – Measure of loss – Rate of depreciation whilst vessel not
able to be used
Legislation:
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) Sch 2 (
Consumer Law
Trade Practices Act 1974
Consumer Guarantees Act 1993 (NZ)
Cases cited:
Admiralty Commissioners v SS Chekiang
[1926] AC 637
Admiralty Commissioners v SS Susquehanna
[1926] AC 655
Alexander v Perpetual Trustees WA Ltd
[2004] HCA 7
(2004) 216 CLR 109
Anthanasopoulos v Moseley
[2001] NSWCA 266
(2001) 52 NSWLR 262
Apollo Shower Screens Pty Ltd v Building and Construction Industry Long
Service Payments Corp
[1985] 1 NSWLR 561
APS Satellite Pty Ltd (formerly known as “Sky Mesh Pty Ltd”)
v Ipstar Australia Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWSC 1898
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v Valve Corp (No 3)
[2016] FCA 196
(2016) 337 ALR 647
Awad v Twin Creeks Properties Pty Ltd
[2012] NSWCA 200
Baltic Shipping Co v Dillon
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 176 CLR 344
Baxter v Obacelo Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 66
(2001) 205 CLR 635
Blatch v Archer
[1774] EngR 2
(1774) 1 Cowp 63
Bray v F Hoffman-La Roche Ltd
[2002] FCA 243
(2002) 118 FCR 1
BY Winddown Inc v Vautin
[2016] FCAFC 168
(2016) 249 FCR 262
Consort Express Lines Ltd v J-Mac Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2006] FCA 833
(2006) 232 ALR
Currie v Dempsey
(1967) 69 SR (NSW) 116
Deal v Father Pius Kodakkathanath
[2016] HCA 31
(2016) 258 CLR 281
Devenish v Jewel Food Stores Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 7
(1991) 172 CLR 32
Dimond v Lovell
[2002] 1 AC 384
Distillers Co (Bio-chemicals) Ltd v Thompson
[1971] AC 458
Dow Jones & Co Inc v Gutnick
(2002) 210 CLR 575
Ferraro v DBN Holdings Aust Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAA 1127
Fink v Fink
[1946] HCA 54
(1946) 74 CLR 127
George Zaravinos v Dairy Farmers Co-operative Ltd
[1985] FCA 77
(1985) 7 FCR
Hope v Bathurst City Council
[1980] HCA 16
(1980) 144 CLR 1
Jackson v Spittall
(1870) LR5CP 542
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298
Leeks v FXC Corporation
[2002] FCA 72
(2002) 118 FCR 299
Luckins (Receiver and Manager of Australia Trailways Pty Ltd) v Highway
Motel (Carnarvon) Pty Ltd
[1975] HCA 50
(1975) 133 CLR 164
McGowan v Hills Ltd
[2015] VSC 674
Medtel Pty Ltd v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
(2003) 130 FCR 182
Merck Sharp & Dohme (Australia) Pty Ltd v Peterson
[2011] FCAFC 128
Meyer Heine Pty Ltd v The China Navigation Co Ltd
[1966] HCA 11
(1966) 115 CLR
Murray’s Transport NSW Pty Ltd v CGU Insurance Ltd
Nesbit v Porter
[2000] NZCA 288
[2000] 2 NZLR 465
Owners of the Steamship “Mediana” v Owners, Master &
Crew of Lightship “Comet”
“The Mediana”
[1900] AC 113
Paper Products Pty Ltd v Tomlinsons (Rochdale) Ltd (No 2)
[1993] FCA 430
Prestige Auto Traders Australia Ltd v Bonnefin
[2017] NSWSC
Protec Pacific Pty Ltd v Steuler Services GmBH & Co KG
Reg v Jameson
[1896] 2 QB 425
Spittles v Michaels’ Appliance Services Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 76
Stone v Chappel
(2017) 128 SASR 165
The Hebridean Coast
[1961] AC 545
Vautin v BY Winddown Inc (No 2)
[2016] FCA 1235
Voth v Manildra Flour Mills Pty Ltd
[1990] HCA 55
(1990) 171 CLR 538
Yates v Mobile Marine Repairs Pty Ltd
[2007] NSWSC 1463
Date of hearing:
26-28 September, 25 October 2017
New South Wales
General Division
National Practice Area:
Admiralty and Maritime
Number of paragraphs:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Dr A Bell SC and Ms L Rich
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Banki Haddock Fiora
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Mr J Renwick SC and Mr J Emmett
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Norton Rose Fulbright
Counsel for the Second Respondent:
Mr S Prince
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
NSD 546 of 2016
WILLIAM VAUTIN
BY WINDDOWN, INC. (FORMERLY BERTRAM
First Respondent
EAGLE YACHTS PTY LTD (ACN 108 311
Second Respondent
DERRINGTON J
DATE OF ORDER:
10 APRIL 2018
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
applicant have judgment against the first respondent in the sum of nine hundred
and eighty-six thousand, four hundred and seventy-four
four dollars and
fifty-six cents ($986,474.56).
applicant have judgment against the second respondent in the sum of five million
two hundred and twenty thousand, two hundred
and seventy-five dollars and
fifty-nine cents ($5,220,275.59).
second respondent have judgment on its cross-claim against the first respondent
in the sum of five million two hundred and twenty
thousand two hundred and
seventy-five dollars and fifty-nine cents ($5,220,275.59).
parties are to be heard as to the amount of interest to be awarded and on the
question of costs.
Note: Entry of orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR
DERRINGTON J:
Introduction
applicant, Mr Vautin, purchased a recreational fishing vessel in October 2011.
As a pleasure craft it is of the larger type,
being some 74 feet long. Vessels
of this type are marketed and sold for ocean going travel and as being capable
of withstanding
all but the most extraordinary sea conditions. Mr Vautin paid a
substantial amount of money for his vessel, specifically the combined
US$3,000,000 and AU$1,200,000 (this latter amount being the ascribed trade-in
value of a vessel he previously owned). The
vessel was sold to Mr Vautin by the
second respondent, Eagle Yachts Pty Ltd (Eagle Yachts). It had been constructed
by the first
respondent whose name at the time was Bertram Yachts Inc (Bertram),
a company incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware
in the United
States of America and carrying on business in and from the State of Florida.
All parties agree that the vessel acquired
by Mr Vautin, which is named
“Revive”, is defective. The defect had its origins in the
manufacturing process as a result
of which the laminated PVC foam core of the
vessel (being the hull, the decks and the superstructure) were not constructed
in accordance
with any known specification or, as has been found,
Bertram’s own specifications. To date, the consequence of the defective
manufacture has been that those areas of the vessel’s hull which have been
subject to the most buffeting, have “delaminated”
separation of the outer laminate layers from the PVC foam core). Necessarily,
this renders the vessel unseaworthy and
not capable of being used for the
purposes for which it was acquired. It certainly cannot be used in the open
seas. It is possible
that other parts of the vessel will delaminate or fail in
the future.
Vautin is, understandably, unhappy with this situation. He brings this action
against Bertram as the manufacturer of the vessel
and against Eagle Yachts as
the entity which sold it to him. Various causes of action are pursued,
including a number which arise
pursuant to the
Australian Consumer Law
(ACL) (Sch 2 to the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
respondents do not assert that Mr Vautin is not entitled to some form of remedy.
However, they dispute the nature of the remedy
to which he is entitled; the
quantum of any damages payable; and, the identity of the respondent whom ought
to be liable to Mr Vautin.
A central issue is the extent to which the defective
manufacture of the vessel has rendered it unfit for its intended purposes.
Vautin asserts that all of the defectively manufactured shell of the vessel
requires rectification to make it comply with a relevant
specification. The
total cost of doing so is in the vicinity of $2.975m. The respondents, on the
other hand, assert remediation
need only occur in the areas of the vessel where
the defects have, to date, resulted in delamination. As an alternative, they
the remediation can be limited to the hull area of the vessel.
of the issues in this matter arise as a result of the residency of the parties.
Mr Vautin is a resident of Australia. Eagle
Yachts is incorporated in Australia
and has carried on business as a seller of boats here. Bertram, on the other
hand, is an American
company, incorporated in Delaware and engaged in the
manufacture of motor vessels in the State of Florida.
relationship between Eagle Yachts and Bertram was, effectively, governed by an
exclusive dealership agreement. In summary, that
consisted of a written
agreement entered into in May 2005 between Bertram and Eagle Yachts whereby the
latter became the exclusive
supplier in Australia of “pleasure
yachts” manufactured by Bertram. That agreement was entitled
“Bertram Yacht,
Inc Dealer Agreement 2005-2008”. By its terms that
agreement terminated on 31 August 2008. However, it is accepted as between
Bertram and Eagle Yachts, that the parties continued to be bound by and
continued to perform the terms of the agreement (exclusive
of the termination
clause) subsequent to that nominated termination date. On 28 October 2013,
Eagle Yachts provided two months’
written notice to Bertram that it would
terminate the agreement. Consequently, on 27 December 2013, the agreement came
The terms of the exclusive dealership agreement and the manner in
which they were carried out are important in the context of the
question of
whether Bertram was carrying on business in Australia. They are discussed in
detail below.
Vautin enjoys boating in motor yachts, including engaging in marlin fishing.
Prior to acquiring Revive, he had been the owner
of four other vessels, all of
which were made by Bertram, the last of which was a 63ft vessel. He had
purchased that vessel from
Eagle Yachts and, at the time of buying it, he had
indicated to Eagle Yachts that he wanted to use the vessel for recreational
fishing and to use it to fish for marlin during the North Queensland
marlin season.
or about mid July 2010, Mr Vautin received a telephone call from Mr Brad Rodgers
who was the sales manager with Eagle Yachts and
who had sold him the 63ft
vessel. Mr Rodgers called to offer to Mr Vautin a larger vessel; being one in
the Bertram 700 series.
The particular vessel offered was especially attractive
to Mr Vautin as it had an enclosed flybridge.
Subsequently,
on or about 6 October 2011, Mr Vautin entered into the contract to purchase a
Bertram 700 Enclosed Bridge motor yacht
(hull #009). He agreed to pay a
purchase price of the combined amounts of US$3,000,000 plus AUD$1,200,000, the
latter amount being
satisfied by the trading in of his existing vessel. He also
agreed to pay the sum of US$75,000 representing the cost of having the
shipped to Australia.
the time of purchasing the vessel, Mr Vautin also purchased from Bertram
upgrades to the vessel which cost US$235,290. He has
also spent a considerable
amount of money making his own additions to the vessel, including the
installation of a satellite telephone,
a marlin tower and associated
electronics, a tender on the bow, a duckboard on the stern, a fridge / freezer
in the cockpit, and
two monitors in the helm with connected boat cameras.
is an agreed fact between the parties that, prior to and at the time that Mr
Vautin purchased the vessel from Eagle Yachts, he
disclosed to Eagle Yachts by
implication that the purpose for which the vessel was being acquired by him was
for motoring on the
open ocean. It is also agreed that Eagle Yachts represented
to him that the vessel was reasonably fit for the purpose of motoring
open ocean. Given the size and type of vessel in question these matters are
somewhat axiomatic.
agreed fact is that Mr Vautin paid the purchase price and the shipping costs in
accordance with the terms of the agreement.
to the dealership agreement, a vessel of the type required to fulfil the order
placed by Mr Vautin was ordered by Eagle Yachts
from Bertram. The latter
manufactured the vessel at its factory in Florida. It did so using a hull
constructed some years previously.
The completed vessel was delivered to Eagle
Yachts at Bertram’s Florida premises and it was shipped to Australia. It
received in Australia by Eagle Yachts in or around February 2012 and
delivered to Mr Vautin on 5 March 2012.
around 4 February 2012, Eagle Yachts, by Mr Rodgers, gave to Mr Vautin a Bertram
Warranty Card in accordance with its obligations
under the dealership agreement.
Mr Vautin completed the card which was immediately returned to Mr Rodgers who
forwarded it to Bertram
in Florida. There is no dispute between the parties
that Mr Vautin received the manufacturer’s warranty from Bertram as he
entitled to under the contract of purchase and there is no dispute that the
warranty card was returned to Bertram.
acquiring it, Mr Vautin used the vessel solely for the purposes of recreational
motor cruising and game fishing. He has not
used it for any other purpose.
There is no evidence that it was used other than in accordance with its intended
uses and within
its intended capabilities. Mr Vautin employed a full time
skipper for the vessel, being Mr Leigh Bradshaw. It has been part of
Bradshaw’s duties to maintain the vessel in first class condition and,
apart from the damage to the vessel caused by the
testing for the purposes of
this litigation, it is apparent that he has fulfilled that obligation. Mr
Bradshaw has incurred expenses
for the maintenance and upkeep of the vessel from
time to time on behalf of Mr Vautin.
after the vessel was acquired, Bertram undertook a number of warranty jobs on
the vessel. When such work was required the
warranty claims were made through
Mr Rodgers at Eagle Yachts. Eagle Yachts undertook the required work to fulfil
obligations under its warranty.
November 2014, the vessel was sailed from Cairns to Brisbane after the
completion of the marlin fishing season. In the course
of that journey the
skipper of the vessel, Mr Bradshaw, noticed damage occurring in the forward
portside part of the hull. In particular,
he observed that there was
delamination of the inside skin in the topside of the bow. He immediately
telephoned Mr Vautin who, the
next day, travelled to the Gold Coast to inspect
the damage.
after Mr Vautin arrived on the Gold Coast and inspected the damage to Revive, he
telephoned Mr Rodgers and advised him of
what had occurred. Within a day or so
Mr Rodgers arrived on the Gold Coast also to inspect the damage. Mr Rodgers was
the employee
at Eagle Yachts who sold Revive to Mr Vautin. At this point in
time, Eagle Yachts had ceased to be the exclusive dealer of Bertram
Australia. That said, it was apparently still handling warranty claims on
Bertram’s behalf.
15 November 2014, and prior to leaving for the Gold Coast, Mr Rodgers sent an
email to Bertram (by that time referred to as the
Ferretti Group) and, in
particular, to Mr Frederico Ferrando. In that email he advised that the vessel
sold to Mr Vautin (referred
to by its code 700/009) had started to delaminate on
the port forward hull in an area of about 2 metres wide running down to just
above the water line. Mr Rodgers advised that Mr Vautin would like to contact
them to discuss a way forward to address the situation.
reply email to Mr Rodgers came from Mr Ferrando on 17 November 2014 the effect
of which was that he would discuss the matter with
Mr Rodgers the following day.
does not appear that Mr Ferrando did contact or communicate with Mr Rodgers on
the following day as, on 19 November 2014, Mr Rodgers
sent a further email to Mr
Ferrando advising him that he was flying to Queensland to inspect the vessel and
to review the damage
and, further, that Mr Vautin was inquiring of Mr Rodgers as
to what assistance would be provided by Bertram and/or the Ferretti Group
future. Mr Rodgers sought information as to what steps would be taken and what
assistance Ferretti would provide. He asked
for an urgent response.
Unfortunately there did not appear to be any response, urgent or otherwise, from
Bertram, the Ferretti Group
or from Mr Ferrando. Despite being entitled in this
action to call evidence as it saw fit, Bertram remained completely silent as
why it did not respond to the requests for assistance in relation to the
delamination on Revive.
4 December 2014, Bertram and Eagle Yachts were notified of the damage in a
letter from Mr Vautin. The letter was directed to Mr
Ferrando as the Logistic
and Commissioning Manager Americas Ferretti Group in Ft Lauderdale, Florida. In
the letter Mr Vautin formally
advised of the defect in the hull of the Revive,
that the defect appeared to fall within the scope of the Bertram warranty, that
the vessel was unseaworthy and awaiting repair by Bertram or on its behalf. Mr
Vautin sought an acknowledgment of the Notice of
Defect as a matter of urgency
together with advice as to how the repairs would be undertaken. The letter was
sent by registered
mail and, apparently, was received.
did not respond to that letter. Again, despite being a party to this action, it
called no evidence as to why it did not reply
to the letter or act to fulfil its
warranty obligations. It has refused to fulfil its obligations under the
warranty which it gave
and has provided no justification for that refusal.
appears that Mr Vautin’s insurers, Club Marine, engaged Marine &
Leisure Assess Pty Ltd to undertake an assessment of
the damage to the vessel.
A report was produced on 24 November 2014. The report identified substantial
delamination on the portside
hull and on the portside deck above the gunwale.
It also identified cracking in the gel-coat and the external port deck. The
identified that it was not possible to estimate the cost of rectification
at that time; it also recommended that the vessel not be
used until further
investigations were conducted.
subsequent report was undertaken by marine assessors, Navsafe Marine Pty Ltd.
It is dated 9 December 2014. There were a number
of inspections of the vessel
for the purposes of this report, including one on 4 December 2014 where some
removal of inner structural
laminate occurred. That investigation revealed the
core bonding had failed. Various photographs were taken of the removed panel
and of the condition of the core. The evidence revealed “the core bonding
between both the inner structural and outer structural
laminates has failed in
large areas of the portside hull topside matrix”. Navsafe reported that
there was sufficient evidence
to justify a conclusion that the structural
integrity of the composite hull topside laminate matrix was compromised on the
portside in the vicinity of the anchor chain locker space. It
postulated that the deficiencies might extend aft of the collision
bulkhead on
the forward cabin area. It pointed out that the nature and extent of the
deficiencies could not be identified at that
time. Most poignantly for present
purposes is the conclusion in the report in relation to the delamination
will be an ongoing and increasing defect in cost and physical size and in time
will cause a catastrophic failure of the hull
structure if not immediately
15 February 2015, Mr Clive J Seares of Reanu Services Pty Ltd, a loss adjuster,
sent further correspondence to the Ferretti Group
and, in particular, to a Mr
Brian Kelley. He advised that he was assisting Mr Vautin with the coordination
of the warranty claim
along with Mr Brad Rodgers. It appears that Mr Seares
enclosed with the email a copy of the Navsafe Survey Report. In that email
Seares identified that there may be very extensive repairs as the surveyor had
found delamination, or signs of delamination, in
a number of areas of the yacht.
He identified that the structural integrity of the hull topside had been
compromised in a number
of places and that further examination was required to
determine the full extent of the affected areas. It was further identified
unless the hull areas were repaired there would be a catastrophic failure of the
hull structure. Mr Seares identified that
he looked forward to receiving an
indication of any further information that Ferretti may require in order to
proceed with the warranty
letter apparently followed from an email of Mr Rodgers of 9 February 2015 to Mr
Kelley about the matter and Mr Kelley’s
response on 10 February 2015
requesting that Mr Rodgers submit the survey and repair quotes ASAP. It is not
apparent that any response
was provided to Mr Seares in respect of the email
which he sent.
Subsequently,
on 27 April 2015 Mr Seares wrote to Mr Kelley of the Ferretti Group (via an
email) in which it was advised that a detailed
draft “scope of work”
and estimate/quote for warranty repairs to the yacht was attached. The work
which was identified
as being necessary was based on the recommendations of the
Navsafe Marine Report and in the expectation that in undertaking repairs
currently visible damage, further failures would be found to involve the entire
port and starboard topsides. The quote was
for repair of those areas and the
total cost was $856,054. In his email Mr Seares requested that Mr Kelley
provide him with full
construction drawings, a detailed laminate schedule for
the inner and outer hull shell laminate, information as to how all secondary
internal bonding was achieved, and identification of the core material and
bonding agents used. He also sought authorisation of
the repairs under the
Bertram did not respond to that email. Again, it chose not to call any evidence
as to why it did not respond to the email nor
comply with its warranty
obligations.
26 June 2015, Mr Vautin sent by registered mail to Mr Ferrando a copy of the
letter of Mr Seares together with the repair quote.
Mr Vautin’s letter
identified that there had been no response to the email of 27 April and that he
looked forward to hearing
from the Ferretti Group.
did not respond to that letter and has called no evidence as to why it did
a consequence of the reports obtained by Mr Vautin as to the potential for the
existence of substantial defects in the vessel,
by letter of 23 July 2015, Mr
Andrew Dovell was engaged to prepare an expert’s report in relation to the
defects. For the
purposes of preparing that report Mr Dovell inspected the
Revive on a number of occasions. First, between 3 and 4 August 2015, and
on 31 August 2015. Mr Dovell obtained “cored” samples of the hull
structure which he sent to the University of
Southern Queensland for testing. A
report was received from that University and it was considered by Mr Dovell for
the purposes
of his report.
9 December 2015, Mr Dovell completed his expert report in relation to the
Revive. It is damning of the structure of the vessel.
16 March 2016 Mr Vautin, by his solicitors, Banki Haddock Fiora, sent a letter
to Eagle Yachts in which Mr Vautin purported to
reject the vessel on the basis
that Revive was not reasonably fit to motor on the open seas and that Eagle
Yachts had failed to comply
with the guarantees in ss 54(1) and
ACL. Further, on the basis of the damage to the vessel and that, due to its
size, it was incapable of being returned to
Eagle Yachts which was now located
in Western Australia, Eagle Yachts was informed of its obligation to collect the
purported rejection of the vessel was not accepted by Eagle Yachts
18 April 2016, the present proceedings were commenced by Mr Vautin against Eagle
Yachts and Bertram. In turn, Eagle Yachts has
pursued a cross-claim against
Bertram in reliance upon a right of indemnity under the dealership agreement.
The issues in dispute between the parties
central issues arise in relation to the defective construction of Revive. The
first is as to the nature and extent of the defects
that exist consequent upon
the defective method of manufacture adopted by Bertram. The second is how that
defect might be characterised
for the purposes of the implied guarantees imposed
by the ACL. The resolution of these issues will determine whether relief is
to Mr Vautin and, if so, to what extent.
relation to Bertram only, the major issue concerns whether it is subject to
liability under the operation of the ACL. To some
extent that involves a
question as to whether it carried on business in Australia. Mr Vautin has also
brought a claim in negligence
against Bertram, which responds by asserting that
the relevant law to apply to such a claim is the law of Florida, which allegedly
excludes such a claim.
appears to accept that it is liable to indemnify Eagle Yachts in relation to the
valid claims of Mr Vautin. It asserts, however,
that the totality of the
quantum claimed by Mr Vautin cannot be sheeted home to it by reason of the
contractual indemnity.
The defective construction of Revive
mentioned, by the time of trial, the parties agreed that the vessel is
defective. They and their experts agreed that the method
by which the cored
construction of the hull, decking and super structure was carried out was not in
accordance with good boat building
practices. Indeed, it appears that the
method of constructing those areas of cored panels was not in compliance with
own construction specifications, nor in accordance with an
appropriate and accepted standard for this type of build. The parties
agreed that the CE Directive 94/25/CE, as amended by Directive 2003/44/CE, was
an appropriate protocol for the construction
of the cored panels of this vessel
and that the construction did not meet the standards identified in that
Directive. Despite that
apparent agreement, the parties remain in dispute as to
the nature and extent of the defects in the vessel.
The PVC foam core construction technique
topsides (being that area of the hull above the waterline), the decking and the
superstructure of Revive is largely constructed
of a rigid, PVC foam core which
is bonded onto internal and external fibreglass laminates. The layer of PVC
core is approximately
30mm in thickness whereas the fibreglass laminates are
and resin. This type of construction is referred to as a “sandwich core
construction”. The hull below the waterline
is constructed of solid
fibreglass, but is not relevant for present purposes.
important part of this sandwich core construction concerns the manner in which
it is used to create the variable or curved surfaces
necessary for constructing
this type of boat in which very few parts are flat. The PVC core (which are
manufactured as flat rectangular
boards) must be adapted to meet the variety of
shapes required. That is achieved by the introduction of what are known as
into the foam core. A “kerf” is, in effect a
cut or a groove which is made through the PVC core. They are made across
length and breadth of the core material through its depth at intervals of
approximately 35mm. The result of making kerfs in
the core material is that it
ceases to be a continuous panel of foam and, instead, is turned into a series of
rectangular prisms
of approximately 35mm x 35mm x 30mm. The grid of pieces is
held together by a light fibreglass “scrim” on the back of
of core material. Kerfs allow the PVC core pieces to be manoeuvred relative to
each other to create the contours required
for the various parts of the vessel.
It would appear that this general method is adapted for different parts of the
vessel and,
in some sections, there are two layers of core material instead of
the reports of the various experts, and in their evidence, they occasionally
refer to parts of the sandwich foam core laminate
“panel”. As it was explained, that term has no special meaning and,
in this context, it is merely a convenient
reference to a section of the
vessel’s shell between two different boundaries of support. I adopt that
expression such that
in these reasons, the expression “sandwich core
panel”, refers to a “panel” of sandwich core laminate
construction.
central issue in this case relating to the construction of Revive is the
efficacy of the construction materials used to cause the
adhesion of the PVC
core material to the inner and outer fibreglass laminate skins. The existence
of the gaps caused by the kerfs
and the fact that the inner and outer skins form
curved and molded surfaces, necessitates the adoption of certain construction
to ensure that the outer skins of the cored panel effectively adhere
to the foam core. These require that:
(a) the kerfs
(or the gaps created by the kerfs) in the PVC foam are completely filled up with
resin or putty prior to the foam being
affixed to the laminates;
surfaces of the kerfs of all of the cored construction are coated with resin;
(c) the outside
surface of the core is effectively primed with resin prior to being installed
against the skins.
is apparent that a significant benefit of filling the kerfs with putty, bonding
paste or resin is that it ensures the curved surface
of the foam core provides
an even and continuous plane on which to adhere the outer skin. Further, if the
kerfs are not filled,
a penetration to the outer skin of the panel might allow
the ingress of water, which may then flow through the unfilled kerfs and
the accumulation of moisture within a wide area of the foam core. The existence
of such moisture may subsequently cause deterioration
and loss of balance in the
is no disagreement as between the parties that Bertram did not apply the above
identified techniques in the construction of
the Revive.
The damage appearing in the vessel
is also no argument between the parties as to the extent of the visible damage
sustained to the vessel as a result of the techniques
used in its construction.
This is because the occasions on which the damage was first noted and through
the investigations which
followed, photographic records of the observations have
first instance of damage appearing in the hull was the identification, in around
November 2014, of delamination in the forward
section of the hull, both
internally and externally in the area of the port-side anchor locker. That is
an area on the forward part
of the topside of the hull which, in the ordinary
course, is exposed to regular wave impact. The inner side of the topside was
by NavSafe Marine on its initial inspection and the photographs then
taken have been viewed by the experts who gave evidence before
the Court. There
is no dispute that those photos show that there was a failure of the bond
between the PVC core and skins. In particular,
there were signs of gaps
existing between the core and skins indicating a failure of the bond.
photographic evidence reveals that the kerfs in the foam core used in the
construction of the forward topside areas of the hull
were not filled with
adhesive paste or putty. They were left as voids. It also is not in doubt
that, prior to being installed,
the surfaces of the PVC core in the kerfs were
neither primed nor resin coated.
of other parts of the vessel were taken where the core construction technique
was used and, again, there does not appear to
be any dispute that the kerfs were
not filled. Voids remained and little or no priming of the core took place
prior to its installation
as appears from the fact that the surfaces of all of
the kerfs which were exposed were raw. The samples taken from the vessel were
tendered as exhibits and they display the qualities which are identified.
expert engaged by Mr Vautin, Mr Dovell, also undertook inspections of the deck
and the superstructure of the vessel. His investigations
disclosed that the
sandwich core construction in these areas also suffered from the same
deficiencies. Specifically, that the core
was not primed as its surfaces were
raw on inspection, there was no sign of resin being applied directly or of any
drainage from
the priming of the outer surface of the core prisms, and the kerfs
were left unfilled. In these areas the manner of construction
did not use a
bonding paste between the foam core and the outer skin. Rather, a layer of
chopped fibreglass with a bonding agent
of the experts called by the respondents suggested that the above observations
were incorrect. Indeed, they are apparent from
a consideration of the
photographs attached to the expert report of Mr Dovell and the samples tendered
in evidence.
The extent of the alleged deficient manner of
construction
number of experts have produced reports for the purposes of the trial in
relation to the manner of the construction of the cored
components of Revive.
The central experts were Mr Andrew Dovell, Mr Christopher Hutchings and Mr Paul
Stanyon. They have also produced
a joint report dated 12 May 2017, which
identifies the areas of agreement and disagreement. The experts agree that the
the vessel is of a sandwich cored construction using contoured foam
throughout and also agree that the hull bottom, below the lower
chine, is of
single skin construction throughout. They also agree that the deck and
superstructure are of cored construction using
contoured foam throughout.
present purposes the following agreed findings are important to the
determination of this matter:
on all evidence the kerfs of all of the cored construction have remained
unfilled. Agree CCH, PS, ACD.
on all evidence the surfaces of the kerfs of all of the cored construction were
not coated with resin. Agree CCH, PS, ACD.
evidence indicates that the outside surface, (the scrim side of the contour
foam), of the core was not effectively primed with
resin prior to being
installed in the hull against the outside skin. Agree CCH, PS, ACD.
little of the applied core bonding paste has penetrated the kerfs of the core.
Agree CCH, PS, ACD.
on the evidence it appears that the inside surface of the core has had
sufficient resin applied to affect an adequate bond between
it and the inside
skins. Agree CCH, PS, ACD.
best measure of fitness for purpose for the design and construction of a
pleasure boat similar to REVIVE is the application of
an appropriate and
accepted standard of which the CE Directive 94/25/CE as amended by directive
2003/44/CE is one. Agree PS, CCH,
to this case are the consequences of the above identified deficient methods of
construction to the integrity of Revive. At
the very least, all of the experts
agree that these methods of construction were inappropriate for those areas
where delamination
has already occurred. That would appear to be self-evident.
All parties agree that these parts of the vessel require remediation
divides them is the qualitative impact of the use of this apparently defective
construction method on those other parts
of the vessel where delamination has
not occurred, or not yet occurred.
Bertram’s own specifications - CE
specifications
Consequences of defective construction
joint experts agree that the consequence of the defective construction is that
the sandwich core panels have a reduced shear capacity.
In the briefest of
terms, the shear capacity of the panel is its ability to withstand forces
impacting perpendicularly upon it.
Once the forces on a panel exceed the shear
capacity the panel will rupture and fracture which may, but not necessarily,
a complete breakage through the whole width of the panel, or the inner
core. That will often involve the inner core separating from
the laminate skins
as occurred in this case. If that occurs, the only protection from external
forces will be the outer laminate
skin which has minimal shear capacity. If
that outer skin fails the vessel ceases to be watertight and is liable to be
compromised.
the experts agree that the construction method used in this case meant the
laminated core panels had a reduced shear capacity,
they were not entirely
as to the extent of that reduction. In considering this issue they all
had reference to a scientific article by Berger, Loiselet,
and Dransfeld
Filling or Not Filling the Slits in Contourable Sandwich
Cores With Resin? – Effect on the Properties of the Sandwich
Construction
”. In that article the authors identified that where the
kerfs / groves in foam core laminate are not filled, the shear capacity
less than where the kerfs / groves are filled. Additionally, fatigue tests
showed that the unfilled kerf configuration had
a substantially shorter life
span than did a filled kerf configuration.
their joint expert reports Messrs Dovell (ACD), Stanyon (PS) and Hutchings (CCH)
recorded the following:
The cored panels as built will have a reduced shear
capacity in the order of 50% as suggested by the paper of BERGER, LOISELET, and
DRANSFELD due to the fact that the cored panels as built in REVIVE have unfilled
kerfs per the paper. Agree PS, ACD. Disagree CCH.
CCH Disagrees with this statement for the following
paper of BERGER, LOISELET, and DRANSFELD relies on the testing of a sandwich
panel consisting of a 20mm core and 1.5mm thick inner
and outer skins; whereas
REVIVE consists of a sandwich panel that has a 30mm core, 7.5mm thick outer skin
and 3mm thick inner skin.
CCH believes that due to the significant difference
in skin thickness between REVIVE and the test panel the magnitude of core shear
failure could be different.
cored panels as built will have reduced shear capacity relative to a panel built
with the kerfs filled, however quantifying that
loss would require testing of a
panel cut from the vessel.
other words, Mr Hutchings was of the opinion that the sandwich core panels, as
built, has a reduced shear capacity relative to
a panel built with kerfs filled.
He asserts, however, that quantifying the level of reduction requires testing of
a panel cut from
the vessel. Messrs Dovell and Stanyon relied upon a scientific
paper of Berger, Loiselet and Dransfeld to conclude that the shear
reduction of the panels on Revive was in the order of 50%. On the other hand,
Mr Hutchings opined that the variation between
the panels which were tested for
the purposes of the article and those used in the construction of Revive, means
that the magnitude
of their reduced shear capacity could well be different. All
of the experts agreed that the actual loss of shear capacity in the
built” core panels of Revive may not directly correlate to the loss in the
panels referred to in the Berger et al
article because they were of a different
construction. On the other hand, Messrs Dovell and Stanyon remained of the view
article supported the conclusion that the panels in Revive had a loss
of shear capacity in the order of 50%. All agreed that the
most accurate
quantification of the loss of shear capacity of the panels as built would
require destructive testing of panels from
the vessel.
experts also agreed that, putting aside the loss of shear capacity, there were
other deleterious effects of the kerfs not being
filled. Those deleterious
effects included:
the kerfs are filled, water ingress due to damage is limited to the area of
impact. Without the kerfs filled water can track away
from the area of the
damage potentially filling all of the kerfs below the waterline in the cored
zone. Long term exposure of the
unprotected foam and laminates to seawater will
have a deleterious effect on the strength of the panel. Agree PS, CCH,
is also the case of any penetration of the inside skin in associated of any
fitting screwed to the inside skin surface or similar.
These penetrations are
not in association with damage. Agree PS, CCH, ACD.
experts further agreed as to the best measure of fitness for purpose for the
design and construction of a pleasure boat such as
Revive in the following
The best measure of fitness for purpose for the design
and construction of a pleasure boat similar to REVIVE is the application of
appropriate and accepted standard of which the CE directive 94/25/CE as amended
by directive 2003/44/CE is one. Agree PS, CCH.
Conclusions concerning the veracity of the expert
is no doubt that all of the experts who gave evidence concerning the defects in
the sandwich core panels of Revive, Messrs Dovell,
Stanyon and Hutchings, were
qualified in the area of expertise. To the extent to which they differed in
their opinions, I preferred
the conclusions reached by Mr Dovell to those
expressed by Messrs Stanyon and Hutchings.
Dovell’s prepared report and evidence caused me to conclude that he was a
more careful and thorough expert. He was more
able to clearly explain his
conclusions and his observations and assertions withstood cross-examination. In
the “hot-tubbing”
process he was, generally, prepared to give direct
and clear answers and displayed a willingness to consider all views. Messrs
and Stanyon were far more reluctant to do this.
his written and oral submissions, Mr Vautin was critical of Mr Hutchings and the
manner in which he gave his evidence. Those criticisms
are not without merit.
Under cross-examination Mr Hutchings was somewhat evasive and sought to avoid
making admissions which were
contrary to Bertram’s contentions. He often
did so by resorting to theoretical possibilities which were lacking in reality.
For instance, it became apparent from the various inspections and testing on the
vessel that it had not been constructed in accordance
with any known standard
for a vessel of a sandwich core construction. Mr Dovell identified in his
report the manner in which the
panels on Revive did not meet the standards
required of the ISO Standard, which he identified as the reasonable minimum
design and construction standard for this type of vessel. He opined
that “boats designed and built in accordance with accepted
good practice
would, at a minimum, meet the ISO Standard”. There did not appear to be
any serious disagreement with these
points. In answer to this, Mr Hutchings
suggested that the ISO Standard did not necessarily apply and that some other
standard might
be applicable (ts.283). Whilst it is theoretically possible the
construction of the vessel might have complied with another standard,
exist, Mr Hutchings did not identify it. It appears that none of the experts
were aware of any standard for the sandwich
core construction of vessels that
permitted leaving the kerfs unfilled and Mr Hutchings could not identify one
despite applying his
20 years of knowledge, study and expertise which he drew
upon for the purposes of giving evidence (ts.350). In the context of the
Standard being the minimum standard, Mr Hutchings hypothesis that the
construction might satisfy another standard, without identifying
suggesting that one existed, was somewhat facetious. That response gave the
appearance that he was not being entirely
impartial in his answers nor
attempting to assist the Court to reach the correct conclusions in relation to
the factual matters under
discussion.
I considered that Mr Hutchings was somewhat dissembling when he sought to
explain away Bertram’s omission to prime
the core, prior to adhering it to
the inner and outer skins, by suggesting the panel might be overdesigned and so
strengthened in
some other way (ts.264 – 267). There was no suggestion
the sandwich core construction was “overdesigned” and nothing
pointed to that suggested it was. Certainly an expert in Mr Hutchings’
position ought to have been able to point to some
factor to support that
proposition. He did not do so and his answer appeared to be an attempt to
obfuscate. That was particularly
so because, while Mr Dovell calculated the
panels on Revive were designed (if constructed properly) to have only 106% of
the minimum
shear strength capacity for that type of construction, Mr Hutchings
made no detailed or effective analysis of that calculation.
Moreover, even if
the panels were otherwise overdesigned, there was nothing to suggest the
redundancies in the design would be sufficient
to counterbalance the reduction
in shear capacity caused by the failure to fill the kerfs or to prime the core.
The suggestion was
also self-evidently false because, if the panels were
“over-designed”, it is most unlikely they would have delaminated
Hutchings’ attitude was also revealed when he opined that other standards,
of which he was aware, did not specifically prohibit
kerfs being left unfilled.
That was a somewhat blatant attempt to diminish the import of standards that
required kerfs to be filled.
Eventually, he admitted that those other standards
actually provided that the kerfs should be filled (ts.351). In these respects,
Mr Hutchings answers tended to obfuscate rather than clarify the nature and
extent of the consequences of the defects in the construction
of the vessel. It
is unfortunate his answers appeared to be attempts to minimise the impact of
points in favour of Mr Vautin’s
case, rather than to ensure that the Court
was accurately apprised of the issues.
perception of Mr Hutchings was that, whilst he is obviously intelligent and
capable in his field of expertise, he appeared to attempt
to agitate his
client's cause rather than make appropriate concessions as and when required.
Overall, I preferred the evidence of
Mr Dovell to that of Mr Hutchings.
Stanyon also revealed an inclination to advance the interests of his client,
Eagle Yachts, in his reluctance to accept that the
Revive was a category A
vessel and, being such, was designed to withstand Beaufort eight winds and
significant seas at four metres
(ts.326). He, like Mr Hutchings, also sought to
obscure the failure of the construction of Revive to comply with any known or
international standard by resorting to speculation that there might
exist a standard to which the construction complied. In attempting
to do so he
made the following comment in relation to standards (at ts 342-343):
There may be a couple of smaller ones from other
European countries, but - so this is issue of kerf filling, we would have to
intimately every single one of those standards. Like there are plenty of
Czechoslovakian built production boats in - that are compliant
with CE and may
be they use their own national standard, I don't know.
considered that Mr Stanyon’s reference to Czechoslovakian standards was
bordering upon disingenuousness. First, given the
dissolution of Czechoslovakia
in the early 1990's, any Czechoslovakian standards would necessarily be almost a
quarter of a century
old. Second, his response in this respect was grasping at
straws given he was unable to identify whether there was any standard
permitted the construction of the cored panel without the filling of the kerfs.
failure of Mr Hutchings and Mr Stanyon to volunteer that they were not aware of
any relevant standard to which the vessel complied
is concerning. As experts
they were entitled to advance the proposition that compliance with the ISO
standards was not the only
way to satisfy the CE Directive. However, that left
the Court with the perception of the distinct possibility that the construction
of the vessel might have complied with some other standard. Their failure to
volunteer, or freely acknowledge when confronted, that
there was no other
standard of which they were aware and to which the building methods in fact
complied, renders it less safe to
rely upon their expressed views.
Mr Stanyon was otherwise mostly responsive to questions put to him, he tended to
attempt to protect his client's interests
where possible. In relation to the
question of what conditions vessels, of the type of which Revive was one, were
designed to be
able to cope, Mr Stanyon's answer was evasive. He attempted to
suggest they should be capable of coastal use in the normal levels
of wind and
wave that might be expected on the Eastern Australian Coast (ts.326). He
ultimately accepted the vessel was designed
as a “Category A” vessel
under the CE Directive described as an "Ocean" vessel. That this was its design
category should
have been obvious to Mr Stanyon and his attempt to suggest
otherwise gave the strong appearance that he was attempting to advance
client's case.
these reasons and for the reasons which appear below, I prefer the evidence of
Mr Dovell over the evidence of Mr Hutchings or
Mr Stanyon where they
Compliance with relevant standards
is identified above, all of the experts agreed that the best measure of fitness
for purpose for vessels such as Revive, is its
compliance or otherwise with an
industry-accepted standard. The respondents were not able to identify any
standard with which the
sandwich core construction panels of Revive or the
vessel in general complied.
his second report Mr Dovell identified the European Union’s Recreational
Craft Directive (RDC) as being an appropriate standard
which should be followed
in the design and construction of pleasure craft similar to the size and type of
Revive. As its title suggests
that document imposes EU requirements for the
design and construction of pleasure craft. It was not suggested by the other
that the application of this protocol would be inappropriate. Indeed,
Bertram had caused the design and construction methods for
the building of
Bertram 700 series to be certified under that Directive. Such certification was
not of the actual construction of
Revive, but as to the design and proposed
methods of construction of Bertram’s 70ft vessels.
copy of the RDC is attached to Mr Dovell’s second report. The RDC
provides at article 1(1) that it is applicable to the design
and construction
, recreational craft. Article 3 provides under the heading
“Essential Requirements”:
The products referred to in Article 1(1) shall meet the
essential safety, health, environmental protection and consumer protection
requirements set out in Annex 1.
A of Annex 1 is entitled “Essential Safety Requirements for the Design and
Construction of Recreational Craft” and
it identifies that for the Boat
Design Category of “Ocean vessels” (of which Revive is one) the
vessel is to be able
to accommodate a wind force (on the Beaufort scale)
“exceeding 8” and “Significant wave height (H 1/3, metres)
“exceeding 4”. The statement of explanation of what is encompassed
by this is:
OCEAN: Designed for extended voyages where conditions
may exceed wind force 8 (Beaufort scale) and significant wave heights of 4 m
above but excluding abnormal conditions, and vessels largely self
sufficient.
The exclusion of abnormal conditions excludes hurricanes and tornadoes and
extreme sea conditions or freak waves generated by abnormal
conditions. As the
notes to the article indicate, vessels of this category have to be able to meet
extreme conditions as they reflect
the type of conditions which might be
encountered on long ocean voyages where conditions may change suddenly and
dramatically.
A of Article 1 goes on to explain that:
Craft in each Category must be designed and constructed
to withstand these parameters in respect of stability, buoyancy and other
relevant essential requirements listed in Annex 1 and to have good handling
characteristics.
3 of Item A of Annex 1 is headed “Integrity and structural
requirements”. Relevantly it provides:
The choice and combination of materials and
its construction shall ensure that the craft is strong enough in all respects.
attention shall be paid to the design category according to
and the manufacturer’s maximum recommended load in accordance with
Relevant Harmonised Standards:
EN ISO 12215-2:2000: Small craft – Hull construction and scantlings
Materials: Core materials for sandwich construction, embedded
materials (ISO 12215-2:2000)
EN ISO 12215-4:2000: Small craft – Hull construction and scantlings
Workshop and manufacturing (ISO
12215-4:2000)
It was not contested that the meaning of the above was that the ISO Standard
relating to Hull Construction and scantlings was an
applicable standard for the
construction of ocean going vessels.
international standard is also annexed to the report of Mr Dovell. The scope of
that Standard is identified as being:
This part of ISO 12215 specifies the requirements for
core materials for structural use and materials that are embedded in sandwich
construction. It is applicable to small craft with a hull length ... of up to
NOTE The underlying reason for preparing this part of ISO 12215 is that sandwich
structures of small craft require careful selection
of core materials from a
multitude of choices, and that the manufacturing has to follow certain
procedures to achieve the intended
long-term durability under the expected loads
and environmental conditions.
of the Standard entitled, “Materials: Core materials for sandwich
construction, embedded materials” the following appears
in relation to
Sandwich core properties:
3.1 Sandwich structure
A sandwich structure is a composite composed of lightweight core material to
which two relatively thin, dense and high-strength functional
laminate skins are
3.2 Structural requirements
Core materials for sandwich construction of small craft shall only
be used if the following requirements of the final structure are
The material shall have adequate properties to enable the sandwich structure to
fulfil the requirements specified in ISO 12215-5
for a normal service life in a
marine environment, with special regard to
- in-plane forces, acting in the direction of sandwich layers, e.g. tension,
compression, shear;
- out-of-plane forces, acting transversely to the sandwich layers, e.g.
compression, tension, shear.
3.3 Material requirements, general
Core materials shall have stable mechanical properties consistent
with the designated use of the craft.
Resin applied to the core material or its protective
sheathing/coating shall be compatible with its surface.
Core materials forming part of a sandwich structure
limit the penetration of water
beyond the area of a possible fracture of the skin laminate. This requirement
does not apply for core
materials that consist of a three-dimensional open
structure bonded to both skin laminates, e.g. honeycomb or three-dimensional
Core material shall be capable of transferring the shear loads
specified in ISO 12215-5.
(Workshop and manufacturing) of that same standard the following appears:
3.7 Manufacturing requirements, sandwich
construction
3.7.1 Sandwich construction using female moulds
Core surface cavities and other irregularities shall be removed
or coated with filler, resin or sandwich adhesive according to the
manufacturer’s specification and depending on the following skin lay-up.
When using scored core material, a sufficient
amount of resin or adhesive shall
be used in the bond to fill the gaps.
matters in items 3.3.3 and 3.7.1.1 are particularly relevant for present
purposes as they require the filling of any kerfs in
the construction of the
sandwich core structure. Where Item 3.3.3 is not complied with, if the kerfs
are not filled, water which
enters in the structure (whether due to holing or
penetration) will spread throughout the structure.
three expert witnesses agreed that the construction of the sandwich core
structures of Revive did not meet the ISO standards,
including because the kerfs
were not filled.
it was submitted that the standard as a whole identified itself as setting
requirements which were towards the minimum standard,
it does not appear that
the words used in
of the Standard necessarily have that effect. There,
the reference is to “design standards” rather than
“construction
standards” although it can be accepted that the two
are closely related. In any event, Mr Dovell and Mr Stayon (if not also
Hutchings) agreed that the ISO standard was appropriately identified as setting
minimum standards for “all regulatory grounds”
for the construction
of vessels of this type (ts.338 – 339).
can be taken from the above is that the actual construction of Revive did not
comply with the ISO standard for the manufacture
of vessels of that type.
However, a point of difference arose as between the experts as to the relevance
or consequence of that
failure. Mr Hutchings and Mr Stanyon identified that the
official guide to the application of the CE Directive noted that it was
necessary manufacturers comply with the ISO standard in order to meet the
requirements of the Directive. They relied upon the
The “essential requirements” as referred to
in Article 3 and detailed in Annex I have to be met by products referred to
Article 1(1) of the Directive. The application by a manufacturer of a
harmonised standard in order to fulfil the essential requirements
presumption of conformity. However, application of a harmonised standard
remains voluntary and is not the only method available
to demonstrate conformity
with the essential requirements. The manufacturer can choose whether or not he
refers to harmonised standards,
as long as his products fulfil the essential
requirements. However, if a manufacturer chooses not to follow a harmonised
he has the obligation to prove that his product is in conformity with
the essential requirements by the use of other means of his
own choice (e.g. by
means of any existing technical specifications).
argument advanced by the respondents was that, whilst Mr Vautin has established
the actual construction of Revive does not comply
with the ISO standards, it has
not shown that the essential requirements of the CE Directive have not otherwise
been met. In essence,
the arguments advanced by Mr Hutchings and Mr Stanyon on
behalf of their clients (the respondents) were that there may have been
other standard with which the sandwich core construction undertaken by Bertram
complied so as to satisfy the directive. In
the light of the evidence as it
emerged, I considered that these two witnesses dissembled somewhat by the
advancing of this argument
and in doing so they damaged their reliability as
expert witnesses.
Stanyon’s position appeared to be that the vessel may have met the
requirements of the CE Directive because there may have
been some other standard
or standards which the construction satisfied. When questioned about this he
acknowledged that he was not
aware whether any of those permitted the
construction of sandwich core structures in vessels without filling the kerfs.
mentioned, in attempting to suggest the construction of the Revive
cored panels by Bertram somehow may have met an appropriate standard,
resorted to hypothesising about Czechoslovakian standards, although he was not
aware of their content (ts 342-343).
argument advanced by Mr Hutchings’ on this was that the CE directive,
whilst identifying the ISO standards as being appropriate,
also gave a builder
the opportunity to build to an equal standard. He reasoned, therefore, that it
could not be said the vessel
was not built to an appropriate specification.
Whilst his comments on this were, perhaps, technically accurate, he refrained
volunteering that he had not located any alternative specification which
permitted sandwich core construction without filling the
kerfs. He eventually
admitted under cross-examination that he could not point to any such standard
and that was despite his 20 years
of knowledge and study and expertise in this
area (ts.350). The standards with which he was familiar all required the
kerfs. This being the case, it is safe to conclude, as I do, that
there is no relevant standard for the construction of sandwich
core components
for vessels to which the building of Revive complied.
failure of Mr Hutchings and indeed, Mr Stanyon, to volunteer that they were not
aware of any relevant standard to which the vessel
complied is concerning. As
experts they were entitled to advance the proposition that compliance with the
ISO standards was not
the only way to satisfy the specifications. However,
their failure to volunteer that there was no other standard of which they were
aware and to which the building methods in fact complied, was conduct below that
expected of experts who appear in this Court and,
as I have mentioned, that
necessarily rendered it less safe to rely upon their expressed views.
course, the question of whether Revive was built to an appropriate standard
could be resolved by reference to the construction
drawings used to build it.
They would indicate the existence of any relevant standards which needed to be
complied with for the
vessel’s construction. In the ordinary course such
drawings would be in the possession of the manufacturer. In this case,
Bertram. Although Mr Vautin issued a Notice to Produce in respect of them to
Bertram, they were not produced. Bertram offered
no excuse for the failure to
produce them save to assert they were not available. No explanation was given
as to why they were not
available. Bertram chose not to call any witness to
explain their non-production. That being so, it is possible to draw an
that their production would not have assisted Bertram’s case in
this respect (
Jones v Dunkel
[1959] HCA 8
(1959) 101 CLR 298).
the inability of either of Mr Hutchings or Mr Stanyon to identify any standard
for the construction of sandwich core structures
on vessels which did not
require the filling of the kerfs or the priming of the core I find that, on the
balance of probabilities,
no such standard existed. I am comforted in reaching
that finding by the fact that if there existed such a standard, it is extremely
likely that Bertram would have known about it and produced it. Its failure to
do so supports my conclusion.
should be observed that no party suggested the vessel, as constructed, actually
met the essential requirements of the CE Directive.
As the following discussion
shows, that is not surprising given failing to prime the core and fill the kerfs
was unconventional,
if not poor, boat building practice. As is discussed below,
the consequence of the utilisation of those boat building practices
the shear strength of the panels was significantly reduced and the hull began to
delaminate. That being so, the essential
requirements of the CE Directive could
not have been fulfilled.
follows from the above that the construction of Revive did not comply with CE
Directive under which the design methods of the model
of vessel in question was
The construction techniques were poor boat building
the construction of Revive, Bertram did not fill the kerfs and so it did not
comply with the ISO Standard and the CE Directive.
Further, the method of
construction was poor boat building practice. In his report Mr Stanyon
There is no doubt that kerfs should be entirely filled
with core bond or thickened resin or resin. This is supported by Best Practice,
manufacturer’s recommendations, classification society’s in-house
procedure and technical manuals and hands-on experience.
They dictate that the
core is to be free of voids and discontinuities if it is to perform as per
design calculations and to ensure
longevity of the laminates structural
Both Mr Hutchings and Mr Dovell agreed with this statement.
is also apparent that the panels on Revive were constructed without there being
any or any adequate priming of the core before
being affixed to the laminate
skins. Mr Dovell identified that priming was vital to ensure the bonding
between the core and the
skin of the laminate was appropriately strong. In
particular, Mr Dovell observed that Revive was constructed with the core
onto a bed of adhesive paste without a sufficient resin content in the
paste to completely wet its surface. This would result in
a dry bond line with
significant void content between the core and the adhesive paste. He identified
this was evident in the photos
of the hull of the vessel where delamination had
occurred (see paragraphs 4.12 – 4.13 of the first report of Mr Dovell and
the corresponding photo). The result was the “outside skin to core
join” in the whole of the topside of the vessel had
a significantly lower
shear strength than it would have if the correct installation procedure had been
followed (see paragraphs 4.16
of the first report of Mr Dovell). In his second
report, Mr Dovell extended this opinion to cover all areas where the sandwich
construction had been used on the vessel, including the decking and
superstructure.
Stanyon, who was the expert engaged by Eagle Yachts, was adamant that the
failure to prime the core was inappropriate in a sandwich
core construction of
such vessels. At ts.264 he said:
MR STANYON: Yes. Well, priming is an essential
function and it’s something that you don’t scrimp on. You
– you don’t – you do it properly. You – you
– you don’t worry about the quantity of resin you’re
It’s just a job that is essential to the integral
Hutchings agreed that the failure to prime the core would result in reduced
shear strength of the sandwich core construction (ts.264
- 265). He was
reluctant to agree with the proposition that it was bad boat building practice
not to prime the core before adhesion
to the skins:
DR BELL: And you would agree with that, Mr Hutchings,
wouldn’t you?
MR HUTCHINGS: I would agree it’s good boatbuilding practice
DR BELL: Well, you would agree it was essential, wouldn’t you?
MR HUTCHINGS: to actually – to actually do it. My belief is
it’s good boatbuilding practice to do it. It’s
rare for it –
for it not to be done.
DR BELL: It’s not good boatbuilding practice not to do it.
MR HUTCHINGS: I believe that’s what I just said.
DR BELL: It’s bad boatbuilding practice not to do it, isn’t
MR HUTCHINGS: As I said, I believe it – it would be – it would be
– it’s good boatbuilding practice to
DR BELL: Yes. And I’m putting to you that it’s bad boatbuilding
practice not to do it.
MR HUTCHINGS: Yes, I agree.
Subsequently,
Mr Hutchings agreed that it “was deeply imprudent not to prime”. He
also said that he would recommend priming
as part of any relevant boat building
exercise and he would never recommend not to do it (ts.265). He further agreed
that to ensure
that a vessel was able to withstand the roughest conditions
(which Bertram had represented Revive was capable of doing) it would
to prime the core in the construction process (ts.267).
initial reluctance of Mr Hutchings to accept such relatively obvious
propositions and his attempt to obfuscate them when they
appeared to undermine
his client’s case, further rendered his evidence less useful than it might
otherwise have been.
Ultimately,
the failure to fill the kerfs and the failure to prime the core with resin has
resulted in the sandwich core construction
in the vessel having a substantially
reduced shear capacity. In his report, Mr Dovell considered the paper by Berger
to the effect that failure to fill kerfs in the construction of
sandwich core panels will result in a reduction in the shear capacity
panels by more than 50% of what it would have been had those construction
defects not been present. Indeed, the loss of strength
in the panels is
increased to 60% when fatigue is considered. Mr Dovell did not merely accept
that the conclusions drawn in that
paper applied to panels of the type in
Revive. He undertook his own calculations to ensure that the critical
parameters were appropriate
to the dimensions on the Revive panels and satisfied
himself that the reduction in shear strength of those panels would be in the
order of 50% (ts.287 and exhibit 17). Mr Stanyon also accepted the conclusions
of that paper and that it applied to the panels in
Revive. Although Mr
Hutchings asserted that he could not be sure that the reduction in shear
strength was 50% and that destructive
testing on the actual panels from Revive
would be required, I prefer the evidence of Mr Dovell and Mr Stanyon on this
part of the
evidence and, in particular, the more carefully considered views of
Mr Dovell who had taken the time to consider the applicability
conclusions in the published paper to the physical dimensions of the sandwich
core panels on the vessel.
Non-compliance with PVC foam manufacturer’s
requirements
Stanyon identified in his report that the PVC foam used in the construction of
the Revive was of a brand called “Airex Divinicel
H80”, which had
GRP inner and outer skins. Mr Dovell could not be certain that this was the
foam that was used in Revive’s
construction, however, he did conclude that
it was “almost certainly made from a PVC foam that is effectively
identical to
the “Airex PVC foam Core Product”. The processing
guidelines for that product are attached to Mr Dovell’s first
they identify that debonding and subsequent catastrophic failure can occur if
the correct installation procedures are
not followed. The installation
instructions for the foam product in the production of sandwich core panels
identified that optimal
quality was obtained from obtaining a strong bond
between laminate and foam and by filling up the slits (kerfs) with resin or
The instructions also identified that the surfaces of the foam should be
primed with resin (including the inside faces of the kerfs)
prior to bedding
into the outside skin. Mr Dovell found that the failure by Bertram to comply
with such installation instructions
resulted in a dry bond line between the core
and the inner and outer skins and represented a significant construction defect.
was no real disputation about this evidence and I find, on the balance of
probabilities, that the foam core material was the Airex
PVC foam Core Product
and that it had not been installed as required by the manufacturer’s
specifications.
The consequences of the manufacturing defects
The real question is whether Revive can be effectively
cannot be used as a motor vessel save in the calmest of waters. The
delamination of the topside means that it cannot be used
in the open ocean even
for short periods of time. The shear strength of the outer skin is all that
presently protects the vessel
at its prow (generally on the portside) and if
that area sustained a significant impact it would, most likely, fail. That
inevitably lead to the entry of water and give rise to a risk that the
vessel would sink. There seems to be no dispute between the
parties that the
vessel is not seaworthy in its present state. There is also no relevant dispute
that the guarantees as to the quality
of the vessel imposed by the ACL were not
respondents assert the construction defects in the topsides in the area where
the delamination has occurred can be repaired at
a relatively low cost of
approximately $106,200 plus GST. Alternatively, they say that the construction
defects in the whole of
the topsides can be repaired for somewhere between
$856,054 and approximately $1.4m (based on Mr Acacich’s evidence). They
say that the effect of those repairs would render the vessel seaworthy and,
effectively, put the vessel in a condition such that
it would comply with the
guarantees as to fitness imposed by the ACL. As a result they contend that the
former amount of money (or
alternatively, the second) represents Mr
Vautin’s damages.
Vautin denies that such repairs to Revive would be effective to cause it to
comply with the guarantees imposed by the ACL. In
particular, he asserts that
even if the topsides were rectified, the sandwich core components of the decking
and the superstructure
of Revive will still contain the defects such that the
vessel will remain not fit for purpose. The total cost of these repairs would
be in the order of $2.7m.
follows that the real debate is whether the repairs which the respondents
propose for Revive will render it compliant with the
guarantees of fitness and
quality as imposed by the ACL
The nature and extent of the defects
has been determined, the sandwich core panels in Revive (being throughout the
topsides, the decking and the superstructure) contained
manufacturing defects
consisting of unfilled kerfs and the core not adequately primed with resin.
This created a dry bond line between
the cores and skins and panels such that
the panels had a substantially reduced shear capacity. This reduced capacity is
order of 50% and had the consequence of delamination occurring in those
areas of the vessel which met with constant impacts in the
course of its use.
experts, however, disagree with the consequences of the above. The
respondents’ experts assert the vessel can be adequately
repaired if the
areas where the delamination has occurred are repaired (by the core being primed
and the kerfs being filled). On
the other hand, Mr Dovell asserts that will not
be sufficient to cure the defects that have resulted in a substantial reduction
the shear capacity of all sandwich core panels.
Vautin submits, relying on the evidence of Mr Dovell, that the construction
defects which exist in all of the sandwich core panels
throughout the vessel,
have the result that the vessel is less safe than it would be had it been
properly constructed. He submits
that, even if the topsides were repaired, the
deck and the superstructure would have about half the strength they should have.
also submits that, as constructed, the sandwich core panels in those areas
would not prevent the permeation of water throughout the
core as a consequence
of penetrations. There is much force in these submissions. The sandwich core
panels were not designed to
200% of their required capacity. There would be no
reason for that to be the case. It follows that the reduction of shear capacity
below 50% of what the panels should be renders them inadequate for their
purposes. That is, their shear capacity is below that which
is necessary and
appropriate for a vessel of this type. This represents a serious safety concern
in an ocean-going vessel such as
the Revive. It is intended to be used for
extended journeys on the open seas and that, necessarily, means it is intended
in very heavy conditions (being wind force 8 on the Beaufort scale and
significant wave height of in excess of 4m, but falling short
of abnormal
conditions such as hurricanes and tornadoes). In such conditions, the vessel
may be buffeted on the deck and the superstructure
by those sea conditions.
That being so, there is a real risk that sandwich core panels, which have less
than half the designed shear
capacity, will fail with catastrophic consequences.
In the result, I find that the effect of the construction defects is that the
vessel is unsafe for use in all of the sea conditions for which it was intended.
It is not safe to be used in conditions up to wind
force 8 and seas with a wave
height of in excess of 4m.
if it were the case that it was not possible to find that the vessel was
actually unsafe for its intended use by reason of the
construction defects,
there can be little doubt that the construction defects create great uncertainty
Hutchings was prepared to accept the existence of
that uncertainty (ts.353) and he further accepted that this was something which
an owner of a premium, high quality, very expensive vessel should not have to
endure. By this, I understood Mr Hutchings to agree
that vessels such as
Revive, which are extremely expensive and are intended to be “top of the
range” ocean going vessels,
should be built to a standard which excludes
safety concerns arising from the manner in which they are constructed. That is
self-evident.
Stanyon was slightly more forthright than Mr Hutchings when he agreed that,
because of the construction defects, he would not use
the vessel in conditions
which he would if it did not have those defects. He agreed he would take a
“more conservative approach”
to the use of the vessel. From that, I
understood Mr Stanyon accepted that the construction defects probably rendered
it less safe
for use in harsher conditions.
was some agreement between the experts that the sandwich core panels on Revive
were less durable than they would have been if
the defects did not exist. Mr
Dovell was of the opinion that the vessel was not durable because the panels
might fail in rough conditions
due to their reduced shear capacity, that the
fatigue strength (the weakening of the panels which are exposed to the usual
arising from use) of the panels was reduced by reason of their manner of
construction, and that there is a risk of core degeneration
because of the
possibility of water entry and dispersal in the foam core. In this latter
respect he said the entry of water into
the core would spread widely due to the
unfilled kerfs and would eventually reduce the life of the panel.
Stanyon also seemed to accept that the absence of a homogeneous core material
would hasten the consequence of a reduction in the
strength of the panels
(fatigue), which occurs as a result of the use of a vessel (ts.295). In this
case it is undoubted that the
construction defects caused the delamination in
the bow areas of the port topside which were often exposed to waves whilst the
was in use. There seems to be no reason why that principle would not
apply to all parts of the vessel which had the same construction
defect even if
the delamination or weakening may take longer as those parts are not exposed to
the same regularity of impact. I
apprehend that when Mr Stanyon said that if
the Revive was his vessel he would monitor it and look for evidence of other
he intended to convey it was more than probable that the construction
defects would generate delamination in other areas of the vessel
(the decking
and superstructure) if only the topside was rectified (ts.348-349).
Stanyon also agreed that entry of water into the foam core would cause its
deterioration in the sense of reducing the foam’s
body and resilience
(ts.254). Both Mr Hutchings and Mr Doveall agreed with Mr Stanyon’s
report where he opined there was no
doubt that the kerfs were required to be
filled if the sandwich core structure is to perform in accordance with its
design calculations
and is to have the longevity it is supposed to (see
of the report of Mr Stanyon and ts.285-296).
evidence establishes that the failure to fill the kerfs will render the sandwich
core structures on the vessel less durable than
they would be if the kerfs were
Fitness for purpose
was substantial evidence from the experts as to whether the construction defects
in the sandwich core panels on Revive rendered
it “fit for purpose”.
It is unfortunate, however, that there was not a great deal of commonality in
the use of that expression.
It did not appear the experts necessarily intended
their opinions to relate to the requirement in
of the ACL Schedule 2 that
goods are to be “reasonably fit” for any disclosed purpose or to the
requirement of “acceptable
quality” in s 54. That renders some of
their opinions in this respect slightly less valuable.
relation to the issue of fitness for purpose, the question is not, directly, how
the sandwich core panels were constructed. It
is, what is the effect of the
defective construction on the nature and quality of the vessel and the uses to
which it might be put?
If the vessel as constructed (or with the bow sections
of the topsides rectified) was able to be used as an ocean-going vessel for
the purposes for which it was intended, then it is likely to be fit for purpose
regardless of the extant construction defects.
Of course, a determination to
that effect would be difficult given the findings which have been made. It
would also require a conclusion
that the structure of the vessel was
significantly “over designed” such that the construction defects
that remained were
inconsequential to the manner in which the vessel might be
his supplementary report Mr Dovell concluded the best measure of “fitness
for purpose” of a pleasure craft such as
Revive, was compliance with
design and construction with an appropriate set of standards. This was agreed
to by all of the experts
in the joint report who also agreed that the CE
Directive 94/25/CE, as amended by directive 2003/44/CE, was an appropriate
Again, whether the vessel was or was not constructed to an accepted
set of standards does not necessarily dictate the uses to which
actually be put. However, the joint statement of the experts (in paragraph 21
of their report) seems to connote that “fitness
for purpose” in
relation to a vessel includes an element of assurance that the vessel will be
known to be safe to use in intended
conditions. They appear to agree that a
vessel is fit for purpose if it is built in accordance with a recognised set of
particular to that type of vessel. If that is so the experts agree a
user can be confident the vessel can be used in the sea conditions
appropriate
to the type or class of vessel. Conversely, their view incorporates the
supposition that a vessel will not be fit for
purpose if it is not constructed
in accordance with the recognised standards. This is because safe use of the
vessel (in sea conditions
relevant to its type) cannot be guaranteed. Given the
catastrophic consequences that may follow from a vessel not being constructed
a manner which the industry recognises will render it safe for use, there is
much sense in the collective views of the experts
in this regard.
Dovell also concluded the failure to fill the kerfs in this case would have
resulted in a significant reduction of the shear strength
of the sandwich core
panels so as to render the vessel not fit for purpose. He concluded that, in
order to render the vessel fit
for purpose it would be necessary that all of the
sandwich core components were rectified. He disagreed with the conclusions of
the other experts that the vessel could be rendered fit for purpose if the
remediation was limited to filling the kerfs in the topsides
of the vessel.
Stanyon and Mr Hutching expressed the view that the vessel would be fit for
purpose regardless of the non-compliance with any standard.
It is not clear how
they reach that conclusion and it appears to be inconsistent with what they
agreed to in paragraph 21 of the
joint expert report.
oral evidence, Mr Stanyon considered the topsides could be repaired in a manner
which met the ISO standards and this would be sufficient
to render the vessel
fit for use. Mr Dovell, however, identified that the remainder of the vessel
would have sandwich core components
with substantially reduced shear strength
(> 50%) such that the boat would not be safe to take out in a sea state of
Beaufort 8 or significant wave height of 4m. In this respect I accept
Mr Dovell’s calculation that the shear capacity of the
topside panels was
approximately 106% of the minimum requirement and that indicated that they were
deliberately designed although
not with unfilled kerfs. I also accept that his
conclusion the panels in the rest of the vessel were not designed with
redundancies
in excess of 100% of the minimum strength which would compensate
for the unfilled kerfs. The other experts generally agreed with
Dovell’s conclusions in this latter respect (ts 273-274). Given that it
is not only the forward part of the hull which
might encounter significant
forces in rough sea conditions, Mr Dovell considered that the decks would be
defective as well because
they were not likely to be able to withstand the
pressures of waves breaking onto them. I accept that evidence and it seems that
the other experts agreed that the decks and superstructure of Revive might
encounter harsh punishment in rough seas.
the basis of the evidence of Mr Stanyon and Mr Dovell, I have concluded the
failure to prime the core of the sandwich components
and the failure to fill the
kerfs caused the shear strength of the panels to be substantially reduced such
that they would not withstand
all the conditions which vessels of this type
should. There is good evidence that this is so as the bow sections of the
had failed even though they had not been used in any unusually rough
conditions. The failure of these sections support Messrs Stanyon’s
Dovell’s evidence as to the essentiality of priming and confirms the shear
strength of the panels was significantly lower
than it ought to have been.
respondents submitted the question of the suitability of the vessel (in terms of
in what conditions it could be used) would be
resolved by destructive testing of
representative panels from the vessel. To this Mr Dovell identified that such a
process would
require unreasonable expense, although that topic was not further
explored. He later identified that a panel of 750mm x 300mm would
tested but that the value of any results from tests undertaken by re-creation in
the laboratory, would be questionable.
Importantly, any test panel would have
to be flat (and such panels are not easy to locate) and it would be necessary to
take multiple
samples from different parts of the vessel. He observed that many
samples would have to be taken such that the vessel would essentially
skinless. He also identified that destructive testing would not be the complete
picture without the rest of the design information
such that much guessing would
still be required.
value of the debate on the necessity or otherwise of destructive testing was
negated to some extent when the experts, including
Mr Hutchings, agreed it would
be unreasonable for the purchaser of a $4.5m vessel to subject it to destructive
testing so as to be
able to ascertain whether it is fit for use in the
conditions which a vessel of that type is usually used (ts.292). This is
to the issue of the degree of certainty which an owner of vessel of
this type ought to be able to have in its inherent safety consequent
proper construction. Here, the failure of Bertram to construct the vessel in
accordance with any known and accepted standard
has rendered its sandwich core
components defective. The defects have resulted in delamination and their
existence throughout the
vessel (even assuming that the topsides were repaired)
gives rise to significant uncertainty as to whether the vessel is safe to
conditions in which vessels of that nature are usually used, or intended to be
used. Resolving that uncertainty would require
the owner to undertake
destructive testing of nearly all sandwich core panels on the vessel.
experts all agreed that the Revive was designed as a Category A vessel, as per
the CE Directive, and should have been capable
to withstanding all but the most
extreme conditions such as hurricanes and tornadoes. Clearly it could not be so
used with delamination
occurring in the topsides.
the question of the use to which the vessel might be put if the topsides were
repaired by the kerfs being filled, there was some
difference of opinion.
his evidence Mr Hutchings expressed the opinion that if the topside area around
the anchor locker was satisfactorily repaired,
the structural integrity of the
vessel would be restored (ts.348). He reached this conclusion on the basis that
there was no evidence
of any structural failure anywhere else on the vessel.
Subsequently, he retreated from that position by agreeing that, from a
integrity point of view, he could not put his name to the proposition
that the vessel would be fit for purpose (ts.353). He acknowledged
construction defects in the vessel were of such a nature that there would be a
level of uncertainty with the vessel into
the future. He also agreed that the
level of uncertainty was something which the owner of a premium, high quality,
very expensive
vessel should not have to endure (ts.353). By this I understood
him to mean that vessels like Revive were not fit for purpose if
there existed
uncertainty as to their structural integrity.
Stanyon also seemed to initially suggest Revive would be fit for purpose if the
topsides were repaired, although he also said that
he would be monitoring the
vessel and the management of it, including voyaging plans, to look for evidence
of other issues (ts 348
– 349). I understood this as indicating an
acceptance that the constructions defects rendered the occurrence of future
delamination
more likely than would have been the case if they did not exist.
Under cross-examination Mr Stanyon acknowledged that knowing what
he knew about
the construction of the vessel (presumably with the topsides repaired) he would
be more careful in his use of the vessel
than would otherwise be the case. He
further agreed that he would take a more conservative approach to the use of the
vessel than
would otherwise have been the case (ts.350). This also appears to
be an acceptance of the proposition that given the construction
defects, even
when the topsides are repaired, it should not be used to the full extent to
which it might be used if the defects did
evidence discloses that the sandwich core components of Revive were not
constructed in accordance with the CE Directive under
which the design of the
vessel had been certified. The vessel ought to have been constructed to the
standard of a Category A vessel.
It was not. The construction of the
components did not comply with the ISO standards or any other relevant standards
principally
because the kerfs were not filled and the core was not primed. None
of the three experts knew of any standard which permitted the
construction of
such components with unfilled kerfs. They were only aware of standards that
required the kerfs to be filled. Even
if the sandwich core panels on the
topsides of the vessel were repaired, the sandwich core components of the decks
and the superstructure
would not comply with any known standard and their
construction would remain the result of the adoption of bad boat building
the construction defects in the sandwich core components had the effect of
reducing their shear capacity by more than 50%
from what it ought to have been
and rendered them and the vessel less durable. Consequently, the owner of the
vessel would have
to be watchful of further damage arising in the future. They
also created substantial uncertainty as to the structural integrity
vessel. That meant the vessel could not be used to the full extent to which it
would be able to be used if it did comply
with an appropriate standard. This is
true of the vessel in its present state and of the state it would be in if the
topside area
of the prow, where delamination had occurred, was repaired.
follows that the vessel was not fit for purpose both because it was not
constructed in accordance with any acceptable standard,
and, because it is not
fit to be used as a Category A vessel.
Claims under the Australian Consumer Law
Vautin makes a number of claims under the ACL in relation to the supply of the
vessel to it in respect of which the following provisions
are relevant.
54 provides:
54 Guarantee as to acceptable
(a) a person supplies, in trade
or commerce, goods to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by
there is a guarantee that the goods are of
acceptable quality.
(2) Goods are of acceptable quality if they are
(a) fit for all the purposes
for which goods of that kind are commonly supplied; and
(b) acceptable in appearance and finish; and
(c) free from defects; and
(d) safe; and
(e) durable;
as a reasonable consumer fully acquainted
with the state and condition of the goods (including any hidden defects of the
goods), would
regard as acceptable having regard to the matters in subsection
(3) The matters for the purposes of subsection (2)
(a) the nature of the goods;
(b) the price of the goods (if relevant); and
(c) any statements made about the goods on any packaging or label on the goods;
(d) any representation made about the goods by the supplier or manufacturer of
the goods; and
(e) any other relevant circumstances relating to the supply of the
is also relied upon and it provides:
55 Guarantee as to fitness for any disclosed purpose
(a) a person (the supplier)
supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by
there is a guarantee that the goods are
reasonably fit for any disclosed purpose, and for any purpose for which the
supplier represents
that they are reasonably fit.
(2) A disclosed purpose is a particular purpose (whether or not that purpose is
a purpose for which the goods are commonly supplied)
for which the goods are
being acquired by the consumer and that:
(a) the consumer makes known,
expressly or by implication, to:
(i) the supplier; or
(ii) a person by whom any prior negotiations or arrangements in relation to the
acquisition of the goods were conducted or made;
(b) the consumer makes known to the manufacturer of the goods either directly
or through the supplier or the person referred to
in paragraph
(3) This section does not apply if the
circumstances show that the consumer did not rely on, or that it was
unreasonable for the
consumer to rely on, the skill or judgment of the supplier,
the person referred to in subsection (2)(a)(ii) or the manufacturer,
as the case
guarantee of compliance of any express warranty given by a manufacturer is
provided for in s 59, which provides:
59 Guarantee as to express
(a) a person supplies, in trade
or commerce, goods to a consumer; and
(b) the supply does not occur by way of sale by
there is a guarantee that the manufacturer
of the goods will comply with any express warranty given or made by the
manufacturer in
relation to the goods.
deals with remedies relating to guarantees. Division 1 of that Part
concerns actions against suppliers and within that division
259 Action against suppliers of
(1) A consumer may take action under this
section if:
(a) a person (the supplier)
supplies, in trade or commerce, goods to the consumer; and
(b) a guarantee that applies to the supply under Subdivision A of Division 1 of
(other than sections 58 and 59(1)) is not complied
(3) If the failure to comply with the guarantee cannot be remedied or is a
major failure, the consumer may:
(a) subject to section 262,
notify the supplier that the consumer rejects the goods and of the ground or
grounds for the rejection;
(b) by action against the supplier, recover compensation for any reduction in
the value of the goods below the price paid or payable
by the consumer for the
(4) The consumer may, by action against the
supplier, recover damages for any loss or damage suffered by the consumer
the failure to comply with the guarantee if it was reasonably
foreseeable that the consumer would suffer such loss or damage as a
such a failure.
the purposes of s 259, s 260 identifies the occasions on which a failure to
comply with a guarantee is a “major failure”:
260 When a failure to comply with a guarantee is a
major failure
A failure to comply with a guarantee
referred to in section 259(1)(b) that applies to a supply of goods is a major
failure if:
(a) the goods would not have
been acquired by a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the nature and
extent of the failure; or
(b) the goods depart in one or more significant respects:
(i) if they were supplied by description—from that description; or
(ii) if they were supplied by reference to a sample or demonstration
model—from that sample or demonstration model; or
(c) the goods are substantially unfit for a purpose for which goods of the same
kind are commonly supplied and they cannot, easily
and within a reasonable time,
be remedied to make them fit for such a purpose; or
(d) the goods are unfit for a disclosed purpose that was made known to:
(i) the supplier of the goods; or
(ii) a person by whom any prior negotiations or arrangements in relation to the
acquisition of the goods were conducted or made;
and they cannot, easily and within a reasonable time, be remedied to make them
fit for such a purpose; or
(e) the goods are not of acceptable quality because they are
262 provides limitations upon the entitlement to reject the goods as provided
for in s 259(3)(a):
262 When consumers are not entitled to reject
(1) A consumer is not entitled, under
section 259, to notify a supplier of goods that the consumer rejects the goods
(a) the rejection period for
the goods has ended; or
(b) the goods have been lost, destroyed or disposed of by the consumer; or
(c) the goods were damaged after being delivered to the consumer for reasons
not related to their state or condition at the time
of supply; or
(d) the goods have been attached to, or incorporated in, any real or personal
property and they cannot be detached or isolated without
(2) The rejection period for goods is the
period from the time of the supply of the goods to the consumer within which it
reasonable to expect the relevant failure to comply with a guarantee
referred to in section 259(1)(b) to become apparent having regard
(a) the type of goods; and
(b) the use to which a consumer is likely to put them; and
(c) the length of time for which it is reasonable for them to be used; and
(d) the amount of use to which it is reasonable for them to be put before such
a failure becomes apparent.
2 of Chapter 5 provides for actions against manufacturers. Mr Vautin relies
upon s 271 which affords consumers a right to
enforce the guarantees imposed by
s 54 against a manufacturer. That section provides:
271 Action for damages against manufacturers of
(a) the guarantee under section
54 applies to a supply of goods to a consumer; and
(b) the guarantee is not complied
an affected person in relation to the goods
may, by action against the manufacturer of the goods, recover damages from the
manufacturer.
(a) the guarantee under section
58 or 59(1) applies to a supply of goods to a consumer; and
(b) the guarantee is not complied
an affected person in relation to the goods
may, by action against the manufacturer of the goods, recover damages from the
manufacturer.
above provisions apply in relation to the supply of goods to a consumer. The
expression “consumer” is defined by
3 Meaning of consumer
Acquiring goods as a consumer
(1) A person is taken to have acquired
particular goods as a consumer if, and only
(a) the amount paid or payable
for the goods, as worked out under subsections (4) to (9), did not exceed:
(i) $40,000; or
(ii) if a greater amount is prescribed for the purposes of this
paragraph—that greater amount; or
(b) the goods were of a kind ordinarily acquired for personal, domestic or
household use or consumption; or
(c) the goods consisted of a vehicle or trailer acquired for use principally in
the transport of goods on public
Application of the ACL
Ultimately,
there was no dispute that the Revive was within the meaning of
“goods” for the purposes of Division 1 of
of the ACL. The
vessel, being a fishing / cruising vessel, was a recreational one acquired by Mr
Vautin so that he may pursue his
passion of boating and marlin fishing and he
used it for those purposes when he could. There was no evidence to the
was, at all material times, incorporated under the laws of Delaware and was a
foreign corporation. It constructed the vessel
in the United States of America
and it was sold to Eagle Yachts, which imported it to Australia. That being so,
for his claim against
Bertram, Mr Vautin, in part, relies upon the extended
operation of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(Cth) (CCA) afforded
which, relevantly, provides:
5 Extended application
of this Act to conduct outside Australia
(1) Each of the following
provisions:
(a) Part IV;
(b) Part XI;
(c) the Australian Consumer Law (other than Part 5 3);
(f) the remaining provisions of this Act (to the extent to which they relate to
any of the provisions covered by paragraph (a), (b)
extends to the engaging in conduct outside
Australia by:
(g) bodies corporate
incorporated or carrying on business within Australia; or
(h) Australian citizens; or
(i) persons ordinarily resident within
Vautin asserts that Bertram was carrying on business in Australia such that, to
the extent any offending conduct occurred outside
of Australia, it will be
caught by this provision. That said, his primary position is that the relevant
conduct of Bertram occurred
within Australia such that the ACL applied to it
without recourse to the extraterritorial operation of the Act. This issue is
in detail below.
Non-compliance with the guarantees imposed by the Australian
Consumer Law
Guarantee as to acceptable quality
Vautin asserts that the existence of the construction defects in the sandwich
core panels of Revive means that the vessel is not
of an “acceptable
quality” within the meaning of the guarantee imposed by s 54 of the ACL.
In determining whether the
guarantee in that section is contravened the
following matters are relevant:
(a) The test as
to whether goods are of an “acceptable quality” is an objective one;
being taken from the perspective
of a “reasonable consumer” (
Satellite Pty Ltd (formerly known as “Sky Mesh Pty Ltd”) v Ipstar
Australia Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWSC 1898
Merck Sharp & Dohme
(Australia) Pty Ltd v Peterson
[2011] FCAFC 128
(2011) 196 FCR 145).
question for the “reasonable consumer” is whether the goods in
question have the identified qualities enumerated
in 54(2) to an
“acceptable standard”. This requirement is derived from the words
“as a reasonable consumer ...
would regard as acceptable”.
“acceptable standard” is used as the yardstick against which the
qualities of the goods are to be measured. It
is ascertained by a consideration
of the matters referred to in s 54(3); the nature of the goods, their price, any
statement made
relating to their supply.
necessary the goods have
of the qualities identified in s 54(2) to
the ascertained acceptable standard. Those qualities are that the goods are fit
the purposes for which goods of that kind are commonly supplied,
acceptable in appearance and finish, free from defects, safe and
assessment of whether the goods meet that relevant standard, the reasonable
consumer is taken to be fully acquainted with
the state and condition of the
goods (including any hidden defects of the goods).
goods supplied do not have
of the identified qualities to the
acceptable standard, they will not be of an “acceptable
compendious terms, the issue is whether, objectively, the goods supplied (when
taking into account their actual quality including
any latent defects) are, to
an acceptable standard, fit for all the purposes for which goods of that kind
are commonly supplied,
acceptable in appearance and finish, free from defects,
safe and durable when measured by a standard which reflects the nature of
goods, their price, statements about the good as per their packaging,
representations made about the goods and any other relevant
circumstance. In
Prestige Auto Traders Australia Ltd v Bonnefin
[2017] NSWSC 149
[132] N Adams J identified the manner in which s 54 should be applied in the
following way:
The relevant test in s 54(2) of the ACL of whether or
not goods are of “acceptable quality” is an objective one based
whether a reasonable consumer who was aware of the “defects” in the
goods at the time of the supply would have considered
them to be of acceptable
quality. There was no issue taken that the determination of what is objectively
reasonable for a consumer
to expect is to be made taking into account the
relevant information known as at the time of the trial, including
“after-acquired
knowledge”:
Medtel v Courtney
at [66] and
this new regime had the effect of replacing the allegedly “archaic”
or “ambiguous” concept of “merchantable
quality” with
modernised terms which are easier for consumers and businesses to understand
(see the Explanatory Memorandum
Trade Practices Amendment (Australian
Consumer Law) Bill
para.25.85) is yet to be determined. That said, the test
of “acceptable quality” is not vastly dissimilar to the test
“merchantable quality” in s 74D of the TPA. It is, however,
apparent that the scope of the concept of “acceptable
quality” is
wider than that of “merchantable quality”. An important difference
is that s 54 specifically imposes
an obligation that the goods in question are
free from defects as well as being fit for
of the purposes for which
they were commonly supplied (
APS Satellite Pty Ltd (formerly known as
“SkyMesh Pty Ltd”) v Ipstar Australia Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWSC 1898
[59]). This affords a wider scope of protection for consumers.
circumstances of this case have some similarities (in a legal sense) with issues
which arose in
Medtel Pty Ltd v Courtney
[2003] FCAFC 151
(2003) 130 FCR 182
, although the
issues in that case arose by reference to whether the goods were of
“merchantable quality” as that term
was used in s 74D of the TPA.
There, an action was brought on behalf of persons who had heart pace-makers
fitted against the Australian
distributor of the product. The design and
construction of the pacemaker had given rise to an increased risk of
short-circuiting.
At first instance the trial judge had determined that the
solder used in the manufacturing process had created a super-added risk
premature failure and, for that reason, the pacemakers were not of merchantable
quality. The distributor appealed on the basis
that the trial judge had erred
in reaching that conclusion because the pacemaker in question had not, at that
stage, short circuited
and had continued to function. The issue before the Full
Court was identified by Branson J at p 202, [54] as being:
whether a product which, at the time of trial, can be
demonstrated to have performed, and to be continuing to perform, satisfactorily
can nonetheless be found to be “not of merchantable quality” within
the meaning of s 74D(1) of the
Trade Practices Act 1974
In the present case the vessel, Revive, is obviously not performing. The
delamination of the topside is evidence of that. However,
the question which
needs to be answered is whether the vessel would be of “acceptable
quality” after that delamination
has been repaired. The respondents say
that it will so that Mr Vautin is entitled to an amount sufficient to achieve
Medtel Pty Ltd v Courtney
, Branson J observed (at pp 203-204, [58]) that
s 74D was concerned with the quality of the goods supplied and, in particular,
quality of the goods at the date on which they were supplied. The trial
judge, Sackville J, had found the pacemaker in question
was not of merchantable
quality due to the superadded risk of premature failure, but he also found it
had always functioned as it
ought to and, that on the balance of probabilities,
it would not have ceased to function properly. The appellant argued the trial
judge ought to have found the pacemaker was of merchantable quality and, that
was particularly so given the “after-acquired
information” to the
effect that it had not suffered from premature battery depletion. In this
respect Branson J held (at p
205, [64]) the requirement of “merchantable
quality” is defined by what is objectively reasonable to expect at the
of the supply of the goods. It required a comparison between the goods in
question and what would be reasonable to expect, in terms
of fitness for
purpose, in all of the relevant circumstances. That comparison would no doubt
be affected by the type of goods in
question as well as their price.
her Honour’s reasons, at pp 206-207, [71]ff, an interesting discussion
occurs concerning the merchantable quality of goods
where there exists a risk
they are defective. The discussion concerned the scenario of a case of 100
cartons of yoghurt sold to a
grocer where three were contaminated with arsenic.
Whilst the 100 cartons sold to the grocer may have been unmerchantable, it was
argued that the uncontaminated 97 cartons to individual consumers would not be
because they were not defective and the consumers
would not have suffered any
loss. That reasoning was rejected by her Honour who identified that it could
not be said that the cartons
of yoghurt were merchantable where there was a
slight but appreciable risk of contamination by a deadly poison. Her Honour said
p 207, [73] – [74]:
[73] It seems to me that to deny that all, or any, of
the purchasers in the above classes purchased goods of a kind that were not
fit for human consumption as it is reasonable to expect is to read into the test
of merchantable quality a requirement concerning
loss or damage. Section
74D(1)(c) is not concerned with loss or damage. It is s 74D(1)(d) that imports
into the statutory cause of
action created by s 74D the requirement that the
consumer suffers loss and damage by reason that the goods are not of
merchantable
[74] I reject the argument that the mere fact that it was known at the time of
trial that Mr Courtney's pacemaker had not failed
prematurely meant that it
could not be demonstrated that Mr Courtney's pacemaker was not of merchantable
quality within the meaning
of s 74D at the time of its supply to Mr
Full Court (Branson J with whom Jacobson J agreed) at pp 208-209, [78] could
find no fault in the conclusion of the trial judge
that a pacemaker which had
only the ordinary or usual risk of premature failure is more fit for purpose
than one which had, by reason
of its manufacture, an appreciably higher risk of
failure. It was reasonable to expect, at the time of its sale, that the
was manufactured in a way which gave rise to the ordinary or usual
risk of failure. See also the observations of Moore J at [14].
should be kept steadily in mind that the question for the Court in relation to
(or s 74D) concerns the quality of the goods supplied. That includes issues
as to their safety or durability and fitness. It is
not concerned with reaching
a conclusion that the goods in question will necessarily fail under any or
particular circumstances.
The section is also not concerned with loss or
damage. In cases where the product in question has not failed, the issue which
to be addressed is whether the product in question carries the
“inherent risk” which renders it not of an acceptable
quality (see
APS Satellite Pty Ltd (formerly known as “SkyMesh Pty Ltd”) v
Ipstar Australia Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWSC 1898
Protec Pacific Pty Ltd
v Steuler Services GmBH & Co KG
[2014] VSCA 338
[528]). The discussion
by the Court in
at [516] – [531] of the application of the
principles identified in
is useful and identifies the appropriate
approach of establishing the unsuitability of a product which has not actually
failed. Their
Honours (Tate, Santamaria and Kyrou JJA) said at [528]:
While it follows from
Medtel v Courtney
is permissible to demonstrate unsuitability on the basis of an inherent risk
associated with a type of product, without the
particular product purchased
having actually failed, it is first necessary to establish that the type of
product carries the inherent
risk alleged. In our opinion, this is what BHP has
failed to do.
concerned the operation of s 74D of the TPA, the principles
observed are useful to a consideration of
of the ACL. If goods could
not be described as being of merchantable quality, neither would they be of an
acceptable quality (see
APS Satellite Pty Ltd (formerly known as
“SkyMesh Pty Ltd”) v Ipstar Australia Pty Ltd
[2016] NSWSC 1898
the present case the respondents submitted Mr Vautin could not establish Revive
was not of an acceptable quality (once the repairs
to the topsides were
complete) because other sandwich core panels had not failed at this point in
time. This submission ought to
also be rejected. At the very least, the
evidence established before the Court indicates that those panels carry with
them an added
and unreasonable risk of failure.
Setting the standard of acceptable quality
order to establish the standard of “acceptable quality” against
which a reasonable consumer would measure the attributes
of Revive, it is
necessary to consider the matters identified in
; namely, the nature of
the goods, their price, any statement made about the goods on packaging or
labels, any representations made
manufacturer, and any other circumstance relating to the supply of the
relation to the first matter, Revive was an ocean-going, cruising vessel. It
was described as a Category A (Ocean) vessel in the
CE Certificate relating to
the model type and, importantly for present purposes, it was so described in the
Owner’s Manual.
If constructed to the requirements of that categorisation
it would have been capable of being used in conditions which may exceed
force 8 (Beaufort scale) and significant wave heights of 4 m and above, but
excluding abnormal conditions, and be largely self-sufficient
conditions. In effect, it ought to have been capable of being used in all
conditions short of a hurricane or tornadoes and
extreme sea conditions or freak
was also a large vessel, being in excess of 74ft, which was capable of carrying
a maximum of 18 persons. It had a 7600 litre fuel
tank capacity, which
indicated it was intended to be capable of being used for extended voyages and,
it follows, capable of handling
all weather conditions which might arise on such
voyages. The consequences of such a vessel failing at sea could include the
of life, so Revive could only be of an acceptable quality if it was
constructed to the safest standards possible and its components
did not carry a
risk of failure.
above features, by themselves, suggest that, given the type of vessel, the
overall structural integrity of Revive ought to have
rendered it capable of
successfully encountering extremely rough conditions. It did not meet this
the Revive been constructed in accordance with any identified acceptable
standard, it would have been a vessel which a manufacturer
or seller might
reasonably hold out as having substantial sea capabilities. In the promotional
material which was provided to Mr
Vautin it was asserted by Bertram
(a) The Bertram
vessels were “the most seaworthy collection of crafts on the water
today” (Tab 24 of the Joint Bundle,
(b) “Hardcore
performance is at the heart of the Bertram legacy”, “every Bertram
is engineered for strength”
and Bertrams are built “for strength and
hull performance” (Tab 24 of the Joint Bundle, p 99); and
(c) Bertram
produces “innovative yachts with remarkable performance, durability and
beauty” (Tab 24 of the Joint Bundle,
particularly, in a 2011 brochure produced by Bertram in relation to the Bertram
700 range of vessels, of which Revive was one,
the following representations
Bertram boats “stand up to the test of time”, that they “are
purpose-built for fishing under the most hostile
conditions”, that
“[t]hey hold up in rough conditions and stand the test of time”, and
“[h]istorical tales
of how owners and captains were thankful that their
Bertrams got them through unexpected rogue seas are known across the
(Tab 23 of the Joint Bundle, p 33);
(b) “Bertram’s
quest to reduce risk in unforeseen adverse sea conditions and make the best sea
keeping vessel is a major
part of Bertram’
-year legacy of legendary
yacht building” (Tab 23 of the Joint Bundle, p 35);
(c) competitors
have not “matched the strength, rigidity and durability of a
Bertram” (Tab 23 of the Joint Bundle, p 35);
(d) Bertram
builds “sport fishing machines; ‘battle wagons’ as they are
commonly referred to. Getting you out where
you need to be – even in the
roughest conditions. ... Running before a storm through high seas to reach safe
(Tab 23 of the Joint Bundle, p 35); and
(e) the Bertram
experience “will get you, your family and guests safely out and back, as
you brave conditions that keep lesser
vessels in port. That’s Bertram.
That’s peace of mind.” (Tab 23 of the Joint Bundle, p
a 2012 brochure (which was apparently produced after the sales of Revive to Mr
Vautin) the key selling points of Bertram vessels
were identified as being that
they were built to withstand the roughest conditions and every part of the
vessel was structurally
bonded to provide robustness including, but not limited
to, furniture, soles and all bulkheads. Mr Rodgers, a former employee of
Yachts, identified that these were the type of messages used by Bertram
representatives to market the yachts in Australia.
He confirmed (at ts.195)
that the vessels were marketed as being constructed to withstand anything short
of a hurricane.
Mr Vautin also relied upon other statements in the brochures which extoled the
claimed virtues of the Bertram range of vessel
and, in particular, the 700
series, the above is sufficient to identify that the vessel was sold as one
being at the “top of
the range” of vessels of that nature. The
statements in the promotional material indicated Bertram vessels were
constructed
to ensure they were as safe as it was reasonably possible to make
them, if not safer. The representations emphasised the vessel
were of robust
strength and design and close to statements the vessel are as safe as they might
possibly be. The statements made
in the marketing of Revive had the result that
the “acceptable quality” of the attributes identified in
be towards the highest level capable of being reached by boat builders.
Clearly, the actuality did not reflect the marketing
statements.
the above circumstances, it is not surprising that the price at which Revive was
sold was in excess of $AUD4 million. The contract
required the payment of $USD3
million and the trade-in of Mr Vautin’s previous vessel valued at
$AUD1.275 million. At that
time there was near parity between the USD and the
AUD. On any view, that is a substantial amount of money to spend acquiring a
pleasure craft. The price suggests the vessel is a “high end”
vessel being constructed to a standard and finish at the
higher end of vessels
of that type. As Mr Rodgers accepted, it was “right at the top of the
market” (ts.197). There
does not appear to be any dispute about that in
might also be observed that at the time of acquiring Revive, Mr Vautin informed
Eagle Yachts he intended to use the vessel for
ocean going voyages. Again, that
was not disputed and there was no suggestion it was not suitable for that type
all these statements indicate that, for the purposes of
, the quality of the
vessels’ attributes were necessarily to be at the highest level.
The expectations of a reasonable consumer
Brad Rodgers, who had a history of dealing in vessels of this nature and who
held a Masters Certificate, gave evidence as to his
appreciation of what
customers of vessels of the type under consideration would expect. He was well
qualified to do so and there
was no objection to his evidence in this respect.
Indeed, it was he who had sold Revive to Mr Vautin. He gave evidence, which was
not disputed, that owners of vessels of the type under consideration wanted a
high degree of assurance as to safety and structural
soundness (ts.195).
manner vessels of this nature were held out to potential purchasers was
important in relation to the expectations of reasonable
customers. Mr Rodgers
acknowledged the Bertram vessels were held out as being able to withstand the
roughest conditions and, in
the case of a Bertram 700, they were held out as
being able to withstand gale force winds, including winds up to the Beaufort 8
He accepted that persons who might be interested in acquiring such
expensive vessels would wish to use them offshore and safety
was a priority,
particularly because sea conditions can change quickly. He further accepted
that, for such potential purchasers,
structural soundness was necessary and such
persons would require that the vessel was built to specification and certified
He further acknowledged that vessels of the nature of Revive which are
ocean going may encounter waves or swells of up to 4 to 5
metres. Such vessels
are designed to go into such seas and he agreed the forces which might there
impact on the vessel could be
significant. Those forces would impact not just
the hull of the vessel, but also upon the superstructure including the deck and
the structure built above it. Mr Rodgers admitted that, for these reasons, the
deck and the super structure required structural
integrity and that purchasers
who might acquire such vessels would insist on that integrity (ts.196 –
Rodgers also agreed that ocean going vessels, such as the Revive, would be
subject to minor collisions at sea with, for example,
flotsam and jetsam, whales
or large fish. He acknowledged that part of the structural design of such a
vessel was to localise the
effect of any such impacts. This concept of
localising the effect of impacts is important. If the consequence of an impact
pierces the outer skin of the vessel is that water will permeate
throughout the hull, deck or super structure, the consequence can
deterioration in the foam core which can impact upon balance and performance as
a result of adding weight to the vessel. It would
also impact upon the
durability of the vessel. Mr Rodgers agreed that these could be the sequela of
water permeating throughout
the sandwich core panels and that, in terms of both
cost and the features of the vessel, such circumstances are not intended. The
filling of kerfs in the construction of a sandwich core panel prevents water
spreading throughout the structure such that the effect
of any penetration is
localised. For this reason, potential purchasers of vessels such as Revive
would expect their manner of construction
would prevent the dispersal of water
which enters the structure through a penetration.
Rodgers also accepted (at ts.198) that a purchaser of a vessel such as Revive
would not consider it acceptable that:
(a) the shear
capacity of the material used in the core construction of the vessel was up to
50% less than it was designed to be;
material used in the construction of the core had not been installed in
accordance with the manufacturer’s specifications;
(c) the vessel
had been constructed in a way that departed from accepted international maritime
construction standards.
Rodgers further agreed that, in terms of the safe use of the vessel, it would be
imprudent to take a defective vessel such as Revive
onto the ocean if an
experienced naval architect had advised not to do so until it was completely
repaired (ts.200). That evidence
was not, however, sufficiently particular for
the purposes of the issues in the present case, although it does reveal persons
use such vessels necessarily demand that the design and construction of
their craft be extremely high. It is axiomatic that the
structural failure of a
vessel at sea and in heavy conditions, generates a great risk of loss of life.
In that respect, he also
agreed that, due to the extensive nature of its
structural impairments, there was no market for a defective vessel like Revive
the state in which she is in as she could not be enjoyed in the way that it
is intended she should be (ts.201).
into account all of the above circumstances, in order for Revive to be of an
“acceptable quality” it would need
to have the characteristics
identified in
-(e) to an extremely high standard.
Failure to comply with manufacturer’s
specifications
Vautin also relied upon the failure of the vessel to be constructed using
materials (the PVC foam core) incorporated in accordance
manufacturer’s specifications. Above I have concluded that there has been
such a failure in this case in relation
to the PVC foam core and I agree with
the uncontested evidence of Mr Rodgers that purchasers of vessels like Revive
would not find
it acceptable for the vessel to have been so
constructed.
Contraventions of the guarantee imposed by
light of the above, taking into account the after acquired knowledge, it is
possible to make the following findings in relation
to whether Revive was of an
acceptable quality at the time it was supplied.
Revive was not of an acceptable quality at the time of
was not of an acceptable quality at the time at which it was supplied by virtue
of the defective construction of the sandwich
core panels. By the time of
trial, that was not seriously in dispute. It had been disputed on the pleadings
however, in its final
submissions Eagle Yachts expressly eschewed asserting the
yacht complied with the guarantees in
of the ACL. Bertram did,
however, contest that Mr Vautin had not established that the vessel was not fit
for purpose within the
Similarly, by the end of the trial the
second respondent, Eagle Yachts, had also capitulated in relation to the
non-compliance of
the yacht with the statutorily imposed guarantees. It
acknowledged that the vessel, when supplied, failed to comply with the
of the ACL.
the light of the evidence and, in particular, the joint experts’ report,
the concessions made by the respondents were inevitable.
The deficient method
of manufacture for those sandwich core panels meant their shear strength was
substantially reduced. I have
accepted it was reduced by approximately 50%, as
opined by Mr Stanyon and Mr Dovell. The presently appearing consequence of the
defective construction is that the forward parts of the topsides which had been
exposed to the most regular forces have delaminated
and particularly on the port
side. It was agreed between the experts that the vessel could not be used in
the ocean in that condition.
Were it to be so used the only shear strength of
those parts of the topside would be in the laminate skins which was minimal and
their failure would be catastrophic for the vessel. Necessarily, with those
construction defects the vessel was not fit for all
of the purposes for which it
commonly supplied, it was not free from defects, it was not safe, and it was not
durable. It was also
not fit for purpose within
of the ACL.
Revive was not of an acceptable quality even with some
repairs being effected
central question agitated in this case was whether Revive would be of an
acceptable quality with the forward parts of the topside
repaired. Those
repairs were, in effect, the removal of the delaminated panels and their
reconstruction using appropriate construction
methods including priming the core
and filling the kerfs. It was the respondents’ contention that this would
have the effect
of rendering the vessel of an acceptable quality and, thereby,
putting Mr Vautin into the position which he ought to have been had
compliance with the statutory guarantees when the vessel was supplied. In the
context of the evidence as it emerged,
the question became whether given the
construction defects permeated all of the topsides, the decks and the
superstructure, it could
be said the vessel was of an acceptable quality once
the delaminated portions had been repaired. Largely, this goes to the question
of damages rather than liability given the initial finding that the vessel was
not of an acceptable quality. An alternative case
advanced by the respondents
was that if all of the sandwich core panels on the topside were repaired, the
vessel would then comply
with the statutory warranties. Necessarily, in that
scenario the cost of repairs would be substantially greater.
follows that it is necessary to consider the hypothetical position that would
exist if the hull or forward part of the hull was
Not fit for all the purposes for which goods of that kind are
commonly supplied
parties accept the defective construction extended to all parts of the vessel
containing a sandwich core. I accept the defective
method of construction
resulted in the shear strength of those panels being reduced in the order of
50%. This defect created a heightened
risk that those parts of the sandwich
core panels which were not repaired might fail, or delaminate and then fail, if
the forces they might expect to receive in conditions a Category A
vessel should be able to withstand. The delamination would have
the effect that
the laminate skins would rupture under the pressure of further impact forces and
the vessel would not remain watertight.
That generates a risk of loss of life
for passengers and crew and any such risk is, obviously, unacceptable.
if it could not be positively established the vessel was so defective it could
not be used in all of the conditions which a Category
A vessel should be able to
withstand, the defective construction generates a significant risk that the
vessel would not be able to
withstand such conditions. This conclusion is
supported by the experts to which I have referred. Mr Dovell, whom I have found
be reliable, said that he would not use the repaired vessel in the rough
conditions which a Category A vessel should be able to withstand.
Similarly, Mr
Stanyon agreed he would not use the vessel in all the conditions that he would
if the vessel did not contain the construction
defects. Mr Hutchings accepted
that even with the identified repairs there would be uncertainty in the use of
the vessel (ts.353)
and such uncertainty was unacceptable in relation to a high
end vessel of this type.
uncertainty surrounding the integrity of the vessel as a result of the defective
construction (even with the delamination repaired)
meant it would not be fit for
all of the purposes it would be commonly used. Specifically, for ocean going
voyages where it might
encounter very heavy conditions. For this reason it
would not be of an acceptable quality even if the identified repairs were
Free from defects
if the delaminated parts of the vessel were repaired, Revive would still contain
defects in the form of the defectively manufactured
sandwich core panels. Those
panels have substantially reduced shear capacity from that which they ought to
have, or were designed
to have. Those defects are likely to lead to future
delamination if the vessel is used for the purposes for which it was designed.
I have accepted that Mr Stanyon indicated further delamination of the vessel is
a distinct likelihood. Indeed, the defective panels
on the deck and in the
superstructure may fail in rough conditions. Moreover, the unfilled kerfs have
the consequence that penetrations
for the affixing of fittings and the like are
likely to permit water to enter the core and permeate throughout it. Over time
would lead to imbalance if a sufficient amount of water entered and it is
also likely to lead to the deterioration of the bonding
or adhesion in the
sandwich core panels. For this reason as well, even if the repairs identified
were effected, Revive would not
be of acceptable quality by reason of the
continued existence of defects.
appears from the above discussion, even if the existing delamination is
remediated, the defective condition of the remaining sandwich
core panels means
that the vessel is not as safe as it should be. In particular, it is not safe
for use in all conditions which
a Category A vessel should be able to withstand.
In this respect I accept the opinions of Mr Stanyon and Mr Dovell to the effect
that, even with the defects repaired, they would not use the vessel in all of
the conditions in which it could be used if the construction
defects did not
exist. Even Mr Hutchings accepted that the uncertainty surrounding the safety
of the vessel was unacceptable in
a high end vessel of this nature. Either
because the vessel is unsafe, as I have found, or because there is a substantial
it is not safe for use in all relevant conditions, it is not of an
acceptable quality.
necessarily follows from the above that, even with the identified repairs being
completed, Revive will not be as durable as it
would have been in the absence of
the construction defects. The panels that are not repaired have only half the
shear strength of
a properly constructed panel and are likely to fail in
conditions which they are designed to encounter. Mr Dovell identified that
fatigue strength of the panels will be reduced. That seems to be supported by
Mr Stanyon’s opinion that if he had the
vessel (which was repaired) he
would constantly inspect the vessel for further delamination. Mr Dovell further
said that the unfilled
kerfs would allow water entering the panels to permeate
the whole panel and cause deterioration. On the evidence of the experts
likely the sandwich core panels will deteriorate faster than if they were
properly constructed. It must also be kept in mind
that Revive is a very
expensive vessel; being one that is sold as being at the “top of the
market”. That being so a
reasonable consumer would expect the vessel to
be as durable as good boat building practice could make it. The defective
construction
has prevented it from meeting that standard. Therefore, even if
the existing delamination was repaired, Revive would not be of an
quality because it would not be as durable as a reasonable consumer would expect
Conclusion on non-compliance with
follows that for each of the above reasons, if the panels where the delamination
had occurred were repaired, the vessel would still
not be of an acceptable
quality. As
requires that the goods supplied have each of the identified
attributes, the vessel is not of an acceptable quality for each of those
individually or any combination of them. The same conclusion is reached even if
the topsides were completely repaired.
Non-compliance with the guarantee for fitness for purpose
mentioned, Bertram did not admit that the vessel, as supplied, did not meet the
guarantee imposed by
The brief submissions made were to the effect that
Mr Vautin had failed to establish the shear capacity of the un-remediated panels
would be lower than the CE “essential requirements”, or that the
construction did not comply with the construction plans
approved by the Royal
Institution of Naval Architects (RINA). It followed, so the argument went, that
Mr Vautin had not established
the vessel was not fit for purpose.
, if certain conditions exist, the goods supplied must be reasonably fit
for any disclosed purpose, and for any purpose for which
the supplier has
represented that they are reasonably fit. In the circumstances of this case it
was accepted that the relevant “purpose”
was that the vessel could
be used as a Category A vessel capable of ocean travel and being able to
withstand conditions that may
exceed wind force 8 (Beaufort scale) and
significant wave heights of 4 m and above, but excluding abnormal conditions,
largely self-sufficient.
is not clear whether Bertram’s position is that Revive is fit for purpose
in its present state or that it would be if the
delamination was repaired. In
its present state, the fact the defective construction of the sandwich core
panels resulted in delamination
in those parts of the topside which, to date,
have received the impact of repetitive forces occurring under ordinary
operation, means
the vessel is not reasonably fit for its disclosed purpose and
that it was not so fit when supplied.
follows that it must be Bertram’s contention that Mr Vautin has not
established that, if the construction defects in the
forward parts of the
topsides are repaired, or the whole of the topside is repaired, the vessel is
not reasonably fit for purpose.
This seems to be founded on its submission that
it has not been shown the panels are of inadequate shear strength or the vessel
not constructed in accordance with the RINA approved construction
submissions in this respect must be rejected. As a matter of fact, the sandwich
core panels have reduced shear capacity
in the order of 50% compared to a panel
constructed with the core primed and the kerfs filled. The consequence of that
construction to date has been delamination in those areas which have
received the most repeated impacts under normal conditions of
usage. That
evidence establishes that the shear strength of the sandwich core panels on the
vessel is inadequate to withstand the
forces encountered under normal or
ordinary conditions. There is no reason to believe that other areas of the
vessel made of the
same sandwich core panels which have, as yet, not been
subject to similar forces will not delaminate in time. There was no suggestion
from any of the experts that this is not likely to occur and, indeed, it seemed
implicit from Mr Stanyon’s evidence (ts 348
– 349). Further, there
was no evidence to suggest that the panels on the vessel would perform any
better in conditions which
are harsher than those which have been experienced to
date. The evidence before the Court was that in harsh sea conditions the vessel
could be impacted across all areas including the decks and superstructure with
substantial forces. Those conditions might involve
large waves crashing onto
the deck or against the superstructure. On the basis of Mr Dovell’s
evidence which I accept, the
shear capacity of the sandwich core panels are, on
the balance of probabilities, well less than that which is adequate for such
with the consequence that it is more likely than not they will fail when
exposed to constant regular forces in ordinary use or to
substantial forces in
harsh conditions. It can be added that the lower standard of durability would
also prevent the vessel being
used for all of its usual purposes. Those
conclusions render the vessel unfit for the purposes for which it is commonly
for the purposes for which the supplier represented that it could be
used. To that extent there was non-compliance with the statutory
guarantee in
of the ACL.
issue of whether or not the vessel was “fit for purpose” was
misdirected, to some extent, by the joint experts’
report. As I have set
out above, the experts agreed upon the following statement in their
21. The best measure of fitness for purpose for the
design and construction of a pleasure boat similar to REVIVE is the application
of an appropriate and accepted standard of which the CE Directive 94/25/CE as
amended by directive 2003/44/CE is one. Agree PS, CCH,
is logic to the point of view expressed in that paragraph in that the standards
which are incorporated into the CE Directive
are carefully developed to provide
appropriate methods and standards of construction which, when met, will ensure
the safety and
seaworthiness of the constructed craft. That is, a vessel
constructed to the appropriate standard will be free from the risk that
not seaworthy.
as a result of the approach adopted by the experts, much of the debate concerned
whether it had been established that the
construction of Revive did not comply
with the requirements of the CE Directive or, the Bertram construction plans.
In particular,
the respondents alleged it had not been established the sandwich
core construction did not comply with some standard which was consistent
the requirements of the CE Directive. Whilst it may be correct to conclude Mr
Vautin was not able to prove directly and conclusively
there was no standard to
which construction of the sandwich core panels complied, it can be found, by way
of inference, that such
was the case. There was evidence before the Court from
three marine experts who were naval architects, had other professional
qualifications
and, between them, had many years of experience. They were aware
of the standard of construction which were required by the CE Directive
the ISO standard. It was agreed by them that the ISO standard was, effectively,
the minimum requirement for the construction
of sandwich core laminates for
vessels of the type under consideration. They also agreed, although Mr
Hutchings did so reluctantly,
that the failure to prime the core was bad boat
building practice, that it was prudent to fill the kerfs, and that was something
they would always advise a boat builder to do. In such circumstances, it was
extremely unlikely there would exist a standard for
the construction of sandwich
core panels which did not require the priming or the filling of kerfs.
order to make good their submission the respondents contend that, although the
failure to prime the core would be bad boat building
practice and the filling of
the kerfs is something that should be done, there might be a standard acceptable
to the CE Directive
requirements which does not require both of those practices.
Whilst that remote possibility cannot be excluded beyond all doubt,
the balance of probabilities that no such standard existed. Given that all of
the experts agreed that priming the core
and filling the kerfs were important
manufacturing techniques, which should be done, the chances of their being some
standard that
does not require both is most improbable. Moreover, it is not
likely that the experts, in preparing to give evidence in this case,
have ascertained the existence of such a standard if one existed.
follows that it is possible to infer that the construction of Revive did not
comply with the ISO Standard (which is not disputed),
nor any standard which
might have been within the requirements of the CE Directive. It was, therefore,
not constructed in accordance
with that Directive.
respondents further submitted that compliance with the ISO standard was not the
only manner in which a manufacturer of vessels
might comply with the CE
Directive (see Article 5 of the CE Directive). They assert that
manufacturer
can, if it chooses, not refer to a harmonised standard for the
construction of a vessel with the result that Mr Vautin must establish
construction of the Revive did not meet the essential requirements of the CE
Directive. That argument is misconceived. The
entitlement of a manufacturer to
refer to an alternative standard, for the purposes of obtaining compliance with
the CE Directive,
necessitates that the manufacturer prove their product is in
conformity with the essential requirements of the Directive by use of
means. If the vessel had been constructed in accordance with some other
standard or the vessel as built did conform with
the essential requirements,
that would be something which would be peculiarly within the knowledge of
Bertram and it has not produced
any evidence of the existence of some other
standard or evidence of the compliance of Revive with the essential
requirements.
Branson J referred to s 140 of the
Evidence Act
concerning the standard of proof in civil proceedings and observed that it
incorporated “the common law rule that evidence
is to be weighed according
to the proof which it was in the power of one party to produce and in the power
of the other to contradict”.
Her Honour referred to
Apollo Shower
Screens Pty Ltd v Building and Construction Industry Long Service Payments
[1985] 1 NSWLR 561
, 565 citing
Blatch v Archer
[1774] EngR 2
(1774) 1 Cowp 63
[1774] EngR 2
at 970. Here, if the construction of Revive does conform to
the essential requirements of the CE Directive by reason of some special
building technique that is something of which Bertram has peculiar knowledge,
its failure to adduce any evidence of that lends support
to the conclusion that
the vessel does not so conform.
support of his client’s case, Mr Hutchings asserted it was not possible to
determine whether the vessel was fit for purpose
by reason of its compliance
with the directive without consideration of the construction plans. Such
drawings would disclose the
design of the sandwich core panels and it would be
possible to ascertain whether the construction of the vessel conformed to that
design. It was apparently within the power of Bertram to produce the
construction plans for Revive. If it had it could have been
determined whether
the vessel was built in accordance with them and whether the vessel complied
with the essential requirements.
Bertram chose not to produce those plans.
There was some evidence the “plans could not be produced”, but that
vague statement was not elaborated upon. The cause of the inability was
not clarified and no attempt was made by Bertram to call
evidence in that
respect or even to attempt to explain why no evidence was being called. Again,
adopting the approach of Branson
, it can be inferred that
Bertram is not able to establish Revive was built in compliance with its
construction plans or satisfied
the essential requirements of the Directive.
add that the above discussion is somewhat hypothetical or otiose in the
circumstances of this case. It may be true that establishing
that a vessel did
not comply with any internationally accepted construction standard or the CE
Directive, will establish that a vessel
is not fit for purpose. However, that
is not the only method of showing unfitness. In this case the construction
defects in the
sandwich core panels have been shown to have rendered them
inadequate in a vessel such as Revive. Those defects prevent it from
as a Category A vessel. That proposition is true whether the topsides are
repaired or not. It has been established here,
as a matter of fact, the vessel
cannot be used for the purposes for which such vessels are commonly used and
that establishes the
breach of s 55.
Revive is not fit for purpose
the result I conclude that Revive is not fit for its purpose of being used as an
ocean going vessel.
Compliance with manufacturer’s warranty
provided a warranty in relation to Revive when Mr Vautin purchased it. That
provided that Bertram “will repair or replace
defects in (a) items
manufactured by BERTRAM for two (2) years, and (b) the yacht’s hull and
its fiberglass structural components
for five (5) years.” If the
provisions of s 59 of the ACL apply to Bertram, a statutory guarantee is created
to the effect
that Bertram will comply with that warranty.
the purposes of that warranty and guarantee, the construction defects in the
sandwich core panels are “defects” within
the meaning of the
warranty. The respondents do no assert to the contrary, at least to the extent
to which they exist in the forward
parts of the topside where the delamination
has occurred. However, as appears from the above discussion, the construction
also constitute defects in other sandwich core panels of the vessel
because their existence in those other parts of the vessel render
it unfit for
purpose and not of an acceptable quality.
for Bertram to be liable under s 59, it is necessary that it is within the
definition of “manufacturer” in s
7 of the ACL which
7 Meaning of
manufacturer
(1) A manufacturer includes the
(a) a person who grows,
extracts, produces, processes or assembles goods;
(b) a person who holds himself or herself out to the public as the manufacturer
(c) a person who causes or permits the name of the person, a name by which the
person carries on business or a brand or mark of
the person to be applied to
goods supplied by the person;
(d) a person (the first person) who causes or permits another person, in
connection with:
(i) the supply or possible supply of goods by that other person; or
(ii) the promotion by that other person by any means of the supply or use of
to hold out the first person to the public as the manufacturer of the goods;
(e) a person who imports goods into Australia if:
(i) the person is not the manufacturer of the goods; and
(ii) at the time of the importation, the manufacturer of the goods does not
have a place of business in
does not appear to be in doubt that,
prima facie
, Bertram would fall
within each of sub-paragraphs (a) – (d) of subsection (1). It produced
and assembled the vessel and held
itself out as manufacturing it. Its branding
is upon the vessel and, through the dealership agreement, it caused Eagle Yachts
hold it out as the manufacturer of the vessel.
here, the vessel was manufactured in the United States and sold there to Eagle
Yachts. It was the latter which imported
it to Australia. So the question
which arises is whether Bertram is subject to the operation of the ACL and, in
particular, the
obligations imposed by s 59?
s 131 of the CCA the provisions of the ACL apply to the conduct of corporations.
That section provides:
131 Application of the Australian Consumer Law in
relation to corporations etc.
(1) Schedule 2 applies as a law of the
Commonwealth to the conduct of corporations, and in relation to contraventions
2, 3 or 4 of Schedule 2 by corporations.
Note: Sections 5 and 6 of this Act extend the application of this Part (and
therefore extend the application of the Australian Consumer
Law as a law of the
Commonwealth).
4(2)(b) and (c) of the CCA provides a definition of “conduct” as
(b) a reference to conduct, when that
expression is used as a noun otherwise than as mentioned in paragraph (a), shall
a reference to the doing of or the refusing to do any act, including
the making of, or the giving effect to a provision of, a contract
arrangement, the arriving at, or the giving effect to a provision of, an
understanding or the engaging in of a concerted practice;
(c) a reference to refusing to do an act includes a reference
(i) refraining (otherwise than
inadvertently) from doing that act; or
(ii) making it known that that act will not be done;
4 also defines the expression “corporation” as including a
“foreign corporation” which, in turn, is
defined as including a
foreign corporation within the meaning of paragraph 51(xx) of the
Constitution
there is nothing in s 131 or in
(or in the definition of
“manufacturer” in
to suggest that the operation of the Act is
confined to persons or corporations within Australia, or who have some
connection with
Australia, as a matter of statutory construction, it is
generally accepted that an enactment will be presumed to apply only to the
territory or nationals over which the Australian Government has jurisdiction.
Meyer Heine Pty Ltd v The China Navigation Co Ltd
[1966] HCA 11
(1966) 115 CLR 10
23, Kitto J cited the relevant principle from the speech of Lord Russell of
Killowen in
Reg v Jameson
[1896] 2 QB 425
, 430 as being:
if any construction otherwise be possible, an Act will
not be construed as applying to foreigners in respect to acts done by them
outside the dominions of the sovereign power enacting
Bray v F Hoffman-La Roche Ltd
[2002] FCA 243
(2002) 118 FCR 1
, 15 [47] Merkel J phrased
that principle as, “a general canon of construction that an enactment will
not be construed as applying
to foreigners in respect of acts done by them
outside the dominions of the sovereign power enacting” and identified it
based on international comity whereby sovereign powers are bound to
respect the subjects and the rights of all other sovereign powers
outside its
own territory. In both
Meyer Heine
it was recognised
that the existence of a statutory provision extending the territorial operation
of an enactment can usually only
be accounted for on the basis that the Act, as
a whole, has been framed upon the assumption that when conduct is made a
contravention
of the Act, such conduct is limited to that which occurs in
Australia or to conduct to which the extraterritorial provisions apply.
respect of the ACL, s 5 of the CCA identifies the extent of its extraterritorial
operation such that, for conduct outside of Australia
to contravene any of its
provisions, that conduct must be within the scope of that section. That section
indicates that, generally,
the provisions of the legislation apply only to
conduct in Australia or to conduct outside of Australia where there is a
nexus between the relevant actor and Australia. It
5 Extended application of this Act to conduct
outside Australia
(1) Each of the following
provisions:
(a) Part IV;
(b) Part XI;
(c) the Australian Consumer Law (other than Part 5-3);
(f) the remaining provisions of this Act (to the extent to which they relate to
any of the provisions covered by paragraph (a),
extends to the engaging in conduct outside
Australia by:
(g) bodies corporate
incorporated or carrying on business within Australia; or
(h) Australian citizens; or
(i) persons ordinarily resident within
necessary implication of s 5 is that the Act, as a whole, applies to conduct in
Australia by, inter alia, the entities mentioned
in sub-paragraphs (g) to (i).
If the Act expressly extends its scope to the conduct of those entities engaged
in beyond Australian
territorial limits, it is axiomatic that their conduct
within Australia is also within the Act’s operational scope. It follows
that if an entity is carrying on business within Australia its conduct, either
within or outside of Australia, is subject to the
liabilities imposed by the
the purposes of this matter the issue resolves to one of the application of the
ACL to the conduct of Bertram in the manufacture
of the vessel in the United
States and as well as, or in the alternative, its provision of a warranty to Mr
Vautin in respect of
Revive. Bertram will be subject to the operation of the
ACL if relevant conduct occurred in Australia or if, at the relevant time,
carried on business in Australia. Here Mr Vautin contends that both connections
existed in 2011 and 2012 when the vessel was
supplied to Mr Vautin.
Conduct in Australia
respect to the submission that Bertram engaged in relevant “conduct”
in Australia, Mr Vautin relies upon the terms
of s 59 and s 271(5), the latter
of which gives an affected person a cause of action where a guarantee is not
complied with. It
(a) the guarantee under section 58 or 59(1)
applies to a supply of goods to a consumer; and
(b) the guarantee is not complied with;
an affected person in relation to the goods may, by
action against the manufacturer of the goods, recover damages from the
manufacturer.
Vautin’s first submission is that all that is required for Bertram to be
subject to the operation of the ACL is that there
has been a supply of goods to
the consumer and that such a supply does not need to be a supply directly by the
manufacturer (see
Spittles v Michaels’ Appliance Services Pty Ltd
[2008] NSWCA 76
(2008) 71 NSWLR 115
Handley JA at [14]). He submits that, here,
that requirement has been satisfied by the supply of the vessel by Eagle Yachts
submission should not be accepted. The question is one of the liability of an
overseas manufacturer who has sold goods in the
USA to Eagle Yachts and the
latter has imported them to Australia and supplied them to Mr Vautin. On a
proper construction of the
ACL the liability imposed on the manufacturer under s
271(5) does not arise merely by reason of the supply of the goods to a consumer
by some third party (such as a retailer). That alone is insufficient and, as
was identified in
Bray v Hoffman-La Roche Ltd,
the nexus with Australia
must be, at least, conduct by the manufacturer. Moreover, that relevant conduct
must be conduct in relation
to the relevant contravention and, indeed, it is
probably necessary that it relate to the gravamen of the statutory cause of
being pursued. In
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v
Valve Corp (No 3)
[2016] FCA 196
(2016) 337 ALR 647
Valve Corp (No 3)
) Edelman J
considered (for the purposes of a misrepresentation claim under the ACL) whether
statements made by the respondent on
the internet was conduct in Australia. His
Honour noted that in
Merkel J had recourse to comparisons
with the rules relating to the jurisdiction of a court when the question in
issue concerned where
a cause of action arose. The cases so considered, which
Voth v Manildra Flour Mills Pty Ltd
[1990] HCA 55
(1990) 171 CLR 538
Distillers Co (Bio-chemicals) Ltd v Thompson
[1971] AC 458
Jackson v Spittall
(1870) LR5CP 542, supported the proposition that
the test for determining whether a cause of action arose in the jurisdiction
ascertaining the place of “the act on the part of the defendant
which gives the plaintiff his cause for complaint”.
However, Edelman J
rejected that as the test for determining whether there was relevant conduct in
Australia. In relation to the
matter before him (being one of misleading
conduct) he agreed with French J in
Paper Products Pty Ltd v Tomlinsons
(Rochdale) Ltd (No 2)
[1993] FCA 430
(1993) 44 FCR 485
at 493, that the question of whether
there was relevant conduct in Australia would be answered by ascertaining
“where the conduct
relied upon took place”. His Honour concluded
that the conduct in question, being the making of the representations, occurred
in Australia. That conclusion was reached upon a consideration of all of the
circumstances surrounding their making.
his Honour had rejected the proposition that the test in
automatically applied in determining whether relevant conduct occurred in
Australia, he acknowledged that the common law
approach which was applied in
that case had occasionally informed the statutory approach. His Honour did not
formulate any test
for ascertaining the relevant conduct which must occur in
Australia before the ACL applies. That said, his close consideration of
circumstances pertaining to the making of the misrepresentations indicates he
was concerned with the conduct which was central
to the contravention of the
statutory prohibition, being the conduct which violated the statutory norms.
s 271(5) the liability of a manufacturer of goods arises where the guarantee
imposed by s 59 is not complied with. It might
be said, however, that a
necessary precondition to that is that the express guarantee had been given by
the manufacturer to the consumer
so as to enliven the operation of s 59. Here
Mr Vautin relies upon both the giving of the guarantee in Australia and the
to perform it here as being the relevant connections which cause s 59 to
have operative effect. He submits that either of these
are a sufficient nexus
for the operation of the Act.
relation to the “giving” of the warranty, it was uncontested that
the offer of a manufacturer’s warranty was
one of the selling points in
respect of the vessel (ts.190.43 – 191.4) and the warranty card was
provided to Mr Vautin in Australia
when the vessel was delivered. Under the
purchase agreement Eagle Yachts was obliged to provide the purchaser with all
the details
of the manufacturer’s warranties and do all things to enable
the buyer to have the benefit of such warranty. The undisputed
evidence is that
the warranty card was given to Mr Vautin by Mr Rodgers on 4 February 2012. Mr
Vautin immediately completed it and
returned it to Mr Rodgers who, in turn,
returned it to Bertram. By its terms the warranty was to commence from the
earlier of the
transfer of title to the yacht, or its delivery. In this case
that was apparently 4 February 2012 although the particular date is
not relevant
to the outcome.
manner in which the warranty was given to Mr Vautin as customer was in
accordance with the terms of the dealership agreement.
By cl 6.4 of that
agreement Bertram agreed it would furnish, through the dealer, its written
limited warranty at the time of the
delivery of the vessel to the dealer. The
dealer agreed to make the warranty known to the purchaser.
submitted that the granting of the warranty occurred in the United States
because the warranty would not come into effect
unless and until the warranty
card, as completed by the purchaser, was returned to it at its address in the
United States. It is
also said that the warranty was subject to the laws of
Florida with the result that it was “given” in Florida. This,
the argument goes, has the consequence that there was no conduct by Bertram in
Australia to bring it within the scope of s 59
is noted that the terms of the warranty contemplate the repairs will be carried
out by the dealer who sold the vessel to the customer.
Under the heading
“Procedures” the following words appear in relation to the effecting
of repairs, “The dealer
must obtain BERTRAM’s written approval
before repairing the yacht and must follow all applicable BERTRAM
procedures”.
That is an indication, which accords with the practice of
Bertram, that pursuant to the dealership agreements, the dealers would
the warranty repairs at the direction of Bertram and on its behalf. It was not
suggested that Bertram would only perform
its warranty if the vessel was
returned to Florida. Although it is not express in the warranty, it seems to be
necessarily implicit
that Bertram would undertake the repairs through its
dealers and return the remediated vessel to the owner where the owner is
these facts the question to be answered is whether, within the meaning of s 59,
any express warranty was made or given by Bertram
to Mr Vautin in Australia? In
this respect Bertram submitted that the proper law of the collateral agreement
pursuant to which the
warranty was given, is the law of Florida. Mr Vautin did
not contend otherwise. It might also be accepted, as Bertram submitted,
the agreement was made in Florida where the condition requiring the receipt of
the warranty card was fulfilled. However, the
matter raised by the statute is
where the warranty was “made or given”. Whilst it might be said
that, in the circumstances,
the making of the promise occurred where the
agreement was finally completed, being Florida, it does not necessarily follow
that is also where the promise was “given”.
59 refers to the manufacturer “giving” the warranty and that
connotes the bestowing of the benefit of the obligation
on the purchaser. In
ordinary parlance the word “give” is associated with the placing of
an item or thing in the possession
or in the hands of another person with the
added connotation that the recipient may keep the item as their own (see
Strouds Judicial Dictionary of Words and Phrases
2012, p 1211 and
Words and Phrases Judicially Defined,
Lexis Nexis, 2007,
p 1035). In the context of “giving a warranty” it would appear that
the undertaking of the obligation
of the person giving the warranty to act in
accordance with a promise to repair or keep harmless etc gives the person
receiving the
warranty the concomitant right to enforce that obligation. In
this way, to give a warranty appears to be to create and bestow on
right to enforce the obligation which is the subject of the warranty.
follows that, when he purchased Revive from Eagle Yachts, Mr Vautin was
“given” Bertram’s warranty in that he
received or obtained the
enforceable right to require Bertram to repair defects in the vessel. It is not
doubted that, at all relevant
times, Mr Vautin was relevantly in Australia and,
in particular, when he received from Bertram the enforceable right to require
repair of any defects in the vessel. That being so, it is difficult to
conclude other than that the vesting in him of a right to
require performance of
the warranty occurred in Australia. A conclusion that Mr Vautin was
“given” the warranty in the
United States has the obvious difficulty
that he was not, when the warranty was given, in the United States. Whilst it
case that the right to enforce the warranty was delayed or did not
crystallise until the Warranty Card was received in Florida, once
received, Bertram had “given” and Mr Vautin had received an
enforceable right to require Bertram undertake
repairs of any defects in the
vessel. The vesting of that right in Mr Vautin does not alter merely because
the arrangement which
gave rise to its existence materialised in the United
States or that the laws of Florida control or purport to control its
it was obviously within the contemplation of the parties that the warranty would
be performed by Bertram in Australia through
Eagle Yachts, that does not make
any difference as to where the warranty was “given” to Mr Vautin
within the meaning
of the Act. Nor is it relevant where the Warranty Card was
physically handed to Mr Vautin by Eagle Yachts on behalf of Bertram.
of the card to Mr Vautin merely afforded him the opportunity to perfect the
warranty obligations of Bertram by sending
the card back to it in Florida.
the parties made very limited submissions in relation to this important issue,
on the basis of the matters referred to above,
the warranty was
“given” by Bertram to Mr Vautin in Australia. This conduct by
Bertram had the effect of attracting
the operation of the ACL and, it follows,
that Bertram also became liable to Mr Vautin by reason of the statutorily
imposed guarantee.
the conduct which gives rise to liability under the ACL and, in particular, s
271 is not the giving of the warranty by the
manufacturer. All that does is
generate the additional statutory guarantee. The conduct which gives rise to
liability under s 271
is the non-compliance with that statutory guarantee and,
necessarily, the express warranty. The statutory norm which is sought to
remedied by an award of damages under s 271 is the omission to comply with the
obligations of the warranty which were given by
the manufacturer and replicated
as a statutory obligation. That non-compliance accords the consumer the right
to recover damages
from the manufacturer in respect of defectively manufactured
goods. The nature and scope of damages available are identified in
s 272(1) as
the reduction in the value of the goods resulting from the failure to comply
with the guarantee and any loss or damage
arising as a consequence of the
failure to comply with the guarantee.
the warranty (or guarantee) was not complied with in Australia. The terms of
the warranty contemplated that the repairs to
any vessel would be undertaken by
the dealer who had sold it and on behalf of Bertram. Further, the undisputed
evidence from Mr
Rodgers was that, at the relevant times, warranty repairs were,
in fact, undertaken in Australia by or through Eagle Yachts on behalf
Bertram. It appears that Bertram accepted the warranty was to be performed in
Australia by Eagle Yachts on its behalf. It follows
that the conduct which was
central to the violation of the statutory norms occurred in Australia and,
consistently with the approach
of Edelman J in
Valve Corp (No 3),
conduct is sufficient to attract the operation of the ACL. Although the failure
to comply with the warranty is a more surer
foundation for the attraction of
liability under the ACL, it does not follow that the “giving” of the
warranty by the
manufacturer was not, also, conduct which attracted its
above conclusion as to the operation of the ACL is coherent with the consumer
protection objectives and a contrary construction
would be likely to render
nugatory the rights of consumers to enforce, in Australia, manufacturers’
warranties which are provided
as part of the rights acquired on the acquisition
of goods in Australia and, no doubt, offered to induce purchasers to acquire the
products. Such a construction is also consistent with the observations of Mason
Devenish v Jewel Food Stores Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 7
(1991) 172 CLR 32
the Chief Justice (although referring to other sections of the TPA) identified
that legislation of a remedial character
should be construed so as to give the
fullest relief which the fair meaning of the words used will permit and that it
is reasonable
to assume that the Parliament intended that protective provisions
should be accorded the widest scope possible. Those comments,
although in a
dissenting judgment, have been referred to with approval in subsequent decisions
of the High Court such as
Deal v Father Pius Kodakkathanath
[2016] HCA 31
, 295 [36].
appropriate respect to the careful and thoughtful submissions of the respondents
on this point, it would be an unusual operation
of the ACL to conclude that a
manufacturer who gives to consumers in Australia a warranty in respect of their
goods which are supplied
in Australia that it will remedy in Australia any
defects in the product and fails to do so, falls outside of the Act’s
The offering of a manufacturer’s warranty is no doubt an
intended inducement to potential purchasers to acquire the product
in question.
That is more so in respect of goods which are marketed as “high end”
or quality goods which have been produced
by a manufacturer who propounds its
own reputation. Sections 59 and 271 facilitate the enforcement of
manufacturer’s warranties
where the manufacturer has failed to comply with
its agreement. Where that refusal to perform the warranty obligation has
in Australia, it is difficult to ascertain any reason why the CCA would
be construed in such a way as not to attach to such conduct.
regardless of the fact that the warranty may have been generated by an agreement
which was formed outside of Australia,
given by a company which was outside of
Australia and the warranty is governed by and enforceable under a foreign law.
The failure
to perform in Australia the promised obligations of warranty is
sufficient conduct to cause the statutory regime to apply.
should be noted that the above conclusion as to the operation of the CCA (and
ACL) does not create any obvious unfairness for overseas
manufacturers. On the
above construction they will only become liable under s 59 if they choose to
give to consumers of their products,
warranties in relation to the goods
supplied in Australia. The overseas manufacturer is not bound to offer
Australian consumers
any promise to repair any defects in the products which
they have produced. They are able to avoid liability potential under s 59
271 by simply not offering any warranty in relation to their goods which are
supplied in Australia. However, once they do
so, they cannot avoid the
operation of the consumer protection provisions of the ACL by making the proper
law of the warranty a foreign
law or making it enforceable in a foreign
Liability arising under ss 95 and 271
follows that ss 95 and 271 are engaged in this case because Bertram gave the
warranty to Mr Vautin in Australia and, or alternatively,
it failed to comply
with the terms of the warranty in Australia.
Whether Bertram carried on business in Australia?
the alternative to the above, the CCA and ACL apply to the warranty given by
Bertram because Bertram carried on business in Australia.
The above discussion
concerning the operation of s 5 of the CCA regarding the extraterritorial
operation of the CCA shows the Act
applies to a foreign corporation carrying on
business here.
was much dispute about whether Bertram carried on business in Australia during
the course of the openings in this matter. However,
the evidence of Mr Rodgers
as to the conduct of Bertram’s employees and agents in Australia in
negotiating the sale of their
vessels, in controlling the advertising of
Bertram’s products, and in controlling the performance of its warranty
obligations
tended to remove most of the doubt around this issue.
the respective openings the submissions concerning the issue of whether Bertram
carried on business in Australia were confined
to those activities which
appeared to be non-contentious, being those matters arising out of
Bertram’s obligations under the
exclusive dealership agreement with Eagle
Yachts. In support of the submission that these facts were sufficient to
establish that
Bertram was carrying on business in Australia, reference was made
to, first, the obligation imposed by Bertram on Eagle Yachts to
Bertram’s limited warranty card at the time of the delivery of the product
to the customer (clause 6.4); second, the
obligation of Eagle Yachts to provide
service facilities under Bertram’s limited warranty to any Bertram yacht
owner regardless
of where in the world the yacht may have been purchased (see
clauses 4.2 and 4.9); and, last, Eagle Yachts’ obligation to promote
Bertram’s products in accordance with Bertram’s approved materials
(see clause 4.1). These topics were the subject of
the decision of Rares J in
Vautin v BY Winddown Inc (No 2)
[2016] FCA 1235
(Vautin No 2)
which concerned an application by Bertram to set aside the service of these
proceedings on it or for a stay of them. Based upon
these matters his Honour
reached the conclusion that Bertram’s acts which were designed to advance
its goodwill in Australia,
amounted to the carrying on of business in Australia
for the purposes of s 5(1)(g) of the CCA. It should be kept in mind that in
that matter his Honour was only considering whether there existed a
case that Bertram was carrying on business in Australia and,
necessarily, his Honour’s conclusions were based upon limited
information.
facts as they have emerged at trial more solidly support the conclusion that
Bertram relevantly carried on business in Australia.
In this respect the
evidence which was given by Mr Rodgers under cross-examination was rather
compelling. For an extended period
of time Mr Rodgers was a director of Eagle
Yachts and aware of its business dealings with Bertram during the period of the
dealership agreement and its continuation after the contractual expiry
date. Amongst other matters relating to the activities of
Bertram in Australia,
Mr Rodgers identified the following:
Bertram approved all advertisements and publications relating to Bertram Yachts
in Australia. During the period of the exclusive
dealership there were many and
substantial advertising campaigns;
(b) representatives
of Bertram attended in Australia regularly, being yearly, to represent Bertram
at annual boat shows. There were
three main boat shows in Australia and they
were located at the Gold Coast, Sydney and Perth. The Bertram representatives
United States would, during the course of these boat shows, be located
on or around the Bertram vessels and would engage in conversations
prospective purchasers and advise those persons of the benefits and attributes
of the vessels. In essence they would promote
the sale of Bertram vessels;
(c) at the boat
shows Bertram representatives would take the lead in attempting to sell the
vessels to the clients. They would explain
the variety of options that were
available to prospective customers;
(d) the pattern
of attendance of the Bertram personnel at the three annual boat shows continued
over the eight year period of the
relationship between Bertram and Eagle
(e) representatives
of Bertram would bring to Australia marketing material for use in marketing the
vessels. Such materials included
glossy brochures relating to particular
models. Bertram also sent such brochures from the United States to Australia
Eagle Yachts;
(f) at the boat
shows and generally, Eagle Yachts’ obligation in relation to selling the
vessel was to promote the benefit of
the manufacturer’s warranty in
relation to the vessel. Under the dealership agreement its obligations to
purchasers of Bertram
vessels was to bring the warranty to those
purchasers’ attention and to provide them with the warranty cards;
(g) apart from
attending boat shows, Bertram representatives came to Australia for other
purposes, including purposes relating to
the fulfilment of Bertram’s
warranty obligations. Mr Rodgers referred to occasions when Bertram
representatives came to Australia
to inspect hulls of vessels and, in
particular, the hulls of the Bertram 630 models where delamination had
(h) that he had
regular contact with Bertram in the United States in relation to marketing
issues, the notification of new models
of boats and in relation to warranty
claims and repairs;
(i) in relation
to contact with Bertram more generally, he was aware that Eagle Yachts was not
able to undertake repair work pursuant
to a warranty claim unless and until it
was authorised by Bertram. He identified that over time there were many
warranty claims
made and acknowledged that at the end of the dealership
agreement there were a number of outstanding warranty jobs to be fulfilled.
Rodgers gave evidence to the effect that there was regular contact between
Bertram and Eagle Yachts to ensure that the latter
had an entitlement to
undertake repairs;
(j) for the
duration of the eight year relationship, Eagle Yachts was focussed exclusively
on the sale of Bertram vessels. Indeed,
he acknowledged that the name of Eagle
Yachts was derived from Bertram’s symbol;
(k) the sales
and service manuals provided by Bertram to Eagle Yachts, a copy of which was
tendered, was reissued periodically and
it contained detailed instructions from
Bertram as to how the Bertram products were to be marketed;
(l) Bertram
kept a tight control on marketing and repair services. Mr Rodgers also
identified that the engagement of Eagle Yachts
for the purposes of servicing
Bertram Yachts was to ensure the development of goodwill for Bertram in
Australia. He acknowledged
that it was part of Eagle Yacht’s business to
build up the Bertram brand in Australia.
has been discussed above, Bertram gave to the purchasers of vessels a warranty
in relation to defects in the vessel. Amongst other
matters, the terms of the
warranty included the following:
The Limited Warranty
Bertram Yachts, Inc.
(“BERTRAM”) warrants, subject to the limitations below, to the first
retail purchaser of this yacht
(“First Owner”)
First Owner completes, signs and returns the BERTRAM Warranty Registration Card
to BERTRAM at the address below by certified
mail, return receipt requested,
within ten (10) days of the First Owner’s purchase of the yacht, and any
properly registered
subsequent owners, that it will repair or replace defects in
(a) items manufactured by BERTRAM for two (2) years, and (b) the yacht’s
hull and its fiberglass structural components for five (5) years. These
warranties run from the earlier of the date title is transferred,
delivery of the yacht, to the First Owner. Unless prohibited by applicable
state law, legal claims relating to any alleged
problem with this yacht will be
barred unless suit is commenced within one (1) year from the date the cause of
action accrues, regardless
of the time remaining in the applicable warranty
BERTRAM’s Obligation
. BERTRAM’s obligation is solely and
exclusively limited to repairing or replacing, at its option, any covered items
by BERTRAM to be defective at a facility designated by BERTRAM. The
foregoing is the Owner’s SOLE and EXCLUSIVE REMEDY. Repaired
or replaced
items shall be warranted as provided herein for the remainder of the applicable
warranty period. Defective parts or
components that are replaced shall
thereupon become BERTRAM’s property.
The authorities concerning “carrying on a
Valve Corp (No 3)
Edelman J also considered the alternative proposition that
the CCA applied because Valve Corp was “carrying on business in
Australia”.
There, his Honour referred to the observations in
where Merkel J considered that the expression in s 5(1)(g), “carrying
on business”, should be broadly interpreted in the
light of its purposes
of consumer protection. Merkel J identified that, for the purposes of the
operation of the TPA, the legislature
recognised that comity required that there
be a nexus with Australia in relation to any acts occurring outside of Australia
were to be brought within the scope of the Act. That was in the form of
citizenship, residence by a person or a corporation, or
the carrying on of
business by that corporation. Thereafter, Edelman J observed (at
As his Honour concluded, the ordinary meaning of
“carrying on business” usually involves (by the words
on”) a series or repetition of acts. Those acts will
commonly involve “activities undertaken as a commercial enterprise
nature of a going concern, that is, activities engaged in for the purpose of
profit on a continuous and repetitive basis”:
Thiel v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
[1990] HCA 37
(1990) 171 CLR 338at
[1990] HCA 37
94 ALR 647at
654 (Dawson
Pioneer Concrete Services Ltd v Galli
[1985] VicRp 68
[1985] VR 675at
[1985] VicRp 68
235 (the Court);
Hope v Bathurst City Council
[1980] HCA 16
(1980) 144 CLR
[1980] HCA 16
29 ALR 577at
582 (Mason J; Gibbs, Stephen and Aickin JJ
that passage Edelman J’s emphasis was on the concept of “carry
on” within the phrase under consideration. It
is apt to keep in mind that
there is a difference between “engaging in” business in a place and
“carrying on”
business there. The latter requires the repetition of
acts which are usually in the nature of commercial activities and which possess
something of a permanent character (see
Hope v Bathurst City Council
[1980] HCA 16
(1980) 144 CLR 1
, 8). Additionally, as Gibbs J said in
Luckins (Receiver and
Manager of Australia Trailways Pty Ltd) v Highway Motel (Carnarvon) Pty Ltd
[1975] HCA 50
(1975) 133 CLR 164
, 178, carrying on a business usually connotes at least
“the doing of a succession of acts designed to advance some enterprise
the company pursued with a view to pecuniary gain”.
above authorities were considered by Rares J in
Vautin No 2
, in respect
of a leave to appeal application concerning
BY Winddown Inc v Vautin
[2016] FCAFC 168
(2016) 249 FCR 262.
His Honour concluded that the activities of Bertram in
requiring Eagle Yachts to provide service facilities to all owners of Bertram
Yachts in respect of all warranty claims regardless of where the vessel was
acquired and in requiring Eagle Yachts to provide the
warranty card to
“first use purchasers” from Eagle Yachts, were sufficient to justify
the conclusion that Bertram was
carrying on business in Australia. His Honour
said at [50]:
Bertram engaged in a succession of acts designed to
advance Bertram’s overall worldwide goodwill, including its goodwill in
Australia, and to promote sales of its products by being able to offer persons
who purchased those products from whichever dealer,
or other source as the
original purchaser of a newly manufactured yacht, the ability to obtain service
for those yachts throughout
the world, including from Eagle Yachts in Australia:
144 CLR at 8;
133 CLR at 178. Accordingly, I am
satisfied that Bertram did carry on business within Australia for the purposes
Competition and Consumer Act
Conclusion as to carrying on business in Australia by
would respectfully agree with the conclusion of Rares J and there is nothing in
relation to the facts as they emerged more clearly
at trial which might diminish
its force. The actions of Bertram through Eagle Yachts in relation to the
provision of the warranty
cards to purchasers, the provision of service
facilities to Bertram owners and the enforcement of Eagle Yachts obligation to
Bertram vessels by use of Bertram approved materials was sufficient to
reach the conclusion that it carried on business in Australia.
the evidence at trial disclosed significantly more numerous repetitive business
activities by Bertram in Australia during
the relevant period. Importantly,
many of these activities were undertaken by it directly rather than indirectly
through Eagle Yachts
as its dealer. The evidence of Mr Rodgers, which is set
out above, discloses the carrying on of business in Australia by Bertram
occurred through additional repetitive business activities designed to advance
its overall worldwide goodwill and promotion of sales.
Bertram had control of
the advertising of its products in Australia by regulating any advertisements
and publications relating to
its vessels. Its employees and agents regularly
attended in Australia over the relevant eight year period to engage in the
negotiation for sale and sale of its vessels. Bertram by its agents
brought into Australia promotional material to use to generate
sales and sent
similar material from the United States. It provided detailed instructions to
Eagle Yachts as to how the vessels
were to be marketed. Bertram’s
employees also regularly attended in Australia for the purpose of overseeing
issues relating
to the fulfilment of its warranty obligations and it generally
supervised the undertaking of warranty repairs by regular contact
Yachts as its agent to carry out those repairs. In other words, Bertram, by
itself, engaged in a succession of various
acts in Australia in relation to the
sale, promotion and servicing of its vessels which acts were designed to advance
its overall
goodwill in Australia and to promote its sales with a view to
pecuniary gain.
follows that the evidence, as it emerged at trial, shows that independently of
the matters relied upon by Rares J, Bertram engaged
in conduct that amounted to
the carrying on of business in Australia. On either basis, or taking the two
sets of activities together,
I find that in the period during the dealership
agreement as it was extended and at all times relevant to the events in this
Bertram carried on business in Australia. For that reason also,
Bertram’s conduct in the giving of the warranty and its failure
with its terms, was subject to the operation CCA and the ACL.
Conclusions on liability under the ACL
the above, it is possible to reach some conclusions as to the liability of the
various respondents pursuant to the provisions
of the ACL.
Eagle Yachts
mentioned there is no real dispute that, when it was supplied, Revive was not of
an acceptable quality as a result of the construction
defects. On the basis of
the matters identified above I find that is so. The delamination in the bow
section of the topside, which
did occur, had the result that the vessel could
not be used in ordinary conditions for extended periods, let alone the
which a Category A vessel should be able to meet. Accordingly, it
was not fit for all of the purposes for which goods of that kind
were commonly
supplied, it was not free from defects, nor was it safe and it was not durable.
Consequently
Eagle Yachts failed to comply with the statutory warranty imposed by s 54 of the
that basis Mr Vautin is entitled to enforce certain of the statutory remedies
against Eagle Yachts as are provided for in Subdivision
A of Division 1 of
of the ACL.
respondents submit that in the calculation of the damages or in the
determination of whether Mr Vautin is entitled to relief under
259(3)(a), the
vessel would be of an acceptable quality once the areas where delamination has
occurred are repaired. However, on
the facts as found above, even if the
delamination on the topsides was repaired, as is suggested, the vessel would not
be of an acceptable
quality. The same conclusion is reached in relation to the
scenario if the whole of the topsides were repaired. Given the existence
defects which have reduced the shear strength, the decking and the
superstructure by around 50% and, or alternatively, that it
is known that
sandwich core panels constructed in the manner in which they have been will
delaminate after constant exposure to forces,
the vessel is not fit for use in
the all of the conditions which a Category A vessel should handle, it is not
free from defects and
nor is it safe or durable.
being so, at the time of the supply, the vessel was not of acceptable quality
even if the topsides had been repaired in whole
or in part. Section 54 of the
ACL will not be complied with on either scenario.
the same reasons, at the time of supply, Revive was not fit for the purpose
which had been disclosed, being that of ocean going
voyaging, such that there
was a breach of the warranty imposed by
of the ACL.
gave to Mr Vautin an express warranty that it will repair or replace defects in
(a) items manufactured by BERTRAM for two
(2) years, and (b) the yacht’s
hull and its fiberglass structural components for five (5) years. By reason of
the operation
of s 59 there was also a statutory guarantee to that effect. As I
have found above, the construction defects in the sandwich core
“defects” within the meaning of the express warranty. They are in
the hull and superstructure manufactured
by Bertram. Those defects render the
vessel unfit for purpose and that remains the position even if the delamination
was repaired.
Vautin called upon Bertram to comply with its obligations under the warranty
which it gave, namely to rectify the defects in the
hull and fibreglass
structures of the vessel. Bertram did not comply with the warranty which it
gave and, it follows, did not comply
with the statutory guarantee. As appears
from the events in 2014 and 2015, it is apparent that Bertram assiduously sought
compliance with the warranty it had given. In the result, Bertram has
failed to comply with its warranty and the statutory guarantee
imposed by s
addition, the Revive did not comply with the statutory guarantees imposed by s
54 with the result that Bertram is liable under
s 271 for the damages suffered
by Mr Vautin in that respect as well.
Relief under the ACL
nature of the relief to which Mr Vautin is entitled depends on whether there has
been a “major failure” to comply
with a guarantee. If the failure
was a “major failure” he had a right under s 259(3) to reject the
The failure to comply with the guarantees were “major
260 identifies the circumstances in which a failure to comply with a guarantee
is a “major failure”. In the present
case, based on the above
findings as to the condition of Revive when it was supplied, the failures to
comply with the guarantees
under ss 54 and
were “major failures”.
That is true regardless of whether the delamination of the topsides was repaired
or even if all
of the topsides was repaired. In either state:
would not have been acquired by a reasonable consumer fully acquainted with the
nature and the extent of the defects.
The nature of the defects in the vessel
are so serious that no purchaser of acquainted with them would have acquired it.
As identified
below, no purchaser would have acquired the vessel at any price
given the extent of the defects.
(b) Revive is
unfit for the purpose for which vessels of that nature are commonly supplied;
being ocean going voyaging and fishing.
The defects cannot be remedied within
a reasonable time. To properly repair the vessel will take an inordinate amount
(c) Revive is
unfit for the purpose for which it was acquired and which was made known to
Eagle Yachts, namely ocean going voyaging
and it cannot be easily repaired
within a reasonable time to make it fit for that purpose;
(d) Revive is
not fit for purpose because the defects make it unsafe.
Rejection of the vessel
Vautin has purported to reject the vessel. He purported to do so by a letter to
Eagle Yachts from his solicitors dated 16 March
2016. Eagle Yachts assert that
he is not entitled to reject the vessel because he took possession of the vessel
on about 5 March
2012 and he ought to reasonably have become aware of the
relevant defects around the time of the receipt of a report from NavSafe
in November 2014. That report identified that there were substantial
manufacturing defects in the hull of the vessel and
warned of potentially
catastrophic damage unless the vessel was repaired immediately. Eagle Yachts
seems to also submit, as an alternative,
that after receipt of the report from
Mr Dovell in late 2015, Mr Vautin was fully aware of the nature and extent of
the defects in
the vessel such that he ought to have then rejected it then
rather than waiting for three months and just prior to the commencement
litigation.
262 provides limitations upon the entitlement of the consumer to reject goods.
Relevantly for present purposes, a consumer
is not entitled to reject the goods
where the “rejection period” has ended or they have been attached to
or incorporated
in any real or personal property and they cannot be detached or
isolated without damage. The “rejection period” is obscurely
defined in s 262(2) as being “the period from the time of the supply of
the goods within which it would reasonable to expect
the relevant failure to
comply with a guarantee referred to in section 259(1)(b) to become
apparent”. The reasonableness of
the time is determined by having regard
(a) the type of
(b) the use to
which a consumer is likely to put them; and
(c) the length
of time for which it is reasonable for them to be used; and
(d) the amount
of use to which it is reasonable for them to be put before such a failure
becomes apparent.
can immediately be noticed that the section contains an apparent anomaly in that
the “rejection period” ends on the
day on which it would be
reasonable to expect the relevant failure to become apparent. Once that time
has expired the goods can
no longer be rejected. It follows that a consumer
must know of the failure
the time when it is reasonable that the
failure to comply with the guarantee becomes apparent, so that the rejection can
occur before
that period. It is not likely that this consumer protection
provision operates in accordance with the literal meaning of the words
the legislative draftsman.
must be kept steadily in mind that the “relevant failure” referred
to in the definition of “rejection period”
is not solely the
existence or manifestation of the defect in the goods. The failure is the
failure of the goods to comply with
the statutory guarantee. Whilst in many
cases the existence of an apparent defect will have the consequence that it can
discerned that a guarantee has not been complied with, that will not
always be the case. A good may contain some form of defect
although it may not
render it unfit for any disclosed purpose. Further, whilst the consequences of
a defect in goods may become
manifest, it may not be immediately apparent that
the manifestation is of a defect as opposed to some other issue. It may take
time before a consumer might be able to ascertain that the cause of a
problem with the goods is the failure of a supplier to comply
with a statutory
Nesbit v Porter
[2000] NZCA 288
[2000] 2 NZLR 465
Yachts relies upon the decision of the New Zealand Court of Appeal in
[2000] NZCA 288
[2000] 2 NZLR 465
Nesbit v Porter
) in support of its
submission that the period in which Mr Vautin might have rejected the vessel had
expired prior to his sending
his letter of rejection. That case concerned the
acquisition by Mr and Mrs Nesbit of a used, four-wheel drive utility motor
from the respondent, Porter Motors. Five months after taking possession
the Nesbits became aware of certain defects in the car.
They approached Porter
Motors seeking to return the car or to be refunded the cost of the repairs,
however, they did not receive
a response. The Nesbits unsuccessfully pursued
Porter Motors through the Motor Vehicle Dealers Institute which rejected their
on the basis that the vehicle was a commercial vehicle. Some nine months
after the supply of the vehicle and after it had travelled
more than 16,000kms
the Nesbits purported to return the vehicle. The matter proceeded to the
District Court which disallowed the
claim on the basis that the vehicle was not
within the description of having been acquired for personal, domestic or
household use
or consumption, the consequence of which was that the Nesbits were
not “consumers” within the meaning of the
Consumer Guarantees Act
. The Court of Appeal overturned that finding and the question
then considered was whether, in the circumstances, the Nesbits were
entitled to
return the vehicle. In particular, the Court dealt with the question of whether
the Nesbits lost the right to do so
because it was not returned within a
“reasonable time” within s 20 of the
Consumer Guarantees Act
Specifically, a period from the time of supply of the goods in which it would be
reasonable to expect the defect to become apparent
having regard to the
enumerated matters.
is to be noted that the legislation considered in
Nesbit v Porter
slightly different terms to the ACL. Under the
Consumer Guarantees Act
the question concerned when “the defect” became apparent.
The correlative issue under the ACL is more complex because
it requires a
determination of when it would be reasonable for the failure to comply with a
guarantee to become apparent. Where
a matter involves the failure to comply
with the guarantee of acceptable quality, issues of qualitative assessment arise
is substantially different to merely identifying whether a good has a
defect or is lacking in durability. However, despite the
terms of the
Consumer Guarantees Act
, the Court of Appeal determined that the
reference in the Act to “defect” must have meant “any failure
to comply with a guarantee of acceptable quality” (see paragraph
[33] of the reasons of the Court).
relation to the operation the s 20 the New Zealand Court of Appeal made the
following observations:
(a) The defect
or failure is that which is actually encountered by the consumer;
(b) The period
must be reasonable in relation to the defect or combination of defects causing
the buyer to reject the goods; (at [35])
(c) Whilst the
actual experience of the consumer in relation to the circumstances of
experiencing the defect are relevant, the matter
is one tested against objective
criteria. In particular, the length of time which is reasonable for the goods
to be used is tested
on the objective criteria and not on the actual usage of
the goods by the consumer; (at [35])
general rule, the period during which it is reasonable to detect the defect is
longer in relation to new goods than is the
case in relation to used goods,
although that will vary depending upon the type of goods and the usual manner in
which they might
be used; (at [36])
reasonable time for the detection of defects may also depend on whether regular
inspections of the goods are likely as in the
case of a motor car; (at
(f) The fact
that under the Act a consumer may return goods to a supplier after there has
been a failure by the supplier to remedy
a defect does not extend the length of
time of the rejection period and nor does the consumer making complaints or
taking other action
against the supplier; (at [38])
(g) In relation
to the determination of what is a “reasonable time” in relation to
non-compliance with a qualitative deficiency
in the goods the Court said (at
A reasonable time under s20 [s 54 in the
ACL] must accordingly be one which suffices to enable the consumer to become
fully acquainted
with the nature of the defect, which, where the cause of a
breakage or malfunction is not apparent the consumer can be expected to
taking the goods to someone, usually and preferably the supplier, for
inspection. In this context, therefore, a defect is not
until its cause has been identified and the buyer knows what has to be done to
fix it, and what that will
cost; in other words, until the buyer is in a
position to determine whether the defect is substantial.
(h) A reasonable time does not elapse until the consumer has had the opportunity
to become “properly informed about the nature
of the defect and has also
had a little time then to consider an appropriate decision, whether or not to
reject the goods.”
(at [40]). (The logic and pragmatism of allowing a
consumer “a little time” after the detection of the non-compliance
in which to reject the goods is undeniable, although it has no foundation in the
literal reading of s 20 of the
Consumer Guarantees Act
or s 262 of the
Nesbit v Porter
, the defects relied upon were extensive rust and problems
with the steering box and shock absorbers, which were latent but became
a little more than six months after acquisition. The Court considered that the
vehicle was an aging vehicle of more than
11 years old, of uncertain history and
with no warranty given as to the correctness of the odometer readings. The
ordinary use of
such a vehicle is for heavy off-road driving and the ordinary
life span of the car was somewhat limited. In those circumstances
that it could be expected that the vessel would be used immediately and for
extensive periods, it was reasonable to expect
that the latent defects would
become apparent relatively soon after supply and a motor dealer should be free
of any obligation to
take back the vessel after a period of six months (being
around the time of the mandatory fitness check). Their Honours said at
In our view the motor vehicle dealer should generally be
freed from the burden of having to accept rejection of a vehicle of this
pedigree after the time for the next mandatory six monthly Warrant of Fitness
check has passed. If, at the latest, a defect
of the kind found in the Navara
has not manifested itself on such an inspection, it would be an unfair burden
upon the supplier if
a buyer of such a vehicle, which must be assumed to have
been in daily use, sometimes in rough conditions, should thereafter be able
reject it. Bearing in mind, however, that most people do not have their vehicles
tested until the six month period is expiring,
there is a need for some latitude
to give time to decide whether to exercise that right.
Court did, however, consider that a longer time might be appropriate in relation
to defects which were unlikely to be revealed
by a vehicle check or which was
difficult to resolve. Ultimately, it held that the rejection period expired
prior to the purported
return of the car.
can be observed that although the Court of Appeal held that “defect”
equalled non-compliance with a guarantee, it did
not seem to maintain the
distinction between a defect simpliciter and the non-compliance with a guarantee
in the course of its reasons.
The Court appeared to be generally concerned as
to when the physical manifestation of a defect arose. This appears to be a too
restrictive reading of the terms of the legislation. What s 20 of the
Consumer Guarantees Act
required (according to the construction of the
Court of Appeal) and what is required by s 262, in relation to the rejection
is ascertaining the time when it would be reasonable to expect that the
right to claim that a statutory guarantee has been breached
has become apparent.
Knowledge of the defect in the goods or even the cause of the defect is not
necessarily sufficient. The relevant
question focuses upon the failure of the
goods to meet the terms of the statutory guarantee and when that non-compliance
must also be remembered that, in relation to the non-compliance with the
requirements of s 54, the issue of non-compliance concerns
the state of the
goods at the time of supply. It does not concern the state of the goods at some
later time when the defect manifests
itself. Therefore, where a latent defect
results in the manifestation of a deficiency in the goods at some subsequent
element in it becoming apparent that the guarantee in s 54 was not
complied with is knowledge that the defect, which was latent in
the goods at the
time of the supply, was causative of the manifested deficiency. That is
particularly relevant in the circumstances
of the present case.
The relevant failure
the definition of “rejection period” the expression “relevant
failure” is used. That latter expression
must mean that “major
failure” to comply with a guarantee on which the consumer relies or is
entitled to rely to reject
the goods. Where the manifestation of the failure to
comply with a guarantee is patent, the period in which it would be reasonable
expect it to become apparent will be relatively short and easy to identify.
Where the item acquired does not work at all and
the cause of that is the
failure of the product rather than the manner of its use, it can be readily
inferred that there has been
a failure which is the result of the goods not
being of an acceptable quality. Different considerations arise where the defect
the goods is latent and the defect does not manifest itself for some period
of time. Indeed, even when the latent defect does manifest
itself, it may not be
clear that the cause is the failure to comply with a guarantee. Additionally,
even when a latent defects manifests
itself to some degree and the cause is
known, it may not be apparent for some time thereafter how the latent defect
will, if at all,
further manifest itself or what are the consequences of its
existence. In
Nesbit v Porter
the Court of Appeal (NZ) determined that
the “reasonable time” for identification of the failure included
time for the
consumer to become aware of the nature and extent of the defect and
what it will cost to fix it. That is, until these matters are
known it cannot
be said that the failure to comply with a guarantee has “become
use of the expression “become apparent” in s 262(2) is also
problematical. Something is apparent when it meets the
eyes or shows itself, is
open to sight, visible or plainly seen (Oxford English Dictionary, online
service). Or, as the Macquarie
Dictionary defines the word, “capable of
being clearly perceived or understood; plain or clear”,
“ostensible”
or “exposed to sight; open to view”. In
other words, the section requires a sufficiently high level of certainty in
relation to the knowledge of the relevant failure including its nature and
extent and what it will cost to remediate it. If the
level of knowledge
required is as identified above, it follows that if there exists doubt about the
consequences of a defect in an
item and, therefore, the cost of repairing it,
the failure of the statutory guarantee has not become apparent. The
circumstances
of the present case provide an example. In general terms Mr
Dovell asserts that, in order to make the vessel safe and capable of
for all of the purposes for which such a vessel is commonly used, it would be
necessary for all of the panels to be repaired.
That includes those comprising
the decking and the superstructure as well as those on the topsides where no
delamination has occurred.
On the other hand, Mr Hutchings asserts, and has for
some time, that if the topsides where the delamination has occurred are
the vessel could be put to most of the uses to which such vessels are
commonly put. Although I have preferred the evidence of Mr
Dovell, that
conclusion on the balance of probabilities, is not equal to a conclusion that
knowledge of the defective construction
throughout the vessel made it
“apparent” that there had been failure to comply with a guarantee at
the time of supply.
Additionally,
Mr Hutchings agreed that the degree to which the shear capacity of the panels
might be diminished could be ascertained
by the destructive testing of a number
of panels (see Mr Hutching’s report of 13 April 2017 at paragraphs 5.23
and 5.26 and
ts 271 and ts 283). This, he said, would involve removing a sample
of them from the vessel and testing them individually. Mr Stanyon,
asserted that such a course would require the dismantling of the entire shell of
the vessel as most of the panels were of
different shapes and so all would have
to be tested to ascertain their actual strength and that the vessel would end up
(ts 290). In other words, as at the date of the trial there existed a
difference of opinion by experts as to the ability to ascertain
the extent of
the structural deficiencies arising from the defective construction. That fact
alone would suggest the extent of the
defective nature of the vessel is still
not apparent. I have accepted, on the balance of probabilities, that the
evidence of Mr
Dovell and Mr Stanyon is to be preferred on this topic, namely
that all of the defectively constructed panels have a reduced shear
capacity of
s 262 of the ACL that one would reasonably
expect that the extent of the failure
to comply with the guarantee (being the extent of the deficiency) was
at any particular time.
the above can be added the fact that, although Mr Stanyon and Mr Dovell agree on
the reduction in the shear capacity of the panels
consequent upon their
defective construction, they differ on the consequence of that reduction. Mr
Stanyon gave evidence to the
effect that (if the delamination in the prow was
repaired) the vessel might be used in most of the conditions for which a
A vessel was constructed. Mr Dovell disagreed and considered that
without all of the panels being rectified, the vessel remained
unsafe and not
fit for ordinary use. Although I have accepted Mr Dovell’s evidence on
this topic there were, nevertheless,
substantial, conflicting expert opinions.
It follows that there existed and continues to exist differing opinions as to
the consequences
of the construction defects in the vessel. If one returns to
the issues in
Nesbit v Porter
for the purposes of identifying that point
in time when it would be reasonable to expect that the amount which it will cost
to remediate
the vessel would be apparent, it is possible that it is still not
“apparent” in the sense of being visible or clearly
perceived or
understood. It is also still not “apparent”, in the sense in which
the word is used, that the vessel can
be remediated short of the reconstruction
of all the panels.
was submitted by the respondents that Mr Vautin has failed to make reasonable
efforts to secure the construction drawings for the
vessel and that a
consideration of these drawings would have enabled a more clear determination to
be made as to the structural integrity
of the vessel. As has been indicated
above, Bertram has refused to provide those drawings to Mr Vautin despite his
requests. A
notice to produce was served upon Bertram requiring that it produce
these documents, but it has failed to do so without providing
any explanation
for that refusal. Bertram and Eagle Yachts submitted that Mr Vautin might have
acquired them from RINA although
there is no evidence that the documents would
be released to him. I find that the failure to obtain these documents does not
the respondents in this matter.
might have been argued that the rejection period ends under s 262 once it is
reasonable to expect that the relevant failure can
be seen to be a “major
failure” within s 260. On such a construction, at that time the consumer
will be aware that the
defect is serious and they would be entitled to return
the goods. However, such a construction tends to confine the rights of
and it is not consistent with
Nesbit v Porter
. Even where a
consumer has become aware of the existence of a major failure and the right of
rejection, they are still entitled
to ascertain the nature and extent of the
defect and how much it will cost to repair, before being put to an election.
The circumstances
of this case provide good reasons why this is so. Here Mr
Vautin was obviously desirous of owning a Bertram 700 vessel and he paid
amount of money to acquire one. Although the defect in the vessel became
apparent after some 20 months of ownership and
the cause of the defect (the
defective construction) soon thereafter, there remained much doubt about the
extent of the defect, the
effect of the defect on the usefulness of the vessel
there was also much doubt as to the amount of money that it would take to put
the vessel into a useable condition. There is nothing in the section which
compels the conclusion that prior to that point in time
where Mr Vautin can be
reasonably aware of these latter matters, the rejection period would have ended.
One might ask rhetorically,
why should a consumer be required to elect between
returning the goods or repairing them prior to that point in time when they are
in a position to make an informed choice. That would appear to be the approach
Nesbit v Porter
where the Court of Appeal held that the
failure to comply with the guarantee was not apparent prior to that point in
time where the
extent of the defect is known as well as the cost to fix
Application of the to the circumstances of the present
considering the duration of the rejection period it is necessary to have regard
to the matters enumerated in s 262(2). However,
those matters do not have a
great impact in the circumstances of this case and none of them tend to shorten
the period greatly, if
fact that Revive is an ocean going game fishing vessel suggests that it would be
extremely durable and it would not be likely
that structural defects, or the
consequences of structural defects, would appear within a short time after
supply. Such matters
are only likely to appear after the vessel is used over a
period of time. That is especially so when it is considered that Revive
very expensive vessel and regarded as being “top of the range”.
vessel was used for the purposes for which it was made, being game fishing and
cruising. It is not suggested that it was used
for purposes other than those to
which it might usually be put. It was also not suggested it was used in a more
conservative manner
than is likely for a vessel of this nature such that it took
longer for the defects to arise. The reference in s 262(2)(c) to the
time for which it is reasonable to use the vessel appears to be a reference to
the length of time which a vessel of that
nature might be used on one occasion
or in the ordinary manner in which such vessels are used. In either case, there
in the circumstances of this case which suggests that Revive was
overused on a single occasion or that it was not used in an ordinary
was not suggested that the vessel was used less than vessels of this nature are
ordinarily used. A consumer is likely
to use a vessel of the nature of Revive
on a periodic basis. As a vessel acquired for personal or domestic purposes it
is not intended
to be used on a commercial basis such that it would be used more
frequently. Here, it is not suggested that the time taken for the
consequences
of the construction defects to appear was other than to be expected in the
ordinary course of events.
of the above matters suggests that, in the circumstances of this case, the
rejection period ended prior to March 2016 when Mr
Vautin sent his letter
rejecting the goods.
Conclusion on whether the failure to comply with the
guarantee was apparent
necessary conclusion from the above is that the existence of the nature and
extent of the latent defects in the vessel and the
consequential failure to
comply with the guarantees were not fully apparent before the letter of
rejection was sent. The consequential
lack of shear capacity of the sandwich
core panels is still not apparent, even if it can be determined on the balance
of probabilities
that there has been a reduction of around 50%. The extent to
which the vessel needs to be repaired in order to make it of an acceptable
quality and, therefore, the cost of necessary remediation is also not
“apparent” within the terms of the section. At
the very least
neither matter was “apparent” before the trial commenced. In this
situation the failure to comply with
the relevant guarantee (being a guarantee
on which the consumer might rely to return the goods) was not apparent as at the
Vautin gave notice of his rejection of the vessel on 16 March 2016, which was
shortly prior to the action being commenced. That
being so the rejection of the
goods was within the “rejection period”.
The loss of the right of rejection due to attachment to
personal property
paragraphs 70 to 72 of its written submissions, Eagle Yachts asserts Mr
Vautin’s right to reject the vessel was lost by reason
of the operation of
s 262(1)(d). That sub-section provides the right to reject the goods is lost
the goods have been attached to, or incorporated in, any
real or personal property and they cannot be detached or isolated without
damaging them.
foundation of Eagle Yachts defence in this respect was twofold. First, that Mr
Vautin caused a marlin tower to be attached to
Revive and, second, that he
caused parts of the engine to be chromed. Somewhat curiously, there was very
little evidence adduced
at trial in relation to this defence. That curiosity is
ameliorated to some extent when it is recognised that a defence based upon
262(1)(d) it is not raised in either of the filed defences. All that is relied
upon by Eagle Yachts in its defence is the effluxion
of time. It is, perhaps,
for that reason that no direct evidence was called by Eagle Yachts to the effect
that the removal of the
marlin tower or the chrome from the engines would damage
the vessel or its parts, though there was some cross-examination of Mr Vautin
relation to the former.
his submissions in reply, Mr Vautin asserts that the respondents carry the onus
of satisfying the Court of the matters that support
the allegation that he lost
his right of rejection. I accept that submission. The issue sought to be
agitated by the respondents
is in the nature of a defence to Mr Vautin’s
claim that he be entitled to reject the vessel pursuant to s 259(3). If the
were the subject of a pleading one would have expected it to have been
raised by the respondents and facts would have been asserted
which supported a
conclusion that s 262(1) applied. Given the structure of s 252, Mr Vautin has
the onus of showing that the failure
is a “major failure” or cannot
be remedied and that they have notified the supplier that they have rejected the
and of the grounds of the rejection. Although s 259(3) is expressed to be
“subject to section 262”, it is for a respondent
who asserts that
the consumer is not entitled to reject the goods to plead and prove the facts in
one or more of s 262(1)(a) to (d).
It does not appear that it is an essential
element of the consumer’s cause of action under the ACL to negate the
of the matters in s 262(1). Those matters constitute good defences
which will avoid the claim which an applicant
prima facie
has (see the
comments of Walsh JA in
Currie v Dempsey
(1967) 69 SR (NSW) 116
Murray’s Transport NSW Pty Ltd v CGU Insurance Ltd
(2013) 118 SASR
, 14-15; [6] – [8]).
s 262(1)(d) is concerned with the separation of the goods supplied from, inter
alia, other goods “without damaging”
the goods supplied. In this
respect I accept Mr Vautin’s submissions that there is no evidence that
the removal of the marlin
tower will cause damage to Revive. The vessel was
sold with plates fitted such that a tower might be added to the vessel and one
was fitted at a cost of approximately $200,000.00. Whilst there is no doubt
that the removal of the tower might require the electrical
wiring of the vessel
to be returned to its original state there is nothing in the evidence which
would suggest that this might cause
damage to the vessel. Eagle Yachts was not
able to make good its submission in this regard.
there is no evidence at all that the chrome cannot be removed from the engines
on the vessel without damaging them. Mr
Prince, for Eagle Yachts, put to Mr
Vautin that the chroming of the engines made a significant change in their
appearance. He did
not, however, suggest that the removal of the chrome would
cause any damage. Eagle Yachts has not made out this defence which, in
event, was not pleaded.
the result, Mr Vautin was not prevented from rejecting the goods on the basis of
the matters referred to in s 262(1)(d).
Returning the vessel to Eagle Yachts
Yachts submitted that Mr Vautin has not rejected the vessel because he has not
returned it pursuant to s 263(2). In response
Mr Vautin submits he is not
required to return it to Eagle Yachts because of the exception in s 263(2)(b)
which provides:
(2) The consumer must return the goods to the supplier
(b) the goods cannot be returned, removed or
transported without significant cost to the consumer because
(i) the nature of the failure to
comply with the guarantee to which the rejection relates; or
(ii) the size, height, or method of attachment of the goods.
of the difficulties in this matter is that in December 2013, Eagles Yachts
closed its office on the Gold Coast. Thereafter, its
only business premises
were in Perth, Western Australia. There was no disputing that once the
delamination of the vessel had occurred
Revive could not be sailed to Western
Australia under its own steam. Indeed, it could only be used in calm, inland
waters. It is
also evident that the vessel was too large to be transported by
road due to its size. That seems to be axiomatic given that it was
in excess of
70ft long. The Revive may have been shipped to Perth although the evidence was
that would have cost in the vicinity
of $200,000.00. On any view, that is a
“significant cost” within the meaning of s 263(2)(b).
the nature of the failure to comply with the guarantee as to acceptable quality,
as well as the size and height of the
vessel, had the result that it could not
be returned to Eagle Yachts because it could not be returned or transported
without significant
costs. For those reasons it was not necessary that the
vessel be physically returned to Eagle Yachts.
paragraph 79 of its written submissions, Eagle Yachts asserts that Mr Vautin
might have returned the vessel to it by simply transferring
title and handing
over the keys to it. It cited no authority for that proposition and none has
been able to be located. Section
263(2) requires the physical return of the
goods and not the retransferring of title as the submission would suggest. This
is apparent
as s 263(6) provides that title to the goods is transferred to the
supplier on the notification of the rejection. No authority was
support of the submission that the handing over of keys to the vessel would have
been sufficient to return physical possession
of the vessel to Eagle Yachts.
That might amount to the return of the keys and perhaps title to the keys, but
it says nothing as
to the returning of the possession of the vessel itself.
There is no validity in the submission that the return of a set of keys
vessel or vehicle is the equivalent of returning the vessel itself. Whilst it
may possibly be a symbolic gesture on the part
of a consumer indicating an
intention to pass title it is not, however, an act by which the goods are
physically returned to the
follows that, in the circumstances of this matter, the operation of s 263(2) had
the effect that Mr Vautin was not required to
physically return the vessel to
Eagle Yachts. Consequently, s 263(3) had the effect of obliging Eagle Yachts to
collect it within
a reasonable time and at its expense. It is not contested
that it has failed to do so. By Mr Vautin’s letter of rejection
vessel dated 16 March 2016, he sought a refund of the purchase price which he
had paid. Pursuant to s 263(4) Eagle Yachts
was obliged to pay that amount to
Mr Vautin. That would include a sum representing the value of the vessel which
he used as part
payment for Revive. In total that amount was $4,200,000. It is
not disputed that Eagle Yachts has not paid that amount to Mr Vautin
entitled to judgment for an equivalent amount.
Deferral of the obligation to return the vessel
the conclusion of the trial Mr Vautin sought an order that he not be required to
return Revive or, more accurately, allow Eagle
Yachts to take possession of it,
until he receives the repayment of the purchase price. He did so because he was
concerned that
Eagle Yachts might become insolvent such that, if he returned the
vessel, his only right would be to participate in its winding up.
His concern
in this regard was well placed. Since the hearing Eagle Yachts has, indeed,
been placed into liquidation. An application
was made by Mr Vautin for leave to
proceed against it despite the winding up and such orders were granted. On one
view that might
be said to increase his desire to retain possession of the
vessel pending repayment of the purchase price lest he is in a worse position
than he is now. To some extent that submission is inconsistent with his
submission that, in its present state, the vessel is of
no commercial worth. If
the vessel were worth something his concern would be well founded, however, as I
have found that the cost
of repairing it is greater than its present as-is
value, he is not likely to be in any worse position if no such order is
Vautin seeks the orders in question pursuant to s 237 of the ACL which is the
descendent of s 87 of the TPA. Whilst that is a
broad power, it is limited by s
237(2) which requires that the Court be satisfied that any order made under it
will compensate the
injured person or prevent or reduce the loss or damage
suffered or likely to be suffered (see
Awad v Twin Creeks Properties Pty
[2012] NSWCA 200
Ferraro v DBN Holdings Aust Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAA 1127, [23] – [26]). In that latter decision, Besanko J
was concerned that the power in the section not be used
for the purposes of
affording a creditor increased rights in the liquidation of the supplier than
the Act envisages.
the present circumstances the only benefit to Mr Vautin by the making of the
order is to effectively generate a security for him
which he might propound in
the winding up. That is not within the intention of s 237. Moreover, the case
as agitated by Mr Vautin
was that the vessel was of no commercial worth and,
indeed, was a constant drain on his resources given the cost of maintaining it.
Those submissions have been accepted. That being so, the making of the proposed
order could not reduce the losses which Mr Vautin
is suffering and I decline to
Damages claim against Eagle Yachts for breach of ss 54 and
General propositions in relation to damages
the basis of the above findings Eagle Yachts has breached the statutory
guarantee of acceptable quality (s 54) and fitness for
disclosed purpose (s 55)
and Mr Vautin is entitled to recover damages against it pursuant to s 259.
Section 259(3) makes provision
for the consumer to reject the goods where the
failure to comply with the guarantee is a “major failure” or to
compensation for any reduction in the value of the goods below
the price paid or payable by the consumer for the goods”. Further,
259(4) makes provision for the recovery of additional consequential damages.
That sub-section provides:
(4) The consumer may, by action against the supplier,
recover damages for any loss or damage suffered by the consumer because of
failure to comply with the guarantee if it was reasonably foreseeable that the
consumer would suffer such loss or damage as a
result of such a
relation to consumer protection, the move by the legislature from the implied
term approach, as had been the case in the
Sale of Goods Acts
Trade Practices Act 1974
to the statutory guarantee
approach would appear to have altered the nature of the relief to which a
consumer is entitled where defective
goods have been delivered. Under the
former “implied term” regimes the consumer would have been entitled
to the contractual
measure of damages following upon a breach of a term. That
is, they would have been entitled to be put into the position which they
have been had the supplier complied with the implied term. If the effect of
pre-contract negotiations were to the effect that
the goods to be supplied were
to be of a particular quality, or might be used for a particular use, the
implied term regime operated
to impose the obligation of the supplier to meet
those specifications. If the supplier fell short, it was obliged to pay damages
which would, as far as money might do it, put the consumer into the position
they would have been in had the implied term as to quality
been performed or
met. The consumer would be entitled to “expectation losses” and
that is so even where the supplier
had made a bad bargain.
new scheme of statutory guarantees in the ACL appears to have abandoned that
regime in favour of one which apparently imposes
standards of normative
behaviour in relation to the quality of goods produced by manufacturers and
supplied by suppliers. The damages
available for breaches of the guarantees
indicate the relief to which a consumer is entitled is that which reverses any
of the consumer’s economic position by reason of the failure of
the guarantee. Where the failure to comply is a “major
failure” the
consumer is entitled to, effectively, rescind the agreement and recover the
consideration which was paid (see
s 259(3)(a)). Alternatively, the consumer is
entitled to retain the goods in question and recover an amount that represents
difference between the price paid for the goods and the value of the goods
(see s 259 (3)(b)). Presumably this difference is one
which is attributed to
the failure of the goods to comply with the guarantee although that is not
specifically stated in the sections.
It might also be presumed that the
difference is measured as at the date of supply which is the relevant date to
consider when ascertaining
whether there was a failure to comply with the
addition to the right to return the goods or to damages representing the
diminution in value, the consumer is entitled to recover
loss or damage suffered
“because of” the failure to comply with the guarantee if that loss
was reasonably foreseeable
(see s 259(4)). This second limb of damages appears
to cover those losses which are sustained consequent upon the acquisition of
defective goods. The scope of that “head of damage” would include
property loss which has occurred as a result of
the defective goods (such as
where a faulty electrical appliance causes a house to burn down); the cost of
attempting to ascertain
the defects in the goods; or, the cost of preserving the
goods. It would appear that this sub-section is concerned with the recovery
“reliance losses” as the inclusion of the limitation of
“reasonable foreseeability” pertains to such losses
rather than
expectation losses. Section 259(6) makes it clear the remedy for recovery of
damages caused by the non-compliance with
the guarantee is in addition to the
alternative remedies of returning the goods or recovering an amount that
represents the diminution
in value of the goods.
Damages claims consequent upon the rejection of the
Vautin pursues his damages claim in various ways. First, he claims that he is
entitled to reject the vessel, recover its purchase
price and obtain damages
under s 259(4) for the losses he has sustained consequent upon the existence of
the construction defects.
Whilst there is no doubt he cannot obtain more than
his actual loss such that “double recovery” is impermissible, there
is nothing in s 259(4) to suggest a consumer cannot recover under it if they
have suffered loss or damage by reason of the failure
of a guarantee which is
not compensated for by the return of the purchase price. Here, the primary
relief sought is for the repayment
of the purchase price which I have determined
is available to Mr Vautin. That being so, he is not entitled to recover any
in the value of the vessel by reason of the existence of the breach
of the guarantee. However, where loss has been sustained an
applicant in the
position of Mr Vautin is entitled to recover consequential damages under s
259(4). In that respect he claims damages
for loss of use and enjoyment of the
vessel, loss of expenses incurred in relation to the vessel, loss of the value
of certain additions
to the vessel and for the cost of its upkeep and
maintenance.
Alternative claim for damages
second basis on which Mr Vautin advances his damages claim is an alternative
one. He submits (at paragraph 145 of his written
submissions) that, if he is
not entitled to reject the vessel, then he is entitled to the following
(a) Compensation
in the amount of the reduction in the value of the vessel below the price paid
and contributed by him for the vessel
(or alternatively the cost of
(b) Damages for
diminution in the value of the vessel;
(c) Damages for
loss of enjoyment of the use of the vessel since 19 November 2014;
(d) The cost of
upkeep and maintenance of the vessel (including mooring and insurance) and the
lost expenditure incurred in relation
to the vessel since November 2014 when it
ceased to be useable.
should be kept in mind that some of the claims for consequential loss are
available to Mr Vautin regardless of whether or not he
rejected the vessel. The
ability to recover other consequential losses will depend upon whether or not
the right to reject the vessel
was, as has been found, effectively
Entitlement to refund consequent upon rejection
Vautin is entitled to be refunded the purchase price of the vessel as from 16
March 2016 when he sent his letter of rejection.
The purchase price was, in
Australian currency, $4,233,801.03.
Cost of shipping to Australia
vessel was shipped to Australia from Florida at Mr Vautin’s cost of
$75,000. Necessarily that cost of acquisition has been
lost by reason of the
fact that he rightly rejected the vessel. It is not an amount which would not
be recoverable as damages if
Mr Vautin had lost the right of rejection.
Damages if the right to reject had been lost
I have determined that Mr Vautin has effectively exercised the right to reject
the vessel, it is convenient at this stage
to consider the primary loss which he
would have sustained had the contrary been found.
The value of Revive at time of supply if the defects were
at the date the vessel was delivered it was newly constructed and it can be
accepted that it was worth its purchase price of $4,233,801.03.
The contrary
was not suggested by any party and the contract to acquire it appears to have
been an arm’s length transaction.
As will be discussed below, the value
of these types of vessels depreciates rapidly over time and a determination of
its value as
at the date of trial needs to take into account that decline in
value. However, such questions of depreciation are not relevant
to its value
when it was brand new. That being so a relatively rough calculation can be made
as to the value of the vessel as at
the date of supply on the assumption that
the putative purchaser would have been aware of the existence of the defects in
as well as the cost of remedying them. On the basis that the total
cost of putting Revive into the condition of a Category A vessel
$2,995,505.70 (as is discussed below),
prima facie
, its value as at the
date of supply was no more than the purchase price less that amount or
approximately $1,238,295.33.
that calculation assumes that at the date of supply the putative purchaser would
have known what the defect was, how it would
manifest itself, the nature and
extent of the defect, and the cost of remediating the defect. As I have
indicated above, those matters
do not encompass the full extent of the nature of
the defects of which a purchaser, fully acquainted with the vessel, would be
The notional purchaser would also be aware that it contained a latent
defect which might take some time to manifest itself, that
a significant but
uncertain amount of time would be required to ascertain what had caused the
damage and further significant time,
also uncertain in duration, would be
required to ascertain the nature and extent of the construction defect and the
amount which
would be required to repair it. By reason of that, the notional
purchaser would also know that the vessel would be out of service
extended time, would require mooring, maintenance and upkeep expenses to be paid
and its value would significantly depreciate
during that period. It is not
conceivable that a purchaser who was acquainted with these matters would not
take them into account
in determining the price which they would be willing to
pay for the vessel. Of these items the value of the vessel lost by depreciation
caused by the effluxion of time whilst the vessel was unusable would amount to
$1,270,140 (which is discussed below). On a straight
calculation that would
reduce the value of the vessel to nil, however, it is not clear that such a
calculation can be made and there
is no evidence before the Court as to how a
potential purchaser would approach the acquisition of Revive were they to have
informed of the nature and extent of the defects. That is a matter
for expert evidence and none was adduced.
and accepting that a broad-brush approach is necessary in the assessment of
damages, it is not appropriate for the Court
to hazard a guess as to the
valuation figure of Revive at the date of sale. That is a matter on which the
Court requires expert
evidence and none was adduced at trial. The best that can
be done on the evidence which was adduced is to conclude that, at the
the supply, Revive's value was, at the most, the purchase price less the cost of
undertaking the necessary repairs to render
it fit as a Category A vessel or
$1,238,295.33. The amount of the diminution in value of the vessel is equal to
the cost of repairs
at $2,995,505.70.
The present value of Revive
was, however, some evidence of Revive’s value at the time of trial when
taking into account the known defects. That evidence
came largely from the
cross-examination of Mr Rodgers who was experienced in the sale of vessels of
this type (at ts.200 –
Yes. Thank you. Now, if you were trying to sell the
Revive in its current condition to somebody else and you had knowledge of the
existence of detailed reports by a senior naval architect indicating it needed
extensive repair, you would, of course, have to disclose
all of that material to
any potential purchaser?---I would have to advise the potential purchaser of the
issues - - -
Yes?--- - - - that I’m aware of, yes.
Yes. And it would be, to put it politely, a very unattractive prospect to a
potential purchaser to look to purchase a boat with what
a naval architect had
described as very extensive manufacturing defects; correct?---Correct.
Potential purchasers in this industry, as I think we’ve already
established, want comfort about safety and structural reliability,
not?---That’s correct, yes.
Your expectation is that told of the existence of extensive structural
impairment, a purchaser would walk away – a potential
purchaser wanting to
take the boat into the open ocean with passengers, crew, etcetera, would simply
walk away and say, “Try
and sell me something which doesn’t have
that history”?---In the – in the context of the vessel being in that
situation, yes.
Yes. The vessel with those defects is a white elephant, to put it colloquially;
correct?---Well, that – that’s pretty
of Mr Rodgers’ evidence as to the expectations of potential purchasers of
vessels of the type of Revive has been identified
above in relation to the
question of whether Revive was of an acceptable quality. The failure of the
vessel to meet those standards
is self-evidently relevant to the vessel’s
value and his conclusion that, in its current state, it is worthless is somewhat
axiomatic. Mr Rodgers was not challenged in any way in respect of this evidence
and I accept his conclusion, although not directly
expressed, that the vessel
was not saleable in its current condition for use as a motor vessel. No party
sought to suggest that
the vessel had any salvageable value. It is not possible
to assume it did. Although it might be accepted that parts of the vessel
as the engines and other mechanical parts might have some value, there is no
evidence that the cost of removing, reconditioning
and selling the same would be
worth anything to any party.
Rodger’s conclusion – that a potential purchaser wanting to take the
boat into the open ocean with passengers, crew
and guests would simply walk away
from the vessel such that its value is nil – can be supported by other
evidence before the
Court. By the time of trial Revive was a number of years
old and, merely by the effluxion of time, it had depreciated in value.
had been constructed in 2009. Moreover, it required extensive repair work to
put it into a condition whereby it could
be safely used in the ocean. Any
potential purchaser who was prepared to assume the risk of undertaking the
repair work to make
it seaworthy would necessarily assess its existing value
against the remediation costs.
this respect it can be concluded that the present value of Revive is nil as the
cost of repairing Revive to bring it up to a Category
A state, would exceed its
current market value (absent any defects) in any event. The evidence about this
was also somewhat sparse
and, again, it came from Mr Rodgers. He gave evidence
to the effect that vessels of this nature will halve in value after about
or seven years and that is especially so given that the manufacturer’s
warranty will have expired (ts.185 – 188).
In giving that evidence he
made references to the sale of other Bertram vessels similar to Revive. That
evidence was substantially
unchallenged and I accept it. It is consistent with
his evidence that in 2015 a Bertram 700 vessel (like Revive) which was about
years old sold for $2.5million (ts.187). In the present case Revive was
acquired in 2011 for approximately $USD4.2million.
If it had been constructed
and supplied in compliance with the statutory guarantees, by the time of trial
it will have depreciated
by approximately 50% and so be worth around $2.1m.
Given the evidence is that the cost of putting it into a condition whereby it
will be of an acceptable quality will be $2,995,505.70, the cost of repairing it
exceeds its value once restored. Again, this evidence
was not seriously
contested. This supports Mr Rodgers’s evidence to the effect that Revive
is unsaleable because of its present
the result, I find that given the existence of the construction defects in the
sandwich core panels in Revive, its present value
is nil. That said, I am
unconvinced the present value of the vessel is directly relevant to the
compensation to be awarded in this
Loss of enjoyment of the vessel
Vautin also seeks to recover damages for the loss of enjoyment of the vessel
although very little attention was paid to this head
of damage in the written
submissions and no relevant authority cited in support of it. It might be
accepted that an award of general
damages might be made in some limited
circumstances to compensate for a breach of a promise to provide enjoyment or
pleasure or to
prevent harassment, vexation or annoyance (see generally
[1946] HCA 54
(1946) 74 CLR 127
Stone v Chappel
(2017) 128 SASR 165
187 [85]). However, the rule remains that damages for non-pecuniary losses are
not generally available in contract claims save
where the contract in question
had, as its object, the provision of enjoyment, relaxation and freedom from
molestation. In
Baltic Shipping Co v Dillon
[1993] HCA 4
(1993) 176 CLR 344
Mason CJ identified the general rule as being:
it is preferable to adopt the rule that damages for
disappointment and distress are not recoverable unless they proceed from
inconvenience caused by the breach or unless the contract is one the
object of which is to provide enjoyment, relaxation or freedom
molestation.
In that case the contract was for the provision of a “pleasure
cruise” and it was considered that one of the contract’s
objects was
to provide enjoyment and relaxation. As a result, damages were awarded for
it can be accepted that Revive is colloquially referred to as a “pleasure
craft” and it is conceivable that some
people may derive pleasure and even
enjoyment from its use, the contract of the sale was merely for the delivery of
and transfer
of title to a boat. It may well have been within the contemplation
of the parties that the vessel would be used by Mr Vautin for
the purposes of
deriving pleasure, however, the provision of enjoyment or pleasure was not the
object of the agreement. That being
so, damages for loss of enjoyment are not
available to Mr Vautin for breach of contract and for similar reasons they are
not available
under the ACL.
Loss of use of boats and ships
the other hand, it should be recognised that the loss of use of a non-profit
making chattel such as a boat or ship has been regarded
as compensable as part
of general damages. In
Yates v Mobile Marine Repairs Pty Ltd
, Palmer J considered the situation whereby the repair of the engines
of a pleasure craft, being a 58ft game fishing vessel, had been
negligently with the result that they were damaged and the vessel was unable to
be used for approximately a year. The
owner of the vessel claimed damages for
loss of use of the vessel. In his reasons Palmer J held that damages for loss
the vessel were available as part of an award of general damages even
though the chattel in question was not used for profit making.
In so doing his
Honour relied upon the speech of Lord Halsbury LC in the House of Lords in
Owners of the Steamship “Mediana” v Owners, Master & Crew of
Lightship “Comet”
“The Mediana”
, 117. There, the Lord Chancellor (at 116) stated what he perceived to be
the general principle for recovery of damages in tort as
being, “that
where by the wrongful act of one man something belonging to another is either
itself so injured as not to be capable
of being used or is taken away so that it
cannot be used at all, that of itself is a ground for damages.” In that
plaintiff was the Mersey Docks and Harbour Board whose lightship,
“Comet”, was sunk by the steamship Mediana. The Comet
was used by
the plaintiff Board to fulfil its statutory duty of lighting the approaches to
the river Mersey. Whilst the Comet was
out of action, the Board used one of its
reserve vessels (which was not required for any other use) to undertake the work
which would
have been undertaken by the Comet. The question was whether the
Board was entitled to damages for loss of use of the Comet even
though it was
not a profit-making chattel? It was held that where a person, by a wrongful
act, deprives another of the use of their
chattel, the person so deprived is
entitled to recover damages for that loss of use and that is so regardless of
the use to which
the owner of the chattel might have put it. The position would
be different if special damages were sought. However, where loss
sought as part of general damages, the amount is what the arbiter of fact
considers to be the “the proper equivalent
for the unlawful withdrawal of
the subject-matter then in question” (at 118).
not dissimilar situation arose in
Admiralty Commissioners v SS Susquehanna
[1926] AC 655
, where an oil tanker, the
used by the
Admiralty to fuel Navy vessels, was damaged in a collision with the
respondent’s steamship. The Admiralty was
required to use one of its
standby vessels in substitution for the
. Neither the
nor the replacement vessel would have been used as charter
vessels at the relevant time. In allowing the claim for loss of use the
of Lords held that damages should not be assessed on the footing that the oil
tanker was a commercial vessel, but on the basis
of rates of interest and
depreciation which might justify the award. In that calculation Viscount
Dunedin observed that it was necessary
to take into account when assessing an
amount for general damages the cost of capital used up in the remediation of the
circumstances
created by the wrongful act. The purpose of this is to ensure the
award, so far as money can do it, will compensate for the detriment
the whole of the circumstances, was imposed on the party who has been deprived
of the use of the goods. This approach
was said to be applicable to actions in
tort and contract. Lord Sumner identified the foundation of the principle as
All the same the
services during the
time of repair were lost, and accordingly the principle of
may be applied, with such rates of interest and depreciation as the
evidence may justify. In other words, the loss of user for the
time of repair,
in effect, made the
then capital value infructuous for the time
being, even though by special effort more benefit was got out of other ships, in
other capital was invested, than would otherwise have been the
decision of the House of Lords in
Admiralty Commissioners v SS Chekiang
[1926] AC 637
, which was delivered on the same day as the decision in
Admiralty Commissioners v SS Susquehanna
, considered a substantially
similar issue. There, one of the Admiralty’s cruisers had been injured in
a collision and she
was laid up for 21 days whilst she was repaired. One issue
in the case was the correct measure of damages for the loss of use of
vessel. Whilst Viscount Dunedin and Lord Sumner acknowledged that such damages
might be calculated on the basis of a percentage
of the capital cost of the
vessel per day during which the vessel could not be used (at 640), they held
that this was not the only
method of calculating such damages.
above Admiralty decisions were cited by the House in
Dimond v Lovell
[2002] 1 AC 384
, 406 for the proposition that even where a chattel is
non-profit earning, there may be scope for allowing general damages for loss
use. A similar principle has been applied in Australia in
Anthanasopoulos v
[2001] NSWCA 266
(2001) 52 NSWLR 262
, 273-4, [58].
follows that where a vessel suffers depreciation for the period during which she
is laid up, the owner is entitled to recover an
amount (as part of general
damages) to compensate for the depreciation in the value of the ship during that
The Hebridean Coast
[1961] AC 545).
Consort Express
Lines Ltd v J-Mac Pty Ltd (No 2)
[2006] FCA 833
(2006) 232 ALR 341
, 356, [87] Rares J
referred to
The Hebridean Coast
when identifying the following
With a nonprofit-earning ship, if no harm were proved
apart from the mere fact that the owner is deprived of her services during the
period of repairs, the court awards damages based on interest and depreciation
on the value of the ship
seems to be no difference in principle in this respect between damages in tort
and damages in contract as was identified by
Viscount Dunedin in
Commissioners v SS Susquehanna
. Whether the damages are to restore the
wronged party to the position which they ought to have been in had the contract
been performed,
or if the wrong had not occurred does not matter, the principle
remains the same. They are designed to compensate for the loss of
vessel. In any event, the damages recoverable under s 259(4) appear to be in
respect of tortious damages or reliance
losses, rather than expectation losses
such that the cases concerning damages for property damage would appear to have
a direct relevance.
follows that general damages might be awarded for loss of use of a non-profit
making chattel such as the Revive for the period
during which the wrongful act
has caused it to be unusable or its value to be “infructuous”. Here
there is evidence
that vessels like the Revive is one, depreciate at an
effective rate of approximately 10% of the original purchase price per annum.
Mr Rodgers gave evidence to the effect that a vessel like Revive will decrease
in value by about 50% over five or six years (ts.187)
being a reduction of
between 10% to 8.3% of the original purchase price each year. That was not
challenged in any way by either
of the respondents and I accept that evidence
although I readily accept that it is a somewhat broad brush approach.
this case, the failure to comply with the guarantees was the consequence of a
latent defect in the vessel which was incorporated
during construction. It was
not immediately detectable and, even when it manifested in delamination, the
nature and extent of the
failure to comply with the guarantee and the cost of
remediation has taken some years to become ascertainable. In rough terms that
was from November 2014 to the time of trial in October 2017, being about three
years. The loss of use continues to this day. That
being so, by reason of the
failure to comply with the guarantees given by Eagle Yachts (and by Bertram) Mr
Vautin has been denied
the use of his vessel for that period of time. Taking a
broad-brush approach, I adopt the higher rate of 10% and limit the period
three years such that an amount of $423,380 per annum or a total amount of
$1,270,140 should be allowed as general damages for
the loss of use of Revive
for the period of approximately three years.
Rejection of goods is inconsistent with damages for loss of
Compensation
for loss of use of a vessel as part of general damages is appropriate because
the owner has lost the entitlement or ability
to utilise the vessel and the
degree of depreciation suffered by the vessel during the period which the vessel
is “infructuous”
is an acceptable measure of the loss. It
represents the capital value of the vessel which the owner has not been able to
However, where due to the defect, the owner is entitled to recover the
purchase price of the defective vessel they are restored
to their original
economic position so far as their capital assets are concerned. Here, Mr Vautin
rejected the goods and became entitled
to a refund of the full purchase price
and that is not consistent with an award of general damages for loss of use.
conclusion from the above is that if Mr Vautin had not rejected the goods, he
would have been entitled to recover the sum of $1,270,140
as damages for loss of
The cost of upkeep, mooring and insurance
Mooring fees, insurance etc
addition to the other claims for a refund of the purchase price or damages, Mr
Vautin seeks to recover as damages the costs which
he has had to expend on
maintaining the upkeep of the vessel. There was little in the way of dispute by
the respondents as to the
by Mr Vautin pursuant to s 259(4). In relation to such damages there are
periods of loss which have to be considered. The first are the losses to the
date on which the vessel was rejected, being 16
March 2016 and, second, the
period thereafter. Whilst it may have been the case that once the notice of
rejection had been given
title re-vested in Eagle Yachts such that the onus of
maintaining the vessel fell on it, it refused to take possession of the vessel
and it denied Mr Vautin’s entitlement to reject it. In that situation of
uncertainty it cannot be said that the cost of the
continued upkeep of the
vessel, including insurance and mooring fees and the like, were not appropriate
expenses nor that the loss
caused by the making of that expenditure was not
reasonably foreseeable as the result of the non-compliance with the guarantees.
Neither of the respondents seriously contested that the losses caused by the
expense of the maintaining of the vessel should not
be allowed for the period
after the date on which Eagle Yachts ought to have retaken possession of the
must be kept steadily in mind that the situation which arose is one where Mr
Vautin found himself in possession of a vessel which
he could not use to any
great degree. Certainly, he could not use it for the purposes for which he
acquired it. This situation
existed because Eagle Yachts and Bertram had
breached the guarantees imposed upon them under the ACL. At no time did either
acknowledge
their liability as I have found it to be. Neither took possession
of the vessel for the purposes of maintaining it pending the resolution
dispute. It follows that, having acquired, and come into possession of the
vessel, Mr Vautin was required to maintain it
and it is apparent he maintained
it in immaculate condition. He cannot be criticised for doing that.
Necessarily,
the cost of insuring the vessel pending the resolution of the dispute was a loss
caused by the breaches of the guarantees
and was reasonably foreseeable as
arising from them. The expenditure is a loss because it was wasted as Revive
could not be used
for that extended period. A sum of $89,580.10 ought to be
allowed for the cost of insuring the vessel during the period from November
the expense incurred by Mr Vautin in the maintenance and upkeep of the vessel
during this period is a loss to him arising
because of the breaches of
warranties by Eagle Yachts and Bertram. I accept the amounts claimed by Mr
Vautin in the schedule to
his submissions as evidenced by the documents in the
joint bundle. There was little if any disputation as to the expenditure and
was there any serious argument that such losses did not occur because of the
breach of the guarantees.
being so I allow the amount of $217,499.91 in relation to the claim for the
wasted costs of maintenance and upkeep incurred,
and wasted, as a result of the
failure of the vessel to comply with the statutory guarantees.
Cost of full time manning of the vessel
Vautin has also sought to recover the cost of manning the vessel. For the
period in question he employed a full time captain,
Mr Bradshaw. He claims that
this expenditure was necessary for the purposes of maintaining the vessel. He
seeks to recover an amount
of $260,007.67 in this respect which represents the
cost of employing Mr Bradshaw on a full time basis since November 2014.
evidence about this issue was somewhat thin from all parties. Mr Vautin
asserted Mr Bradshaw was required to keep Revive in perfect
condition so that it
would be available for him to go out in it at any time (ts 138). However, it
was apparent that from 2014 it
could not be used in the manner Mr Vautin wished
to use it and he did not use it. Whilst there is little doubt that a vessel of
nature requires a significant amount of attention, I was not convinced on
the balance of probabilities that Mr Bradshaw’s full
time attention was
required for the vessel. It would appear that Mr Vautin sought to keep on a
good employee to whom he had provided
employment and he was reluctant to
terminate his engagement. Although the evidence was sparse, on that which is
available, I find
that in order to adequately maintain the vessel in the
relevant period would require a part-time employee working two thirds of the
time of a full time employee. For that reason I allow the sum of $173,333.45
for this head of damages.
Cost of upgrades
Vautin claims the cost of the upgrades which he has made to Revive. It seems
that the basis of this claim is that the benefit
of the upgrades will have been
lost to him because vessel became unusable and he has now rejected the goods.
The damages claimed
in this respect would not be available if Mr Vautin had not
rejected the vessel.
Upgrades provided by Eagle Yachts
addition to the vessel as per the contracted amount, Eagle Yachts sold a number
of additional upgrades to Mr Vautin. These included
an additional electronics
package, hydraulic crane, swim platform and a custom mast. The total cost of
all of these additional items
for the vessel was $232,200.38. The loss of the
vessel includes the loss of these additional items and it was not seriously
that the cost of these elements would not form part of the losses
sustained in circumstances where the vessel is returned.
Marlin tower
next item in respect of which loss is claimed concerns the Marlin tower which
was installed on the vessel. The difficulty in
relation to this claim is that
Mr Vautin has argued, and I have accepted, that it can be removed without
causing damage to the vessel.
He is entitled to do that and he will be left
with the parts of the tower when the vessel is returned. The amount of claimed
in the sum of $205,067.75, was not explained in any detail in the course
of oral or written submissions on behalf of Mr Vautin.
The Court was provided
with a bundle of documents representing this item of damage and a perusal of
them discloses that the significant
portion of the cost involved in the
installation of the Marlin tower is in the labour rather than the component
parts even if the
latter are not without their expense. No attempt was made to
show that the parts of the Marlin tower once removed from the vessel
without value or had lost value once installed. Although a broad brush approach
to the assessment of damages is the established
method, some evidence is
required before a court can act. A court is not entitled to merely guess a
residual value for the Marlin
tower. Again, in the face of somewhat thin
evidence on this topic and the lack of explanation by Mr Vautin in his
submissions, doing
the best that I am able, I assess the wasted cost of the
installation of the Marlin tower at the labour cost of installing it at
$130,000.00 in round figures.
Upgrades added by Mr Vautin after purchase
Vautin also seeks to claim the cost of other upgrades to Revive in the sum of
$68,860.63. Again, the evidence as to these matters
was adduced by the
provision of a bundle of documents such as invoices, receipts and the like
without any explanation in the oral
or written submissions. The evidence
identifies a number of minor improvements which were done to the vessel
including the upgrading
of various lights (including navigation lights),
underwater lights, meters, sound equipment, electrics, power boards,
refrigeration
facilities, additional plating and the like. These items, as
identified in the Court Bundle, constitute minor improvements to the
in most cases the cost of installing them appears to a major portion of the
overall amount claimed. That indicates that
it is likely that there would be a
significant cost to remove them and restore the lesser quality items.
cost of acquiring and installing these items will be lost because of the failure
of Eagle Yachts and Bertram to comply with their
respective guarantees under the
ACL. The respondents made no substantive submissions in relation to this head
of damage. That being
so, I allow the amount of $68,860.63 in respect of these
Repair costs
it were the case that Mr Vautin had not rejected the vessel in accordance with
the ACL, he would be entitled to recover damages
in respect of the diminution in
the value of the vessel or the cost of remediating the defects in it. If the
consequence of remediating
the vessel was still that its value was diminished,
he would have been entitled to damages for diminution in value as well as the
cost of remediation. Above I have indicated that the present value of the
vessel as it is, is nil although the relevance of that
conclusion would appear
to be minimal. One basis on which that conclusion was reached was that the cost
of repairing the vessel exceeded
its diminished value. In reaching that
conclusion I accepted the evidence of Mr Akacich who was called by Mr Vautin.
I have already found, in order to remedy the construction defects in the vessel
so as to render it of acceptable quality it would
be necessary to rectify all of
the sandwich core panels. As Eagle Yachts conceded in the course of argument
(see paragraph 41 of
its closing submissions) it was the scope of the repair
which was at the heart of identifying the quantum of the remediation costs.
That being so the only evidence which was available at trial as to the cost of
undertaking the full remediation work was that of
Mr Akacich and I accept that
the primary cost of undertaking the same is in the amount of $2,425,792 as
appears in his report. Other
repairers did not quote or give evidence as to the
repair of the entire vessel. The evidence from them was in relation to lesser
repairs. I also accept that Mr Akacich’s proposed method of repairing the
vessel would be necessary in order to ensure that
the vessel met the standards
of a Category A vessel. Mr Akacich’s evidence was not damaged in
cross-examination.
also accept that the nature of the work required to repair the vessel is
substantial and, given the size of such a project, it would
require extensive
preparation requiring a large amount of planning. Mr Akacich gave evidence that
the cost of undertaking that task
is $297,395 and that sum ought to be allowed
as an additional cost of undertaking the repairs. Again, there was no real
as to the correctness of this evidence. Therefore, the total cost of
putting Revive into an acceptable condition is $2,723,187.
Mr Vautin is entitled to a margin of 10% of the total cost as a margin for
unforeseen expenses. The margin amount would
be $272,318.70. Given the size of
the remediation project and the obvious difficulties associated with the
preparation for and undertaking
of the stripping the vessel and the
reconstruction of the hull and all of the superstructure, a margin for
unforeseen expenses is
warranted. This amount was also not greatly disputed by
the respondents.
follows that the total costs which will be incurred to ensure that Revive is of
an acceptable quality within the meaning of that
term as it is used in
the ACL is $2,995,505.70. If Mr Vautin had not returned the vessel he would be
entitled to that amount.
Operation of
and 64A of the ACL
Yachts submitted that any claim for damages by Mr Vautin was limited by cl 8.8
of the agreement for the purchase of Revive.
That clause purported to limit
Eagle Yacht’s liability for breach of a term or of a warranty to repair
the vessel, to payment
of the costs of repair, its replacement or paying the
cost of replacement. However,
of the ACL renders such contractual clauses
void to the extent to which they might exclude, restrict or modify the effect of
remedies provided in the ACL. Eagle Yachts further submitted that the
exclusion clause in the contract of sale was saved by the
proviso in s 64A of
the ACL. However, that proviso only applies in relation to goods which are
other than those acquired for personal,
domestic or household use or
consumption. In this case Revive was acquired for personal use with the result
that the agreement does
not fall within the proviso. It follows that to the
extent to which it might otherwise have applied, cl 8.8 is rendered void and
entitlements of Mr Vautin under the ACL are not diminished by it.
Damages entitlements against Bertram
Vautin’s entitlement to damages against Bertram, which have been
occasioned by the failure to comply with the statutory guarantees
, is provided by s 272. That section provides:
272 Damages that may be recovered by action against
manufacturers of goods
(1) In an action for damages under this
Division, an affected person in relation to goods is entitled to recover damages
(a) any reduction in the value
of the goods, resulting from the failure to comply with the guarantee to which
the action relates,
below whichever of the following prices is lower:
(i) the price paid or payable by the consumer for the goods;
(ii) the average retail price of the goods at the time of supply; and
(b) any loss or damage suffered by the affected person because of the failure
to comply with the guarantee to which the action relates
if it was reasonably
foreseeable that the affected person would suffer such loss or damage as a
result of such a failure.
(2) Without limiting subsection (1)(b), the
cost of inspecting and returning the goods to the manufacturer is taken to be a
foreseeable loss suffered by the affected person as a result of the
failure to comply with the guarantee.
Reduction in value
has been discussed above, Mr Vautin became entitled to reject the vessel and he
did so. That being the case, title to it vested
in Eagle Yachts and he became
entitled to recover the full amount of the purchase price. On that basis, Mr
Vautin is not entitled
to recover damages from Bertram in respect of the
diminution in the value of the vessel because he has not sustained any. As he
is entitled to recover the purchase price the fact that Revive is worth less
than the price he paid for it, causes him no loss.
Mr Vautin had not been able to return the vessel and sought damages against
Bertram for the diminution in the value of the vessel,
the amount which Mr
Vautin could recover for against Bertram would be the same amount as that which
is recoverable against Eagle
Yachts. I have found that to be in the amount of
the cost of remediating the vessel in accordance with Mr Akacich’s
at $2,995,505.70. That is so because, in relation to the failure of the
guarantee relating to acceptable quality, both Eagle Yachts
and Bertram are
liable. In any event, all of the defective construction work falls within the
scope of the warranty provided by
Bertram in respect of the hull and fibreglass
shell. That being so Bertram is liable for damages for breach of the statutory
of the ACL. There did not appear to be any assertion
by Bertram to the contrary.
follows that if Mr Vautin had not rejected the vessel, Bertram would have been
liable for the reduction in value of Revive occurring
by reason of the failure
of the guarantees in the sum of $2,995,505.70.
Consequential losses
to ss 272(1)(b) Mr Vautin is also entitled to recover damages from Bertram for
the loss or damage suffered by him because
of the failure to comply with the
guarantee as to acceptable quality, as well as the failure to comply with the
guarantee imposed
In that respect the quantum of the damage is the
same as that for which Eagle Yachts is liable and the quantum will differ in the
various scenarios identified above; being whether the vessel was rejected or
Summary of the established claims against the
respondents
Claims against Eagle Yachts
follows from the above that Mr Vautin has established that Eagle Yachts breached
both the statutory guarantees in
of the ACL. The failures of the
guarantees were “major failures” and he was, therefore, entitled to
reject the vessel,
which he did. He is entitled to a refund of the purchase
price in the amount of $4,233,801.03 as well as damages
representing:
(a) the wasted
cost of transporting the vessel to Australia in the sum of $75,000.00;
(b) the wasted
cost of upgrades undertaken with respect to the vessel (aside from the Marlin
tower) in the sum of $301,061.01 (in
the Australian Dollar equivalent);
(c) the lost
value of the installation of the Marlin tower in the sum of $130,000.00;
(d) the wasted
cost of insuring the vessel whilst it was not able to be used in the sum of
$89,580.10;
(e) the wasted
cost of manning the vessel during the period for which it was not able to be
used in the sum of $173,333.45; and
(f) the wasted
costs of upkeep and maintenance of the vessel in the sum of $217,499.91.
Mr Vautin is entitled to recover the sum of $4,233,801.03 (as the refund) plus
the sum of $986,474.56 or $5,220,275.59.
that entitlement to reject not been available or were it the case that Mr Vautin
had not rejected the vessel within the rejection
period he would have been
entitled to damages against Eagle Yachts for:
diminution in the value of the vessel or the cost of undertaking repairs in the
sum of $2,995,505.70;
(b) loss of use
of the vessel in the sum of $1,270,140 (being the depreciation of the vessel for
three years whilst it could not be
(c) the wasted
cost of manning the vessel during the period for which it was not able to be
used in the sum of $173,333.45;
(d) the wasted
cost of insuring the vessel whilst it was not able to be used in the sum of
$89,580.10; and
(e) the costs
of upkeep and maintenance of the vessel in the sum of $217,499.91.
if it were the case that Mr Vautin was not entitled to or did not effectively
reject the vessel, he would be entitled to
retain it and recover the sum of
$4,746,059.06.
Claims against Bertram under the ACL
the above it follows that if Mr Vautin has validly rejected the vessel, as I
have found he did, he is entitled to recover damages
against Bertram for breach
of the guarantee as to acceptable quality and the statutorily entrenched express
warranty in the following
(a) the wasted
cost of transporting the vessel to Australia in the sum of $75,000.00;
(b) the wasted
cost of upgrades undertaken with respect to the vessel (aside from the Marlin
tower) in the sum of $301,061.01 (in
the Australian Dollar equivalent);
(c) the lost
value of the installation of the Marlin tower in the sum of $130,000.00;
(d) the wasted
cost of insuring the vessel whilst it was not able to be used in the sum of
$89,580.10;
(e) the wasted cost of manning the vessel
during the period for which it was not able to be used in the sum of
$173,333.45; and
(f) the wasted costs of upkeep and maintenance of the vessel in the sum of
$217,499.91.
that scenario he is entitled to recover from Bertram the sum of $986,474.56.
the right to reject the goods had been lost, Mr Vautin would have been entitled
to recover against Bertram damages in the sum of
$4,746,059.06 comprising of the
(a) the diminution in the value of the
vessel or the cost of undertaking repairs in the sum of $2,995,505.70;
(b) loss of use of the vessel in the sum of $1,270,140 (being the depreciation
of the vessel for three years whilst it could not
(c) the wasted cost of manning the vessel during the period for which it was not
able to be used in the sum of $173,333.45;
(d) the wasted cost of insuring the vessel whilst it was not able to be used in
the sum of $89,580.10; and
(e) the costs of upkeep and maintenance of the vessel in the sum of $217,499.91.
Interest on judgment sums
Vautin is entitled to recover interest on the amounts for which judgment is
given. As the quantum of the judgment granted does
not accord with Mr
Vautin’s submissions, it is appropriate to allow the parties to make
submissions as to the appropriate order
for interest.
Right to recover judgment against Eagle Yachts and
these proceedings Eagle Yachts admits it breached the statutory guarantees in
by reason of the existence of the construction defects. Its main
defences concerned the extent of the damage and the cost of repairs.
it also submits that judgment should not be entered against it because judgment
might be entered against Bertram for the
same losses. The basis for this
submission was somewhat obscure. It seemed to be based upon a combination of
the doctrine of implied
repeal and the maxim,
generalia specialibus non
It was submitted that the right to recover damages under s 259
against a supplier is a general remedy and that it “yields”
more specific remedy against a manufacturer under s 270. It was further
submitted that the inconsistency between s 259 and
s 271 resulted in a consumer
being able to recover 100% of their loss against the supplier and 100% of their
damages against the
manufacturer and there is no provision in the ACL that
permits joint and several liability to apply in respect of damages awarded
favour of the consumer. This, it is alleged, is further supported by the fact
that there are no provisions which permit an apportionment
as between the
manufacturer and the supplier.
Eagle Yachts relied upon the observations of Gleeson CJ, Gummow and Hayne JJ in
the High Court in
Alexander v Perpetual Trustees WA Ltd
[2004] HCA 7
(2004) 216 CLR
, 122 [27], that paragraph actually supports the opposite conclusion. There,
the High Court recognised that the legislature often
seeks to remediate the
situation where two wrongdoers are severally liable to a plaintiff who chooses
to pursue one of them with
that person not being able to obtain contribution
from the concurrent wrongdoer. The mere fact that some injustice may arise in
relation to concurrent wrongdoers who are severally liable to a single consumer
does not result in the Court not giving effect to
the variety of relief which is
available to the consumer under the ACL.
is no conflict between the operation of ss 259 and 271. They are both statutory
causes of action and they are given to the
consumer against different entities
in the supply chain. Even if it were the case that the breach of the statutory
guarantees by
the supplier and the manufacturer caused the same damage to the
consumer, there is nothing in the ACL which suggests that the consumer
limited to pursuing the manufacturer only. On Eagle Yacht’s argument, if
it were the case that both a supplier and manufacturer
were liable to a
consumer, the consumer might only proceed against the manufacturer even if the
manufacturer were insolvent. That
would be a most unusual construction of
consumer protection legislation. There is nothing which was said by Lockhart J
George Zaravinos v Dairy Farmers Co-operative Ltd
[1985] FCA 77
(1985) 7 FCR 195
198 that alters the above conclusion. In that case his Honour considered
Division 2A of the
Trade Practices Act
which concerned remedies against
manufacturers and those comments do not touch upon the question of whether the
consumer might pursue
whichever remedy or remedies they consider appropriate.
Moreover, there is nothing in the ACL which would support the restrictive
construction which is advanced by Eagle Yachts and the authorities have not
regarded the rights of consumers to be so restricted
Leeks v FXC
Corporation
[2002] FCA 72
(2002) 118 FCR 299
which concerned proceedings against two
manufacturers for the same damage).
is also relevant that the causes of action and relief available against the
supplier and the manufacturer are not identical. As
the circumstances of this
case reveals, the consumer is entitled to recover the purchase price as against
the supplier if the goods
are rejected although that relief does not appear to
be available against the manufacturer. As a result, there will be differences
in the amounts recoverable against each respondent.
construction of the legislation which permits the consumer to pursue both the
supplier and the manufacturer for their respective
breaches of the statutory
guarantees does not result in the consumer recovering more than the loss or
damage suffered. It is well
established that a party cannot recover twice in
respect of the same damage, nor recover more that their actual loss (see
Baxter v Obacelo Pty Ltd
[2001] HCA 66
(2001) 205 CLR 635
, 656 [46] – [47]). As
was correctly submitted by Counsel for Mr Vautin, so long as an applicant does
not recover more than
his loss against one or more their respondents, he is
entitled to pursue both in a proceedings and he is not required to elect before
recovering judgment against any of the respondents.
follows that Eagle Yacht’s submission that Mr Vautin may not recover
judgment against both it and Bertram in the same action
cannot succeed.
The negligence claim
Vautin also advances a claim against Bertram in negligence, but only in the
circumstance where Bertram is not liable to Mr Vautin
under the ACL. Although I
have found that Bertram is liable under the ACL, it remains necessary to
consider this cause of action.
the evidence which I have assayed above there can be little doubt that
Bertram’s manufacture of Revive was negligent.
That conclusion can be
derived from Bertram’s own expert, Mr Hutchings, to the effect that the
construction of the sandwich
core panels occurred without filling the kerfs,
with minimal penetration of resin to the core to inner skin bond line and
an effective bond between the core bond and the laminate. Ultimately,
all of the experts, in effect, agree that the construction
of Revive involved
“bad boat building practices”.
was not disputed that, in the circumstances of this matter, Bertram owed a duty
in the manufacture of Revive to Mr Vautin to exercise
reasonable care in the
construction. It would be difficult to see how that proposition could be
disputed under Australian law in
the circumstances of this case.
here, the manufacture of the vessel occurred in Florida. Although, Mr Vautin
submitted to the contrary, in this case the
lex loci delicti
would appear
to be the law of that State. As was identified in
Dow Jones & Co Inc v
(2002) 210 CLR 575, the question is where in substance did the cause
of action arise. In cases of negligent manufacture, the place
where the product
was made is the usual or typical place where the cause of action arises. That
is the place where the negligent
act or omission occurred and that is so despite
the fact that the damage manifested elsewhere (see
McGowan v Hills Ltd
[2015] VSC 674
, [16]-[17]; see also
Nye’s Conflict of Law
[20.9]). Here Bertram constructed the vessel for Mr Vautin in Florida. Its
failure to meet any relevant construction specifications
in the building of the
vessel occurred in Florida. The failure to fills the kerfs and the failure to
appropriately prime the core
occurred in Florida. Once complete, the vessel had
been negligently manufactured. It follows that the substance of Bertram’s
negligence occurred in Florida.
can be accepted that the vessel was intended to be supplied to Mr Vautin in
Australia. However, pursuant to the agreement between
Bertram and Eagle Yachts,
Bertram supplied the vessel to Eagle Yachts in Florida. The vessel was
delivered to Eagle Yachts “ex
works” there. It follows that the
answer to the question of where, in substance, did the cause of action arise, is
and that State’s law is the
lex loci delicti
was ultimately no dispute as to the content of the law of Florida. It was
contained in an expert report of Mr Allen Von Spiegelfeld
dated 17 July 2017.
Mr Spiegelfeld is an attorney based in Tampa, Florida. His summary of the law
of Florida with respect to the
issue of the entitlement of a consumer to recover
damages in negligence from a manufacturer is set out at page 3 of his report.
It is as follows:
Florida law is very clear on the issue of recoverable
damages in a matter where the purchaser of a product asserts that the product
defective and the defect has damaged only the product, as opposed to causing
personal injury or third party damages. Under Florida
law, as set forth in the
Indemnity Insurance Co. v American Aviation
891 So.2d 532 (Fla.
Tiara Condominium Association v Marsh & McLennan
, 110 So.3d
399 (Fla. 2013), citing and adopting
East River Steamship Corporation v
Transamerica Delaval, Inc
[1986] USSC 130
476 U.S. 858
106 S.Ct. 2295
(1986) adopts the
doctrine of Economic Loss Rule. Pursuant to the Economic Loss Rule, a
manufacturer of a product, who issues a warranty,
cannot be sued in tort for a
defect in the property that does not damage anything other than itself, which is
true whether there
is privity between the owner of the product and the
manufacturer or not.
accept that this is an accurate statement of the law and it follows that Mr
Vautin has no claim in negligence against Bertram in
respect of the defective
construction of Revive. He may only claim pursuant to the warranty which was
given to him. In reaching
this conclusion I am comforted by the analysis of
Atkinson J in
Tarangau Game Fishing Charters Pty Ltd v Eagle Yachts Pty
[2017] QSC 306
[348]-[363]. In that case Atkinson J considered a
similar claim against Eagle Yachts and Bertram. There too Bertram relied upon
the law of Florida as being applicable to the claim against it in negligence.
It would appear that in the reasons of Atkinson J,
her Honour relied upon
similar evidence by Mr Von Spiegelfeld. At [350] of her Honour’s reasons
the almost exact same passage
as that identified above was cited.
the result, Mr Vautin’s claim in negligence against Bertram fails.
Eagle Yacht’s crossclaim against Bertram
to its crossclaim, Eagle Yachts seeks indemnity from Bertram pursuant cl 5 of
Addendum A to the dealership agreement. That
clause provided:
Bertram shall indemnify, defend and hold harmless, Eagle
Yachts from and against any loss, costs, or expense, including judgments,
claims, demands and attorneys’ fees (collectively
”) related to or arising out of any personal injuries
or property damage sustained as a result of the defective manufacture
products, of course, were the Bertram constructed vessels. It was not disputed
as between Bertram and Eagle Yachts that the dealership
agreement operated when
Eagle Yachts sold Revive to Mr Vautin.
the course of the hearing Bertram acknowledged its liability to Eagle Yachts.
It was said on behalf of Bertram that “there
is no basis on which the
first respondent would resist an indemnity in relation to any primary liability
found against the second
respondent. Costs may be a different
is not contested that Bertram failed to respond to Eagle Yachts’ claim for
indemnification of it under the indemnity in the
dealership agreement.
Yachts tendered an expert report of Mr Steven Ellison, an attorney-at-law in
Florida. He gave evidence relating to Eagle Yachts’
right to be
indemnified by Bertram if orders are made against Eagle Yachts in the present
proceedings. The factual background on
which he bases his conclusion was
established by the evidence. On that foundation he concluded that Eagle Yachts
would be entitled
to indemnity from Bertram for both any obligation imposed upon
Eagle Yachts to pay money to Mr Vautin in this action, as well as
its costs and
expenses incurred in defending Mr Vautin’s claims.
did not cross examine Mr Ellison or adduce evidence to the contrary. I accept
his evidence as to the effect of the law of
Florida in relation to the indemnity
claim against Bertram.
follows that to the extent to which Eagle Yachts is liable to Mr Vautin, Eagle
Yachts has a concomitant right to indemnity from
Bertram. That includes any
order as to costs.
An irrelevant issue
handing down of these reasons was originally listed for 4 April 2018, however,
on that occasion I raised with the parties a matter
for their consideration.
That was that on 28 September 2017, and after the hearing of the evidence, one
of the experts who had given
evidence had a chance encounter with my former
Associate at Sydney airport. In that encounter the expert made an unsolicited,
comment about the vessel. The comment was mentioned to me although I
ignored it and it almost immediately passed from my mind.
I had forgotten about
it when the matter was resumed the following month when submissions were made.
Had I recalled it on that occasion
I would have made mention of it at that time.
I expect that the comment was merely a matter of casual conversation and there
no intention on the part of the expert to seek to influence the outcome of
the case. Nevertheless, it is of the greatest importance
that actions be
determined on the evidence which is made admissible at trial and presented in
Court such that it is to be open to
scrutiny and consideration by all parties.
Information should not be communicated deliberately or even accidently to the
Court about
a case without the knowledge and consent of all persons who have an
interest in the litigation. For this reason, on 4 April, I mentioned
occasion on which the comment was made and allowed the parties an opportunity to
consider their position. The delivery of judgment
was, subsequently, adjourned
to 10 April. I requested that if any party wished to re-open the hearing they
ought to inform my present
Associate in sufficient time so that arrangements
could be made to re-list the matter if that were needed. At the time of
preparation
of these reasons there was no indication from any party that they
wish to reopen the case. That is appropriate since the comment
has played no
part in the determination of the issues in this case. It was an unsworn
statement which was made out of Court. It
had no evidentiary value or relevance
whatsoever and was not considered for the purpose of making the findings on
which the judgment
follows that there will be judgment for Mr Vautin against Eagle Yachts and
Bertram in the terms of the orders.
parties ought to be heard on the question of
I certify that the preceding three hundred and
seventy-four (374) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
herein of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 10 April 2018
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
RTF format (1.49 MB)
Signed PDF/A format
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter