1412737 [2015] RRTA 290 (22 May 2015)
[2015] RRTA 290
(22 May 2015)
DECISION RECORD
RRT CASE NUMBER:
COUNTRY OF REFERENCE:
People’s Republic of China
TRIBUNAL MEMBER:
Rosemary Mathlin
PLACE OF DECISION:
The Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant
a Protection visa.
Statement made on 22 May 2015 at 10:38am
Any references appearing in square brackets indicate
that information has been omitted from this decision pursuant to
section 431(2)
Migration Act 1958
and replaced with generic information which
does not allow the identification of an applicant, or their relative or other
STATEMENT OF DECISION AND REASONS
is an application for review of a decision made [in] June 2014 by a delegate of
the Minister for Immigration to refuse to grant
the applicant a Protection visa
Migration Act 1958
applicant arrived in Australia [in] February 2014 travelling on a passport
issued by the relevant authorities of the People’s
Republic of China, a
copy of which was submitted with her protection visa application.
applicant applied for the protection visa [in] March 2014. She claimed that she
feared harm in China because her husband, who
was having an affair with another
woman, set her up on false drug charges. She is afraid that if she returns she
will be gaoled or
executed because a bag of heroin was found in her car. She
claimed that with the assistance of his friend, the local chief of police,
husband arranged for her to leave China and travel to Australia. She later
realised that his plan all along was to get her out
of the country so that he
could seize her property and stay with his mistress.
applicant was invited to attend an interview with the delegate to discuss her
claims, but did not do so. The delegate refused
to grant the application because
she found that the applicant’s claims were lacking in detail and she had
been unable to test
the veracity of the applicant’s claims.
applicant provided no further written information in support of her application
for review. She gave evidence before the Tribunal
at a hearing on 20 May 2015
with the assistance of an interpreter.
RELEVANT LAW
criteria for a protection visa are set out in
of the Act and Schedule 2 to
Migration Regulations 1994
(the Regulations). An applicant for the visa must
meet one of the alternative criteria in s.36(2)(a), (aa), (b), or (c).
Sub-paragraphs
(a) and (aa) are relevant in this case.
36(2)(a) provides that a criterion for a protection visa is that the applicant
for the visa is a non-citizen in Australia
in respect of whom the Minister is
satisfied Australia has protection obligations under the Refugees
simply, this requires that the decision maker be satisfied that the applicant
has a well-founded fear of persecution in their
country of nationality for one
of five Convention stipulated
Section.36(2)(aa)
provides that a person found not to meet the refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a) may
meet the criteria for the grant
of a protection visa if he or she is a
non-citizen in Australia in respect of whom the Minister is satisfied Australia
has protection
obligations because the Minister has substantial grounds for
believing that, as a necessary and foreseeable consequence of the applicant
being removed from Australia to a receiving country, there is a real risk that
he or she will suffer significant harm: (‘the
complementary protection
criterion’). ‘Significant harm’ is exhaustively defined in
s.36(2A) and s.5(1) of the
accordance with Ministerial Direction No.56, made under s.499 of the Act, the
Tribunal is required to take account of policy guidelines
prepared by the
Department of Immigration –PAM3
Refugee and humanitarian -
Complementary Protection Guidelines
Refugee and humanitarian -
Refugee Law Guidelines
– and any country information assessment
prepared by the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade expressly for protection
determination purposes, to the extent that they are relevant to the
decision under consideration.
DISCUSSION OF EVIDENCE, FINDINGS AND REASONS
seen her passport, which she presented at the hearing, I accept that the
applicant is a national of the People’s Republic
of China. There is no
information before me to suggest that she has the right to enter and reside in
any other country. Her claims
to protection will be assessed against the
People’s Republic of China. The issues to be determined are whether the
has a well-founded fear of persecution in China, or whether there is a
real risk she will suffer significant harm if she returns
there. Determination
of these issues requires firstly an assessment of whether the applicant’s
account of events should be
accepted. This, in turn, requires an assessment of
her overall credibility.
do not find the applicant’s account of the circumstances in which she
fears returning to China to be credible. In my view
her account contains
significant inconsistencies and gaps, is inherently implausible, and she
appeared to change her evidence from
time to time in a manner suggesting that
she would say anything regardless of whether it was the truth.
Presentation of claims
asked at the hearing about the circumstances which led to her departure from
China the applicant appeared to recount the facts
set out in her written
statement in a rehearsed fashion. Although she was able to provide additional
details about some matters -
for example, being stopped by the police - other
aspects were vague and lacking in detail. While she said that she opened the
of her car for the police, her description of what was found in the boot
was extremely vague; she indicated that she could not see
very well what the
police found and apparently made little effort to do so. Similarly, her evidence
station was hesitant, difficult to obtain and
somewhat evasive, and did not appear to reflect her actual experience.
find the applicant’s account of having passed out when she was hit by the
police and then woken up at home the next day to
be highly implausible.
Moreover, based on her account, she has no direct knowledge of whether charges
were actually laid against
her. This renders the entire basis of her claimed
fear of harm highly speculative, even if the broad details were accepted.
the whole I did not find her account of the events which she claims led to her
departure to be persuasive.
Plausibility of claims
applicant’s own account of the harm she claims to fear and the reasons for
her claimed fears is illogical. She stated at
the hearing that she fears
returning to China because her husband and the police station set her up; she is
worried that her son
“will not belong” to her and her husband will
make arrangements that the house will become his. She said that she is
worried about the drug case, she is worried about her family and her husband.
Asked to confirm that she is not worried about
the drug case, she said that
it’s impossible that she is not worried about it completely, but it needs
evidence. Asked what
persecution she fears, she said that it’s about the
drugs and her husband’s relationship with the police. She is afraid
he will take their property and her son. I put to her that these property and
custody issues arising from her relationship with
her husband do not fall for
consideration under the Refugees Convention. I suggested that he could seek
court orders in relation
to these matters while she is outside China. She said
that he could not do it without her signature. I asked in that case why it
in his interests to send her out of the country, as she claimed. She said that
her husband wanted to gain her trust by appearing
to help her.
my view, the applicant’s account simply does not make sense. If, as she
claims, her husband did wish to get rid of her so
he could be with his mistress,
take their property and get custody of their son, it seems that these ends would
more readily be achieved
if the applicant had, in fact, been executed on drugs
charges, or even imprisoned. I do not understand why, if the applicant’s
account were true, and he had set her up on drug charges with the connivance of
his friend the police [official], her husband would
have assisted her to leave
the country; especially given her own evidence that the arrangements he wishes
to see in place cannot
be finalised without her signature and if she is absent
from China.
the applicant cannot be expected to speculate about her husband’s
motivation and why he might have done certain things,
in my view, the inherent
illogicality underlying the applicant’s entire account substantially
undermines its credibility.
Travel to Australia
do not consider that the applicant has been truthful about the arrangements
under which she travelled to Australia. She said that
after being released from
the police station she rested at home for a few days then went to Shanghai where
she stayed for a few days
with relatives of her husband while waiting for her
visa to travel to Australia. Initially, when recounting her story, she said
that when her visa was issued she “packed her luggage and arrived at
Australia”, without even telling her parents she
was leaving. Later she
said that she stayed in Shanghai for two weeks or one month; when she left
Shanghai she “fled”
to Hong Kong one week before she came to
Australia. She said that she flew to Hong Kong from Pudong Airport. I noted that
no stamps in her passport indicating entry to or exit from Hong Kong.
She said that she did not show her passport, just her identity
card. I noted
that there was one exit stamp relating to her travel in 2014 which showed that
she left [a different] Airport [in]
February 2014. The applicant said that
[Airport] is close to her home town. She then made the new claim that she
returned to her
to Hong Kong, stayed there overnight and then flew to Australia.
I noted that
she had previously said that she spent one week in Hong Kong. She said that she
stayed in Shanghai for a few days, then
went to Hong Kong for one week, then
flew back home to see her parents, then flew back to Hong Kong and on to
Australia. I asked
why she went to Hong Kong for a week. She said that she had
been longing to go to Hong Kong, she wanted to visit there and do some
I put to the applicant that it was hard to believe that if her claims were true,
and she believed she was facing drug charges
which carried the death penalty and
was waiting for her husband to smuggle her out of the country to avoid these
charges, she would
have been thinking about a shopping holiday in Hong Kong. She
said that in fact she was not in the mood to shop.
the light of the numerous inconsistencies in the applicant’s evidence
been sent to Shanghai by
her husband, and her arrival in Australia, I do not believe that the applicant
has been truthful. Moreover,
on numerous occasions she changed her evidence when
her account was challenged, giving me no confidence that she was even attempting
to provide a truthful and accurate account. In my view the claims about the
applicant’s travel arrangements are central to
her account overall, and if
the applicant is unable to provide a coherent and truthful account of these it
casts significant doubt
on the credibility of her evidence overall.
Departure arrangements
accordance with s.424A of the Act I discussed with the applicant at the hearing
information about the visa on which she travelled
to Australia. The
Department’s records show that the visa application was made [in] December
2013. The visa was issued [in]
January 2014. The applicant left China [in]
February 2014. I put to the applicant that the considerable delays between the
discovery of the drugs [in] November 2013 and the application for the
visa some six weeks later, and between the issue of the visa
and her departure,
did not indicate that her departure was organised with much urgency; this
appeared to contradict her claims about
the circumstances in which she was
forced to leave China. The applicant responded that she did not know anything
husband made all the arrangements.
the applicant cannot be expected to explain matters that, if her account were
accepted, had been attended to by her husband,
I consider that if her account
were true, it is reasonable to expect that her husband would have been acting
with considerably more
haste, especially in relation to the application for the
visa for travel to Australia. Moreover, some of the applicant’s own
evidence suggested that her departure had been arranged hastily – for
example, her initial claim (subsequently changed) that
when the visa was issued
she packed her bags and left without saying good bye. Again, I consider that the
independent information
to leave China is not consistent with her claims about the circumstances in
which she left.
as discussed at the hearing, the applicant’s passport contains a visa to
enter [another country] that was issued [in]
September 2013 and valid for three
months from that date. In my view, had there been any urgency attached to her
departure from China,
she need not have waited for an Australian visa to be
Relationship with son
applicant’s evidence about her ongoing contact with her son appeared
evasive and contradictory.
said initially that she is not in contact with her family members in China. She
then said that she sometimes contacts her mother
and most recently spoke to her
last weekend. She said that she “seldom” contacts her son. She last
spoke to him around
Christmas time. She said that she does not know where her
son is living. She indicated, however, that he lives with his father and
mistress. She then said that she is “pretty sure” her son would be
with his father, that is “what usually happens”.
I asked where he
was when she spoke to him at Christmas. She said that he was at her
mother’s place. I asked whether he sees
her relatives. She replied
“should be”. I put to her that surely she must know where her son is
living and whether he
sees her relatives. She said that she does not know where
he is living but he goes to her mother’s house every weekend. I asked
she seldom spoke to him if he went to her mother’s every weekend. She said
that she cannot talk to him, it is not every
week that he goes to her
mother’s; it is possible that her husband is instilling certain concepts
my view the vagueness of the applicant’s evidence about the current
whereabouts of her son and the extent of her contact
with him is inconsistent
with her claimed concern that her husband might take custody of him. The
applicant was not able to provide
a coherent or sensible explanation for her
claimed inability to contact her son. When I attempted to obtain an explanation,
the applicant’s
evidence appeared to be made up as she went along - having
stated at first that she has no contact with family members, she went
that she is in contact with her mother, and indicated that her son might see her
mother every weekend. She was unable to
then explain why she did not speak to
her son more frequently or why she did not have more information about his
living situation.
According to the protection visa application, the
applicant’s son was [under 18]. If what she says about the circumstances
of her departure and her family situation is true, and if in fact she held the
concern that she claims about losing custody of her
son, I simply do not accept
that the applicant would know so little about his current circumstances. I
consider that the gaps and
inconsistencies in the applicant’s evidence
Preparation of protection visa application
do not consider that the applicant has been truthful about the preparation of
her protection visa application. She stated on the
form that [Ms A] assisted her
to complete the form. Asked at the hearing who [Ms A] is, the applicant said
that she is a woman who
the applicant met by chance in a [bar]. She noticed that
the applicant appeared to be in a bad mood and the applicant told her about
problems in China. [Ms A] told the applicant that there was a special visa for
women in her situation and helped her to apply.
They have not kept in contact
since the application was prepared. I do not accept that during the three weeks
between her arrival
in Australia and the lodging of her application, the
applicant met a person by chance in a bar who was able to advise her about
for protection and who assisted her to do so for no payment.
Failure to attend protection interview
consider that the applicant was evasive in relation to the reasons for her
failure to attend the protection interview. She initially
said that she had
received the invitation letter, but she did not attend the interview because she
was visiting a former classmate
in [another Australian city]. She provided a
number of different reasons to explain why she went to [this city] rather than
the interview. She suggested at one point that she had not understood the
letter, then confirmed that she did, and that she understood
the importance of
attending the interview; she also said that she was changing her address,
indicating that she did not receive the
letter, but then acknowledged that she
had received it. Ultimately, she said that she knew that it was important to
attend the interview
and put forward her story, but that she was afraid in case
her application would be rejected. I noted that her application in fact
rejected because the delegate had insufficient information because she had not
attended the interview. The applicant said
that she regrets not having attended
the interview.
find the applicant’s various explanations unsatisfactory. She gave the
impression that she was not being truthful in explaining
why she did not attend
the interview, but was casting around for excuses. While applicants for
protection may be nervous about the
outcome of their application and about
attending at the Department to be interviewed, in my experience most applicants
who genuinely
fear harm in their home country are co-operative and keen to tell
their story. The applicant claims that she was told by [Ms A] that
she met the
criteria for the visa; in these circumstances there is no apparent reason for
her to have feared that her application
would be refused. I do not consider that
she has provided a satisfactory explanation for her failure to attend the
protection interview.
I consider that this indicates that she did not wish her
claims to be explored, or that she was seeking to delay the processing of
case for reasons other than a genuine fear of returning. Considered together
with the other deficiencies in her account, I consider
that this casts further
doubt on her credibility.
Conclusion on credibility
the light of the numerous problems in the applicant’s evidence I have
concluded that her entire account is not credible and
should be rejected. I do
not accept that the applicant is an innocent person who has been framed on drug
charges by her husband and
his friend the police chief so that she could be sent
out of China purportedly for her protection. I do not accept that she faces
penalty in relation to drug offences on return that would constitute persecution
or significant harm, or that she faces persecution
or significant harm in
connection with the claimed breakdown of her relationship with her husband.
There is no credible evidence
before me to support a conclusion that the
applicant faces harm of any kind on return to China, including the unspecified
or psychological harm that she claimed to fear from her husband. I am
not satisfied that she has a well-founded fear of persecution
under the Refugees
Convention; or that there is a real risk that she will suffer significant harm
for the purposes of complementary
protection.
am not satisfied that the applicant is a person in respect of whom Australia has
protection obligations under the Refugees Convention.
Therefore the applicant
does not satisfy the criterion set out in s.36(2)(a). Having concluded that the
applicant does not meet the
refugee criterion in s.36(2)(a), I have considered
the alternative criterion in s.36(2)(aa), however I am not satisfied that the
applicant is a person in respect of whom Australia has protection obligations
under s.36(2)(aa). There is no suggestion that the
applicant satisfies s.36(2)
on the basis of being a member of the same family unit as a person who satisfies
s.36(2)(a) or (aa) and
who holds a protection visa. Accordingly, the applicant
does not satisfy the criterion in s.36(2).
Tribunal affirms the decision not to grant the applicant a Protection visa.
Rosemary Mathlin
1951 Convention
Relating to the Status of Refugees as amended by the 1967 Protocol relating to
the Status of Refugees.
Sections 91R and
91S of the Act qualify some aspects of Article 1A(2) for the purposes of the
application of the Act and the regulations
to a particular person, and the High
Court has considered this definition in a number of cases - See Chan Yee Kin v
(1989) 169 CLR 379
, Applicant A v MIEA (1997) 190 CLR 225, MIEA v Guo
(1997) 191 CLR 559
, Chen Shi Hai v MIMA
[2000] HCA 19
(2000) 201 CLR 293
, MIMA v Haji Ibrahim
[2000] HCA 55
(2000) 204 CLR 1.
RTF format (162 KB)
Signed PDF/A format