Denham & Newsham (No. 2) [2021] FamCAFC 154 (19 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Denham & Newsham (No. 2)
FamCAFC 154
Appeal from:
Denham & Newsham
[2020] FamCA 271
Appeal number(s):
EAA 61 of 2020
File number(s):
SYC 5428 of 2018
Judgment of:
AINSLIE-WALLACE, RYAN & ALDRIDGE JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – COSTS – Where the appeal was
allowed – Where the parties applied for costs certificates pursuant
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
(Cth) – Conditions for costs
certificates to issue are met – Costs certificates ordered.
Legislation:
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
Cases cited:
Denham & Newsham
FamCAFC 141
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
By way of written submissions
In Chambers
Counsel for the Appellant:
Solicitor for the Appellant:
P Williams & Company Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Nolan Lawyers
SYC 5428 of 2018
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
AINSLIE-WALLACE, RYAN & ALDRIDGE JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The Court grants to the appellant father a costs certificate pursuant to
the provisions of
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
being a certificate that in the opinion of the Court it would be appropriate for
the Attorney-General to authorise a payment
under that Act to the appellant in
respect of the costs incurred by him in relation to this appeal.
2. The Court grants to the respondent mother a costs certificate pursuant to
the provisions of
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
being a certificate that in the opinion of the Court it would be appropriate for
the Attorney-General to authorise a payment
under that Act to the respondent in
respect of the costs incurred by her in relation to this appeal.
3. The Court grants to the appellant and the respondent a costs certificate
pursuant to the provisions of
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act
(Cth), being a certificate that in the opinion of the Court it would be
appropriate for the Attorney-General to authorise a payment
under that Act to
each party in respect of the costs incurred in relation to the rehearing of
these proceedings.
Note: The form of the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be
subject to review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the
order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules 2004
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
has been approved by the Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
AINSLIE-WALLACE, RYAN & ALDRIDGE JJ:
1 On 6 August 2021, this Court allowed an appeal by
Mr Denham (“the father”) from parenting orders made on 23 April
Various orders were set aside and certain issues have been remitted for
rehearing. Although we sought submissions as to costs of
the appeal in order to
save the parties the trouble and expense of addressing this issues later, the
father wanted the opportunity
to address costs following publication of our
reasons for judgment (
Denham & Newsham
FamCAFC 141)
Denham & Newsham”
). We agreed and directions were made
for written submissions on the point.
2 At the hearing of the appeal and in our reasons for judgment (
), we indicated that assuming there was no order for costs, we
were minded to grant costs certificates for the appeal and any rehearing
accordance with the
Federal Proceedings (Costs) Act 1981
3 The father filed submissions as to costs on 12 August 2021. He no longer
seeks costs against Ms Newsham (“the mother”)
and applied for costs
certificates for the appeal and remitted rehearing. There is no application by
the mother for costs and, by
her written submissions filed the same day, she
also seeks costs certificates for the appeal and rehearing.
4 The conditions for costs certificates to issue are met and we order
accordingly.
I certify that the
preceding four (4) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Judgment of the Honourable Justices Ainslie-
Wallace, Ryan &
Dated: 19 August 2021
RTF format (290 KB)
Signed PDF/A format