Kinsella v Melonie Investments Pty Ltd [2013] FMCA 230 (9 April 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
KINSELLA v MELONIE
INVESTMENTS PTY LTD
[2013] FMCA 230
CONSUMER LAW – Misleading and deceptive
conduct – whether goods fit for purpose – whether goods of
acceptable quality
– customised fit-out of bus.
Australian Consumer Law
ss.18, 29(1), 54, 55,
236, 259, 261
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
Evidence Act 1995
Federal Magistrates
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Barnes
(2008) 70 ATR 776
[2008] FMCA 7
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v
Barnes & Anor (No.2)
[2008] FMCA 1229
LEIGH MAY KINSELLA
Respondent:
MELONIE INVESTMENTS PTY LTD
File Number:
PEG 157 of 2011
Judgment of:
Hearing dates:
3-4 July 2012
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitors for the Respondent:
(1) That the Applicant’s Application in a Case
filed on 6 July 2011 be dismissed.
(2) That the Respondent’s Application in a Case filed on 6 March 2012 be
(3) That there be judgment for the applicant in the sum of $860, but otherwise
the Application filed 20 June 2011, as amended on
13 July 2011, further amended
on 31 October 2011, and further amended on 28 November 2011, be
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
LEIGH MAY KINSELLA
MELONIE INVESTMENTS PTY LTD
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
Introduction
applicant is a retired school teacher who bought a second-hand Toyota Coaster
bus (“Bus”) in which she planned to
go travelling in her retirement.
The respondent is a company which customises buses and camper vans for touring
purposes. At the
applicant’s request the respondent undertook to customise
the applicant’s Bus. The applicant was not happy with the customisation
the Bus, and now brings proceedings in this Court under the
Consumer Law
is Schedule 2 of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
”), as applied under Subdivision A of Division 2 of Part XI of the
, s.4(1), definition of “
Consumer Law
Application, Response and Applications in a Case
application, filed on 20 June 2011, has been amended and further amended, and in
its final manifestation is the Second Further
Amended Application filed 28
November 2011 (“Application”).
a detailed statement of chronology, material facts, causes of action and
remedies filed on 29 March 2012 the applicant detailed
the remedies sought by
her as follows:
to ss.259(2) and 261 of the
, orders that the respondent:
and fit two new batteries comparable to the batteries that were installed;
the unsealed batteries from the Bus;
and fit another solar panel comparable to the one that was initially
the plasmatronic unit to prevailing safety standards;
pumps from cushions and replace cushions;
the shower hose to a reasonable standard;
the shower door to a reasonable standard;
the water hose to a reasonable standard;
the elbow joint of the outlet pipe to a reasonable standard;
the sink tap to a reasonable standard;
the slide-out barbeque set to a reasonable standard;
and deliver up all manuals and serial numbers for all appliances supplied to the
applicant; and
the power supply, gas and plumbing of the Bus generally, and complete the fit
out, to an acceptable standard;
alternatively,
orders for damages under ss.236 and 259(4) of the
sufficient to
compensate the applicant for:
costs of engaging a suitably qualified person to fix the defects pleaded in
subparagraph (a);
costs and expenses she has incurred due to the breaches by the respondent and
its employees;
inconvenience of not having the vehicle, hardship and emotional distress
suffered by the applicant from December 2010 to the present;
health risks associated with the gas bottle and the unsealed battery; and
loss of income as a relief teacher, estimated at $600 per day (or $104,000 per
orders for:
other orders as the Court sees fit.
an Amended Response filed on 13 April 2012 the respondent sought that the
Application be dismissed and that the applicant pay the
respondent’s
costs. Grounds of opposition were set out, as follows:
Applicant having filed and served all documents for trial has failed to
substantiate a proper claim or any claim at all and
the Respondent further
time did the Respondent engage in false or misleading and deceptive conduct or
make any false, misleading or deceptive representation;
b. That the
Goods were of acceptable quality; and
c. That the
goods supplied were fit for the Applicant’s purpose.
Applicant has not allowed the Respondent to rectify any alleged defects and has
further contaminated the evidence of any alleged
defects by allowing other
individuals or entities to work on the Bus.
applicant filed an application in a case on 6 July 2011 seeking that the
application be treated as a matter of urgency (“Applicant’s
Application in a Case”). The Applicant’s Application in a Case was
overtaken by events, including orders made a week
later on 13 July 2011 that the
matter be referred for mediation before a Registrar of the Court as a matter of
urgency. There have
been no further orders with respect to the Applicant’s
Application in a Case since that time. There were subsequent general
orders made
on 4 November 2011, including liberty to apply in respect of further mediation
to be undertaken before 30 June 2012.
respondent also filed an application in a case (“Respondent’s
Application in a Case”) on 6 March 2012 seeking
dismissal of the
Application and that the applicant pay the respondent’s costs. The
Respondent’s Application in a Case
came on for hearing on 16 March 2012.
At that time the Court made various orders with respect to the future
programming of the matter,
including granting liberty to apply to relist it on
three days’ notice, but did not dismiss the Respondent’s Application
in a Case. There have been no further orders with respect to the
Respondent’s Application in a Case since that time.
that both the Applicant’s Application in a Case and the Respondent’s
Application in a Case have been overtaken by
subsequent events, including
mediation and the hearing of the matter, there should be formal orders that each
of the Applicant’s
Application in a Case and the Respondent’s
Application in a Case be dismissed.
False or misleading representations or misleading or deceptive conduct
provides as follows:
(1) A person
must not, in trade
or commerce, engage in conduct that is misleading or deceptive or is likely
or deceive.
(2) Nothing in Part 3-1 (which is about unfair practices) limits by
implication subsection (1).
29(1) of the
provides as follows:
must not, in trade
or commerce, in connection with the supply
or possible supply
or services
or in connection
with the promotion by any means of the supply
or use of goods
or services:
(a) make a false or misleading representation that goods
are of a particular standard, quality, value, grade,
composition, style or model
or have had a particular history or particular previous use; or
(g) make a false or misleading representation that goods
or services
have sponsorship, approval, performance
characteristics, accessories,
uses or benefits; or
(l) make a false or misleading representation concerning the need for any
or services;
applicant alleges that there were a number of false or misleading
representations made to her under s.29(1)(a), (g) and (l) of
alternatively that the same conduct was misleading or deceptive conduct under
s.18 of the
. Each of the representations or conduct is set out
it is asserted that the respondent and its employee Mr Vitasovic represented
that the Bus would have sufficient power for four
to five days, and that that
was a false or misleading representation under s.29(1)(a) of the
alternatively, it was misleading or deceptive conduct under s.18 of the
it is asserted that the respondent and its employee Mr Vitasovic, did not inform
the applicant that the televisions, the computer,
the refrigerator, any other
electrical appliance, the lights, the water pump, the gas stove, the gas water
heater, the water pumps
for the toilet and shower, would also be using battery
power, which was a false or misleading representation under s.29(1)(a) of
, alternatively misleading or deceptive conduct under s.18 of the
represented that the bus would have sufficient power for four or five days even
if the applicant utilised the power point outlet,
which was a false or
misleading representation under s.29(1)(a) of the
, alternatively
misleading or deceptive conduct under s.18 of the
that representations as to how the battery monitor should be utilised were false
or misleading representations under s.29(1)(a)
, alternatively
misleading or deceptive conduct under s.18 of the
that the representation that the unsealed battery is safe for use in the Bus or
any enclosed environment was a false or misleading
representation under
s.29(1)(a) of the
, alternatively misleading or deceptive conduct
under s.18 of the
that the representation that the two batteries were wired up properly, was a
false or misleading representation under s.29(1)(a)
, or in the
alternative, misleading or deceptive conduct under s.18 of the
that the representation that the single solar panel was more efficient, and more
powerful, than the two requested by the
applicant, was a false or misleading
representation under s.29(1)(a), (g) and (l) of the
, alternatively
misleading or deceptive conduct under s.18 of the
Goods of unacceptable quality or not fit for purpose
provides as follows:
(a) a person
supplies, in trade
or commerce,
to a consumer;
(b) the supply
does not occur by way of sale by auction;
guarantee that the goods
are of acceptable quality.
acceptable quality
if they are as:
(a) fit for all the purposes for which goods
of that kind are commonly supplied; and
(b) acceptable in appearance and finish; and
(c) free from defects; and
(d) safe; and
(e) durable;
reasonable consumer
fully acquainted with the state and condition of the goods
(including any hidden defects of the goods),
would regard as acceptable having regard to the matters in subsection (3).
(3) The matters for the purposes of subsection (2) are:
(a) the nature of the goods;
(b) the price
of the goods
(if relevant); and
any statements made about the goods
on any packaging or label on the goods;
(d) any representation made about the goods
by the supplier or manufacturer of the goods;
(e) any other relevant circumstances relating to the
of the goods.
supplied to a consumer
are not of acceptable quality; and
(b) the only reason or reasons why they are not of acceptable quality were
specifically drawn to the consumer's
attention before the consumer
agreed to the supply;
are taken to be of acceptable quality.
are displayed for sale or hire; and
(b) the goods
would not be of acceptable quality if they were supplied to a consumer;
or reasons why they are not of acceptable quality are taken, for the purposes of
subsection (4), to have been specifically
drawn to a consumer's
attention if those reasons were disclosed on a written notice that was displayed
with the goods
and that was
transparent.
do not fail to be of acceptable quality if:
(a) the consumer
to whom they are supplied causes them to become of unacceptable quality, or
fails to take
reasonable steps to prevent them from becoming of unacceptable
quality; and
(b) they are damaged
by abnormal use.
do not fail to be of acceptable quality if:
(a) the consumer
acquiring the goods
examines them before the consumer
agrees to the supply
of the goods;
(b) the examination ought reasonably to have revealed that the goods
were not of acceptable quality.
provides as follows:
(a) a person
) supplies, in trade
or commerce, goods
to a consumer;
(b) the supply
does not occur by way of sale by auction;
guarantee that the goods
are reasonably fit for any disclosed purpose, and for any purpose for which the
supplier represents
that they are reasonably fit.
disclosed purpose
is a particular purpose (whether or not
that purpose is a purpose for which the goods
are commonly supplied) for which the
are being acquired
by the consumer
(a) the consumer
makes known, expressly or by implication, to:
(i) the supplier; or
(ii) a person
by whom any prior negotiations or arrangements in relation to the acquisition of
were conducted or made; or
(b) the consumer
makes known to the manufacturer of the goods
either directly or through the supplier or the
referred to in paragraph (a)(ii).
(3) This section does not apply
if the circumstances show that the consumer
did not rely on, or that it was unreasonable
for the consumer
to rely on, the skill or judgment of the supplier, the person
referred to in subsection (2)(a)(ii) or the manufacturer,
as the case may
applicant asserts that the respondent and its employee, Mr Vitasovic, were aware
of and understood the applicant’s purpose
of customising the Bus, and the
requirements specified.
applicant says that the following goods supplied by the respondent and its
employee, Mr Vitasovic, were either not of acceptable
quality under s.54(1) of
or not fit for purpose under s.55(1) of the
two batteries;
shower hose;
shower door;
shower access;
water hose;
elbow joint of the outlet pipe;
plasmatronic unit;
LED lights; and
slide-out barbeque set.
Evidence – credibility
applicant’s credibility was affected by the fact that, to a reasonably
significant degree, the applicant’s evidence
was, in the Court’s
view, inconsistent, particularly in respect of significant matters, such as the
independent power source
and gas appliances matters, referred to below. The
applicant’s evidence about other matters, and in particular those matters
related to whether or not the goods were of acceptable quality or fit for
purpose was, in some respects, vague as to precisely what
the nature and extent
of the alleged lack of quality or unfitness for purpose actually was.
primary evidence from the respondent, given by Mr Vitasovic, also suffered from
some inconsistencies, but overall was far more
consistent than that of the
applicant. Mr Vitasovic was also consistent and understandable in relation to
his evidence about those
issues associated with fitness for purpose and quality
of the goods concerned. By and large, Mr Vitasovic’s evidence was also
supported by the applicant’s expert witness, and also the
respondent’s expert witness.
the above circumstances, to the extent that there have been any differences
between the accounts of various events as between the
applicant and Mr
Vitasovic, the Court has generally preferred Mr Vitasovic’s evidence, and
has usually preferred the evidence
of the experts to that of both the applicant
and Mr Vitasovic where their evidence conflicts.
relation to credit (as opposed to credibility) the Court considers that both the
applicant and Mr Vitasovic did endeavour to truthfully
inform the Court, to the
best of their abilities, as to their recollections of
Evidence – applicant’s expert – admissibility and
relation to the expert evidence, the applicant’s expert evidence, in the
form of the affidavit of Glen Anthony White, sworn
19 June 2012, was admitted
pursuant to the provisions of
Federal Magistrates Act 1999
(Cth), which permits the Court to give the matters in the affidavit such
weight as the Court thinks fit in circumstances where the
deponent does not
appear as a witness to be cross-examined with respect to the matters in the
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Barnes & Anor (No. 2)
at para.38 per Lucev FM (“
Barnes (No. 2)
this Court observed that:
circumstances where:
respondents have been requested to attend for cross-examination;
respondents have not attended;
efforts have been made by the respondents to attend by video link or telephone
link in circumstances where the ability to do
so will usually be afforded to
remote witnesses by this Court;
were matters upon which the respondents might have been cross-examined;
ordinarily the respondents’ failure to attend for cross-examination would
mean that the affidavits would not be admissible
in evidence (subject to any
relevant Court rules); and
respondents’ conduct has been such (both in relation to attendance for
cross-examination, and generally) as to preclude
any indulgences being granted
to them, or any prejudice being suffered by the applicant on account of that
is of the view that no weight ought to be given to the respondents’
affidavits. This view will not preclude weight
being given to either of the
affidavits if there are future proceedings, if either of the respondents submit
to cross-examination
in any such proceedings.
circumstances in
Barnes (No. 2)
were significantly different to
those in this case.
Barnes (No. 2)
involved creditors petitions in
this Court’s bankruptcy jurisdiction taken out by the Deputy Commissioner
of Taxation for sums
of allegedly unpaid tax significantly in excess of $3m for
each of Mr and Mrs Barnes. Mr and Mrs Barnes were sophisticated investors
legally represented litigants, whom the Court had previously found had committed
an act of bankruptcy by, amongst other things,
leaving Australia with intent to
defeat their creditors (including the Deputy Commissioner of Taxation): see
Deputy Commissioner of Taxation v Barnes
[2008] FMCA 7
(2008) 70 ATR 776
at 782-783 per
[2008] FMCA 7
at paras.50-51 per Lucev FM.
this case, the applicant is self-represented, although she did have some pro
bono assistance prior to hearing from a major commercial
law firm. The applicant
appears to have generally endeavoured to assist with the proper conduct of the
litigation, and has cooperated
with the Court in the proper conduct of the
litigation, throughout. The applicant’s expert, Mr White is a small
business person
who was simply not able to attend on the second day of the
hearing. In this regard, no endeavours were made to facilitate an alternative
means of appearance, but for reasons which follow that is not generally of
concern to the Court in the circumstances of this case.
To the extent that the
evidence of both “experts” might be characterised as expert
evidence, Mr White’s expert
evidence was more comprehensive than that of
the respondent’s expert (see the affidavit of Doug Logan, sworn 3 May
in that regard of greater assistance to the Court. Significantly, the
applicant’s expert evidence was unfavourable to the applicant
when viewed
overall, and, significantly so in some respects. The applicant’s expert
evidence on affidavit was, on many disputed
matters, to the same effect as the
respondent’s expert’s affidavit evidence, and oral evidence.
all of the above circumstances the Court has determined that the affidavit of Mr
White, in addition to being admitted, as it was
at hearing, ought to be given
appropriate weight and effect, having regard to all of the other evidence, and,
where appropriate,
the inability to cross-examine Mr
Evidence – other
was evidence given by Mr Butt, an auto electrician who ordinarily does work for
the respondent, but who inspected the Bus at
the applicant’s request, and
who was paid by the applicant for that inspection. There is no reason to doubt
any of Mr Butt’s
Consideration
applicant, Leigh May Kinsella, is a retired school teacher. In her retirement
she planned to travel, and to engage in relief teaching,
particularly in remote
areas. It was to facilitate these purposes that the Bus was being customised by
the applicant.
respondent, Melonie Investments Pty Ltd, is an Australian corporation which,
trading as Dove Campers, specialised in the customisation
of buses and camper
vans for touring purposes. Mr Vitasovic, a director of the respondent, dealt
primarily with the applicant. Mr
Vitasovic has over 25 years experience in the
April 2010 the applicant approached Mr Vitasovic for an estimate of the cost of
customising the Bus. The applicant asserts that
she specified that she wanted
the following in the Bus:
air-conditioning;
toilet; and
usual fittings
”, which the applicant understood to include an antennae
for a television set and a cooking range or fan.
applicant says that she also specified to Mr Vitasovic that:
did not want any gas appliances;
would have a generator as back-up power;
needed power to stay out of caravan parks for four to five days;
wanted two solar panels to provide independent power for two or three
applicant asserts that Mr Vitasovic provided an estimate of $42,000 for the
above requirements (“April 2010 Estimate”).
October-November 2010
30 October 2010 email
occurred in relation to the April 2010 Estimate until October 2010 when the
applicant sent the respondent an email indicating
that she had purchased the
Bus. The applicant went on as follows:
I am hoping
that you could send me some floor plans to choose from.
in the Kimberley so my son and/or daughter will be acting on my behalf until I
get back to Perth.
like to have a toilet and separate shower. I would need water tanks and my plan
is to eventually use mainly solar power and
a generator so I don’t need to
stay in caravan parks all the time.
Can you let
me know if you are able to fit the bus out for me.
timeframe and a quote.
October 2010 Email”)
is no indication in the 30 October 2010 Email that any reliance is placed upon
what occurred in April 2010.
13 November 2010 – the plan
13 November 2010 the respondent provided a plan to the applicant for customising
the Bus, and quoted $48,900 for completion (“Mr
2012 Affidavit, Annexure DOV 4”) (“the Plan”). The applicant
subsequently paid $49,000 in three instalments
on 15 November 2010
($15,000), 16 November 2010 ($14,000) and on 23 December 2010 ($20,000),
the latter date being the day upon which
the applicant collected the Bus.
applicant says that as the quote was $7,000 above the original estimate she
assumed that the increase was due to having to meet
all of the requirements
outlined in the discussion between the applicant and Mr Vitasovic in April 2010.
The applicant says that
she noted that the Plan provided by the respondent did
not include any gas appliances or a slide-out barbeque gas set.
is therefore a dispute as to what plan was sent to the applicant. The applicant
says that the Plan was not the plan sent to
her, but that she has not kept, nor
has she been able to retrieve the plan that she says was sent to her, which she
” to the plan forwarded to her: see
Transcript, 3 July 2012, pages 19 and 39. The applicant says in particular that
was not the plan sent to her because the plan sent to her did not refer
to any gas appliances, whereas the Plan, in a box headed
“CONVERSION
COST”, says it includes “GLASS TOP SINK WITH A GAS
applicant asserted that she “
made it clear what I wanted
Transcript, 3 July 2012, page 51. It is, however, clear that she did not discuss
in any detail numerous items which were
required in the Bus, including the type
of fridge, stove, and the air-conditioning, and she also did not discuss items
which appear
on the Plan including the slide-out barbeque bench and the awning.
Other items not discussed included the type of curtains and floor
vinyl to go
into the Bus: Transcript, 3 July 2012, pages 36-37. Cross-examined as to
whether she knew what she was paying for, the
applicant said “
that stage, I had absolutely no idea ...
”: Transcript, 3 July
2012, page 36.
Plan was modelled on a plan for a similar camper bus (“Other Bus”)
that the applicant had looked at on the respondent’s
website, and she
agreed, and it is not seriously in dispute, that she asked for a customisation
similar to the customisation of the
Other Bus, with one or two significant
exceptions. One of those was that the applicant did not want a second fridge.
She did not
get a second fridge, and that is not in dispute. The applicant
however alleges that she did not ask for, or want, gas appliances
in the Bus.
The gas appliances issue is a serious matter of dispute which is dealt with
applicant’s attitude towards the question of a fridge is instructive. As
indicated above, she said that she had seen, on
the website, the fridge on the
recently completed customisation of the Other Bus. The applicant conceded that
she did not know what
to the customisation without ever knowing what type of fridge was being
included, and that she had not checked on the internet to see what type of
fridge it was: Transcript, 3 July 2012, page 20. Ultimately,
she said that
didn’t really care what sort of fridge and freezer it was,
as long as I had a fridge and freezer
”: Transcript, 3 July 2012,
Gas appliances
respect to the issue of gas appliances the applicant said that she said she did
not want gas appliances, and says that had she
seen that there were gas
appliances on the Plan she would have rung the respondent and said that she did
not want them. She says
that the plan that was sent to her did not contain
reference to gas appliances. The applicant also says that she told Mr Vitasovic
that she did not want any gas appliances, but did not put this in writing, even
though it was important, and she denies having received
the Plan which included
reference to the “GAS STOVE”: see Transcript, 3 July 2012,
pages 35, 41 and 42, and 4 July 2012,
pages 64 and 65.
applicant says that she did not realise the Bus had gas appliances until she got
realised that it had a gas stove.
She says that she was “
really, really very upset about that
Transcript, 4 July 2012, page 64. She also says that her son told her not
to worry, and because everything else was “
the issue of the gas appliances no further.
that the applicant did not want gas appliances, and was “
really, really
” about the fact that there were gas appliances it is
puzzling that the applicant mounted no challenge whatsoever, and did not
mention to, or query with, the respondent, the installation of gas
appliances.
Vitasovic’s evidence was that there was no request by the applicant for
there not to be gas appliances in the Bus.
Vitasovic gave evidence that had he been told that the applicant wanted to have
electric hotplates and an electric barbeque, in
combination with her desire to
stay off road or out of caravan parks for periods of up to four to five days, he
would have told her
that that was absurd: Transcript, 4 July 2012, page 87.
Also, Mr Vitasovic was not cross-examined on the notation in the Plan that
customisation included a “GAS STOVE”. Nor was he cross-examined
to gas appliances, being sent
to the applicant.
all the circumstances, the Court accepts Mr Vitasovic’s evidence, and is
persuaded, on the evidence, that the respondent
did send the Plan, with the
reference to a “GAS STOVE” to the applicant. The applicant was
unable to produce any other
plan sent to her, or any evidence (apart from her
say so) that another plan was sent to her. In coming to the conclusion that the
Plan was sent to her the Court accepts that Mr Vitasovic, a man with
considerable experience in conversions and customisations of
this type, would
have told the applicant of the absurdity of any proposition that she run
electric appliances rather than gas appliances
if she intended to stay off road
for a considerable period of time. Furthermore, the applicant’s conduct in
simply accepting
the fact that there were gas appliances in the Bus following
the conversion also tends to indicate that the applicant did not specifically
request non-gas appliances, or, at the very least, that she had no issue with
the fact that gas appliances were installed in the
conversion, consistent with
the Plan. In the Court’s view there were no representations made by the
respondent, or by Mr Vitasovic,
and no conduct by the respondent, or Mr
Vitasovic, which could, reasonably or otherwise, have led the applicant to
believe that there
would be no gas appliances in the
Independent power
large in the applicant’s case was the concept of “
independent
” to the Bus, and how the so called “
independent
” was to be provided. It is fair to observe that the parties were
at odds with respect to what constituted independent power.
applicant claims that she told Mr Vitasovic, on a number of occasions, that she
wanted independent power, and that in particular
she wanted to have independent
power which operated for two to three days off the batteries in the Bus,
extended to three to four
days with two solar panels, and to four to five days
with a back-up generator. The applicant said that this was what she meant when
she was referring to independent power sources: Transcript, 3 July 2012,
pages 20, 22, 38, 40 and 43.
applicant also said that she expected to be able to run the fridge for two to
three days if the batteries were fully charged:
Transcript, 3 July 2012,
no stage did the applicant confirm with Mr Vitasovic, or anyone from the
respondent, what “
independent power
” meant to the respondent.
Rather, the applicant “
independent
” meant the same thing to Mr Vitasovic as it meant to her. When
asked to define independent power the applicant said, in cross-examination
the batteries
”: Transcript, 3 July 2012, page 22, and
later confirmed again under cross-examination that “
the same as independent power
Transcript, 3 July 2012, page 43.
highlighted above, even the applicant seemed to indicate that independent power
might mean the batteries alone, or a combination
of the batteries, solar power
and a back-up generator. In the 30 October 2010 Email the applicant
indicated that it was her “
plan...to eventually use mainly solar power
and a generator so I don’t need to stay in caravan parks all the
”: Mr Vitasovic’
July 2011 Affidavit, Annexure DOV2. The
30 October 2011 Email contains no reference to the utilisation of batteries, or
the utilisation
of batteries to run the power system in the Bus exclusively for
the first day or two. Further, the 30 October 2010 Email does not
refer to the
use of the generator as “
”, as was later asserted by
the applicant to be her intention with respect to the use of a generator:
Transcript, 3 July 2012,
pages 39 and 49.
installation of a generator was not part of the contract between the applicant
and the respondent for the customisation of the
Bus: Transcript, 4 July
2012, page 67. Rather, it was installed as a so-called “
” (the concept of which was not further explored in the hearing)
over Easter in 2011, and was organised by the applicant independently
respondent.
Vitasovic said that the applicant’s initial instruction was that she was
going to tow a generator, which he advised against:
Transcript, 4 July
2012, page 82. There is no dispute that the applicant ultimately said that she
would have a generator for “back-up”
power. Mr Vitasovic conceded
this in cross-examination: Transcript, 4 July 2012, page 83.
Vitasovic confirmed that he had relied on the use of the generator by the
applicant for the supply of power to enable the applicant
to stay off road or
out of caravan parks for four to five days, as that was consistent with the
instructions he had been given by
the applicant. It was also consistent with the
fact that she needed to run an air-conditioner and a microwave off road,
with a television and a computer. Mr Vitasovic indicated that it would
have been absurd to try to run all of these things solely
off battery power, and
had the applicant indicated that that was her intention, he would have told her
so: Transcript, 4 July 2012,
page 87. Mr Vitasovic was unconcerned with the
overall power requirements because the applicant indicated that there would be a
generator: Mr Vitasovic’
July 2011 Affidavit, para.8, and that
this would provide her with the power required to remain off road or out of
caravan parks for
four to five days.
is clear that what the applicant considered to be “
independent
” was not clear in her own mind. Sometimes it was battery power
alone. At other times the applicant described “
independent
” in terms of a combination of battery, solar and back-up
generator power. If her 30 October 2010 Email was intended to be indicative
what constituted “
independent power
” it then did not
specifically include battery power. What is clear is that the applicant wanted a
system which, at its broadest,
would enable her to remain off road or out of
caravan parks for four to five days running the Bus under power generated from
on the Bus. Ultimately, that is what the applicant obtained, when,
independently, she arranged for the generator to be installed,
four months after
she took delivery of the Bus. The respondent customised the Bus knowing that the
applicant intended to install
back-up generator power. The respondent therefore
knew that the Bus would provide for up to four to five days power once the
was installed, as had always been planned by the applicant, and known
by the respondent.
the power supply was adequate, and what was agreed upon between the parties, is
clear from subsequent admissions with respect
to the power supply in the Bus and
the installation of a generator, made by the applicant as follows:
letter dated 25 May 2011 to the respondent (that is, less than a month before
these proceedings were instituted) the applicant
indicated that:
I went down
south for 4 weeks and apart from 5 days in caravan parks the power supply was
all that I had anticipated
in the letter of 25 May 2011 the applicant indicated that:
intention was always to reduce the cost of staying in caravan parks and I
realised that a generator was going to be necessary
although I did not realise
the cost involved because of the air conditioner.
not realise that the solar panel may only run my refrigerator for maybe two
an email a day later than the above letter the applicant said as
don’t have a problem with using the generator, it is still a lot cheaper
than having to stay in a caravan park, I just wish
I had been aware that the
fridge would defrost when the generator reached 22.8 as you have advised, or 24
volts as I was told by
I am now aware of what I need to do and am quite happy to do it.
right, I always had intended to get a generator but I didn’t expect it to
have to be so large or so expensive to buy
and install. Nor did I expect further
expense because of the weight on the back of the bus.
I intend to
have the bus for a very long time and although I was not expecting these
expenses I understand that if I want the bus
to be safe and large enough to run
the air conditioner, then these expenses have been necessary.
intend to infer that these expenses were in any way decisions that were
influenced by you.
been my decisions as to what, long term, would be in my best interests.
my computer or TV will obviously depend on what voltage I have in the batteies
[sic – batteries], while being aware
of the fridge cut out point, and
whether I have been driving and the weather conditions. I am confident that I
can do that.
would like and what I can have will obviously depend on the fridge cut out
See annexures to affidavit of Leigh May Kinsella, sworn 20 June 2011 at pages
LK14, LK 17 and LK18.
Court is simply not persuaded on the evidence that the applicant made it clear
what she considered constituted “
independent power
specificity that she now claims, and the most that can be said to be clear on
the evidence is that she asked for,
and ultimately obtained after she installed
the generator, a power system which enabled her to remain off-road or out of
parks for up to four to five days. There was, in the Court’s view,
no representations or conduct which were misleading or deceptive
respondent, or Mr Vitasovic, with respect to the question of independent power
in the Bus.
Solar panels
respect to the installation of the solar panels there does not appear to be any
dispute that what was originally planned to be
installed were two 12 volt 85
watt solar panels. At some point, Mr Vitasovic determined to install only one 24
volt 190 watt solar
panel, which he was told by the supplier would deliver more
power than the two 12 volt solar panels, and which he therefore felt
preferable, even though more power was not required: Transcript, 3 July
2012, pages 42 and 87. The evidence before the Court
does not establish that the
single solar panel was not more efficient than the two 12 volt 85 watt solar
panels. The applicant’s
expert evidence does not support the
applicant’s assertion of false or misleading representations or misleading
and deceptive
conduct by the respondent. Rather, it simply indicates that
people just settle on 2 x 80 watt solar panels or the equivalent 1 x
” solar panels, whilst indicating some doubt as to whether
will do the job
”. The complaint made is not as to
whether there is one or two solar panels, but that the single solar panel was
represented
to be more efficient and more powerful than the two requested by the
applicant. There is nothing in the evidence which establishes
that the single
solar panel was not more efficient nor more powerful than the two requested by
the applicant. As to efficiency of
the solar panels there is no evidence from a
person in a position to know as to the efficiency of the two versus one solar
On the question of power, on the face of it the one solar panel at 190
watts, does appear to be more powerful than the two solar
panels, which combined
provide 170 watts, and there was evidence from Mr Vitasovic to this effect:
Transcript, 4 July 2012, page
112. Again, this is not a matter which is the
subject of any expert evidence as to the actual power provided.
applicant’s central premise with respect to this alleged misleading or
deceptive conduct or representation is therefore
not made out, in that the
applicant has failed to prove that the single solar panel is not as efficient or
powerful as the two solar
panels. It follows, therefore, that there was no
misleading or deceptive conduct or representations by the respondent or Mr
in this regard.
Battery system
applicant argued that the battery system in the Bus was not sufficient because
the fridge would only run for one and a half days:
Transcript, 3 July 2012,
page 52. The applicant conceded, however, that she did not request a two-way
power system, and, therefore,
the power ran off the batteries all the time.
Based on previous experience she had “
” that there
would be two-way power system so that when she was plugged in to mains power the
system would not be running off
the batteries all the time, but that that was
not the case: Transcript, 3 July 2012, page 34.
was given by Mr Butt, an auto electrician from Bentley Auto Electrics, as to
work conducted on the Bus immediately prior
to Easter 2011, that is from 18
April to 21 April 2011. Mr Butt’s evidence was that when the Bus was
brought to Bentley Auto
Electrics the batteries were “
”. Mr Vitasovic would later give evidence that, in his experience,
batteries become out of sync when one or other them is flattened
by over-use. In
any event, Bentley Auto Electrics had the Bus for four days during which time,
having charged the batteries, they
ran the fridge, as well as some of the lights
in the Bus, for four days off the batteries: Transcript, 4 July 2012, page
72, corroborated
by Mr Vitasovic’s evidence at Transcript, 4 July
2012, page 93. Mr Butt’s evidence therefore cast considerable doubt
applicant’s assertion that the fridge could only be run for 1.5 days on
the batteries.
Butt’s evidence was that one of the batteries was out of sync because it
not up to spec
”, but there is no evidence as to how that
happened, or from when the battery was out of sync. It is relevant in that
to note, however, that the applicant gave evidence that she was using a
television and computer on the Bus for up to seven hours
a day, and it is,
therefore, conceivable that she may have flattened one or other of the batteries
to such an extent that the batteries
were out of sync. In any event, Mr
Butt’s evidence is not consistent with the applicant’s assertion
that the fridge would
only run for one and half days off the batteries.
Butt also gave evidence that he did replace a cable so as to allow the batteries
to charge better, but that the previous cable
was adequate: Transcript,
3 July 2012, pages 75 and 79.
Mr Butt had examined the batteries, the applicant sought advice and had the
batteries examined by a number of parties, independent
of the respondent. In
those circumstances, it would not be safe for the Court to draw any conclusions
from the hearsay evidence of
the applicant (which although not objected to is in
any event not admissible):
Evidence Act 1995
, and because
the Court cannot on the evidence be satisfied that the batteries have not
otherwise been the subject of work or interference
by persons other than the
respondent or its nominated contractors: affidavit of Leigh May Kinsella, sworn
20 June 2011 at paras.35-47.
is, in short, no cogent evidence that the batteries which were installed by the
respondent were not of acceptable quality or
were unfit for purpose in any way,
at the time of their installation. There is no sufficient evidence to enable the
Court to draw
an ultimate conclusion as to the reasons why, by shortly before
Easter 2011, the batteries were “
out of sync
evidence in that regard is not inconsistent with the batteries being over-used
by the applicant to such an extent
that one or other of them flattened,
therefore putting them “
out of sync
”. It is relevant in that
regard to note that the applicant concedes that there were no problems with the
Bus until March or
April of 2011: Transcript, 4 July 2012, page
December 2010
applicant collected the Bus on 23 December 2010, paying an extra $400 for a
power point outlet that her son had requested be installed.
applicant says that on 23 December 2010 Mr Vitasovic, on behalf of the
respondent, made the following representations:
one solar panel was installed instead of two as originally requested because the
one solar panel installed was more efficient,
and therefore better, than the
combined effect of the two that Mr Vitasovic had originally intended to install,
and it was cheaper;
he installed two batteries;
the refrigerator would work for two or three days on the batteries alone without
a generator or solar power;
a battery monitor was installed, and Mr Vitasovic showed the applicant and her
son how to interpret the battery monitor;
if the battery monitor showed a reading of less than 12 volts Mr Vitasovic
advised the applicant that she ought to utilise other
sources of power;
pumps were installed in the back of the seating, which had not been requested by
the applicant; and
to operate the awning.
applicant also says that at no time did Mr Vitasovic communicate to her
lights, the water pump, the gas stove, the gas water heater, the water pumps for
the toilet and shower, would all be using battery
television, the computer or any other electrical appliance would be using
battery power;
utilisation of power from the power point outlet would reduce the amount of
power supply to the refrigerator;
battery monitor did not indicate the amount of power that was being used;
ought to use the plasmatronic unit to get an indication of how much battery
power was being used;
did not how to read the plasmatronic unit;
did not how to wire up the battery correctly; and
did not how to operate the awning.
evidence, the applicant conceded that the Bus “
” and that she was “
very very happy
Transcript, 3 July 2012, page 23. The Bus “
perfect...wonderful
” at pick-up, and apart from the issue of the gas
appliances, the applicant conceded that it was “
everything that I could
possibly have wanted, and I still feel that way.
”: Transcript,
4 July 2012, page 68. As late as 25 May 2011, less than a month before
instituting these proceedings, the applicant
would advise Mr Vitasovic as
want to convey again that I am 100% satisfied with how you outfitted my bus.
There were a few surprises like the pumps
in the seats and the outdoor gas BBQ
and how big and heavy the awning was but overall I am happy with how great the
bus looks and
how it is set out.
See affidavit of
Leigh May Kinsella, sworn 20 June 2011, annexures page LK16.
it appears to the Court that the applicant made a general inquiry of the
respondent in April 2010 and received a general
response and estimate of the
cost of customisation of her Bus. In light of subsequent events the Court does
not consider that any
real reliance was placed upon that general inquiry and
response in April 2010. Those subsequent events included the fact that the
applicant ordered a customisation of her Bus on essentially the same basis as
the Other Bus, which she had seen on the respondent’s
website in a
customised version. The respondent sent the applicant the Plan, including
reference to the “GAS STOVE”,
and the applicant, without really
knowing what it was that she was getting apart from what she had seen on the
website in relation
to the customised version of the Other Bus, went ahead and
placed an order for the customisation of her Bus in much the same terms
Other Bus. In so doing the applicant did not ascertain with any degree of
specificity matters of importance, including the
nature of the Bus’ power
sources, or the nature of the appliances to be installed, and did not specify
that she wanted non-gas
appliances. The applicant simply made many assumptions
as to how the Bus was to be customised. The applicant conceded this under
cross-examination, generally conceding on a number of occasions that she had
made assumptions which did not turn out to be true,
and specifically said that
she had been “
...foolish enough...to trust that I was going to get what
I asked for...
”, in circumstances where what she asked for was based
on both assumption and a lack of specificity, in circumstances where
prepared to concede that in so doing she had been “
very foolish, very
”: Transcript, 3 July 2012, page 52.
Ultimately,
the Court concludes that in December 2010 the applicant essentially got from the
respondent what she asked for: a customisation
of the Bus in a manner not
manifestly dissimilar to the Other Bus.
February-March 2011
February 2011 the applicant had travelled over 1000 kilometres through the
south-west of Western Australia, during which time everything
in the Bus seemed
to be working, and during which time she did spend two, albeit separate, nights
operating under what she described
independent power
when parked up in information bays. That can only mean that she was operating
off battery power on those nights.
problem emerged until the applicant returned to Perth, was parked up in her
daughter’s driveway, and using her daughter’s
power, at which time
the fridge defrosted, the applicant says, in a day and a
December 2010 to June 2011
the period between December 2010 and June 2011 the applicant says that she
discovered the following issues with the Bus:
the battery was not wired properly;
the shower hose was stuck, and as a result, the shower could not be
the shower door was faulty and did not shut properly;
the shower recess has three unprotected wood walls;
the water hose was dislodged, and as a result, there was no access to
the elbow joint is too small for the outlet pipe;
the water hose is too big for the joint;
the cover came apart from water pressure;
the outlet pipe from the sink is not secured properly;
the hose from the shower outlet is crimped;
water comes up from under the shower access, which was temporarily fixed so as
not to cause further water damage to the shower
surrounds and nearby
sink tap drips;
plasmatronic unit had exposed metal parts;
plasmatronic unit was not wired up correctly to use all functions;
plasmatronic unit did not have a remote meter installed;
plasmatronic unit alarm is not activated;
plasmatronic unit was initially under a seat and not accessible to read;
LED lights flicker;
is no ventilator to remove smoke from the gas cooker;
slide-out barbeque set is stiff and difficult to pull out;
has not been a weather shield installed over the awning;
tension knobs for the awning were not supplied;
gas bottle was not supposed to be under the bed; and
unsealed batteries were installed in the Bus.
Battery not properly wired
is no evidence that the batteries installed in the Bus by the respondent were
not properly wired. Indeed, Mr Butt’s evidence
is to the contrary, that
the wiring was adequate as at Easter 2011. Since then, various people have had
access to the batteries,
and have taken them in and out of the Bus. That,
together with a lack of specificity as to when it is asserted that the battery
not properly wired, means that the Court is not prepared to conclude that
any battery installed in the Bus was not properly wired.
Shower hose
applicant’s evidence indicates that the applicant did not use the shower
hose until April or May 2011, that is four to five
months after the Bus was
collected from the respondent. The evidence establishes that the shower hose was
stuck, and could not be
retracted, and therefore could not be used for the hand
basin, which it seemingly was intended to be used for as part a dual purpose.
Thus, whilst the applicant could use it to shower, because it could not be
retracted, and then drawn out again to use for the hand
basin, it was limited to
one use rather than two. See Transcript, 3 July 2012, pages 29-30 and
32-33. Subsequently, the applicant
has had the problem with the shower hose
fixed by a person other than the respondent.
respondent’s expert gave evidence that “
the shower hose is of
acceptable quality and has been used for many years in the industry
respondent’s expert’s report, point 2. That evidence, however, goes
to the quality of the shower hose, and not
whether it was fit for purpose. In
any event, it appears that the respondent’s expert inspected the Bus on
1 May 2012, after
the shower hose had been repaired.
the circumstances, the Court is satisfied, on the applicant’s evidence,
that the shower hose as supplied by the respondent
in the Bus was not reasonably
fit for the purpose of being both a shower hose and hand basin hose, which was
the particular purpose
for which the hose was supplied as part of the Bus. In
those circumstances, there has been a contravention of
is no evidence of the cost of repairing the shower hose, but it is unlikely to
be a significant cost.
Shower door
applicant gave evidence that the shower door does not shut properly: affidavit
of Leigh May Kinsella, sworn 27 January 2012, para.59
and annexure LK42.
is no evidence from the applicant’s expert that the shower door does not
shut properly. There is a reference to “
Loose fittings attributed to
poor workmanship. (Fixed by other parties as claimed)
applicant’s expert’s report, page 4. The respondent’s expert
merely indicates that “
The shower door and lock are standard for this
conversion.
”: respondent’s expert’s report, point 3.
is no evidence of the shower door being repaired, nor of the cost of any such
repair if it was undertaken. In the circumstances,
these facts, taken together
with the relative vagueness of the expert’s evidence as to the shower door
and the nature of the
alleged defect, do not enable the Court to draw a positive
conclusion as to whether or not the shower door was not of an acceptable
or was unfit for purpose. The applicant has, therefore, not made out her case in
this respect.
Shower recess
complaint as set out is that the shower recess has three unprotected wood walls,
but on the evidence it would appear that the
problem is that the wood is warping
as a consequence of water getting in.
applicant’s evidence was that this was a problem which commenced in
February 2012: Transcript, 3 July 2012, page 53. It
was subsequently fixed
when a seal around an extractor fan was resealed. The inference which the
applicant seemingly seeks that the
Court draw is that the extractor fan seal was
never sealed properly when the work was initially carried out: Transcript,
3 July 2012,
Vitasovic conceded that any wood would warp if it became excessively wet:
Transcript, 4 July 2012, page 108. Mr Vitasovic was not
cross-examined as
to the sealing of the extractor fan, or the workmanship associated with the
installation of the extractor fan,
or any problem with the sealing of the
extractor fan.
applicant’s expert’s evidence is that the shower seal finish appears
to be satisfactory, but there “
seems to be movement which is
” and that could be “
a maintenance issue as the vehicle
build is 18 months old. (Distance travelled)
”: applicant’s
expert’s report, page 4. The applicant’s expert also indicates that
an extension handle kit
might have been used on the extractor fan and roof
hatch, but that the roof hatch still operates, although it would have worked
with an extension handle: applicant’s expert’s report, page
4. The applicant’s expert goes on to indicate that
there was a
Poor choice of sealant used on roof vent. (Annual
maintenance)
”: applicant’s expert’s report, page 4. The
respondent’s expert does not comment on these issues other than
that the shower access is “
ample given the limited space in this
”: respondent’s expert’s report, point 4. The
applicant’s expert went on to indicate that the hatch in the
needs urgent attention and that he had sealed it with silicon to stop additional
water entry. The applicant’s expert
also notes that the
...panelling in the shower is warped at this stage. Investigations
show possibly from leaking roof hatch and hand basin (as claimed)
applicant’s expert’s report, page 4.
problem commenced 14 months after the Bus was collected, and there is no
evidence as to the nature of the problem with the seal
from the person who fixed
it, and no evidence from the applicant other than that there was a problem with
the seal. This problem
might have arisen because of natural shrinkage of a seal
over time or movement from road travel. Inferences to that effect are available
from the applicant’s expert’s evidence, and in particular his
comments about movement in the shower seal as a consequence
of distance
travelled, and that the sealant used on the roof vent was an annual maintenance
matter. Although the applicant’s
expert is critical of the roof hatch to
the bathroom area the evidence is that it “
still operates
applicant’s expert’s report, page 4. The applicant’s expert is
not conclusive as to whether the warping
is as a consequence of a leaking roof
hatch or hand basin: it is a possible cause, but no definite conclusion is set
out or reached.
the evidence as it presently stands the Court is not satisfied that the problem
with the seal with the extractor fan, and the consequent
shower recess problems,
are ones that were of the respondent’s making. All that can be said is
that 14 months after the applicant
took delivery of the Bus the area around the
extractor fan began to leak. There is no evidence as to the cause of the leak
links it to the nature or quality of the goods supplied, or the
workmanship involved in installing, the extractor fan. Likewise,
the fact that
no extension handle kit was installed does not appear to have had any specific
Dislodged water hose
applicant asserts that the water hose came apart and that she did not have water
for the toilet: affidavit of Leigh May Kinsella,
sworn 27 January 2012,
para.59 and annexure LK 41. The fact that the water hose came apart and that the
applicant did not have water
for the toilet accompanied by a photo which shows
that, does not, without more, establish unfitness for purpose or unacceptable
The applicant is not assisted by the applicant’s expert’s
evidence in relation to this issue, which appears to be somewhat
contradictory,
indicating that the interior of the toilet is of a standard that is accepted in
the industry, which notes that the
cover plate provided for the toilet
installation kit is not in place, and then notes that the fittings at the back
of the toilet
have failed, but that the expert has seen this many times before:
applicant’s expert’s report, page 2. The applicant’s
indicates that he is not sure whether the cover plate has been left off or has
been removed. The applicant’s evidence
was that it was left off at
installation.
the circumstances, the Court is not prepared to find that there was any
unfitness for purpose or lack of quality in relation to
the water hose itself,
because of the applicant’s expert’s evidence that this is not an
unusual occurrence, or at least
it is one that he has seen many times before,
and that otherwise the interior is of a standard accepted in the industry. With
to the cover plate, the Court accepts the applicant’s evidence
that that was never in installed, and, in those circumstances,
finds that that
aspect of the goods was unfit for its particular purpose, contrary to
is no evidence as to the cost of rectification of this issue, but it would not
appear to be significant.
Elbow joint
applicant asserts that the elbow joint was too small for the outlet pipe from
the shower recess. The applicant says that the respondent,
at some point,
removed the smelly water from the outlet drain, but did not fix the alleged
underlying problem with the elbow joint:
see Transcript, 3 July 2012, page
applicant has subsequently had the problem rectified by a person other than the
respondent.
respondent’s expert’s evidence is that the elbow joint is that
normally used in all conversions
”: respondent’s
expert’s report, point 6. The applicant’s expert does not directly
comment upon the assertion
with respect to the elbow joint on the outlet pipe,
but does observe, apropos of a further issue, that the shower waste hose under
the vehicle is kinked throughout its length, that there is poor pipe routing,
and that the “
use of elbow fittings would stop this
the evidence, it would appear that there was not any defect or unfitness for
purpose in the elbow joint as supplied, in that it
appears that it was the elbow
joint normally used in such customisations. There is no expert, and otherwise no
adequate, evidence
to indicate that the elbow joint was too small for the outlet
pipe from the shower recess, and that it caused any problem with respect
either the water accumulating in the outlet drain, or any water damage caused by
internal flooding in the shower surrounds.
Water hose too big for joint
issue is the obverse of the elbow joint issue discussed above, and, likewise,
the evidence does not establish any defect or unfitness
for purpose in the water
Cover coming apart from water pressure
matter is covered under the “Dislodged water hose” heading
Outlet pipe
evidence of the applicant was that the outlet pipe from the sink and shower was
loose, and that the applicant found this out when
she tried to use the grey
water tank immediately after she picked up the Bus, but because she did not
subsequently use the grey water
tank it was not a problem until later:
Transcript, 3 July 2012, pages 55-56. This contrasts with the
applicant’s evidence that
the Bus was “
that she was otherwise happy with the fit-out at the time that she took
delivery. It is clear that the applicant’s
evidence in this regard is
inconsistent.
the evidence, there is insufficient evidence to conclude that the water outlet
pipe was not properly secured at the time of delivery
of the Bus. The
applicant’s case in this respect has not been made
Shower outlet hose crimped
applicant asserts that the hose from the shower outlet is crimped. The
applicant’s expert agrees that it is “
kinked throughout its
” and that the use of elbow fittings would stop this problem.
The respondent’s expert does not comment on this issue at
all. It may be
that the crimped or kinked shower waste hose is the cause of the smelly water
and water backup into the shower recess,
but there is no evidence which
indicates that this is the case. Nevertheless, a pipe which is kinked throughout
its length is not
a pipe or hose which is fit for purpose, particularly in
circumstances where the use of elbow fittings would, on the applicant’s
expert’s evidence, make it fit for purpose. In these circumstances, the
applicant has established that the shower waste hose
under the vehicle was not
fit for purpose, for the purpose of
is no evidence as to the likely cost of rectification of this problem, but once
again it would not appear to be significant.
Kitchen tap
applicant says that the kitchen tap leaks. The applicant’s expert evidence
indicates that the installation of the sink and
plumbing to the sink is
restrained and clipped up. Further, that all items used are available in the
industry, and that whilst any
leaks might be associated with poor workmanship
that is not apparent: applicant’s expert’s report, page 3. The
applicant’s
expert goes on to comment on some missing lock clips on pipe
work, and a possible source of a water leak from an external screw:
applicant’s expert’s report, page 4, none of which, however, goes to
the question of a leaky kitchen tap. The respondent’s
expert simply
indicates that the “
Sink tap is also acceptable
respondent’s expert’s report, point 7.
evidence does not clearly establish leakage from the kitchen tap, or that there
was a problem with the goods supplied or their
quality. In the circumstances,
the Court is not prepared to find that there is a leaking kitchen tap, and even
if there is a leaking
kitchen tap there is nothing to indicate that it is the
fault of the respondent, either in terms of the quality of the goods supplied
their fitness for purpose.
Plasmatronic unit
evidence establishes that the applicant did not specifically request that the
plasmatronic unit be installed in the Bus, but that
the respondent installed a
plasmatronic unit as there was one on the Other Bus. The plasmatronic unit on
the Bus was, however, different
to the system on the Other Bus: Transcript,
3 July 2012, page 34 and 4 July 2012, page 92.
applicant makes certain assertions, including that there were unsafe and
uninsulated bare wires in the plasmatronic unit, that
the unit did not have a
remote meter or alarm, and was initially inaccessible. The respondent says that
the unit was relocated, but
that in any event the applicant was told that the
plasmatronic unit was not, essentially, for her use, but installed as a
which might be useful for an auto electrician: Transcript, 3 July
2012, page 56 and 4 July, page 94.
is nothing in the applicant’s expert evidence which indicates that the
plasmatronic unit is not fit for purpose or is
otherwise of unacceptable quality
in any way. The applicant’s expert evidence essentially agrees with that
of the respondent.
The applicant’s expert in summary finds that the
plasmatronic unit:
top of the range product too complex for the average user in most
situations;
been relocated from its original location;
installation
under the seat is not technically a problem, but they are usually installed in
an electrical only dedicated location
in a cupboard away from view;
too complex for the average person, and there are many functions in the
plasmatronic controller which are not required in every
installation.
Applicant’s expert evidence, pages
is not clear what, if any, damage the applicant says that she may have suffered
by reason of the matters which she asserts in relation
to the plasmatronic unit.
Further, the evidence does not establish that the plasmatronic unit was not fit
for purpose or of unacceptable
quality. The applicant has not, on the evidence,
made out her case in this regard.
applicant concedes that there was no discussion with respect to what lights were
appropriate for the Bus, and that she assumed
that the respondent would install
appropriate lighting in the Bus: Transcript, 3 July 2012, pages 30-31.
evidence of the applicant suggests that there is a problem with the LED lights
in that they dim and flicker and that that has
occurred since she took delivery
of the Bus. A significant difficulty with the applicant’s evidence is that
she also gave evidence
that apart from the alleged issue with respect to the gas
appliances everything in the Bus was “
”, and that
there was not a problem until March or April of 2011.
applicant’s expert evidence does not assist the applicant. The
applicant’s expert indicates that he is “
satisfied with the
lighting system
”, albeit that he prefers to use halogen lights rather
than LEDs due to the number of issues with the LEDs. The applicant’s
expert then says that he “
...found the LED lights are unreliable,
although they are very efficient with power consumption
”, but that any
...issue should be taken up with the suppliers for
”: applicant’s expert report, page 3. The difficulty
with the applicant’s expert evidence, particularly in the absence
being available for cross-examination, is that the statements that he makes with
respect to being satisfied with the lighting
system in the Bus appear to be at
odds with his statement that “
LED lights are unreliable
although this might be explained by reference to LED lights generally, and not
in the lighting system for this particular
Bus. Because the applicant’s
expert was not made available for cross-examination this matter was not able to
be tested by the
respondent, and in those circumstances the respondent ought not
suffer any prejudice by reason of internal conflict within the applicant’s
expert’s advice, and the Court will therefore take the applicant’s
expert’s evidence at its highest for the respondent
with respect to the
lighting system. Furthermore, the applicant’s expert evidence taken at its
highest is consistent with that
of the respondent’s expert who says that
...LED lights are the latest fittiings (sic) available and
”: respondent’s expert’s report, point 9.
the circumstances, and particularly given the expert evidence as accepted by the
Court, the applicant has not made out a case that
the LED lights were either of
unacceptable quality or not fit for purpose.
Ventilator for gas cooker
applicant now complains that there is no ventilator for the gas cooker within
the Bus. No ventilator was however requested, and
there is no evidence that a
ventilator was fitted to the Other Bus. The final point of the applicant’s
expert evidence is that
...range hood is not compulsory to have in a
vehicle when cooking
”: applicant’s expert’s report, page
6. In circumstances where such ventilation is not compulsory, and where there
no evidence that there was such a ventilator in the Other Bus, and, further, no
evidence that such ventilation was ever requested
by the applicant, the
applicant cannot now complain that there is not a ventilator or range hood for
the gas cooker. This aspect
of the applicant’s case is therefore not made
applicant appears to assert that the barbeque is not correctly installed, and
needs to be greased in order for it to slide out
correctly. The remedy sought by
the applicant is, it seems, to have the barbeque properly greased to enable it
to slide correctly.
respondent says that the barbeque is standard for a customisation of this type,
and was of acceptable quality as inserted.
inspection by the respondent’s expert it was found that that the
Slide-out barbeque is (sic) of acceptable quality
respondent’s expert’s report, point 10.
respondent’s expert’s evidence, which the Court accepts, indicates
that there is nothing with respect to the barbeque
which means it was of
unacceptable quality or not fit for purpose. The remedy sought now is one which
appears to be a maintenance
issue, if, given the evidence of the
respondent’s expert, it is an issue at all. The applicant has not made out
her case in
this respect.
is a complaint that the cost of the installation of the barbeque significantly
exceeded the cost of the barbeque itself. There
is, however, no evidence which
would establish that although the barbeque itself was a relatively cheap item to
purchase, that its
installation in the Bus cost less than was charged when
regard is had to the fact that the barbeque has to be installed, and there
labour cost involved in that installation, including the necessary gas fitting.
Although this particular complaint does not
come under any particular head, it
is not made out on the available evidence in any event.
applicant’s complaints appear to be that there were no tension knobs
supplied with the awning, that there were holes left
by relocation of the
awning, and that there was no weather shield for the awning.
applicant conceded that a weather shield was not requested for the awning:
Transcript, 3 July 2012, page 56.
applicant’s expert evidence was that it was common to fit awnings to this
come standard
”: applicant’s expert’s report, page 1. The
applicant’s expert goes on to note that awnings are prone to damage
the elements. The applicant’s expert notes that the awning has been
relocated, leaving holes not repaired in the bodywork
which is not of tradesman
like quality: applicant’s expert’s report, page 1. The existence of
such holes was characterised
as poor practice by the applicant’s
Vitasovic gave evidence that on two occasions he showed the applicant how to put
up the awning, and in those circumstances does
not believe that the tension
knobs were missing. It is relevant to note that the tension knobs were first
observed to be missing
some months after the applicant took delivery of the Bus.
As to holes as a consequence of relocation of the awning, this is not disputed,
although it is said by the respondent that there were only three holes, and that
they were probably filled with sealer in the expectation
that the applicant was
to have the Bus painted. It is relevant to note that the applicant’s
expert does not note how many holes
there are in the Bus. In the circumstances,
the Court is prepared to accept Mr Vitasovic’s evidence that there are
the circumstances, although the matter appears to be a trifling one which might
otherwise have been solved by the application of
some sealer and a lick of
paint, because the practice is a poor one, the goods supplied were not fit for
purpose, and it is only
to this extent that the complaint about the awning is
again, there is no evidence as to the cost of remediation of this issue, but it
is clearly not a significant cost.
evidence was that a gas bottle was installed under the bed in the Bus. Sometime
after the applicant had taken delivery of the
Bus the relevant State government
department issued a defect notice requiring that the gas bottle be relocated.
The relocation was
required to be done by a certified gas fitter. Transcript,
3 July 2012, pages 46-47.
is not apparent what, if any, injury the applicant suffered as a consequence of
the gas bottle having to be shifted.
applicant’s expert clearly took the view that the relevant State
government inspector was correct in requiring relocation
of the gas bottle, as
its location under the bed was not in accordance with the relevant regulations
or standards: applicant’s
expert’s report, page 5.
Vitasovic gave evidence that he did not think that the location was a problem,
but once that it was deemed to be so then the respondent
would have got a gas
fitter to rectify the problem. Mr Vitasovic gave evidence that there was a gas
fitter’s certificate with
respect to the original location of the gas
bottle: Transcript, 4 July 2012, pages 81 and 110.
is beyond doubt, particularly given the rectification notice issued by the
relevant State government inspector that the gas bottle
was fitted in a manner
which was not fit for its particular purpose under
The applicant has made out her case in this respect.
unchallenged evidence of the applicant was that she had to pay $110 to have the
defect with respect to the gas bottle remedied:
affidavit of Leigh May Kinsella,
sworn 27 January 2012, at para.28.
Unsealed batteries
evidence of the applicant was that two unsealed batteries were put into the Bus
in June 2011 as replacement batteries when the
normal batteries were taken to
the respondent to be recharged and resynchronised. The batteries inserted which
were unsealed were
loan batteries and it was intended that they be very short
term insertions, and that they be replaced by the resynchronised batteries:
Transcript, 3 July 2012, pages 43-44. The applicant was however then told
by the respondent, through Mr Vitasovic, that there was
a fault with the
batteries and that two replacement batteries would be obtained for the
applicant’s Bus. The applicant insisted
upon knowing the make, model and
tell her, she refused
to provide the respondent with access to the Bus to
replace the loan batteries with new batteries.
applicant now claims that unsealed batteries ought not to have been placed in
the Bus, and that they give off toxic fumes. The
applicant conceded, however,
under cross-examination, that she had no idea whether the unsealed batteries in
her Bus gave off toxic
fumes, and that when she had blood and urine tests done,
her results were clear: Transcript, 3 July 2012, page 45. Furthermore, she
concedes that she did not return the unsealed batteries to Mr Vitasovic as
requested by him: Transcript, 3 July 2012, page 45.
Vitasovic says that the applicant’s daughter was told that the unsealed
batteries were not meant to be permanent, and indeed
that they were extremely
temporary, having been obtained at short notice, at the applicant’s
request, over a weekend in June
2011: Transcript, 4 July 2012, page
Vitasovic indicated that the batteries were on temporary loan for three to four
days, a position not disputed by the applicant.
Nor did the applicant dispute Mr
Vitasovic’s evidence that she refused to bring the Bus back to enable new
batteries to be
fitted, and that this was said to be, ultimately, on the basis
that the applicant was going to take legal action. Given that these
supposedly occurred over a weekend in June 2011, that rings true, with the
Application being filed on 20 June 2011. See Transcript,
4 July 2012, pages
Vitasovic gave evidence that he did not want the applicant to even drive the Bus
whilst the loan batteries were installed (those
batteries being for non-driving
power purposes), and that he would have preferred to take them out when she
brought the Bus back,
but that she refused to come back to have the unsealed
batteries taken out: Transcript, 4 July 2012, pages 101-102.
the circumstances, the unsealed batteries were not intended to be anything other
than a very short term and temporary solution
to a particular problem with
respect to the recharging of the ordinary batteries, and then the supply of
ordinary batteries. The
applicant cannot complain about the consequences of
exposure to unsealed batteries in circumstances where she refused to return the
Bus to have sealed batteries put back into the Bus. Furthermore, there is no
evidence of any injury whatsoever being suffered by
the applicant as a
consequence of the unsealed batteries being in the Bus, and, moreover, it is
highly unlikely that the applicant
would have suffered any injury if she had
returned the Bus to the respondent as requested immediately after the June
weekend concerned.
That she did not so return the Bus evinces a lack of concern
for her own welfare, the consequences of which, if any (and on the evidence
there are none) ought not, in any event, be visited upon the
respondent.
Air-conditioner
air-conditioner was leaking, and was fixed under warranty by the manufacturer:
see affidavit of Leigh May Kinsella, sworn 13 July
2011. The applicant’s
expert observed that water does drain from these air-conditioners and if the
drainage or channels become
blocked it will result in water dripping inside the
Bus: applicant’s expert’s report, page 3. The applicant asserts in
her affidavit of 13 July 2011 that the leak was a consequence of poor
installation, but there is no evidence to support that assertion,
applicant has no relevant expertise sufficient to make that assertion.
Significantly, the applicant’s expert does not
make this assertion. On the
evidence, the applicant has failed to make out her case against the respondent
on this issue.
a complaint is made about the installation of the pumps in the seats, there is
no evidence that these pumps are unfit for
purpose or of an unacceptable
quality, or that they were not inserted in the Other Bus. In any event, there
was no evidence of any
damage or injury caused to the applicant by reason of the
positioning of the pumps.
is, finally, relevant to note that the applicant’s expert gave evidence
that the customisation of the Bus “
...appears to be a standard expected
given the cost
...the fit out is of a usual acceptable
”: applicant’s expert’s report, page 4. The
respondent’s expert indicated that “
the conversion in the Coaster
bus is of a very high standard
”: respondent’s expert’s
report, final paragraph.
Consideration – summary
summary the Court has concluded that:
claims of misleading and deceptive conduct and representations under
have not been established; and
claims as to unacceptable quality and unfitness for purpose have only been
established in relation to unfitness for purpose for:
shower hose;
toilet water pressure cover;
crimping of the shower outlet hose;
gas bottle; and
awning, but only as to the three unsealed holes.
respect of the above there is no specific evidence as to the cost of
rectification of each of the above matters, or the damage
suffered by the
applicant, save for the cost of $110 with respect to the gas
applicant claims damages of $11,824.40 for monies expended in rectifying what
she alleges were deficiencies with the customisation
of her Bus, and a further
$6,231.25 for matters still to be repaired: Transcript, 3 July 2012, page
15. The applicant asserts that
she spent more than $4,000 having rectification
work undertaken, including the addition of two further batteries and an
solar panel, plus the un-jamming of the shower hose, the connection
of the running water and the repairing of the elbow joint, together
installation of lights and an extractor fan for the gas stove: Transcript,
3 July 2012, page 49.
Additionally,
the applicant asserts that she may have lost as much as $104,000 by reason of
her not being able to undertake a year
of relief teaching because she did not
have enough power in the Bus to enable her to be accommodated at remote relief
teaching sites:
Transcript, 3 July 2012, page 26. The applicant, therefore,
asserts that she could not go relief teaching.
claim with respect to relief teaching must however fail on the evidence. There
is no evidence that the applicant would have got
relief teaching, or any
specific independent evidence as to what rate she would have been paid, or had
been paid in the past. There
is in evidence no payslips from past work carried
out on a relief basis, and no evidence of, for example, industrial awards or
establishing the relevant rate of pay for teachers undertaking relief
remote teaching.
was also an unquantified claim with respect to distress and injury arising from
the circumstances generally, which was unsupported
by any medical evidence
whatsoever. In those circumstances, that claim cannot succeed.
respect to the claims which have succeeded under
applicant has failed to specifically quantify and prove damages, save for the
damages with respect to the gas bottle, which cost
$110. It is, however,
apparent that there is no significant cost attached to rectification of the
remaining items with respect to
which the Court has found liability under
. Damages in these circumstances are not necessarily an
exact science, and the Court does not consider that the rectification of those
issues which were unquantified ought to exceed $750.
will therefore be judgment for the applicant on her Application in the sum of
$860 ($750 plus $110 for the gas bottle) with
respect to the items upon which
liability has been found, but otherwise the Application will be
Conclusion and orders
Court has concluded that:
Applicant’s Application in a Case filed on 6 July 2011 ought to be
Respondent’s Application in a Case filed on 6 March 2012 ought to be
dismissed; and
be judgment for the applicant in the sum of $860, but otherwise the Application
ought to be dismissed.
There will be orders
accordingly.
Court will hear the parties as to the costs of the Application, the
Applicant’s Application in a Case and the Respondent’s
Application
I certify that the preceding one hundred and fifty-two
(152) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of Lucev FM
Date: 9 April 2013
RTF format (349 KB)
Signed PDF/A format