Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v Bartley [2025] HCA 29 (6 August 2025)
HIGH COURT OF
GAGELER CJ,
GORDON, EDELMAN, STEWARD AND
BEECH‑JONES JJ
HELENSBURGH COAL PTY LTD APPELLANT
NEIL BARTLEY AND OTHERS NAMED
IN THE SCHEDULE RESPONDENTS
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v Bartley
[2025] HCA 29
Date of Hearing: 6 March 2025
Date of Judgment: 6 August
Appeal dismissed.
On appeal from the Federal Court of Australia
Representation
B W Walker SC with A M Pomerenke KC and P M Zielinski for the appellant
(instructed by MinterEllison)
J T Gleeson SC with P A Boncardo for the first to twenty-second respondents
(instructed by Mining and Energy Union)
Submitting appearance for the twenty-third respondent
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v Bartley
Industrial law (Cth) – Unfair dismissal – Genuine redundancy
– Where employer dismissed employees because of changes
in operational
requirements of employer's enterprise – Where employer continued to deploy
contractors to perform work in employer's
enterprise – Where s 389(2)
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth) provides dismissal not genuine redundancy if
it would have been reasonable in all circumstances for person to be redeployed
within employer's enterprise – Whether Fair Work Commission, in
undertaking
inquiry, permitted to inquire into whether employer
could have made changes to its enterprise to create or make available position
for otherwise redundant employee.
Appeals – Standard of appellate review – Where Full Bench of Fair
Work Commission applied
House v The King
standard of appellate review to
review of decision that dismissals were not cases of genuine redundancy under
Fair Work Act
House v The King
appropriate standard of appellate review – Whether application of wrong
standard of appellate review would constitute jurisdictional
Words and phrases – "affording latitude", "all the circumstances",
"appeal by way of rehearing", "appellate restraint", "business,
project or undertaking", "case of genuine redundancy", "contractors",
"correctness standard", "counter-factual", "discretionary
decision", "employer's
enterprise", "employment", "enterprise", "error within jurisdiction", "Fair Work
Commission", "genuine redundancy",
House v The King
", "hypothetical",
"insourcing", "job", "judicial review", "jurisdictional error", "nature of the
employer's enterprise", "operational
requirements", "position", "reasonable in
all the circumstances", "redeploy", "reinstatement", "restructure", "standard of
review", "termination", "unfair dismissal", "work", "would have been
reasonable".
Fair Work Act 2009
GAGELER CJ,
GORDON AND BEECH-JONES JJ. The first to twenty-second
respondents
Employees") worked at the Metropolitan Coal Mine ("the Mine") operated by
the appellant, Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
("Helensburgh").
Two companies, Nexus Mining Pty Ltd ("Nexus") and
Mentser Pty Ltd ("Mentser"), were engaged, in 2018 and 2019 respectively, to
various services at the Mine. Nexus and Mentser engaged contractors to
provide those services (collectively, "the Contractors").
COVID-19 pandemic significantly reduced the demand for the coking coal extracted
at the Mine. As a result, in May 2020, Helensburgh
gave notice to employees
that it had resolved to restructure its operations at the Mine by reducing the
number of crews and reducing
the number of days per week worked, thereby
requiring fewer workers.
consultations with workforce representatives, Helensburgh was asked to mitigate
the impact of the restructure on employees
by reducing its reliance on the
Contractors. Helensburgh agreed to some "insourcing" but did not agree to
terminate the arrangements
with Nexus and Mentser.
The restructure resulted in the number of the
Contractors falling by approximately 40 per cent and the number of employees
being reduced
by 90, with 47 forced redundancies. On 24 June 2020, the
Employees were dismissed from their employment. On or about 10 July 2020,
the Employees applied to the Fair Work Commission ("the FWC") for
remedies for unfair dismissal under
Fair Work Act
(Cth) ("the FW Act"). Helensburgh objected to the applications
on the basis that the terminations were cases of "genuine redundancy"
s 389 of the FW Act
issue for determination before the FWC was whether it would have been reasonable
in all the circumstances for the Employees to
be redeployed within Helensburgh's
enterprise for the purposes of s 389(2) of the FW Act. If it would have
been reasonable, the dismissal
of each Employee was not a case of genuine
redundancy and each could have their unfair dismissal claim heard on the
a series of four decisions, including two first instance decisions and two
appeals, the FWC ultimately held that the terminations
were not cases of
"genuine redundancy" because it would have been reasonable in all
the circumstances for the Employees to be redeployed
to perform the work
that was being performed by the Contractors. Helensburgh applied to the Full
Court of the Federal Court of Australia
for a writ of certiorari quashing all
four FWC decisions and a writ of prohibition to compel the FWC to cease dealing
further with
all the unfair dismissal applications. The Full Federal Court
refused relief and dismissed Helensburgh's application.
principal issue before this Court concerns the scope of the inquiry mandated by
s 389(2); in undertaking the inquiry of whether
it would have been
reasonable in all the circumstances for a person to be redeployed within
the employer's enterprise, can the FWC
consider whether the employer could
have made changes to how the employer uses its workforce to operate its
enterprise? Helensburgh
contended that, properly construed, s 389(2) does
not permit the FWC to consider changes to the ways in which it might have
its enterprise, including by replacing the Contractors with the
question as to whether the FWC may consider other ways an employer might use its
workforce to operate its enterprise, as part
of the inquiry under s 389(2),
turns on the correct construction of that provision. Addressing that issue does
not require this Court
to determine whether the FWC's conclusion about
the reasonableness of redeployment was correct. For the reasons which
follow, the
FWC was permitted by s 389(2) to inquire into whether
Helensburgh could have made changes to how it uses its workforce to operate
enterprise.
second issue raised by Helensburgh in this Court – namely, is
the decision of whether a dismissal is a "genuine redundancy"
discretionary decision, such that
House v The
does not need to be addressed.
the reasons that follow, the appeal should be dismissed.
Legislative framework
3 of the FW Act addresses the "Rights and responsibilities of employees,
employers, organisations etc". Part 3-2 addresses
"Unfair dismissal".
Section 381(1) states the object of Pt 3-2 is threefold:
(a) to establish a framework for dealing with unfair
dismissal that
balances the needs of business (including small business) and the needs of
employees; (b) to establish procedures
for dealing with unfair dismissal that
are quick, flexible and informal and address the needs of employers and
employees; and (c)
to provide remedies if a dismissal is found to be unfair,
with an emphasis on reinstatement. Those procedures and remedies, "and
manner of deciding on and working out such remedies, are intended to ensure
that a 'fair go all round' is accorded to both the
employer and employee
concerned".
defines what it means for a person to have been
"unfairly dismissed". There are four elements, each of which must be
satisfied. Importantly
for this appeal, in order for a person to be unfairly
dismissed, the dismissal must not have been a case of "genuine
redundancy".
Section 389 defines "genuine redundancy" positively and negatively as
"(1) A person's dismissal was a case of
genuine redundancy
(a) the person's employer no longer required the person's job to be performed by
anyone because of changes in the operational requirements
of the employer's
enterprise; and
(b) the employer has complied with any obligation in a modern award or
enterprise agreement that applied to the employment to consult
redundancy.
(2) A person's dismissal was not a case of
genuine redundancy
it would have been reasonable in all the circumstances for the person to be
redeployed within:
(a) the employer's enterprise; or
(b) the enterprise of an associated entity of the employer."
The most important part of s 389 for the purposes of this appeal is
s 389(2) – namely, "[a] person's dismissal was not a
genuine redundancy
if it would have been reasonable in all
the circumstances for the person to be redeployed within ... the employer's
enterprise".
defines "enterprise" to mean "a business, activity, project or
undertaking".
does not define what it means for a "person to be redeployed".
of Pt 3-2 of the FW Act contains the remedies for unfair dismissal.
Division 4 commences with s 390, which provides that
the FWC may order
remedies for unfair dismissal, including reinstatement or the payment of
compensation, if, among other things,
the person has been unfairly dismissed.
Significantly, reinstatement is the primary remedy for unfair dismissal:
s 390(3) provides
that the FWC must not order the payment of
compensation to the person unless it is satisfied that reinstatement of the
inappropriate and an order for payment of compensation is appropriate
in all the circumstances of the case.
Section 391
deals with reinstatement. It provides that an order for a person's
reinstatement must be an order that the person's employer
at the time of
dismissal reinstate the person by reappointing the person to the position in
which the person was employed immediately
before the dismissal
appointing the person to another position on terms and conditions no less
favourable than those on which the person was employed immediately
dismissal. Section 391(1A) provides that, if the position in which the person
was employed immediately before the dismissal
is no longer a position with the
person's employer at the time of the dismissal and that position, or an
equivalent position, is
a position with an associated entity of the
employer, the order for reinstatement may be an order to the associated entity.
procedural provisions in Div 5 are important. Section 394 confers upon a "person
who has been dismissed" the right to apply to
the FWC for an order under Div 4
of Pt 3‑2. Section 396 provides that the FWC, before considering the
merits of an application
for unfair dismissal, must decide, among other things,
"whether the dismissal was a case of genuine redundancy". It is because
396 isolates this inquiry as a separate, and preliminary, question that
this appeal, and the decisions below, are only concerned
with the question
of whether the terminations were genuine redundancies. This appeal will not
resolve the ultimate question of whether
the Employees were unfairly
FWC decisions
First Commissioner Riordan decision
or about 10 July 2020, the Employees applied to the FWC for remedies for unfair
dismissal, pursuant to s 394 of the FW Act. Helensburgh
objected to
the applications, submitting that the FWC did not have jurisdiction under
s 396 of the FW Act to consider the merits
of the applications because each
termination was a genuine redundancy within the meaning of s 389 of the FW
Employees argued that the terminations were not genuine redundancies because
Helensburgh should have taken steps to redeploy the
Employees to perform work
that was performed by the Contractors. Helensburgh argued that the work
that was performed by the Contractors
was specialist work.
Helensburgh submitted that s 389(2) of the FW Act did not oblige it to
structure its enterprise to create roles
for redundant employees and that it
would not have been reasonable to remove all the Contractors in order to
redeploy the Employees.
Commissioner
Riordan was not satisfied that the work performed by the Contractors was
specialist work. Commissioner Riordan held that,
therefore, it would have
been reasonable in all the circumstances to redeploy the Employees into the
roles performed by the Contractors.
Commissioner Riordan held that
the Employees' terminations did not satisfy s 389(2)(a) of the FW Act
dismissed Helensburgh's jurisdictional objection.
First appeal decision
Helensburgh
appealed the first Commissioner Riordan decision to the Full Bench of the FWC.
The Full Bench rejected Helensburgh's
contention that the work of the
Contractors was not part of Helensburgh's "enterprise" and was therefore
excluded from consideration
under s 389(2)(a). The Full Bench reasoned that
"there are no binding principles that attach to a consideration of whether
redeployment
within the enterprise is 'reasonable in all of the circumstances'"
and did not consider it reasonable "to establish a rule, as suggested
[Helensburgh], as to what contracted work it might be feasible to consider and
what should be automatically discounted in considering
the reasonableness or
otherwise of redeployment".
Full Bench agreed with Helensburgh that, in making his assessment, Commissioner
Riordan was required to consider the feasibility,
from the employer's
perspective, of insourcing the Contractors' work
in addition
considering the nature of that work, including whether or not it was
specialised. The Full Bench held that Commissioner Riordan
was required to
consider whether it was reasonable, in all the circumstances, to redeploy the
Employees, and that the Commissioner
had failed to do so because he had
considered only whether the Employees could perform the Contractors' work.
The Full Bench allowed
the appeal and remitted the matter to Commissioner
Second Commissioner Riordan
the issue was whether the terminations were cases of "genuine redundancy"
– specifically, whether it would have been
reasonable in all the
circumstances for the Employees to be redeployed. Helensburgh accepted that some
of the work performed by the
Contractors could have been performed by
the Employees, but submitted that the removal of the Contractors would have
represented
a "fundamental change" to its operations at the Mine and that it
would have been "operationally impracticable" to redeploy the Employees
work performed by the Contractors.
Commissioner
Riordan held that it was feasible for Helensburgh to insource some of the work
of the Contractors. Commissioner Riordan
did not agree that doing so was
"operationally impracticable", reasoning, in effect, that Helensburgh could work
around any inconveniences
associated with insourcing. Commissioner Riordan held
that much of the work performed by Nexus was not specialist work, and that
was "no easily identifiable reason why [the Employees] could not be performing
this work". Commissioner Riordan held that the
terminations of
the Employees were not cases of genuine redundancy.
Second appeal decision
Helensburgh
appealed the second Commissioner Riordan decision to the Full Bench of the
FWC. The Full Bench stated that, just because
the Employees had the
necessary skills to undertake the work of the Contractors, that was not
sufficient to conclude that it would
have been feasible to insource the work of
the Contractors. The Full Bench held that, following a consideration of
the feasibility
of insourcing the work of the Contractors and a
determination of whether the Employees had the necessary skills to undertake
work, Commissioner Riordan needed to return to the question he was required
to answer – namely, whether it was reasonable in
circumstances to redeploy the Employees.
Nonetheless,
the Full Bench "[did] not agree that the Commissioner applied the wrong test or
that he failed to take into account relevant
considerations in reaching his
decision". The Full Bench said, "A full and fair reading of
the [second Commissioner Riordan decision]
indicates that ... the
Commissioner turned his attention to the matters identified in the first appeal
decision as being relevant
matters to consider in deciding if insourcing was
feasible." And, "[t]he Commissioner was not narrowly focussed in his
investigation
and, having considered all of the circumstances, including the
feasibility of insourcing, concluded that redeployment was reasonable
those circumstances".
The Full Bench dismissed
the appeal.
Full Federal
Court decision
Helensburgh
applied to the Full Federal Court for a writ of certiorari quashing all four FWC
decisions and a writ of prohibition
to compel the FWC to cease dealing further
with all of the unfair dismissal applications. The relief sought by Helensburgh
available if the challenged decisions were affected by jurisdictional
error. It is only necessary to address the first three of Helensburgh's
1 and 2 contended that, insofar as s 389(2) of the FW Act
contemplates a
dismissed employee's potential for redeployment, s 389(2) does not
authorise consideration of potential redeployment
to roles that are already
filled by others. Katzmann and Snaden JJ held that s 389(2) contemplates a
"qualification of some width:
specifically, redeployment that 'in all [of]
the circumstances' would have been 'reasonable'". Their Honours reasoned that
"'would have been' reasonable ... necessarily envisages some analysis
of the measures that an employer
have taken in order to
redeploy an otherwise redundant employee" (emphasis in original). Their Honours
then held that:
"Given the undeniable width of the text in which the exemption is couched,
there is no reason to excise from 'all [of] the circumstances'
the possibility
that an employer might free up work for its employees by reducing its reliance
upon external providers. The existence
of that possibility in any given case is
a circumstance that is capable of informing whether redeployment 'would
have been reasonable'."
and Snaden JJ also held that the unavailability of a position to which a
redundant employee could have been conveniently
"is a circumstance that, in any given case, might well favour a
conclusion that redeployment would not have been reasonable.
Whether that is so,
however, will depend upon 'all [of] the circumstances'." Their Honours
held that it is for the FWC to determine,
within the "wide bounds of what
is legally reasonable", whether redeployment would have been reasonable in any
given case, and that
that is what occurred in the decisions below. Katzmann and
Snaden JJ dismissed grounds 1 and 2.
J did not disagree with their Honours' reasons on grounds 1 and 2 but gave
additional reasons. Her Honour said that although
"[t]here is an apparent
attractiveness to the construction of s 389(2) urged upon this Court by
[Helensburgh] ... s 389(2) does not
confine redeployment to a particular
(vacant) position – the text does not constrain it". Her Honour concluded
"It is not insignificant that the effect of the Full Bench's reasoning is that
there does not need to be a vacant position in the
enterprise for redeployment
to be 'reasonable in all the circumstances'. A consequence is that the [FWC],
satisfied that there is
not a 'genuine redundancy' may enter the fray, as part
of the unfair dismissal proceedings and, by operation of s 391, order
reinstatement
which will require the creation of a new position and potentially
as is the case here, lead to the termination of third-party contractual
arrangements and a fundamental change of the employer's business model. It would
be a rare case indeed where an applicant (seeking
to avail him or herself
of unfair dismissal protections) could satisfy the [FWC], under this provision,
that redeployment in such
circumstances, was reasonable."
Raper J held that the rightness or wrongness of the ultimate conclusion was
beyond the Full Federal Court's remit, and that it was
possible that the
consequences just identified would be the subject of argument as to the
appropriate relief under s 391 at the end
of the unfair dismissal
proceedings.
3 contended that the Full Bench incorrectly considered Commissioner Riordan's
second decision to be discretionary and thus
subject to the
House v The
standard of appellate review. Katzmann and Snaden JJ relevantly held
that, even if the Full Bench "wrongly arrived at its conclusion
Commissioner Riordan's decision was untainted by error", the Full Bench's error
would have been an error within jurisdiction,
as opposed to an error as to the
nature of the FWC's jurisdiction, and therefore not a jurisdictional error.
Their Honours dismissed
ground 3. Raper J agreed with their Honours'
reasons in relation to ground 3.
Helensburgh
pursued essentially two appeal grounds in this Court. The first concerned
the correct construction of s 389(2). Helensburgh
again submitted that the
language of s 389(2) does not permit the FWC to inquire into whether
an employer could have made changes
to its enterprise so as to create or
make available a position for an employee who would otherwise have been
redundant. It also submitted
that the "enterprise" referred to in s 389(2)
is the actual enterprise of the employer at the date of dismissal, and not some
enterprise conceived of in the mind of the FWC. By its second ground of
appeal, Helensburgh once again contended that the correctness
standard of review
was applicable before the Full Bench of the FWC.
– nature of inquiry under s 389(2)
389(1) of the FW Act defines "genuine redundancy". Unless that provision is
satisfied, s 389(2) is not reached. Although
there was no dispute that
s 389(1)(a) and (b) was satisfied in this case, it is necessary to say
something further about s 389(1)(a).
It is a factual inquiry about what
happened. The first part of s 389(1)(a) turns on the existence of a
decision in fact made by an
employer. It is the employer's decision to no
longer require a person's job to be performed by anyone. The provision does not
to whether the employee's
, in terms of job title, was no
longer required, but whether their "job", in the sense of the nature of the
work they performed, was
no longer required. Section 389(1) refers to a decision
by the employer and no one else.
second part of s 389(1)(a) provides that the job must have ceased to be
needed "because of changes in the operational requirements
of the employer's
enterprise". An employer determines what those changes might be or if they are
needed. There is no reasonableness
inquiry in s 389(1). Therefore, the fact
that the employer, due to changes in operational requirements, no longer
required the work
to be performed by anyone need not have been reasonable.
389(2) then provides a protection for the dismissed employee and provides that
protection by posing a "counter-factual".
It provides that notwithstanding that
the employer no longer required the dismissed employee's job, namely their work
or their duties,
to be performed by anyone because of changes in the operational
requirements of the employer's enterprise, the person's dismissal
nonetheless
a case of genuine redundancy "if it would have been
reasonable in all the circumstances
for the person to be redeployed
within ... the
employer's enterprise
" (emphasis
s 389(1), s 389(2) is qualified by a requirement of reasonableness. A
person's dismissal was not a case of genuine redundancy
"if it would have been
reasonable in all the circumstances for the person to be redeployed".
The language is broad.
Nonetheless,
the range of the inquiry permitted by s 389(2) is limited in the sense
that the inquiry is in respect of the employer's
(or an associated entity's)
"enterprise" and that the redeployment of the person must have been reasonable
"in all the circumstances".
It is useful to address each element of the inquiry
under s 389(2).
the employer's "enterprise" in s 389(2) is its "business, activity, project
or undertaking".
provides the scope of the inquiry under s 389(2). It is not
appropriate for the FWC to disregard the very nature of the employer's
enterprise. It cannot, for example, change the nature of the business,
activity, project or undertaking of the employer's enterprise.
of the employer's "enterprise", however, is not defined by reference to how
the employer uses its workforce to operate
its enterprise, or why it does
so in that manner.
circumstances are not the "business, activity, project or undertaking".
the inquiry is whether it would have been reasonable in all
the circumstances for the person to be "redeployed" within the
enterprise. "Redeployed" does not require there to be a vacant position. The
word "redeploy" does not, by its ordinary
meaning, exclude or prohibit some
change to how an employer uses its workforce to operate its enterprise that
facilitates redeployment.
Indeed, the ordinary meaning of "redeploy" – "to
rearrange, reorganise, or
envisages some reorganisation or rearrangement. In other words, it does not
mean that it would only have been reasonable
to redeploy the person if there was
a vacant position in the enterprise. This is reinforced by the fact that, unlike
s 389(1), s
389(2) does not refer to a "job". The text of
s 389(2) therefore does not, on its face, assume that a job is readily
available. Rather,
"redeployed" looks to whether there was work, or a demand for
work, within the employer's enterprise or an associated entity's enterprise
could have been performed by the otherwise redundant employee.
the inquiry is whether redeployment "would have been reasonable". The words
would have been
" direct the FWC to consider a hypothetical situation.
A hypothetical is inherently a consideration of a situation
from what it was. The use of the past tense directs attention to the
situation at the time of the dismissal. The hypothetical inquiry
s 389(2) therefore asks what, at the time of the dismissal, could
have been done to redeploy the employee within the employer's
enterprise.
words, would it, at the time of the dismissal, have been reasonable to redeploy
the employee to perform other work within
the employer's enterprise.
the inquiry is a reasonableness inquiry. Reasonableness is an objective
question to be determined by the FWC. The inquiry
does not look to
reasonableness only from the point of view of the employer, or only from the
point of view of the employee (although
they are relevant). It is an inquiry as
to reasonableness in the context of the employer's enterprise, with regard to
of that enterprise.
the inquiry is whether redeployment would have been reasonable in "all the
circumstances". The words "all the circumstances"
are unmistakably broad; they
point against the existence of binding rules concerning the application of
s 389(2) in all cases irrespective
of the circumstances of each particular
case. If there were circumstances that were intended to inform whether, in
any given case,
redeployment would have been reasonable, the legislature would
not have used the qualifying phrase "in all the circumstances".
the circumstances" can include the attributes of the otherwise redundant
employee, such as their skill set, experience, training
and competencies. "[A]ll
the circumstances" can also include those attributes of the employer's
enterprise that concern its workforce,
such as: its policies, including appetite
for risk; plans; processes; procedures; business choices, such as a decision to
a contract in the future and a decision to persist with using
contractors; decisions regarding the nature of its workforce, such
whether it has a blended workforce of both employees and contractors; contract
terms, such as whether they are "as needs" contracts
and whether the contractors
are on daily work orders or on some long-term fixed commitment; practical
concerns, such as whether redeployment
would require the employee to undergo
further training; and anticipated changes, such as another employee going
on parental leave
or retiring, a contract expiring, or a position being
performed by a contractor while waiting for an employee to be hired. These
"circumstances" of how an employer uses its workforce to operate its
enterprise, or why it does so in that manner, which can,
depending on the
circumstances of the case, bear on whether it would have been reasonable to
redeploy an employee within the enterprise.
These circumstances are not directed
at the size, scope or nature of the enterprise, which are fixed at the date of
approach to s 389(2) and the nature of the inquiry to be conducted under
s 389(2) further an object of the unfair dismissal
scheme under Pt 3-2 of
the FW Act, which is to establish a framework for dealing with unfair
dismissal that balances the needs of
business and the needs of
The language
of s 389 does not prohibit asking whether an employer could have made
changes to how it uses its workforce to operate
its enterprise so as to create
or make available a position for a person who would otherwise have been
redundant. None of the statutory
language, context or purpose supports such
a proscriptive rule. Yet that was the very proposition of law upon which
Helensburgh based
ground 1 of its appeal. That proposition must be rejected.
Moreover, Helensburgh's distinction between "organic" and "inorganic"
the enterprise, the former being within the scope of the inquiry under s 389(2)
and the latter being outside it, is not
apparent from the text of s 389(2),
which directs the FWC to consider "all the circumstances".
statutory context, including the objects of Pt 3-2, compels no contrary
conclusion. For example, s 389(1) does not exclude considering
how the employer uses its workforce to operate its enterprise from the FWC's
inquiry under s 389(2). Section 391(1)(b)
concerns the remedy of
reinstatement and provides that an order for reinstatement can be an order
appointing the dismissed person
to another position. It has been held that, upon
being ordered to reinstate the dismissed person, the employer may create a new
for the purpose of doing so and that "it will not be to the point that,
in the absence of the order, the employer might not have
created the
the extrinsic materials do not support the limitation proposed by Helensburgh.
The statement from the Explanatory
Memorandum,
relied on by
Helensburgh, that an example of redeployment not being reasonable is where there
are "no positions available for which
the employee has suitable qualifications
or experience" is no more than a high-level and undetailed example of
"circumstances" where
redeployment might not be possible; it cannot be read as
a clear statement of Parliament's intention that the FWC cannot consider
whether the employer could have made changes to how it uses its workforce to
operate its enterprise in order to make a position available.
The statement says
nothing about the meaning of the employer's "enterprise".
further statement from the Explanatory
"[w]hether a dismissal is a genuine redundancy does not go to the process
for selecting individual employees for redundancy"
does not suggest that the FWC
cannot consider how the employer uses its workforce to operate its enterprise,
or why it does so in
that manner, as part of "all the circumstances" under
s 389(2); rather, the FWC cannot consider the
for selecting
individuals for redundancy.
Explanatory Memorandum
provides a fictional scenario of a restaurant – referred to as an
"[i]llustrative example" – where, due to reduced profits,
the restaurant
makes two employees redundant. In the scenario, "[t]here are no
redeployment opportunities ... as [the restaurant]
only employs a small
number of staff", and the redundancy is therefore a genuine
redundancy.
illustrative example is a short and fact-deficient example which says nothing
a different scenario,
changes could have been made to how the employer uses its workforce to
operate its enterprise in order to free
the legislative history of s 389 does not justify reading into
s 389(2) the limitation proposed by Helensburgh. Prior to
Workplace Relations Amendment (Work Choices) Act 2005
the Australian Industrial Relations Commission was required to consider,
in determining whether a termination was harsh, unjust
or unreasonable,
"whether there was a valid reason for the termination related to ... the
operational requirements of the employer's
undertaking"
other things, "any other matters that the Commission considers
There was no
express ability to consider redeployment, although that could potentially have
been considered under "any other matters
that the Commission considers
the enactment of the
Workplace Relations Amendment (Work Choices)
, an employee could not apply for relief for "harsh, unjust or
unreasonable" termination if their employment was terminated for
operational
"[O]perational
reasons" were defined
expansively.
Redeployment
opportunities were generally treated as irrelevant to "genuine operational
legislation, there was no ability for the Australian Industrial Relations
Commission to consider the type of question found
in s 389(2).
Section 389
of the FW Act
is a significant change in Australian workplace
relations legislation. Unlike the
Workplace Relations Act 1996
s 389 of the FW Act expressly requires the FWC to consider
redeployment opportunities. There has therefore been a significant
rebalance in
favour of employees since the enactment of the FW Act.
appeal confirms the authority of the FWC to make a particular type of inquiry.
Because the FWC was permitted to make the inquiry
into whether an employer
could have made changes to how it uses its workforce to operate its enterprise
so as to create or make available
a position for an employee who would otherwise
have been redundant, ground 1 is rejected.
standard of review
both appeal decisions, the Full Bench of the FWC said that the decision under
appeal was of a discretionary nature and could therefore
only be challenged on
appeal if there was a
House v The
is ultimately unnecessary for this Court to decide whether the Full Bench was
wrong to apply the
House v The King
standard of appellate review.
That is because, even if the appropriate standard of appellate review for a
decision as to whether a
dismissal was a genuine redundancy for the purposes of
s 385(d) of the FW Act is the correctness standard, the Full Bench's
application
of the wrong standard of appellate review would have been an error
within jurisdiction, not a jurisdictional error.
would only have been jurisdictional error on the part of the Full Bench if it
had misconceived its role, misunderstood the nature
of its jurisdiction,
misconceived its duty, failed to apply itself to the question required of it,
or misunderstood the nature of
the opinion which it was required to
It did not do
appeals to the Full Bench were appeals by way of
The Full Bench
properly understood that it could only exercise its powers on appeal if there
was an error on the part of Commissioner
Riordan in his decisions that
the dismissals of the Employees were not cases of genuine
redundancy.
words, the Full Bench's function or "role" on appeal was to determine whether
there was an error on the part of Commissioner
is a distinction between the nature of the appeal and the standard of appellate
review applicable to a particular decision
The former goes
to jurisdiction, the latter does
The standards of
appellate review are concerned, in essence, with the nature of an appeal –
that is, the nature of the error
of the primary decision-maker that the
appellate court or tribunal is required to identify in order to uphold the
appeal. Under the
correctness standard, the appellable error is that the
primary decision-maker made the wrong decision. Under
House v The King
the appellable error is that the primary decision-maker made an error of the
kind described in
House v The
Fundamentally, however, both standards of appellate review are concerned
with identifying error.
a failure to apply the correct standard of appellate review on the part of
the Full Bench would not amount to a misunderstanding
of its role.
It properly understood the nature of its function and that its role was to
identify error. The failure would be that
the Full Bench identified the
error or identified error in the wrong way. To do so would be to
make an error within jurisdiction. But that would not be to misunderstand
fundamental duty required of the Full Bench.
conclusion is consistent with the decision of Gleeson CJ, Gaudron and Hayne JJ
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations
, where their Honours
"In [the President of the Commission's] reasons for decision,
[the President] proceeded on the basis that the Full Bench could intervene
only if there was error on the part of [the primary decision-maker]. In this his
Honour was correct. [The President] held that there
was error on the part of
[the primary decision‑maker]. If [the President] was wrong in that
view ... that was an error within
nature of the jurisdiction which the Full Bench was required to exercise
under ... the Act."
those reasons, ground 2 should be rejected.
appeal should be dismissed.
Introduction
requirement of
Fair Work Act 2009
(Cth), which must be
met before the Fair Work Commission can be satisfied that a person has been
unfairly dismissed, is that "the
dismissal was not a case of genuine
redundancy".
requirement for a "genuine redundancy" is that "the person's employer no longer
required the person's job to be performed by
anyone because of changes in the
operational requirements of the employer's
enterprise".
requirement for a genuine redundancy, contained in
, is that it would not have been "reasonable in all the
circumstances for the person [who was dismissed from employment] to be
within: (a) the employer's enterprise; or (b) the
enterprise of an associated entity of the employer". It is that further
requirement
that is central to this appeal. Since no issue arises on this appeal
convenient in these
reasons simply to refer to the employer's enterprise.
first question on this appeal concerns the matters that are relevant to the
application of that requirement for a genuine redundancy
by the Fair Work
Commission. The second question concerns the appellate standard of review for
the application of that requirement
if an appeal is brought to the Full Bench of
the Fair Work Commission.
the COVID-19 pandemic there was a worldwide collapse in demand for coking coal.
The appellant coal mining company ("Helensburgh
Coal") reduced its production.
This reduction led to a restructure of the enterprise and consequently resulted
in Helensburgh Coal
decreasing its contractor workforce by around 40 per cent
and dismissing 90 of its employees. There was no longer any need for the
Helensburgh Coal that were performed by the first 22 respondents ("the former
employees"). Helensburgh Coal had, and continued
to have, work that was not
allocated to any employee and which was ongoing and "sustaining" (in the sense
that it did not fall within
a specialist skill set). The majority of that
unallocated work included "basic black coal work" that could be performed by the
unallocated work was performed after the restructure by around 60 workers who
were supplied by two contractor companies on an
"as needs" basis. At least 50 of
the workers were supplied by one of those contractor companies, Nexus Mining
Pty Ltd ("Nexus").
There were enough ongoing jobs performed intermittently
by workers supplied by Nexus for all of the former employees to be redeployed.
Under the contracts with the contractor companies, Helensburgh Coal was not
obliged to request any workers from the contractor companies.
Although, as the
Commissioner found,
is greater flexibility afforded to an enterprise by engaging contractors, there
was no evidence that Helensburgh Coal had any
policy, or (at least in relation
to the Nexus workers) had made any formal or informal business decision or given
any commitment,
to use available workers from the contractor companies to
perform jobs in preference to its own employees. The Full Bench held that
was "little evidence of substance" of the asserted difference in cost to
Helensburgh Coal between engaging its employees and
the workers supplied by the
contractor companies.
history of this proceeding is described in the reasons of Steward J.
Relevantly, following the remitter by the Full Bench and
the re-making of the
Commissioner's decision, the Full Bench, applying a standard of review involving
appellate restraint (affording
latitude to the Commissioner in the making of his
decision) without any submission by any party to the
dismissed an
appeal from the finding of the Commissioner that the dismissal of the former
employees was not a genuine redundancy
Helensburgh Coal
sought, among other remedies, a writ of certiorari in the Federal Court of
Australia to quash all the decisions
in this proceeding.
the Federal Court, one ground of the application was that
"permit[] or contemplate[] the redeployment of an employee to a role, within the
relevant enterprise, which was already
filled at the relevant time by others
whose services were provided under a contract". Another ground was that by
applying a standard
of review of appellate restraint rather than a correctness
standard the Full Bench made a jurisdictional error. The Full Court of
Federal Court (Katzmann and Snaden JJ, Raper J agreeing), exercising
original jurisdiction, dismissed the application.
appeal to this Court from the decision of the Full Court of the Federal Court,
Helensburgh Coal relied again upon the two grounds
described above. Neither
ground should be accepted. The appeal to this Court must be
The relevant considerations in applying
Fair Work Act
Fair Work Act
does not contain any express restrictions
upon the considerations relevant to whether it would have been reasonable in all
the circumstances
for the person who was dismissed to be redeployed within the
employer's enterprise. Instead, the reference to "all the circumstances"
the Fair Work Commission to have regard to a wide range of considerations.
Nevertheless, there are limits to the considerations
to which the Commission may
have regard.
limit to the matters to which the Fair Work Commission may have regard under
derives from the reference to "the employer's enterprise".
"[E]nterprise" is defined as "a business, activity, project or
undertaking".
Steward J explains, when the Fair Work Commission assesses whether the
employee could have been redeployed within the employer's
enterprise the
Commission may have regard only to the state of the employer's enterprise at the
time of the employee's
point can be reached at which the circumstances in which an employee asserts
that redeployment should occur would involve changing
the nature of the
enterprise, where the enterprise (business, activity, project or undertaking) is
characterised at a level of generality
that is neither too general (eg, "coal
mining") nor too particular (eg, "coal mining in accordance with every one of
the precise
processes and procedures presently adopted"). At the right level of
generality which focuses upon the essential or important facets
enterprise, I agree with
"employer's enterprise" in
includes the "policies, processes,
procedures, strategies and business choices of the enterprise, including any
plans it had for
the future", at least where those matters are important aspects
of the employer's enterprise.
particular, as Steward J explains, the employer's enterprise includes the
employer's "policies and practices in relation to the
use of labour, including
as to whether to use permanent employees, independent contractors, casual
labour, or contractors".
The Commission has no authority to consider the reasonableness of a redeployment
that would involve any significant change to any
of these matters such that
there would be a change in the enterprise, properly characterised, at the date
of dismissal.
Helensburgh
Coal effectively submitted that a consideration of potential redeployment to
perform jobs that are already performed
by others involves an assessment that is
other than in accordance with the conditions of the existing enterprise at the
date of dismissal.
As an absolute proposition, that submission could not be
accepted. Indeed, Helensburgh Coal properly accepted as much. A simple example
might be an employee who was dismissed from an enterprise in which another
employee, performing an identical job, was to retire the
next day. In those
circumstances, it would be open to the Commission to consider whether, on the
state of the employer's enterprise,
the dismissed employee could have been
redeployed to perform the job that would have been vacant the next day. All
other things being
equal, the natural conclusion in such circumstances would be
that redeployment would have been reasonable. Hence, it could sometimes
reasonable, in all the circumstances of the employer's enterprise at the time of
dismissal, for an employee to be redeployed within
the employer's enterprise
even if there were no vacant job at that time.
the other hand, if there were no jobs available, or imminently available, within
the employer's enterprise, then it could require
a change to the employer's
enterprise, as properly characterised, for a new job to be created to which the
dismissed employee could
be redeployed. In such cases, it is irrelevant whether
the creation of a new job would be "reasonable in all the circumstances".
point is that the Commission would be in error by engaging in such a
reasonableness enquiry because it would not be doing so
by reference to the
essential nature of the "employer's enterprise" as it existed at the date of
dismissal. The exercise would be
performed by reference to a different and
hypothetical enterprise with a vacant job.
the circumstances of this case, there were jobs imminently available to which
the former employees could have been redeployed.
The relevant contractors were
supplied by the contracting companies on an "as needs" basis to do work that was
ongoing and sustaining,
without any continuing obligation upon Helensburgh Coal
to request the provision of those contractors. The only obligations imposed
Helensburgh Coal concerned those contractors who were engaged under existing
purchase orders, such as the purchase orders made
under cl 1.4(b) of the
contract with Nexus which was before the Court. Although there was no clear
evidence before this Court as
to whether those purchase order contracts were
day-to-day or week-to-week contracts, the premise of the parties' submissions
that the contractors could be replaced quickly, if not immediately. Indeed,
the contract with Nexus under which the contractor workers
were supplied was
itself due to expire shortly after the former employees were dismissed. In other
words, the premise of the parties'
submissions was that the jobs being performed
by the contractors were constantly becoming available and being renewed by new
only was there no suggestion of any legal obligation upon Helensburgh Coal to
re‑engage contractors to perform the desired
work but there was no
evidence that Helensburgh Coal had any enterprise policy or practice that the
jobs performed by contractors
at the time of the dismissal of the former
employees should be performed only by contractors and not by employees. Indeed,
initial decision, the Commissioner found that Helensburgh Coal was "not
philosophically opposed to 'insourc[ing]' work [to employees]
by removing
contractors from the
An appeal from
that decision was upheld by the Full Bench, with the Full Bench casting doubt
upon the basis of that finding and correctly
concluding that the relevant
enquiry was the reasonableness of redeployment, not the reasonableness of
insourcing.
Nevertheless,
on remitter the Commissioner repeated and justified his earlier finding that
Helensburgh Coal was not philosophically
insourcing.
conclusion was not doubted on the further appeal to the Full
these reasons, there were jobs imminently available to which the former
employees could have been redeployed without any change
in any essential or
important facets of the enterprise. It was, therefore, open to the Commissioner
and the Full Bench to consider
whether redeployment of the former employees
within Helensburgh Coal's enterprise would have been reasonable in all the
circumstances.
The standard of appellate review on appeal to the
second ground of appeal by Helensburgh Coal is that the Full Court of the
Federal Court erred by treating the assessment of whether
there is a genuine
redundancy under
Fair Work Act
'discretionary' decision which can be interfered with on appeal only in
accordance with the test in
House v [The]
]". In other
words, Helensburgh Coal submitted that the appellate standard of review that
should have been applied by the Full Bench
was one of "correctness", not one in
which "[i]t must appear that some error has been made in exercising the
discretion" so that
"[i]t is not enough that the [decision-makers] composing the
appellate court consider that, if they had been in the position of the
[decision-maker], they would have taken a different
House v The King
, this Court described the appellate standard of review
in which latitude is afforded to a primary decision-maker as a standard which
attaches to "discretion[ary]"
That label is
frequently used. But it is unfortunate. Since "discretion" can connote "the
exercise of judgment in making
the danger of
that label is that it can encourage the view that latitude should be afforded to
a primary decision-maker for all decisions
involving evaluative
That view is
wrong. It is now established that a correctness standard can apply even if the
issue is one requiring evaluation upon
which reasonable minds might
Steven Moore (a pseudonym) v The
this Court said
that the determination of whether the appellate standard of review is a
correctness standard or a standard in which
latitude is afforded to a primary
decision-maker:
"turns on whether the legal criterion to be applied 'demands a unique outcome,
in which case the correctness standard applies, or
tolerates a range of
outcomes, in which case the
House v The King
standard applies'".
one view, this statement is nothing more than a description of the difference
between a standard that requires correctness ("demands
a unique outcome") and a
standard which affords latitude to a primary decision-maker ("tolerates a range
of outcomes"). But the reference
to "turns on" has rightly also been understood
as pointing to the uniqueness of an outcome or the toleration of a range of
as being an important factor in deciding which appellate standard of
review applies.
the question of whether the legal criterion requires a unique outcome or
tolerates a range of possible outcomes is an important
factor in determining the
standard of review to be applied, it is not an exclusive
There are instances
where the legal criterion to be applied demands a unique outcome but where the
House v The King
standard, or an equivalent standard, of appellate
restraint applies. Many decisions on practice and procedure are
For instance,
an application for an adjournment may have a unique outcome but latitude must be
given in assessing the adjournment
decision on
just as it is
given on judicial review.
There are also instances where the legal criterion to be applied tolerates a
range of outcomes but the correctness standard applies.
For instance, a
statutory phrase may be open to multiple reasonable interpretations but only one
will be correct.
reference by this Court in
to the legal standard "turn[ing] on"
whether there is a unique outcome or a range of possible outcomes
understood as pointing only to one important factor in determining the intention
of Parliament, particularly where the unique
outcome concerns a matter of fact
or the application of fixed legal rules to
Another important
factor, upon which emphasis is placed in many cases, is the breadth (including
the subjectivity) of any evaluative
power afforded to the primary
decision-maker.
Ultimately, however, just as the nature of a right of appeal "must ultimately
depend on the terms of the statute conferring the
standard of appellate review must depend upon what was intended by
Parliament.
In the usual
circumstance where Parliament has made no express provision for the standard of
appellate review, the legislative presupposition
of the standard of review will
be identified by, and will turn on, matters including: whether there is a unique
outcome or a range
of outcomes; the breadth of any evaluative power afforded to
the primary decision-maker; the nature of the legal relations in issue,
including whether the decision is one of practice and procedure; whether the
adjudication concerns individual rights or the general
public interest; the
manner in which the issue has historically been adjudicated; and the expertise
of the primary decision-making
body in the area of adjudication.
leading decision on the discernment of the proper standard of appellate review
is that of this Court in
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian
Industrial Relations
involved a decision by a member of the Australian Industrial Relations
Commission (Boulton J) to make orders under s 170MW
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(Cth) terminating a bargaining period,
during which industrial action had taken place, and declaring a period within
which no new
bargaining period could
An appeal was
brought to the Full Bench of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission
Workplace Relations Act
as an appeal by way of
The Full Court
of the Federal Court, exercising original jurisdiction, held that the Full Bench
had made a jurisdictional error and
had constructively failed to exercise its
to this Court, it was held that any error by the Full Bench would have been an
error within jurisdiction, not a jurisdictional
their joint judgment in
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd
, Gleeson CJ,
Gaudron and Hayne JJ said that the decision by Boulton J to terminate
the bargaining period under s 170MW involved "two
discretionary decisions".
The first was his Honour's "satisfaction" that the industrial action being
pursued posed a threat for the
purposes of that section which "involved a degree
of subjectivity". The second was "a further discretionary decision as to whether
the bargaining period should be
terminated".
Honours concluded that the correctness of those decisions could "only be
challenged by showing error in the decision-making
process", consistent with
House v The
the appeal to the Full Bench of the Australian Industrial Relations Commission
Workplace Relations Act
, considered in
Allied Operations Pty Ltd
, an appeal to the Full Bench of the Fair Work
Commission under
Fair Work Act
is also an appeal by way
of rehearing.
cases, as the joint judgment explained in
Coal and Allied Operations Pty
, the usual position is that, without further evidence or a change in the
law, an appellant will need to show an error of law in the
decision from which
the appeal is
the satisfaction of the Commission that a dismissal "was not a case of genuine
redundancy" requires a unique outcome, it
is not a unique outcome concerning a
matter of fact or the application of fixed legal rules to facts. Further, almost
every other
indicium of the standard of appellate review on an appeal under
Fair Work Act
points to the appellate review by the Full Bench being one in which latitude
should be afforded to the Commission in the making
of the primary decision.
the appeal is significantly circumscribed with an emphasis upon allowing
latitude to the Commission. An appeal under
can only be considered
after a broad assessment of the public interest. Appeals to the Fair Work
Commission, including the appeals
brought in this case to the Full Bench,
require leave which must be given if the Commission is satisfied that it is in
interest to do
That enquiry
encompasses a wide range of considerations that are not independent of the
merits of the case. Further, an appeal can
only be brought in relation to
factual matters arising under
Fair Work Act
matters arising under
) if the "decision involved a
significant error of
the Commission is a specialist tribunal afforded extremely broad powers with
which to determine whether a dismissal is
a genuine redundancy. The exercise of
its powers, including in relation to such a determination, must take into
account "equity,
good conscience and the merits of the
The Commission
is not bound by rules of evidence and
and has powers
to "inform itself in relation to any matter before it in such manner as it
appropriate".
like s 170MW of the
Workplace Relations Act
that was considered in
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd
, the criteria in
Fair Work Act
are open-textured, involving a significant
level of discretion.
Section 385(d)
is concerned with whether the
Commission is "satisfied" that the dismissal was not a case of genuine
redundancy.
meaning of a "genuine redundancy" in
, for the purposes of
, is concerned with whether redeployment within the employer's
enterprise "would have been reasonable in all the circumstances".
Klein v Domus Pty
in the context
of a power to grant an extension of time, Dixon CJ considered the statutory
words "if he is satisfied that sufficient
cause has been shown, or that having
regard to all the circumstances of the case, it would be reasonable so to do".
In remarks which
might be echoed in relation to
Fair Work Act
, his Honour noted that there was "not a little
difficulty in knowing how the words 'it would be reasonable so to do' march with
words 'if he is satisfied that sufficient cause has been
Nevertheless,
Dixon CJ concluded that "the real object of the legislature in such cases
is to leave scope for the judicial or other
officer who is investigating the
facts and considering the general purpose of the enactment to give effect to his
view of the justice
In other words, a
standard of review of appellate restraint applies.
although there are no precise historical analogues, a comparison can be drawn
with the provisions of the
Workplace Relations Act
considered in
and Allied Operations Pty Ltd
which, as explained above, involved a
significant level of discretion and were held to require appellate restraint on
an appeal to
the Full Bench on a matter of law.
and perhaps most fundamentally, in relation to the provision in
the appeal of decisions from the Commission to the Full Bench, the Explanatory
Memorandum to the
Fair Work Bill 2008
"This provision is modelled on the appeal provisions contained in the
Workplace Relations Act
] and its predecessors, and is intended to
maintain the existing jurisprudence in relation to AIRC appeals, in particular
the decision
of the High Court in
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v
Australian Industrial Relations Commission
(2000) 203 CLR 194 ...
Where the original decision has involved the exercise of a significant level of
discretion, the Full Bench should only intervene
on the limited grounds set out
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 488".
these reasons, an acceptance of Helensburgh Coal's submission that the
correctness standard of appellate review applies to
would require the rejection of the plain intention of the Commonwealth
Parliament. The consequence is that the Full Bench was
not in error in affording
latitude in the assessment of whether there was error in the decision of the
Commissioner. Without error,
the Full Bench could not have made any
reasons of Gageler CJ,
Gordon and Beech-Jones JJ that any error by the
Full Bench in this respect would not have been jurisdictional.
Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia was correct in relation to both of
the grounds of appeal reagitated in this Court.
The appeal should be dismissed.
On 24 June 2020, 22 of the appellant's employees ("the Employees"),
the first to twenty-second respondents to this
were dismissed as
a result of changes in the operational requirements of the appellant's
enterprise. The appellant operates a mine
in the Illawarra region of New South
Wales. The issue for determination before the Fair Work Commission ("the
FW Commission") had
been whether it would have been reasonable in all the
circumstances for the Employees to have been redeployed within the appellant's
enterprise for the purposes of
Fair Work Act
(Cth) ("the FW Act"). If it had been so reasonable, it would
follow that the dismissal of each of the Employees was not a case of
redundancy and that, in the circumstances here, each had been unfairly dismissed
for the purposes of s 386 of the FW Act.
issue before this Court only concerns the scope of the inquiry mandated by
s 389(2). The FW Commission determined that it would
reasonable to redeploy the Employees within the appellant's enterprise because
those individuals could have been used to
undertake other work performed at the
time by staff of two existing contractors. It practically decided that it would
have been reasonable
to have terminated the services of those contractors, thus
rendering the Employees suitable candidates for redeployment. The appellant
contends that, properly construed, s 389(2) does not authorise the
FW Commission to inquire into other ways in which the appellant
conducted its enterprise, including by replacing contractors with employees.
question as to whether the FW Commission is authorised to inquire into
other ways an employer might structure its enterprise,
as part of the task
required by s 389(2), turns on the correct construction of that provision.
Addressing that issue does not require
this Court to determine whether the FW
Commission's conclusion about the reasonableness of redeployment was or was not
correct. The
appellant did not otherwise challenge that conclusion. For the
reasons which follow, the FW Commission was authorised by s 389(2)
inquire into whether the appellant could have made alternative changes to its
enterprise.
Applicable legislation
of the FW Act is headed "Unfair dismissal". Section 381 of that Act
states that one of the objects of Pt 3-2 is to establish
a framework for
dealing with unfair dismissal that "balances" the "needs of business" and the
"needs of employees". Another stated
object is to establish procedures for
dealing with unfair dismissal that, amongst other things, are "quick, flexible
and informal".
Section 385
of the FW Act defines when a person has been unfairly dismissed. Unfair
dismissal has four elements, each of which must
be satisfied. It is sufficient
to note for the purposes of this appeal the last element; a person will not have
been unfairly dismissed
if the dismissal "was ... a case of genuine
redundancy".
"genuine redundancy" is defined in s 389 as follows:
"(1) A person's dismissal was a case of
genuine redundancy
(a) the person's employer no longer required the person's job to be performed by
anyone because of changes in the operational requirements
of the employer's
enterprise; and
(b) the employer has complied with any obligation in a modern award or
enterprise agreement that applied to the employment to consult
redundancy.
(2) A person's dismissal was not a case of
genuine redundancy
it would have been reasonable in all the circumstances for the person to be
redeployed within:
(a) the employer's enterprise; or
(b) the enterprise of an associated entity of the employer."
terms "enterprise" and "associated entity" are defined in the
for this appeal, the term "enterprise" is defined to mean "a business, activity,
project or undertaking".
of Pt 3-2 of the FW Act addresses the remedies for unfair dismissal.
Pursuant to s 390, the FW Commission has the power
to order a person's
reinstatement or to make an order for the payment of compensation. Pursuant to
s 390(3), the FW Commission must
not make an order for compensation
unless, amongst other things, it is satisfied that the "reinstatement of the
person is inappropriate".
Section 391 addresses the topic of reinstatement
within an employer's enterprise or within the enterprise of an associated
Section 391(1A) provides that an order for reinstatement to an
associated entity may be made if:
"(a) the position in which the person was employed immediately before the
dismissal is no longer a position with the person's employer
at the time of the
dismissal; and
(b) that position, or an equivalent position, is a position with an associated
entity of the employer".
to s 604 of the FW Act, a person may appeal a decision of a Fair Work
Commissioner to the Full Bench of the FW Commission.
This requires the
permission of the FW Commission. Pursuant to s 400(1), permission must
not be granted unless the FW Commission
considers that it is in the public
interest to do so. Permission was here granted by the Full Bench. For the
reasons set out below,
it is otherwise unnecessary to consider the function and
purpose of the Full Bench of the FW Commission in hearing
facts are not in dispute. The appellant operates the Metropolitan Coal Mine in
the Illawarra region of New South Wales ("the
Mine") which produces coking coal.
For that purpose, it had employees, including the first to twenty-second
respondents. It also
used contractors. In 2018 it engaged Nexus Mining Pty Ltd
("Nexus") to provide services at the Mine on an as needs basis. The relevant
contract with Nexus, which was for a period of two years (with an ability
to extend this for another 12 months), remained in force
when the Employees
were dismissed on 24 June 2020. Following a fire at the Mine, in 2019
the appellant engaged Mentser Pty Ltd ("Mentser")
to provide servicing,
inspection, auditing and rectification of the Mine's underground conveyor
systems. This contract was for a
period of up to five years. It was a
"Standing Offer Agreement" whereby Mentser would only supply services when
required. The contract
with Mentser also remained in force when the Employees
were dismissed.
2020, the COVID-19 pandemic caused the price of coking coal to fall. The
appellant decided to reduce its production of coal and,
as a result, it needed
fewer employees. There followed a process of consultation with the appellant's
employees in accordance with
the requirements of s 389(1)(b). The appellant
decided that it would agree to insource some of the work carried out by
contractors.
It reduced its direct workforce of employees by 90 (47 of whom were
subject to a forced redundancy; these included the first to twenty-second
respondents); it also reduced the number of contractor staff by 40 per cent. The
dismissal of the Employees was the result of a decision
made by the appellant to
reorganise the performance of work at the Mine.
was not in dispute that, for the purposes of s 389(1), due to COVID-19, the
appellant no longer required the jobs of each Employee
to be performed because
of changes in the operational requirements of the appellant's enterprise.
was also not in dispute that at the time of the dismissal of the Employees,
there was no vacant role within the appellant's enterprise
to which any of them
might be redeployed. Nor was it foreseeable that such a vacancy might arise. The
only way to redeploy the Employees
would have been to demobilise the workers
engaged by either Nexus or Mentser.
the time of the dismissal of the Employees, eight Mentser employees and
around 90 Nexus employees worked at the Mine. If the eight
employees had been removed and replaced by eight of the Employees, this would
have had a significant adverse impact on Mentser's
business and would have
resulted in the almost inevitable dismissal of the eight Mentser workers.
Similarly, if the Nexus employees
had been replaced by the Employees, it was
accepted that the vast majority of the replaced Nexus employees would also have
been dismissed.
This would have led to the loss of core expertise which would
have been difficult for Nexus to replace.
it is accepted that the appellant had a blended workforce of permanent employees
and contract workers, during oral argument
the appellant was unable to point in
the evidence to any business decision to use this blended workforce in any
particular proportion.
July 2020 each of the Employees filed an application in the
FW Commission claiming that they had been unfairly dismissed for the
purposes of Pt 3-2 of the FW Act.
The decisions of the
FW Commission
were four decisions of the FW Commission.
first instance, a Commissioner decided that because the work undertaken by the
Nexus and Mentser workers was not specialised
because the work
of those individuals fell within the skills and competencies of the permanent
and because
the work was "ongoing and
sustaining"
reasonable in all the circumstances to redeploy the Employees into the jobs
performed by the contract
In that respect,
and based only upon another earlier decision of the
FW Commission,
Commissioner formed the view that the appellant was not "philosophically
opposed" to insourcing work undertaken by
contractors.
decision was appealed to the Full Bench of the
FW Commission.
Full Bench quashed the decision and remitted it back for
determination.
proceeded on the basis that the appellant was obliged to demonstrate that the
Commissioner's reasons contained an error
of law, in the sense described in
House v The King
The Full Bench decided that there was no evidence to support the finding that
the appellant was not opposed to insourcing; the earlier
decision of the
FW Commission, relied upon by the Commissioner, did not supply such
Commissioner had thereby erred. It also held that there were no "binding
principles" which regulate what is or is not reasonable
in deciding whether a
worker can be redeployed and that, accordingly, the replacement of a contract
worker with a permanent employee
could not be "automatically excluded" from
consideration.
factors included the degree of control over the work of the contractor by the
employer, the length of the contract, any
requirement to change the employer's
business strategy, the history of contracting the work in question, the rights
of third parties,
that positions cannot be created where there are none, and
that displacing existing occupants of positions may not be
appropriate.
Bench also decided that the reasonableness of insourcing labour was not the
correct question to pose for the purposes of
remittal, it appears that the Commissioner did not accept that he had erred and
in parts preferred his own views, rather than
relying on the evidence before
him. He stated, for example, that the Full Bench "obviously did not understand
the background" to
the earlier FW Commission decision he had relied
In relation to the
appellant's use of Mentser following the fire, he said that instead of using
that contractor "it could be argued
that a change in the culture of Management
was all that was needed".
However, the appellant made no specific complaints about those observations
before this Court.
Nonetheless,
the Commissioner did go on to apply the factors identified by the Full Bench as
set out above.
unnecessary to set out the findings that were made, save that when it came to
considering the appellant's business strategy,
the Commissioner confined himself
to the utility of using Mentser and Nexus without any apparent consideration as
to whether the
appellant had policies or practices concerning the use of those
contractors or the use of contractors more
it came to considering the principle that it is not appropriate simply to create
positions where none exist – a very grave
consideration in this matter for
the reasons expressed below – the Commissioner merely observed that there
were in excess of
60 employees of Nexus and Mentser who continued to be
employed at the Mine after the
restructure.
no consideration at all of the Full Bench's statement that it may not be
appropriate to displace existing occupants of
positions. Again, no specific
complaint was made before this Court about these matters.
considering the factors identified by the Full Bench, as well as further factors
pertaining to whether Nexus and Mentser performed
specialist work, the
Commissioner concluded that it was "feasible for the [appellant] to insource
some of the work of the
contractors".
respect, it was found that there was sufficient basic black coal work to
gainfully employ all of the
appeal yet again to the Full Bench, it was accepted that the Commissioner had
made two errors. First, it was said that the Commissioner
failed to consider
whether, having regard to the terms of the agreements that had been entered into
with each of Mentser and Nexus,
there might have been an "impediment to
insourcing the work".
Secondly, it was submitted that the Commissioner had failed to consider the
effect of insourcing on the employees of Mentser and
Nexus when considering the
appropriateness of displacing
individuals.
the Full Bench considered that these two matters "were not matters of great
weight in the evidence or submissions of the
Appellant".
followed that these factors did not demonstrate that the decision of the
Commissioner was otherwise incorrect, especially given
all the other factors
that had been taken into
reasons given below, in a case such as this, those two matters should have been
given "great weight" by the appellant in
leading evidence and making
submissions.
The decision of the Full Court of the Federal
appellant made an application for judicial review of all four FW Commission
decisions in the Federal Court of Australia. It sought
orders quashing all four
this Court's decision in
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian
Industrial Relations
Full Court considered that its task was to discern whether the second Full Bench
decision was the product of jurisdictional
The appellant
relied upon essentially three grounds said to establish such error. The first
error was that s 389(2) did not authorise
the FW Commission to
consider the redeployment of an employee to a position already filled by
another. This was expressed as an inflexible
proposition mandated by the
language of the section. The second error was that the Full Bench misunderstood
the applicable standard
of appellate review. That review, it was contended, was
not to be governed by an application of
House v The King
, but, rather,
was to be carried out using the correctness standard. The third error was that
the errors identified by the Full Bench
in the second decision of the
Commissioner were not immaterial.
the reasons given below, it is unnecessary to address the Full Court's reasoning
concerning the second alleged error, and the
third alleged error was not pursued
in this Court. As to the first alleged error, the appellant contended: that the
word "redeploy"
necessarily meant to deploy to a position which is vacant or
available; that the language of s 389(2) did not contemplate the creation
of new positions or different business structures; that the legislative history
did not support any power of reconstruction of the
appellant's enterprise; and
finally that the approach of the Full Bench was inconsistent with the object of
Pt 3-2 to establish procedures
which are quick, flexible and
dismissing these contentions, Katzmann and Snaden JJ emphasised that
s 389(2) requires analysis of what measures an employer could
have taken to
redeploy an otherwise redundant employee. Given the "undeniable width of the
text" of s 389(2), their Honours observed
that there was no reason to
exclude, as a possibly reasonable outcome, the freeing up of positions by
reducing reliance on contract
introduced a measure of complexity, then that was necessarily
the reference in s 389(2) to "in
[of] the circumstances"
meant that the inquiry could not constrained by an absolute rule of the kind
contended for by the
Ultimately,
the plurality determined that all that controlled the inquiry mandated by
s 389(2) is what "would have been reasonable
in all the circumstances".
Those words did not necessarily exclude the approach of the FW Commission.
Katzmann and Snaden JJ concluded
that the Full Bench of the
FW Commission had not misunderstood the language of s 389(2), and thus
did not err.
agreed with Katzmann and
Her Honour acknowledged the attractiveness of the appellant's construction
of s 389(2).
she accepted that the language of s 389(2) could not confine the concept of
redeployment to a "particular (vacant)
Having said
that, Raper J observed, correctly, that it would be a "rare case indeed" in
which it could be concluded that it would
be reasonable to require the creation
of new positions and a fundamental change to an employer's business
grounds of appeal
appellant pursued two grounds of appeal in this Court. The first concerned the
correct construction of s 389(2). The appellant
again submitted that the
language of s 389(2) did not authorise the FW Commission to inquire
into whether an employer could make
changes to its enterprise so as to create or
make available a position for an employee who is otherwise redundant. It also
that the "enterprise" referred to in s 389(2) is the actual
enterprise of the employer at the date of dismissal, and not some other
enterprise conceived of in the mind of the FW Commission.
its second ground of appeal, the appellant once again contended that the
correctness standard of review was applicable before
Ground one – no right of reconstruction
The appellant's contentions
essential foundation of the appellant's case was that an "employer's enterprise"
in s 389(2) is an objective fact as at the date
of dismissal which cannot
be altered by the FW Commission. The question posed by s 389(2), it
was said, is not an abstract inquiry
but rather is one fixed by reference to
that enterprise. It was thus not open for the Commissioner to second-guess a
business decision
made by an employer about its enterprise. It submitted that
the word "redeployed" did not mean "replaced".
appellant also relied upon the Explanatory
accompanied the introduction of the
Fair Work Bill 2008
which gives an example of when it would not be reasonable to redeploy a person.
That example was when there are "no positions
available" for that former
employee. The appellant submitted that if there are in fact no available jobs to
be filled, it was not
open to the FW Commission to restructure an
enterprise to create such positions for the first time. That was especially so
restructure necessarily involved the termination of another person's
employment. The FW Commission could not pick and choose as to
who must go
and who may stay. The FW Commission did that here, it was said, when it decided
that the Employees should be given the
jobs of the contract workers.
foregoing was said to be supported by s 391(1A) of the FW Act, which
provides for redeployment to an associated entity, but only
if the person's
position with the employer no longer exists. In other words, it was contended
that provision assumes that one cannot
be redeployed with an employer if at the
date of dismissal there are no vacancies to fill, and no such vacancies are
otherwise expected
in the future.
foregoing was also said to be supported by the objects of Pt 3-2 of the
FW Act and in particular by the need that there be procedures
"quick, flexible and informal". If the FW Commission has a broad power to
reconstruct an enterprise, it was said that the
proceedings before it will be
unable to be of this kind. They will be both complex and protracted. The
appellant submitted that this
could not have been what Parliament
Disposition of ground one
but not all, of what the appellant submitted may be accepted. One commences with
a consideration of s 389(1). Unless that provision
is satisfied, one will
not need to consider s 389(2). Section 389(1) has two limbs. The
first, found in para (a), is the more relevant
to this matter. The second,
found in para (b), is concerned with consultation by an employer and is not
in dispute.
Section 389(1)(a)
has two parts. The first turns on the existence of a decision in fact made by an
employer. It is the decision to
no longer require a person's job to be performed
by anyone. That is a choice which cannot be set aside or second-guessed. It is
reserved to the employer to make and no-one else. But it can only be made
for a particular reason.
second part of s 389(1)(a) supplies that reason. It is that the job has
ceased to be needed "because of changes in the operational
requirements of the
employer's enterprise". However, an employer is at liberty to determine what
those changes might be, or if they
are needed. That is because it is the
employer's "enterprise" which is in issue. The decision to make changes is not
qualified by
any requirement of reasonableness, and it cannot otherwise be
challenged in the FW Commission, assuming it to be genuine. It is in
sense that the capacity to render a position redundant has been likened to an
employer's "prerogative". As Ryan J observed in
Jones v Department of
"[I]t is within the employer's prerogative to rearrange the organisational
structure by breaking up the collection of functions,
responsibilities attached to a single position and distributing them among the
holders of other positions, including newly-created
positions."
contrast, s 389(2) is qualified by a requirement of reasonableness. A
person's dismissal will not be a case of genuine redundancy
"if it would have
been reasonable in all the circumstances for the person to be redeployed". As
Katzmann and Snaden JJ observed,
this language is
But the breadth
of the inquiry authorised by s 389(2) is controlled by the fact that it is
posed in respect of the employer's (or
associated entity's) "enterprise" and
that it is directed to reasonableness "in all the circumstances". The word "in",
in this context
means, "in accordance with". And the word "enterprise" must bear
the same meaning in s 389(2) as it does in
the context of the privilege afforded to employers by s 389(1), the phrase
"employer's enterprise" in s 389(2) is a reference
to the actual enterprise
of an employer as at the date of dismissal. In other words, the
FW Commission must take the enterprise as
it in fact was on that day. That
includes, for example, all of the actual policies, processes, procedures,
strategies and business
choices of the enterprise, including any plans it had
for the future. It includes the composition of the enterprise's actual labour
force, as well as any vacant positions which existed at that time, or which were
expected to arise. It includes the approach of the
business to issues such as
risk-taking, its corporate governance practices and its methods of carrying on a
business. It includes
its policies and practices in relation to the use of
labour, including as to whether to use permanent employees, independent
contractors,
casual labour, or contractors. It also includes the actual
practices and policies of the enterprise in relation to labour relations.
FW Commission, subject to any issues of proof, must accept all of this in
applying s 389(2) of the FW Act.
"circumstances" are again all of the actual circumstances which in fact existed
as at the date of dismissal, and which are relevant
to the issue of
redeployment. They include all of the above. They also include the "changes in
the operational requirements" of the
enterprise, the decision of the employer
that a particular job is no longer needed, the actual and expected prevailing
economic and
market conditions, and any other fact as at the date of dismissal
that might be relevant to the inquiry mandated by s 389(2).
is in these circumstances that the question must be posed as to whether it would
have been reasonable for a person who has been
dismissed to be redeployed in the
employer's enterprise, or in an associated entity's enterprise. The answer to
that question takes
the enterprise as it finds it on the date of dismissal in
the sense described above. That is why the two matters found by the Full
to have been overlooked by the Commissioner should have been given great weight
in the submissions and evidence of the appellant.
the language of s 389 does not otherwise limit how the FW Commission
is to answer that question. It certainly does not in every
case prohibit asking
whether an employer could have made changes to its enterprise so as to create or
make available a position to
a person who would otherwise have been made
redundant. Neither the statutory language, context or purpose supports such a
proscriptive
rule. Yet that was the very proposition of law upon which the
appellant based ground one of its appeal. That proposition must be
statutory context, including the objects of Pt 3-2 as well as
s 391(1A), compels no contrary conclusion. This appeal merely confirms
authority of the FW Commission to make a particular type of inquiry in a
given case. Whether that results in greater complexity
may be doubted; but more
importantly, and in any event, as Raper J observed, cases mandating such an
inquiry will be rare.
As for s 391(1A), it merely reflects the more typical case where
redeployment is not possible in an enterprise because there are
no vacancies
which are available.
the content of the first ground of appeal, this Court is not on this occasion
concerned with the legal merit of the conclusion
redeployment reached below. Having said that, it must be accepted that it would
be difficult to conclude
that redeployment is reasonable if that meant that
another person with a job, for which there is a business need, has to make way
for someone else whose job was no longer needed. It would make very little sense
in the ordinary case to conclude that it was reasonable
to redeploy a person by
terminating the permanent employment of another person. No different conclusion
might be expected if the
other person were employed by a contractor, or if they
were themselves independent contractors or casual labourers. Redeployment
person at the expense of another person's position would be a very grave step to
take and would be unlikely to be a reasonable
foregoing reflects an earlier decision of the FW Commission that states the
following in relation to
(a) positions
cannot be created where there are none;
(b) displacing existing occupants of positions is not appropriate; and
(c) a requirement that there be a complete change in the employer's employment
strategy is not appropriate.
Full Bench in that matter observed that the foregoing propositions are not
"binding principles applicable to every
and that is so.
But they are an expression of what the measure of reasonableness should demand
in an ordinary case. The passage in
the Explanatory Memorandum, relied upon by
the appellant, reflects that fact.
if it were clear from the evidence that any postulated change to an enterprise
would be inconsistent with the nature of
the actual enterprise, or with any of
its actual practices, policies, procedures, strategies or plans, then it is
likely that any
such change could not be reasonable. But there may also be cases
– although they are likely to be rare – where the evidence
nonetheless supports the relevance of making an inquiry into whether an
enterprise could reasonably have been altered to create new
jobs, or to make
other jobs available to be filled. These are issues which will ultimately turn
on the evidence adduced before the
FW Commission.
the FW Commission was authorised to make the inquiry into whether an
employer could make changes to its enterprise so as
to create or make available
a position for an employee who is otherwise redundant, ground one is
Ground two – the standard of review
respectfully agree with and adopt the reasons of Gageler CJ, Gordon and
Beech-Jones JJ in relation to ground two.
Disposition
appeal should be
The twenty-third respondent is the
Fair Work Commission.
Although the Mine is also operated
by other companies, and Helensburgh is not charged exclusively with managing the
Mine, there is
no issue in this matter about corporate identity.
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
FW Act, s 381(2).
FW Act, s 385(d).
FW Act, s 389(2)(a).
FW Act, s 12 definition of
"enterprise".
Or the enterprise of an associated
entity of the employer.
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v
[2024] FCAFC 45
; (2024) 302 FCR 589 at 606
FW Act, s 12 definition of
"enterprise".
See [40] below.
Macquarie Dictionary
online, definition of "redeploy".
Or the enterprise of an
associated entity of the employer.
s 381(1)(a).
Technical and Further
Education Commission v Pykett
[2014] FWCFB 714
; (2014) 240 IR 130 at 143‑144 [47],
Anthony Smith & Associates Pty Ltd v Sinclair
67 IR 240 at 244.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Fair Work Bill 2008
, Explanatory Memorandum at 247
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Fair Work Bill 2008
, Explanatory Memorandum at 247
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Fair Work Bill 2008
, Explanatory Memorandum at
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Fair Work Bill 2008
, Explanatory Memorandum at
Workplace Relations Act 1996
(Cth), s 170CG(3)(a), prior to the enactment of the
Relations Amendment (Work Choices) Act
Workplace Relations Act
s 170CG(3)(e), prior to the enactment of the
Workplace Relations
Amendment (Work Choices) Act
Workplace Relations Act
, after the enactment of the
Workplace Relations Amendment (Work
Choices) Act
Workplace Relations Act
, after the enactment of the
Workplace Relations Amendment (Work
Choices) Act
. See also Shi, "A Tiger With No Teeth:
Genuine Redundancy and Reasonable Redeployment Under the
[2012] UQLawJl 4
; (2012) 31(1)
University of Queensland Law Journal
Cinemas Australia Pty Ltd
(2007) 158 IR 137 at 145 [28].
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
Coal and Allied Operations
Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
(2000) 203 CLR 194 at
208-209 [31].
Coal and Allied
(2000) 203 CLR 194 at 203 [14], 204 [17].
Coal and Allied
(2000) 203 CLR 194 at 203 [14], 204 [17].
Coal and Allied
(2000) 203 CLR 194 at 208-209 [30]‑[31];
Steven Moore
(a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] HCA 30
; (2024) 98 ALJR 1119 at 1127
[2024] HCA 30
; 419 ALR 169
Coal and Allied
203 CLR 194 at 208-209 [30]‑[31].
(1936) 55 CLR 499 at
(2000) 203 CLR 194 at 209
Fair Work Act 2009
Fair Work Act 2009
s 389(1)(a).
Bartley v Helensburgh Coal
[2021] FWC 6414 at [68(i)].
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v
[2022] FWCFB 166
House v The King
CLR 499 at 504-505; see also at [30].
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v
[2022] FWCFB 166
Fair Work Act 2009
Reasons of Steward J at
[131]-[132].
Reasons of Steward J at
Reasons of Steward J at
Bartley v Helensburgh Coal
[2020] FWC 5756
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v
(2021) 306 IR 219 at 239 [89]-[91].
Bartley v Helensburgh Coal
[2021] FWC 6414 at [67].
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2022] FWCFB 166
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
House v The King
55 CLR 499 at 504-505.
House v The King
55 CLR 499 at 503, 504-505. See also
Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
; (2018) 264 CLR 541 at 589-591
Dwyer v Calco Timbers Pty
(2008) 234 CLR 124 at 138 [37], quoting
Carty v Croydon London
Borough Council
[2005] EWCA Civ 19
; [2005] 1 WLR 2312 at 2319
[2005] EWCA Civ 19
; [2005] 2 All ER 517 at 524.
Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
; (2018) 264 CLR 541 at 589-590
Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
; (2018) 264 CLR 541 at 563
, 591 [150];
Dennis Bauer (a pseudonym)
[2018] HCA 40
; (2018) 266 CLR 56 at 88-89
Steven Moore
(a pseudonym) v The King
[2024] HCA 30
; (2024) 98 ALJR 1119 at 1124
[2024] HCA 30
; 419 ALR 169 at
[2024] HCA 30
; (2024) 98 ALJR 1119 at 1124
[2024] HCA 30
; 419 ALR 169 at 174, quoting
Minister for Immigration and Border
Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
; (2018) 264 CLR 541 at 563
White v Redding
[2019] NSWCA 152
99 NSWLR 605 at 628
Council of the Law Society of New South Wales v
[2020] NSWCA 163
; (2020) 102 NSWLR 655 at 679
Augusta Pool 1 UK Ltd v
[2023] NSWCA 93
; (2023) 111 NSWLR 378 at 381
, 394 [76]-[77], 412-413
White v Redding
[2019] NSWCA 152
; (2019) 99 NSWLR 605 at 628
State Government
Insurance Office (Q) v Biemann
[1983] HCA 34
; (1983) 154 CLR 539 at 549;
[2007] HCA 46
; (2007) 232 CLR 67 at 128
Bloch v Bloch
[1981] HCA 56
; (1981) 180
CLR 390 at 395-396;
Sali v SPC Ltd
[1993] HCA 47
; (1993) 67 ALJR 841 at 843-844;
[1993] HCA 47
625 at 628-629.
Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship v Li
[2012] HCA 61
; (2013) 249 CLR 332 at 366
Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
; (2018) 264 CLR 541 at 591
Enfield City Corporation v Development Assessment Commission
[2000] HCA 5
; (2000) 199
CLR 135 at 151-152
Warren v Coombes
[1979] HCA 9
142 CLR 531 at 552.
Water Conservation and
Irrigation Commission (NSW) v Browning
(1947) 74 CLR 492 at 504-505;
Lovell v Lovell
[1950] HCA 52
; (1950) 81 CLR 513 at 525;
Norbis v Norbis
[1986] HCA 17
161 CLR 513 at 540;
Oshlack v Richmond River Council
[1998] HCA 11
; (1998) 193 CLR 72 at
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial
Relations Commission
(2000) 203 CLR 194 at 204-205 [19]-[21];
[2001] HCA 62
; (2001) 207 CLR 121 at 145-147
[2002] HCA 36
; (2002) 211
CLR 238 at 262
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission v
C G Berbatis Holdings Pty Ltd
(2003) 214 CLR 51 at
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
; (2018) 264 CLR 541
Re Coldham; Ex parte
Brideson [No 2]
[1990] HCA 36
; (1990) 170 CLR 267 at 273-274, citing
Builders Licensing
Board v Sperway Constructions (Syd) Pty Ltd
[1976] HCA 62
; (1976) 135 CLR 616 at 621-622.
Minister for Immigration and
Border Protection v SZVFW
[2018] HCA 30
; (2018) 264 CLR 541 at 592
(2000) 203 CLR 194.
Workplace Relations Act
(Cth), s 170MW(1), (3);
Construction, Forestry, Mining and
Energy Union v Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd
(1997) 77 IR 269 at
Coal and Allied Operations
Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
(2000) 203 CLR 194 at
204 [17]. See
Coal and Allied Operations Pty Ltd v Construction, Forestry,
Mining and Energy Union
(1998) 80 IR 14.
Construction, Forestry,
Mining and Energy Union v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
[1998] FCA 1404
89 FCR 200 at 245.
Coal and Allied Operations
Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
(2000) 203 CLR 194 at
Coal and Allied Operations
Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
(2000) 203 CLR 194 at
ALDI Foods Pty Ltd v Shop,
Distributive and Allied Employees Association
[2017] HCA 53
; (2017) 262 CLR 593 at 621
Coal and Allied Operations
Pty Ltd v Australian Industrial Relations Commission
(2000) 203 CLR 194 at
203 [14]. See also
(1998) 197 CLR 172 at 201-202 [111];
Allesch v Maunz
[2000] HCA 40
; (2000) 203 CLR 172 at 180-181
Fair Work Act 2009
Fair Work Act 2009
Fair Work Act 2009
Fair Work Act 2009
Fair Work Act 2009
Buck v Bavone
[1976] HCA 24
135 CLR 110 at 118-119.
[1963] HCA 54
; (1963) 109 CLR 467.
Klein v Domus Pty Ltd
[1963] HCA 54
; (1963) 109 CLR 467 at 472.
Klein v Domus Pty Ltd
[1963] HCA 54
; (1963) 109 CLR 467 at 473.
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Fair Work Bill 2008
, Explanatory Memorandum at 353
[2320], 354 [2323].
The twenty-third respondent is
the Fair Work Commission, which filed a submitting appearance in the
proceedings.
FW Act, s 385(d).
FW Act, s 12.
Bartley v Helensburgh Coal
[2020] FWC 5756
Bartley v Helensburgh Coal
[2020] FWC 5756
Bartley v Helensburgh Coal
[2020] FWC 5756
Bartley v Helensburgh Coal
[2020] FWC 5756
Construction, Forestry,
Maritime, Mining and Energy Union v Peabody CHPP Pty Ltd
Bartley v Helensburgh Coal
[2020] FWC 5756
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v
(2021) 306 IR 219.
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v
(2021) 306 IR 219 at 240 [95].
(1936) 55 CLR 499.
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v
(2021) 306 IR 219 at 239 [90].
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v
(2021) 306 IR 219 at 235 [68].
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v
(2021) 306 IR 219 at 236 [69].
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd v
(2021) 306 IR 219 at 239 [91].
Bartley v Helensburgh Coal
[2021] FWC 6414 at [67].
Bartley v Helensburgh Coal
[2021] FWC 6414 at [68(c)].
See at [110] above.
Bartley v Helensburgh
Coal Pty Ltd
[2021] FWC 6414 at [68(c)].
Bartley v Helensburgh
Coal Pty Ltd
[2021] FWC 6414 at [68(g)].
Bartley v Helensburgh
Coal Pty Ltd
[2021] FWC 6414 at [95].
Bartley v Helensburgh
Coal Pty Ltd
[2021] FWC 6414 at [95].
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2022] FWCFB 166
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2022] FWCFB 166
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2022] FWCFB 166
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2022] FWCFB 166
(2000) 203 CLR 194.
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2024] FCAFC 45
; (2024) 302 FCR 589 at 602-603
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2024] FCAFC 45
; (2024) 302 FCR 589 at 603-604
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2024] FCAFC 45
; (2024) 302 FCR 589 at 605
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2024] FCAFC 45
; (2024) 302 FCR 589 at 605-606
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2024] FCAFC 45
; (2024) 302 FCR 589 at 606
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2024] FCAFC 45
; (2024) 302 FCR 589 at 607
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2024] FCAFC 45
; (2024) 302 FCR 589 at 611
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2024] FCAFC 45
; (2024) 302 FCR 589 at 611
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2024] FCAFC 45
; (2024) 302 FCR 589 at 611
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2024] FCAFC 45
; (2024) 302 FCR 589 at 611
Australia, House of
Representatives,
Fair Work Bill 2008
Explanatory Memorandum at
247 [1552].
[1995] IRCA 292
; (1995) 60 IR 304 at 308. See
ICI Australia Operations Pty Ltd v Hutton
(1993) 47 IR 288 at
Short v F W Hercus Pty Ltd
(1993) 40 FCR 511 at 520-521;
Quality Bakers of Australia Ltd v Goulding
[1995] IRCA 285
; (1995) 60 IR 327 at 332-333;
Finance Sector Union of Australia v Commonwealth Bank of Australia
[2001] FCA 1613
111 IR 241 at 269-275
Dibb v Commissioner of Taxation
[2004] FCAFC 126
136 FCR 388 at 401-405
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2024] FCAFC 45
; (2024) 302 FCR 589 at 606
Attorney-General (Cth) v
[2023] HCA 13
; (2023) 97 ALJR 298 at 326-327
[2023] HCA 13
; 408 ALR 684 at 716;
for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
v Moorcroft
[2021] HCA 19
; (2021) 273 CLR 21 at 39
Registrar of Titles
(WA) v Franzon
[1975] HCA 41
; (1975) 132 CLR 611 at 618.
Helensburgh Coal Pty Ltd
[2024] FCAFC 45
; (2024) 302 FCR 589 at 611
Teterin v Resource
Pacific Pty Ltd t/a Ravensworth Underground Mine
[2014] FWC 1578
Teterin v Resource
Pacific Pty Ltd t/a Ravensworth Underground Mine
[2014] FWCFB 4125
; (2014) 244 IR 252 at 266
RTF format (611 KB)
Signed PDF/A format