Kain v R&B Investments Pty Ltd; Ernst & Young (a firm) v R&B Investments Pty Ltd; Shand v R&B Investments Pty Ltd [2025] HCA 28 (6 August 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
EDELMAN, STEWARD, GLEESON, JAGOT AND BEECH‑JONES JJ
Matter No S146/2024
KAIN APPELLANT
R&B INVESTMENTS PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR
THE R&B PENSION FUND & ORS RESPONDENTS
ERNST & YOUNG (A
FIRM) APPELLANT
R&B INVESTMENTS PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR
THE R&B PENSION FUND & ORS RESPONDENTS
ROBERT WARNER SHAND APPELLANT
INVESTMENTS PTY LTD AS TRUSTEE FOR
THE R&B PENSION FUND &
ORS RESPONDENTS
Kain v R&B Investments Pty Ltd
Young (a firm) v R&B Investments Pty Ltd
Shand v R&B
Investments Pty Ltd
[2025] HCA 28
Date of Hearing: 4 & 5 March
Date of Judgment: 6 August 2025
S146/2024, S144/2024 &
Matter No S146/2024:
aside paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Orders of the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia made on 5 July 2024 and, in their place,
(a) the question reserved in paragraph 1 of the Orders of the Full Court made
on 5 July 2024 be answered:
"Where the solicitor acting for the representative party or a group member
is subject to the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(NSW), then the Federal
Court of Australia may not make an order under s 33V(2) or
s 33Z(1)(g)
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) that an amount be paid to
or for the benefit of the solicitor calculated by reference to the amount that
might be or is to
be paid under a settlement or an award of damages or the value
of any property that may be recovered in the proceedings. The question
otherwise inappropriate to answer."; and
(b) the applicants pay the second, ninth and twelfth respondents' costs of
and incidental to the hearing of the reserved question.
first and second respondents pay the appellant's and the fourth and fifth
respondents' costs of the appeal.
Matter No S144/2024:
aside paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Orders of the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia made on 5 July 2024 and, in their place,
(a) the question reserved in paragraph 1 of the Orders of the Full Court made
on 5 July 2024 be answered:
"Where the solicitor acting for the representative party or a group member
is subject to the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(NSW), then the Federal
Court of Australia may not make an order under
s 33Z(1)(g)
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) that an amount be paid to
or for the benefit of the solicitor calculated by reference to the amount that
might be or is to be
paid under a settlement or an award of damages or the value
of any property that may be recovered in the proceedings. The question
otherwise inappropriate to answer."; and
(b) the applicants pay the second, ninth and twelfth respondents' costs of
and incidental to the hearing of the reserved question.
first and second respondents pay the appellant's and the fourth and fifth
respondents' costs of the appeal.
Matter No S143/2024:
aside paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Orders of the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia made on 5 July 2024 and, in their place,
(a) the question reserved in paragraph 1 of the Orders of the Full Court made
on 5 July 2024 be answered:
"Where the solicitor acting for the representative party or a group member
is subject to the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(NSW), then the Federal
Court of Australia may not make an order under
s 33Z(1)(g)
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) that an amount be paid to
or for the benefit of the solicitor calculated by reference to the amount that
might be or is to be
paid under a settlement or an award of damages or the value
of any property that may be recovered in the proceedings. The question
otherwise inappropriate to answer."; and
(b) the applicants pay the second, ninth and twelfth respondents' costs of
and incidental to the hearing of the reserved question.
first and second respondents pay the appellant's and the fourth and fifth
respondents' costs of the appeal.
On appeal from the Federal
Court of Australia
Representation
R M Foreman SC with R
K Jameson for the appellant in S146/2024, the fourth respondent in S143/2024 and
the fifth respondent in S144/2024
(instructed by Arnold Bloch
Hodge KC with G B Westgarth for the appellant in S143/2024 and the fourth
respondent in S144/2024 and S146/2024 (instructed by
GRT Lawyers)
Lawrance SC with A E Smith for the appellant in S144/2024 and the fifth
respondent in S143/2024 and S146/2024 (instructed by Corrs
J T Gleeson SC and S H Hartford Davis with D S Morris and O J
Ronan for the first and second respondents in each appeal (instructed
Group and Shine Lawyers)
C L Lenehan SC with R Harvey for the Association
of Litigation Funders of Australia, intervening in S146/2024 (instructed by
Roberts Lawyers)
Submitting appearance for the third respondent
in each appeal
No appearance for the sixth to ninth respondents in each
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
Kain v R&B Investments Pty
Ernst & Young (a firm) v R&B Investments Pty
Shand v R&B Investments Pty Ltd
Practice and procedure – Representative action – Orders –
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) provides
that in representative proceedings Federal Court may make such orders as are
just with respect to distribution of
any money paid under settlement or paid
into Court – Where
s 33Z(1)(g)
Federal Court of Australia
provides Court may in determining matter in representative proceeding
make such other order as Court thinks just – Where s
Profession Uniform Law
(NSW) provides law practice must not enter into costs
agreement under which amount payable is calculated by reference to amount of
award or settlement – Where applicants in representative proceeding
proposed to provide notice of intention to seek common
fund order in favour of
law practice at settlement or judgment – Where costs agreements to be
amended to provide for common
fund order in favour of law practice if notice
approved – Whether
Federal Court of Australia
empowers Federal Court to make common fund order at settlement or
judgment in favour of law practice.
Words and phrases –
"commencement CFO", "common fund order", "concept of justice", "contingency
fee", "costs agreement", "distribution",
"federal jurisdiction", "funding
commission", "funding equalisation order", "group costs order", "just", "legal
costs", "litigation
funding", "new legal rights", "payment for costs and
disbursements", "regulation of the legal profession", "remuneration for risk",
"representative proceeding", "requirements of State law", "settlement CFO",
"solicitors' CFO", "solicitors' common fund order".
Federal Court of
Australia Act 1976
Profession Uniform Law
, 169, 172, 179, 180, 181, 182, 183,
GAGELER CJ.
Funded representative proceedings constitute a form of civil litigation the
prevalence of which has increased and the
incidents of which have varied over
the two decades since litigation funding was held to be permissible in
Campbells Cash and Carry Pty Ltd v Fostif Pty
The litigious form
of the funded representative proceeding has attracted coteries of specialist
legal practitioners and has led to
the establishment within courts of panels of
specialist judges. Together, they have developed specialist terminology
incomprehensible
to the non-cognoscenti.
appeals are from a judgment of the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia
(Murphy, Beach and Lee JJ)
which determined a question reserved under
Federal Court of
Australia Act 1976
(Cth) ("the FCA"). The question was reserved in
consolidated representative proceedings in the original jurisdiction of the
Court under
of the FCA. Cutting through the jargon, the question
can be restated in two parts. The first part is general; the second part is
general part of the question is this: does the Federal Court have power, under
of the FCA (in the event of a representative proceeding being
concluded by settlement) or under
s 33Z(1)(g)
of the FCA (in the event of a
representative proceeding being concluded by judgment), to make an order that
requires all members
of the group on whose behalf the representative proceeding
has been commenced, who have not opted out of the proceeding by the date
and notified under
, to contribute equally to payment
to a litigation funder of a funding commission which contains a premium for
litigation risk and
which is calculated as a percentage of the settlement or
judgment sum? In the vernacular of the speciality, an order of that kind
known as a "common fund order" or "CFO".
making of a CFO under
of the FCA, in the form of an order
authorising and requiring payment to a litigation funder out of a settlement
fund of a specified
amount or of an amount to be calculated in a specified way,
has in practice become commonplace in the five years since
BMW Australia Ltd
come to be known as a "settlement CFO". A CFO under
s 33Z(1)(g)
authorising and
requiring payment to a litigation funder out of a judgment sum has been
described by parity of language as a "judgment
specific part of the question only arises if an affirmative answer is given to
the general part of the question. That is to say,
the specific part of the
question only arises if the Federal Court has power to make a CFO under
s 33Z(1)(g)
of the FCA.
specific part of the question is this: does the power of the Federal Court to
make a CFO under
s 33Z(1)(g)
extend to making a CFO in
circumstances where the litigation funder is a law practice regulated by the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(NSW) ("the Legal Profession Uniform Law")
as given force by the
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
making of a CFO in such circumstances would be
In the course of the
consolidated representative proceedings in the Federal Court in which the
question was reserved for determination
by the Full Court, a settlement CFO or
judgment CFO putatively made in such circumstances came to be known as a
"solicitor's CFO".
Full Court answered both parts of the question reserved in the
affirmative.
In relation to
the general part of the question, the Full Court followed its earlier decision
Elliott-Carde v McDonald's Australia
in considering that
the Federal Court has power under s 33V(2) and s 33Z(1)(g) of the FCA
to make a CFO upon settlement or
Building on that
earlier decision in relation to the specific part of the question, the Full
Court considered those powers to make
such a CFO sufficient to encompass power
to make a solicitor's CFO.
consequence of the judgment of the Full Court embodying those answers for the
conduct of the consolidated representative proceedings
is to pave the way for
the inclusion in a notice to group members to be approved by the Federal Court
under s 33X of the FCA of a
statement of the intention of the applicants to
seek a solicitor's CFO in the event of settlement or judgment. Against the
described by Gordon, Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ and by Jagot
J, the solicitor's CFO to be so sought by the applicants in
the consolidated
proceedings in the event of settlement or judgment would be governed by the
terms of the written contract of retainer
between the applicants and their
solicitors, as those terms would come by agreement to be amended upon the making
of the order for
the giving of the notice. The precise form of the solicitor's
CFO to be sought in accordance with the terms of the retainer as amended
be that the solicitors be paid out of the settlement or judgment sum such amount
(being not greater than 30% of the settlement
or judgment sum) as the Federal
Court considers at the time of making the CFO to be fair and reasonable in all
the circumstances
in addition to professional costs and disbursements incurred
by the solicitors in acting for the applicants.
my opinion, the Full Court's answer to the general part of the question was
correct. The power conferred on the Federal Court
by s 33V(2) of the FCA,
to "make such orders as are just with respect to the distribution of any money
paid under a settlement",
is broad enough to empower the Federal Court to make a
settlement CFO. Likewise, the power conferred on the Federal Court by
s 33Z(1)(g)
of the FCA, to "make such other order as the Court thinks just"
in "determining a matter in a representative proceeding", is broad
empower the making of a judgment CFO. In the terminology of the separate
question, the making of a CFO is "licit".
my opinion, however, the Full Court's answer to the specific part of the
question was incorrect. My view is that an order under
s 33V(2) or
s 33Z(1)(g) of the FCA could not properly be thought "just" if seeking or
giving effect to the order would involve a
contravention of the Legal Profession
Uniform Law. The making of the solicitor's CFO foreshadowed in the present case
would not be
"just" according to that standard. That is because, to provide in
the terms of the written retainer, as proposed to be amended upon
the making of
the order under s 33X for the giving of notice to group members, for the
applicant to apply to the Federal Court for
the solicitor's CFO would involve
the solicitors in a contravention of
of the Legal Profession Uniform
Law. In the terminology of the separate question, the making of the solicitor's
CFO would be "illicit".
the support of the Association of Litigation Funders of Australia, which applied
for and was granted unopposed leave to intervene
in the appeals, those of the
parties who sought to defend the Full Court's determination of the question
reserved pursued an application
. However, the
correctness of
does not squarely arise in the appeals, and the
application to reopen
is for that reason inappropriate to be
considered.
was that s 33ZF of the FCA does not empower the
making of an order of a kind there described as a
but which has
since and in retrospect been described with more precision as a "commencement
CFO" to distinguish it from a "settlement
CFO" or a "judgment
The commencement
CFO there in question was an interlocutory order made on the application of a
representative applicant and in accordance
with the terms of a funding agreement
between the applicant and a litigation funder, before the fixing of an opt-out
date under s
33J, by force of which the applicant and group members were to
be required to pay to the litigation funder out of any settlement
or judgment
sum amounts by way of reimbursement for funded costs and funding commission
(which included a premium for litigation
risk) as were identified in the funding
essential reason for the holding that s 33ZF of the FCA does not empower
the making of an order of that kind given by all members
of the majority in
was that the power the section confers to "make any order the
Court thinks appropriate or necessary to ensure that justice is done
proceeding" is limited to making an order directed to the just and efficient
resolution of an issue that has arisen between
the parties in a representative
proceeding. The majority considered that the making of a commencement CFO was
beyond the scope of
the power so limited because the central concern of an
applicant seeking such an order was with the "radically different" question
whether the representative proceeding which had been commenced but which had not
been determined was a viable vehicle for the
doing of justice between the
parties at all.
the holding in
concerning the limited scope of the power
conferred by s 33ZF of the FCA nor the reason for that holding has any
impact on the present
question of whether the making of a CFO in the form of a
"settlement CFO" or a "judgment CFO" is empowered by differently worded
provisions operating within the scheme of
at a different and later stage
of a representative proceeding, those provisions being s 33V(2), operating
only if there is a settlement,
and s 33Z(1)(g), operating only if there is
a judgment.
party disputed the application to each of s 33V(2) and s 33Z(1)(g) of
the FCA of the general principle of construction that makes
it "inappropriate to
read provisions conferring jurisdiction or granting powers to a court by making
implications or imposing limitations
which are not found in the express
That is hardly
surprising given the observation in
Wong v Silkfield Pty
that "[l]ike
other provisions conferring jurisdiction upon or granting powers to a court,
is not to be read by making implications or imposing limitations not found
in the words used" and that "this is so even if the evident
purpose of the
statute is to displace generally understood procedures".
was put to one side, the argument of those of the parties
who sought to challenge the Full Court's determination of the question reserved
by denying the power of the Federal Court to make any CFO at all under
s 33V(2) or s 33Z(1)(g) of the FCA was reduced to the proposition
the power conferred by each of those provisions was not to be read as a power to
create and confer a new legal right on a third
party based on a norm of what is
"just", but rather as a power to give effect to an entitlement arising at law or
in equity. By reason
of that inherent limitation, so the argument went, the
powers do not extend to conferring a right to payment on a litigation funder
against unfunded group members with whom the litigation funder is not in a
contractual or other relationship recognised at law or
argument accordingly treated the powers conferred by ss 33V(2) and
33Z(1)(g) of the FCA, to "make such orders as are just with
respect to the
distribution of any money paid under a settlement" and to "make such other order
as the Court thinks just" in "determining
a matter in a representative
proceeding" respectively, as akin to the power conferred by
Administrative Decisions (Judicial Review) Act 1977
(Cth) to make any
order directing any party to do or refrain from doing an act or thing "which the
court considers necessary to do
justice between the parties". In
Australian Securities
power was construed not to "set the Court on an uncharted course without legal
reference points by which to
but merely to
authorise the making of an order against a party only if a ground for relief
under the general law was established
against that party, the word "justice"
being taken to mean "justice according to
context in which ss 33V(2) and 33Z(1)(g) of the FCA will have scope to
operate, where group members on whose behalf a representative
proceeding has
been pursued to settlement or judgment stand to benefit from the settlement or
judgment without necessarily having
incurred the costs and without necessarily
having been exposed to litigation risk, tells against confining what is "just"
the meaning of those provisions to what is necessary or appropriate to
give effect to an entitlement arising at law or in equity.
Especially when
regard is had to the equitable procedures which
was designed to
the concept of
what is "just" in those provisions cannot be conceived of so narrowly as to deny
the Federal Court the capacity to
recognise and, where appropriate, compensate a
third party for what that third party has done and risked in bringing into
the settlement or judgment from which the group members stand to
in the text or structure of s 33V(1) and (2) or s 33Z(1) and (2)
compels a narrower reading so as to confine those provisions
to making orders
necessary to do justice only between group members or parties to the
representative proceeding. Nor is a narrower
reading suggested by the presence
of s 33ZJ, which by s 33ZJ(2) confers a specific power on the Federal
Court to order payment of
a representative party's anticipated costs out of
damages that have been awarded and by s 33ZJ(3) itself empowers the Federal
on an application under that section to "make any other order it thinks
is "just" for the purposes ss 33V(2) and 33Z(1)(g) is not confined to what
is independently required at law or in equity. What
is "just" for the purposes
of those provisions can encompass recognising and compensating from the
settlement or judgment to be distributed
amongst group members those whose
efforts have resulted in the coming into existence of the settlement or judgment
that is to be
distributed amongst group members.
making of a CFO, in the sense of a settlement CFO under s 33V(2) of the FCA
or a judgment CFO under s 33Z(1)(g) of the FCA, is
permissible even though,
on the authority of
the making of a commencement CFO
under s 33ZF of the FCA is not.
Solicitor's CFO
members of this Court explained that a "law of the Parliament conferring
will, in the absence of a
clear legislative intent to the contrary, ordinarily be construed as not
intended to confer jurisdiction
to make an order authorizing or requiring the
doing of an act which is specifically prohibited and rendered criminal by the
criminal law of the State or Territory in which the act would be done".
The explanation continued that "the reason why a law conferring
general terms is to be construed in the manner indicated is that it is
ordinarily to be presumed that it is the intent
of the Parliament that
within the confines imposed
by, the ordinary criminal law of the relevant State
or Territory". A reference to the doing of an act specifically prohibited by
law of the State or Territory operating within a general field of regulation can
be added, for essentially the same reason, to
the reference in that statement of
principle to the doing of an act specifically prohibited and rendered criminal
by the ordinary
criminal law of the State or
such general field of regulation in which State and Territory laws operate is
the regulation of the legal profession, which characteristically
"legislative frameworks for disciplining practitioners under the supervision of
the Supreme Courts of the States and
Territories".
framed on the assumption of the continuing application of those laws to legal
practitioners retained by parties to proceedings
before the Federal Court. That
is confirmed by provisions of the
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) which make the
entitlement of a legal practitioner to practise and appear in a federal court
ordinarily dependent on the legal
practitioner being admitted and having a
current entitlement to practise in the Supreme Court of a State or
whilst the power of the Federal Court to make any CFO under s 33V(2) or
s 33Z(1)(g) of the FCA is not limited to making an
order which gives effect
to an entitlement arising at law or in equity, the discretion conferred on the
Federal Court to make any
such CFO would not be properly exercised if doing so
would not be "just". An order, the seeking of or giving effect to which would
involve contravention of a State or Territory law regulating the legal
profession in that State or Territory, although not beyond
would not properly
be thought of as "just".
the argument on the appeals ranged more widely, it is not necessary for the
resolution of the appeals to go beyond an examination
of the operation of
s 183 of the Legal Profession Uniform Law. That
as recently
Bogan v Estate of
that a law practice "must not enter into a costs agreement under which the
amount payable to the law practice, or any part
of that amount, is calculated by
reference to the amount of any award or settlement or the value of any property
that may be recovered
in any proceedings to which the agreement relates".
Contravention of that prohibition by a law practice exposes the law practice
a civil penalty,
capable of constituting "unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct" on the part of a principal of the law
practice or any legal
practitioner associate involved in the
contravention
and renders
the costs agreement
written contract of retainer between the applicants and their solicitors answers
the description of a "costs agreement" for the
purposes of the Legal Profession
Uniform Law and would continue to answer that description even as it is proposed
to be amended.
That is because it relates and would continue to relate to "legal
("legal costs"
being relevantly "amounts that a person has been or may be charged by, or is or
may become liable to pay to, a law
practice for the provision of legal
services" being "work done, or business transacted, in the ordinary course of
legal practice"
the amount (being not greater than 30% of the settlement or judgment sum) which
the applicants would seek to become payable
to the solicitors by force of a
solicitor's CFO to be made under s 33V(2) or s 33Z(1)(g) of the FCA on
application to the Federal
Court in accordance with the retainer as proposed to
be amended would itself meet the description "legal costs" need not be
determined.
Either way, the amount would answer the description in s 183 of
the Legal Profession Uniform Law of an "amount" or "part of [an]
amount" that
would be "payable to the law practice" and that would be "calculated by
reference to the amount of any award or settlement
... that may be recovered in
any proceedings to which the agreement relates".
issue on which the application of the prohibition in s 183 of the Legal
Profession Uniform Law turns is whether such an amount
would be payable "under"
the costs agreement if the solicitor's CFO to be applied for by the applicants
were to be made by the Federal
Court under s 33V(2) or s 33Z(1)(g) of
the FCA. In my opinion, it would.
crux of the Full Court's reasoning to the contrary conclusion is contained in
the observation it made in relation to the retainer
as proposed to be amended
that "[t]here is no promise to pay any amount; a promise
application
for an order directing approved remuneration on a particular
basis is a quite distinct
I accept the
distinction drawn. But I cannot regard the distinction as determinative.
most prepositions, the word "under" is mutable and must be contextually and
purposively construed. In the context of s 183 of
the Legal Profession
Uniform Law, the word connotes a relationship between the costs agreement and
the amount that is payable to
the law practice. Nothing in the context indicates
that the relationship connoted is confined to one in which the obligation to pay
the amount has its immediate source in the contractual force of the costs
agreement. Significant in that respect is that s 183, read
in light of
s 180(1), does not specify whom the amount in question might be payable by
and does not in terms confine the amount payable
to an amount payable by the
client or another person who is party to the costs agreement. The section
therefore does not in terms
exclude an amount payable by a group member in a
representative proceeding with whom the law practice has no contractual
relationship.
to purpose, s 183 is located in
of the Legal Profession Uniform Law, the
stated objects of which include "to ensure that clients of law practices are
able to make
informed choices about their legal options and the costs associated
with pursuing those options" and "to provide that law practices
must not charge
more than fair and reasonable amounts for legal
consonant with those objects to understand the relationship connoted by the word
"under" in the section as encompassing
not only circumstances where the
obligation to pay is "created by" the costs agreement but also circumstances
where the obligation
to pay is brought into existence "in accordance with,
pursuant to or under the
of the costs
agreement. That, I am convinced, is the preferable construction.
Accordingly,
in my opinion, to make provision in the contract of retainer for the applicants
to apply to the Federal Court for a
solicitor's CFO would involve the solicitors
in a contravention of s 183 of the Legal Profession Uniform Law. For that
would not be "just" to make the solicitor's CFO under either
s 33V(2) or s 33Z(1)(g) of the FCA.
Conclusion and
appeal should be allowed, and the consequential orders proposed by Gordon,
Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ should be made.
STEWARD, GLEESON AND BEECH-JONES JJ. Can the Federal Court of Australia
make orders under
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) ("the FCA Act"), upon the settlement of or judgment in a
representative proceeding, to approve the distribution of a sum
as a funding commission calculated as a percentage of the sum
recovered in favour of a litigation funder or a law practice conducting
proceeding on behalf of the representative party?
these reasons will explain, under ss 33V(2) and 33Z(1)(g) in Pt IVA of
the FCA Act, the Federal Court can make such an order in
favour of a litigation
funder but not a law practice conducting the representative proceeding.
The Federal Court exercises power
in federal jurisdiction against the
background of the scheme of regulation of the legal profession in the State or
Territory in which
the solicitors in the proceeding are
practising.
Where, as in
these appeals, the solicitors are practising in New South Wales, s 183
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(NSW) ("the LPUL") prohibits
contingency fees.
Federal Court cannot make such an order in favour of the law practice conducting
the representative proceeding because to do
so would be contrary to s 183.
Representative
proceedings were brought in the Federal Court under Pt IVA of the FCA Act by the
first and second respondents, R&B
Investments Pty Ltd and Mr David Furniss
("the Applicants"), against Blue Sky Alternative Investments Limited (In
liq) ("Blue Sky"),
the third respondent, and some of Blue Sky's former
directors (Mr John Kain and Mr Robert Shand) and Blue Sky's former auditor,
& Young ("EY"). The Applicants initially each brought competing
representative proceedings. R&B Investments was represented
Group, and Mr Furniss by Shine Lawyers. The proceedings were consolidated
("the Consolidated
Proceeding").
Group and Shine Lawyers ("the Solicitors") reached an "in principle"
agreement to effectuate that consolidation and for the
the Consolidated Proceeding. They agreed upon the terms of a proposed
"cooperative litigation protocol" ("the Protocol")
that it is envisaged the
Applicants will execute and the terms of a proposed "consolidation agreement"
that the Solicitors will execute
("the Consolidation Agreement"). If executed,
the Protocol will document the manner in which the Applicants and the
Solicitors are
to conduct the Consolidated Proceeding. The Protocol will also
record that the Applicants "have each given their instructions to
representative applicants in the Consolidated Proceeding" and that they consider
that the Protocol "serves to benefit Group
Members". Clause 5.1 of the Protocol
records that the Applicants will request the Federal Court:
"a) at an appropriate stage of the proceeding – to make orders that or to
the effect that:
costs and disbursements be shared among the Applicants and Group Members
) on a costs‑equalisation basis (for instance, but
without limitation, under section 33ZJ of the [FCA] Act):
Solicitors] be further remunerated for their risks in funding the legal costs
and disbursements by payment of such percentage
of the Resolution Sum as may be
approved by the Court (
Solicitors' Common Fund Order
Solicitors' CFO
b) as early as practicable in the proceeding – orders that notice be given
to the Claimants of the matters in (a) hereof."
"Resolution Sum" is defined to mean the sum recovered as a result of
the Consolidated
Proceeding.
default of orders pursuant to cl 5.1(b), under the Protocol the Applicants
agree to seek orders for the transfer of the Consolidated
Proceeding to the
Supreme Court of Victoria and, upon such transfer, a group costs order ("GCO")
pursuant to
Supreme Court Act 1986
or, alternatively,
to seek commercial litigation funding.
executed, the Consolidation Agreement will record, among other things, that the
Applicants have reached agreement in principle
to consolidate
the proceedings and that that agreement was recorded in a Protocol executed
by the Applicants. The recitals also record
that the Protocol authorised
and directed the Solicitors to prepare terms governing the joint carriage
of the Consolidated Proceeding
and that the Solicitors had agreed to
share carriage on the terms set out in the Consolidation Agreement.
10 March 2023, to facilitate performance of the Protocol and
the Consolidation Agreement when they are executed, the Applicants
interlocutory application seeking the Federal Court's approval to distribute a
notice to group members ("the Proposed Notice")
pursuant to ss 33X and 33Y
of the FCA Act which stated:
"The solicitors for the Applicants are financing these proceedings,
by paying lawyers in their employ as well as barristers and other
and by taking on the financial risks of conducting the proceeding,
including by indemnifying the Applicants against adverse
and furnishing any security for costs ordered by the Court.
If a settlement or judgment in the Class Action results in compensation being
payable to you, the Applicants will ask the Court (who
has the power to make the
below orders) to make an order that a portion of the compensation be used
to remunerate the [Solicitors]
for the value of their work, the expenses and
outgoings (disbursements) they incurred, and the financial risks they took,
the Class Action (a
Solicitors' CFO
). If it makes a
Solicitors' CFO, the Court has power to decide what portion of the compensation
should be paid to the solicitors,
and will set a proportion that the Court
considers fair and reasonable in all the circumstances. The solicitors will not
Court to approve an amount that is greater than what a third party
litigation funder would seek for funding this proceeding, which
is up to 30% of
the total recovery plus reimbursement of its out-of-pocket costs.
Some group members have previously entered 'litigation funding agreements' with
International Litigation Partners No 10 Pte Ltd [('ILP')].
Solicitors' CFO is made, it will wholly replace the ILP funding agreements."
is envisaged that if the terms of the Proposed Notice are approved by
the Court, then, with the agreement of the Applicants, the
terms of the
existing costs agreement between each Applicant and their solicitor will be
amended. In the case of Banton Group, the
existing costs agreement between
Banton Group and R&B Investments ("the Banton Costs Agreement") will be
amended by an "Addendum"
which was in evidence.
Banton Costs Agreement recorded that that agreement, together with Banton
Group's "General Terms of Business", set out the terms
of its offer to provide
legal services to R&B Investments and constituted its "costs agreement
and disclosure pursuant to the
[LPUL]". Clause 3.1 of the Banton Costs
Agreement, under the heading "Funding Agreement", provided that:
"While you are primarily liable to this firm for the costs incurred in
the Proceedings, we understand you will sign a funding agreement
and are in the process of arranging execution. Pursuant to this retainer and the
funding agreement, this firm's invoices
will be addressed to you, care of ILP
and will be paid by ILP."
In the event ILP did not pay any of the firm's invoices, Banton Group
confirmed that it would not enforce any of the costs against
Investments.
The basis on
which its professional fees were charged and calculated on an hourly basis was
then set out. Banton Group's General
Terms of Business were annexed to the
Banton Costs Agreement.
proposed Addendum to the Banton Costs Agreement envisaged it being executed as
an agreement between R&B Investments and Banton
Group. The Addendum
provided for amendments to the Banton Costs Agreement which relevantly
provided that, after cl 3 of the Banton
Costs Agreement, a new cl 3A
be inserted as follows:
3A. ALTERNATIVE FUNDING ARRANGEMENTS
3A.1 You have instructed us to seek Court orders establishing a funding
arrangement in substitution for the ILP Funding Agreement
described in
Section 3 above.
3A.2 Specifically, you have instructed us to:
(c) at an appropriate stage of the proceeding – to the extent permitted by
law seek orders that or to the effect that:
costs and disbursements be shared between the [Applicants] and the group members
in the Consolidated Proceeding (together and
pro rata in proportion to their respective recoveries as a result of the
proceeding or otherwise as the Court may direct (
Costs Reimbursement
Solicitors] be remunerated for [their] risks in funding the legal costs and
disbursements (pursuant to the agreement described
in this clause 3A) by payment
of such percentage of the sum recovered as a result of the Consolidated
Proceeding (
Resolution Sum
) as may be approved by the Court
Solicitors' Common Fund Order
Solicitors' CFO
(d) as soon as practicable in the proceeding – seek orders that notice be
given to the Claimants of the matters in 3A.2(c)."
the event that the orders described in cl 3A.2(d) were made – being
notice of those matters set out in cl 3A.2(c) –
then cl 3A.3 provided
that Banton Group would finance the Consolidated Proceeding (including security
for costs and payment of any
adverse costs orders against R&B Investments)
as required by the Consolidation Agreement; Banton Group would indemnify
Investments against any liability in respect of legal costs and
disbursements, security for costs or adverse costs in or in connection
Consolidated Proceeding; and in the event that a Resolution Sum was
obtained in the Consolidated Proceeding or otherwise
in connection with the
claims that are the subject of the Consolidated Proceeding (defined as
"Claims"), Banton Group would seek
the "Costs Reimbursement" and the
"Solicitors' CFO". "Resolution Sum" was
to mean "any
amount or amounts, or the value of goods or services, to which
[R&B Investments] or a group member becomes entitled
in connection with
or satisfaction or part satisfaction of the Claims, including such amount/s or
value: (i) as a result of a settlement,
judgment or arbitration; and
(ii) provided by a respondent in the Consolidated Proceeding or any other
person, including a person
against whom any respondent claims any indemnity,
apportionment or contribution".
3A.4 of the Addendum recorded that, "[f]or the avoidance of doubt, by entering
into this agreement" R&B Investments (a)
agrees that Banton Group are
to seek orders as described in cl 3A; (b) does not agree to any particular
remuneration, or form of
remuneration, to be paid to Banton Group from
the Resolution Sum; and (c) agrees that the form and value of remuneration
to be provided
to Banton Group will be determined by, and take effect pursuant
only to, any order for Costs Reimbursement or Solicitors' CFO.
further matters about these arrangements should be noted. First, Shine
Lawyers intended to enter into an updated costs agreement
with Mr Furniss
to substantially the same effect as the Addendum to the Banton
Costs Agreement. Second, the evidence before the Full
Court of the Federal
Court was to the effect that neither of the Solicitors was or is willing to
conduct the Consolidated Proceeding
on a "no win, no fee" basis. The stated
basis for that view was the "significant risks involved with outlaying legal
costs, and taking
responsibility for any adverse costs and security for costs
(weighed against the likely uplift available on those fees)". Third,
evidence before the Full Court was also to the effect that
neither of the Solicitors was willing to conduct the Consolidated
Proceeding on
an ongoing basis without the Federal Court determining, at an early
stage, whether the Court had power to make a Solicitors'
it must be emphasised that the phrase "Solicitors' CFO", as used in the Proposed
Notice, the proposed agreements and the
balance of this judgment, refers to an
order authorising a payment to the solicitors for the applicants conducting the
proceedings
out of a settlement or judgment sum calculated by reference to a
"percentage of the sum recovered" or the value of any property that
recovered. It is not a reference to an order authorising a payment out of a
settlement or judgment sum to the solicitors acting
for a representative party
representing their costs and disbursements paid by reference to a scale or
hourly rates.
Reserved question and the appeals
was the background to the Applicants filing the interlocutory application in the
Federal Court seeking the Court's approval
to distribute the Proposed Notice to
group members pursuant to ss 33X and 33Y of the FCA Act. In short, if the
Proposed Notice was
approved, the Solicitors would seek amendment of their costs
agreements to include terms consistent with cll 3A.2, 3A.3 and 3A.4
Addendum, including the Solicitors' right to recover
the Costs Reimbursement and the Solicitors' CFO.
interlocutory application came before Lee J, who made an order that the
following question be reserved before the Full Court
of the Federal Court
pursuant to s 25(6) of the FCA
"Is it a licit exercise of power, pursuant to statutory powers conferred within
Pt IVA of the [FCA Act],
or otherwise,
for the Court, upon the
settlement or judgment of a representative proceeding, to make an order (being a
'common fund order', as
that term is defined in
Davaria Pty Ltd v 7-Eleven
Stores Pty Ltd
[2020] FCAFC 183
; (2020) 281 FCR 501 at
, [22]-[30])
which would provide for the distribution of funds
or other property
solicitor otherwise than as payment for costs and disbursements incurred in
relation to the conduct of the proceeding?"
Full Court answered the amended reserved question "Yes". In this Court, Mr Kain,
Mr Shand and EY were granted special leave to
appeal to challenge that
answer. Their appeals were heard together. The Association of Litigation
Funders of Australia was given
leave to intervene on the hearing of
the appeals.
the course of the hearing of the appeals, a number of difficulties emerged with
the reserved question.
the question posed was expressed as a question about the power of the Federal
Court, upon the settlement of or judgment in
a representative proceeding, to
make an order "which would provide for the distribution of funds ... to a
solicitor otherwise than
as payment for costs and disbursements incurred in
relation to the conduct of the proceeding". That last phrase did not
identify that the real issue was whether the order that the
Solicitors proposed that the Federal Court should make fell within the
prohibition against solicitors charging contingency fees contrary to s 183
of the LPUL.
the question assumed that the payment which would be authorised would be
"otherwise than" as payment for costs and disbursements
incurred in relation to
the Solicitors' conduct of the Consolidated Proceeding when, in fact,
the proposed payment would be a reward
for the Solicitors amending the
costs agreements and then continuing to prosecute the Consolidated Proceeding to
the point of recovery
on the terms set out in the amended costs agreements.
The consideration for the Solicitors' agreement to continue to prosecute
Consolidated Proceeding to a successful outcome would be more than
whatever sum was given the badge "costs and disbursements"; it
would be all of
the stipulations in the amended costs agreements. As explained later in
these reasons, no sum that would be paid
under the amended costs agreements
would be "otherwise than as payment
costs and disbursements incurred
in relation to the conduct of the proceeding" (emphasis added) even if it
were expressed in the
amended costs agreements as remuneration for assuming
the risk of funding the legal costs and disbursements. All of the amounts for
which the amended costs agreements would provide would be a reward
for, or, at the very least, in relation to, the performance of
Solicitors' legal services. That is why the supposed distinction drawn in the
reserved question between "costs and disbursements"
and amounts "otherwise than
as payment for costs and disbursements incurred in relation to the conduct of
the proceeding" is illusory.
is then a further difficulty about the reserved question which should be
identified but is not determinative here. Questions
generally expressed discretionary power (here, a power to make such order as is
just under s 33V(2) or s 33Z(1)(g)
of the FCA Act) will often overlap
with questions about what factors may affect the exercise of the discretion. The
bounds of a discretionary
power are not always sharply defined. But equally
there are cases, of which this is one, where some exercises of the power fall
the ambit of permissible discretion because the proposed exercise of the
power is unlawful.
the specific form of order sought was not identified in the question. None of
the identified passages in
to in the question defined the term "common fund order" (or "CFO") and,
during the hearing, the parties could not precisely
identify what was meant by
that term or other terms – such as a "settlement CFO", a "judgment
CFO" or a "funding equalisation
order" (or "FEO") – that were used in
argument in this Court as well as in earlier cases. At the request of the
Court, after
the hearing the parties filed a joint note which provided a
conceptual description of a CFO and an FEO, as well as examples of each
CFO was conceptually described as:
"an order which requires all group members (including those who have not entered
into a funding agreement) to contribute equally
to a payment to the funder in
respect of the funder's commission. It is generally made at the same time as
orders dealing with other
expenses incurred in the conduct of a class action,
the most significant usually being legal costs. The funding commission,
as a percentage of the settlement or judgment sum, to be paid to the
litigation funder includes a premium for litigation risk."
Specific examples of settlement CFOs – a form of CFO made at settlement
were provided.
orders either authorised the payment of part of the total settlement sum to a
or authorised a
scheme administrator to deduct a proportion of the amount otherwise payable to a
particular group member and pay
Contrary to the
above description of a CFO, neither order had the
legal effect
"requir[ing]" group members to "contribute" to a payment. On their face
each order was "with respect to the distribution of any
money paid under a
settlement".
The parties
were unable to locate an example of a judgment CFO – a CFO made at
judgment – with the parties noting their
understanding that a judgment CFO
has never been made.
funding equalisation order or FEO was conceptually described as "an order
that reduces unfunded group members' awards so as to
spread the fee or
commission payable to the litigation funder by funded group members across all
group members". In
Elliott-Carde v McDonald's Australia Ltd
explained his Honour's conception of an FEO as an order that could be made by
either of two methods he referred to as "FEO
method 1" and "FEO method
In this Court, the
parties agreed that although both methods resulted in both funded and unfunded
group members having amounts deducted
from their recoveries for the payment of
the funding commission, there were distinctions between the methods. Two were
identified.
The first is the starting point. In FEO method 1, the court
first calculates the notional amount that unfunded group members would
in commission to the funder and then distributes those notional amounts across
the whole class so that the net outcome
for both the cohort of funded group
members and the cohort of unfunded group members was the
method 2, the court starts with the contracted funding commission actually
incurred as between funded group members and the
funder and distributes that
contractual obligation equally amongst funded and unfunded group members after
the litigation funder's
commission is
determined.
distinction was said to be that, under FEO method 1, there is a prospect that a
funder may seek commission on the notional
incremental increase attributed to
funded group members as part of the funding equalisation
relation to FEO method 2, Order 12 in
Equity Financial Planners Pty Ltd v AMP
Financial Planning Pty Ltd
was given as an
In relation to
FEO method 1, the joint note recorded that it was difficult to discern from the
authorities whether an order reflected
that method but gave two examples where
that method
have been used because each contained a reduction in the
entitlement of unfunded group members which was then spread pro rata across
funded and unfunded group members, thus incrementally increasing the return to
funded group members who paid the funding commission
the settlement CFOs, the legal effect of the orders made in the cases
giving effect to FEOs to which this Court was referred
was to distribute, or
authorise the distribution of, part of the settlement sum otherwise payable
to unfunded group members to funded
group members as reimbursement for the
amounts paid or contractually owing by the latter to the
these reasons, the conceptual description of a CFO and an FEO provided by the
parties has been adopted. However, as has been explained,
those conceptual
descriptions are principally addressed to the manner of calculation of the
various component payments to be made
as part of any settlement of or judgment
given in a representative proceeding rather than their legal effect. The
reference to a
"settlement" or "judgment" CFO or an FEO in the balance of these
reasons also incorporates the legal effect of orders to give effect
calculations by way of distributing part of the settlement (or judgment) sum to
either the funder or funded group members
to reflect those calculations. The
same applies to a Solicitors' CFO. These reasons do not address whether, to
effect a settlement
or judgment, orders can be made imposing liabilities on
group members.
Part IVA of the FCA Act
IVA of the FCA Act has previously been considered by this
The answer to the
real issues underlying the reserved question in these appeals concerns the
proper construction of ss 33V(2) and
33Z(1)(g) in Pt IVA.
Each provision is concerned with a representative proceeding coming to an
end – s 33V by settlement; s
33Z by judgment.
33V is headed "Settlement and discontinuance –
representative proceeding". Sub-section (1) provides that a representative
proceeding may not be settled or discontinued without the approval of the Court.
Sub-section (2) provides:
"If the Court gives such an approval, it may make such orders as are just with
respect to the distribution of any money paid under
a settlement or paid into
the Court."
33Z, headed "Judgment – powers of the Court", provides:
"(1) The Court may, in determining a matter in a representative proceeding, do
any one or more of the following:
(a) determine an issue of law;
(b) determine an issue of fact;
(c) make a declaration of liability;
(d) grant any equitable relief;
(e) make an award of damages for group members, sub-group members or individual
group members, being damages consisting of specified
amounts or amounts worked
out in such manner as the Court specifies;
(f) award damages in an aggregate amount without specifying amounts awarded in
respect of individual group members;
make such other order as the Court thinks just
(2) In making an order for an award of damages, the Court must make provision
for the payment or distribution of the money to the
group members entitled.
(3) Subject to section 33V, the Court is not to make an award of damages under
paragraph (1)(f) unless a reasonably accurate assessment
can be made of the
total amount to which group members will be entitled under the judgment.
(4) Where the Court has made an order for the award of damages, the Court
may give such directions (if any) as it thinks just in
relation to:
(a) the manner in which a group member is to establish his or her entitlement to
share in the damages; and
(b) the manner in which any dispute regarding the entitlement of a group member
to share in the damages is to be determined." (emphasis
will be explained, where the solicitor acting for the representative party or a
group member is subject to the LPUL, then the Federal
Court may not make an
order under s 33V(2) or s 33Z(1)(g) of the FCA Act under which an
amount to be paid to or for the benefit of
the solicitor is calculated by
reference to the amount that might be paid or is to be paid as an award or under
a settlement or the
value of any property that may be recovered in the
proceedings, including in the terms of the Solicitors' CFO.
Federal Court, however, does have power under ss 33V(2) and 33Z(1)(g) of
the FCA Act to make a settlement CFO or a judgment CFO
in favour of a litigation
funder, or an FEO. It is appropriate to address the power of the Federal
Court to make those orders before
turning to the Solicitors' CFO that is the
subject of these appeals.
of contention and
Applicants filed a notice of contention
which they contended
that the decision of the Full Court the subject of these appeals erroneously
failed to decide that the Federal
Court had power to make an order or orders
relating to the remuneration of a litigation funder to be borne pro rata by the
members from a common fund of the proceeds to be recovered from the
litigation, including at an early stage in the
proceedings,
this Court's decision in
BMW Australia Ltd v
reopened and overturned to the extent it holds to the contrary.
did not address, let alone resolve, the power of the Federal Court under
s 33V(2) or s 33Z(1)(g) of the FCA Act to make a settlement
judgment CFO in favour of a litigation funder, or a Solicitors'
, this Court considered s 33ZF(1) of the FCA Act
(and its equivalent in
Civil Procedure Act 2005
(NSW)) and a majority held that those provisions did not empower the Federal
Court (or the Supreme Court of New South Wales) to make
an order early in
representative proceedings that allowed for part of a litigation funder's
remuneration to be a proportion of moneys
recovered in a settlement or judgment,
with all group members (both funded and unfunded) bearing a proportionate share
of liability.
the ratio in
of order sought in
to make payments from moneys recovered in a
settlement or judgment – a "commencement CFO" or
an "interim CFO" – was distinct.
Such orders are made early in
the representative proceeding, in interim form, and are usually made
"subject to further
and in some cases
purport to impose substantive future liabilities on the representative party and
group members.
judgments in
described the orders as being made at an early
stage of proceedings and reasoned on that
This is reinforced
by the fact that the majority reasoned that s 33ZF(1) (which relevantly
provides that "the Court may, of its own
motion or on application by a party or
a group member, make any order the Court thinks appropriate or necessary to
ensure that justice
is done in the proceeding") was concerned with justice in
the proceeding, not whether a proceeding could proceed or be pursued at
Further, the
plurality considered it a "speculative exercise" to fix the litigation funder's
rate of remuneration at the commencement
of the proceeding absent criteria
to evaluate its appropriateness or
In any event,
the order sought in
was directed to payments to litigation
funders, not solicitors.
is no basis to reopen
should not be reopened merely to permit re-agitation of
arguments that did not prevail in favour of a "commencement
Sections 33V(2) and 33Z(1)(g) in
established that
is not determinative of the issues in these
appeals, the starting point is the text of each of s 33V(2) and
s 33Z(1)(g), which obliges
the Federal Court to decide what orders are
"just" in a particular context – s 33V(2), where the proceeding ends
by settlement;
s 33Z(1)(g), where it ends by judgment. Both are powers
of considerable breadth and wide discretion. Moreover, as both provisions
either provision "by making implications or
imposing limitations which are not
found in the express
33V – settlement
33V(1) requires that a representative proceeding not be settled or discontinued
without the approval of the Court. A negotiated
settlement will often
include a distribution of part of a fund to a third party; it is a matter for
the Court whether that is approved.
Section 33V(2) then provides that, if the
Court gives such an approval, it may make such orders as are just with respect
to the distribution
of any money paid under a settlement or paid into the
Court. The power in s 33V(2) is to make final orders in the Court's
The Court's role
is to evaluate the proposed settlement terms at the time of settlement based on
the circumstances that pertain at
there a limit on the power in s 33V(2) that prevents a settlement CFO?
Nothing on the face of the terms of s 33V(2) implies anything
identity of the recipient of any distribution, beyond that such orders will not
be made unless they are
Mr Kain, however,
submitted that s 33V(2) must be limited to payment to the applicant and
group members, or those to whom a pre‑existing
legal obligation is owed,
on the basis that the settlement fund relates to the settling of the claims
between the parties. That argument
must be rejected. There is no reason to read
"distribution" or the text of s 33V(2) as limited to the parties to
the litigation.
settlement agreement may sometimes include terms that concern
third parties, particularly where those third parties helped to facilitate
the proceeding or the outcome of the proceeding. One example, as counsel
for Mr Shand properly conceded would be within the scope
of s 33V(2),
is that it is sometimes necessary in securing the distribution of funds to
provide for payment to a third party in order
to achieve that distribution, such
as the costs of the actual
distribution of the fund itself through the
use of an administrator. It is difficult to identify any meaningful distinction
this payment and a payment to a litigation funder who paid the costs and
disbursements to facilitate the proceeding and to secure
the settlement fund.
unlike a commencement or interim CFO, an order distributing a proportion of the
settlement sum to the litigation funder
does not create new relationships
between unfunded group members and the litigation funder. It is not proposed by
reference to agreed
funding terms between funded group members and the
litigation funder, but instead on the basis that it is a fair and reasonable
of the settlement.
other powers in Pt IVA that use the term "distribution" name the recipient
of that distribution, including, for example,
ss 33M(b), 33Z(2) and 33ZA.
This is a further basis against construing s 33V(2) to limit the class of
particular recipients of any
distribution where none is identified on its face.
For those reasons, an order authorising the deduction of an amount from a
sum as payment to a litigation funder may answer the description of
an order "with respect to the distribution of any money" in s
and that may include both a CFO and an FEO at settlement.
33Z – judgment
33Z(1) enumerates a list of actions that the Court may take in determining a
matter in a representative proceeding. Paragraphs
(a) to (f) list specific
powers of the Court at judgment. Paragraph (g) provides that the Court may
"make such other order as the
Court thinks just".
there a limit on the power in s 33Z(1)(g) that prevents the Court from
making a judgment CFO? Although the parties could not provide
an example of a
judgment CFO, there was no identified basis for concluding that such an order
could not be made. First, Mr Kain,
Mr Shand and EY submitted that
s 33Z(1)(g) should be interpreted consistently with paras (a) to (f) of
s 33Z(1), which are limited
to orders affecting the parties or group
members. That submission must be rejected. A judgment CFO by its nature would be
affecting the parties to the litigation, as submitted by the
Applicants, by "sharing both the burdens and benefits of the litigation
... achieving justice between" the parties. The fact that a judgment CFO might
affect a third party is not determinative.
Mr Kain, Mr Shand and EY submitted that the power in s 33Z(1)(g) is limited
by the term "matter", which should be read as
a source of power to make orders
necessary to resolve the dispute between the parties and limited to issues
within the proceeding.
Once again, this is an overly restrictive reading
of s 33Z(1)(g). The "matter" may well include the fair
distribution of the fund
created by the award of damages on judgment, having
regard to all people who may have claims on that fund.
Mr Shand submitted that, as s 33Z(2) is limited to payment or distribution
of money to group members, the general power in
s 33Z(1)(g) should not be
construed as an exception to s 33Z(2). That submission
misconstrues s 33Z(2). That sub-section does not
exhaust the Court's
powers on the distribution of a judgment fund. It does not operate as a
constraint on s 33Z(1)(g).
Mr Shand submitted that the construction adopted would make s 33ZJ
redundant. Section 33ZJ expressly deals with the possibility
of adjustment to
group members' entitlement to damages to account for legal costs. It deals
with a specific situation – costs
equalisation between group members. On
its face, s 33ZJ does not address, let alone exhaust, the Court's powers on
the distribution
of a judgment fund.
No power to make a
Solicitors' CFO
ss 33V(2) and 33Z(1)(g) allow for the making of a settlement CFO,
a judgment CFO and an FEO does not answer whether they permit
the making of
a Solicitors' CFO. As will be explained, neither provision empowers
the Federal Court to make an order for payment
from the settlement or
judgment fund which is prohibited by law or gives effect to an agreement or
understanding that is otherwise
unlawful. An unlawful payment cannot be a "just"
payment. That last statement needs explanation.
and Territory schemes of regulation of the legal profession form part of the
context in which federal jurisdiction is exercised,
and have an impact upon the
practical circumstances in which the rule of law is
maintained."
For that reason, the Federal Court exercises
power in federal jurisdiction against the background of the scheme of
regulation of the
legal profession in the State or Territory in which the
solicitors in the proceeding are
practising.
In New South
Wales, that includes the LPUL and the
Legal Profession Uniform Law Australian
Solicitors' Conduct Rules 2015
(NSW) ("the Uniform Rules"), which
regulate the legal profession in New South Wales. As will be seen, a
Solicitors' CFO is prohibited
by s 183 of the LPUL and its recovery is
prohibited by s 185(4) of the LPUL.
is necessary and appropriate to consider the components of the scheme.
LPUL seeks to "promote the administration of justice and an efficient and
effective Australian legal profession" by, among other
things, "providing and
promoting interjurisdictional consistency in the law applying to the Australian
legal profession"; "ensuring
lawyers are competent and maintain high ethical and
professional standards in the provision of legal services"; "enhancing the
of clients of law practices and the protection of the public
generally"; "empowering clients of law practices to make informed choices
the services they access and the costs involved"; and "promoting regulation of
the legal profession that is efficient, effective,
targeted and
proportionate".
4 of the LPUL is headed "Business practice and professional conduct". The
objectives of Ch 4 are to "ensure appropriate safeguards
are in place for
maintaining the integrity of legal services" and to "apply those safeguards
regardless of the type of business structure
used for the delivery of legal
services" means "work done, or business transacted, in the ordinary course of
legal practice".
4.3 of Ch 4 addresses legal costs – relevantly, "amounts that a
person has been or may be charged by, or is or may become
liable to pay to, a
law practice for the provision of legal
The objectives
of Pt 4.3 include ensuring "that clients of law practices are able to make
informed choices about their legal options
and the costs associated with
pursuing those options" and "to provide that law practices must not charge more
than fair and reasonable
amounts for
legal costs".
Consistent with those objectives, a law practice must, in charging legal costs,
charge costs that are no more than fair and reasonable
the circumstances and that, in particular, are (a) proportionately and
reasonably incurred and (b) proportionate and reasonable
In considering whether legal costs are fair and reasonable, regard must be
had to whether the legal costs conform to any applicable
requirements of
Pt 4.3 and the Uniform
4 of Pt 4.3 deals with costs agreements. A client of a law practice has the
right to require and to have a negotiated costs
agreement with the
law practice.
costs agreement must be written or evidenced in
although the
phrase "costs agreement" itself is not defined. A costs agreement may provide
for what is commonly described as a "no
win, no fee" arrangement where the
payment of some or all of the legal costs is conditional on the successful
outcome of the matter
to which those costs relate ("a conditional
costs agreement").
conditional costs agreement is subject to specific limitations
and exceptions.
for example, s 182 provides that a conditional costs agreement may provide
for an uplift fee,
subject to the following specific constraints:
"(2) If a conditional costs agreement relates to a litigious matter –
(a) the agreement must
provide for the payment of an uplift fee
unless the law practice has a reasonable belief that a successful outcome of the
is reasonably likely; and
(b) the uplift fee must
exceed 25% of the legal costs (excluding
disbursements) otherwise payable.
(3) A conditional costs agreement that includes an uplift fee –
(a) must identify the basis on which the uplift fee is to be calculated; and
(b) must include an estimate of the uplift fee or, if that is not reasonably
practical –
(i) a range of estimates for the uplift fee; and
(ii) an explanation of the major variables that may affect the calculation of
the uplift fee.
(4) A law practice must
enter into a costs agreement in contravention
of this section or of the Uniform Rules relating to uplift fees.
Civil penalty: 100 penalty units." (emphasis added)
A law practice that has entered into a costs agreement in contravention of
s 182 is not entitled to recover the whole or any part
of the uplift fee
and must repay the amount received in respect of the uplift fee to the
person from whom it
was received.
contrast, s 183 expressly prohibits "contingency fees":
"(1) A law practice must not enter into a costs agreement
under which the
amount payable to the law practice, or any part of that amount,
is calculated by reference to the amount of any award
or settlement or the
value of any property that may be recovered in any proceedings to which the
agreement relates
Civil penalty: 100 penalty units.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the extent that the costs agreement adopts
an applicable fixed costs legislative provision.
(3) A contravention of subsection (1) by a law practice is capable of
constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct on
the part of any principal of the law practice or any legal practitioner
associate or foreign lawyer associate involved
in the contravention." (emphasis
A law practice that has entered into a costs agreement in contravention of
s 183 is not entitled to recover any amount in respect
of the provision of
legal services in the matter to which the costs agreement related and must repay
any amount received in respect
of those services to the person from whom it was
costs agreement that contravenes, or is entered into in contravention of, any
provision of Div 4 of Pt 4.3 is
In addition, a
law practice is not entitled to recover any amount in excess of the amount that
the law practice would have been entitled
to recover if the costs agreement had
not been void and must repay any excess amount
4.3 of the LPUL expressly refers to and incorporates the Uniform Rules
in considering whether legal costs are fair and
relation to
uplift fees.
Uniform Rules apply as the Legal Profession Conduct Rules under the LPUL to
solicitors and Australian‑registered foreign
lawyers acting in the manner
of a solicitor.
considering whether a solicitor has engaged in unsatisfactory professional
conduct or professional misconduct, the Uniform Rules
apply in addition to the
common law.
A breach of
the Uniform Rules is capable of constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct
or professional misconduct, and may
give rise to disciplinary action by the
relevant regulatory
States and Territories
charging by a law practice of a contingency fee is prohibited in other States
and Territories.
exception to that prohibition is that the
Supreme Court Act
(Vic) empowers the Supreme Court of Victoria to make a GCO in a group
proceeding commenced under
A "GCO" is "an
order that the legal costs payable to the law practice representing the
plaintiff and group members in a group proceeding
be calculated as a specified
percentage of the amount of any award or settlement recovered in the proceeding
and that liability for
payment of those legal costs be shared amongst the
plaintiff and group
be observed that a GCO, once ordered, is the sole mechanism for the recovery of
all legal costs, whereas a Solicitors'
CFO is ordered
in addition to a
law practice's usual recovery of costs and disbursements.
statutory prohibitions, their consistency and the existence of the power of
the Supreme Court of Victoria to make a GCO were
addressed by a federal
Parliamentary Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services that
published a report in December 2020
entitled "Litigation funding and
the regulation of the class action
The Committee
considered that "the public interest outcomes potentially achieved with the
availability of contingency fee billing
in class actions [were] not ...
outweighed by the potential for their exploitation for the benefit of lawyers'
profits, even with
the existence of
safeguards"
concluded that "[a] measured and steady approach to the use of contingency fees
in class actions is
essential".
Committee recommended that the Commonwealth Government work with State and
Territory governments to achieve consistent class
action regimes across
For present purposes, it is sufficient to note that, except for the power
to make a GCO in Victoria, there has been no change to
the statutory
prohibitions against contingency fees.
Civil Liability Act
New South Wales, the
Maintenance, Champerty and Barratry Abolition Act 1993
(NSW) ("the
Abolition Act
") abolished the crimes, and the torts,
of maintenance and
Abolition Act
, however, preserved any rule of law in which
a contract is to be treated as contrary to public policy or as otherwise
Hayne and Crennan JJ observed in
Campbells Cash and Carry Pty Ltd v Fostif
abolishing those crimes and those torts, any wider rule of public policy (that
is, wider than the particular rules preserved by
Abolition Act
lost any footing.
the statutory prohibition in New South Wales against contingency fees, it is
otherwise unnecessary to identify the nature and
extent of the particular rules
which were preserved by
, the extent to which questions of maintenance
and champerty remain legally relevant, or how and why considerations of public
and illegality can still arise in connection with contracts providing for
maintenance or
is sufficient to record that, consistent with
Clyne v NSW
Bar Association
in New South Wales, which has abolished the torts of maintenance and champerty
but has an exception for agreements which are contrary
to public policy, there
may be no overarching rule which prohibits all champertous agreements but
champertous agreements that are
otherwise contrary to a rule of law, such as the
prohibition against contingency fees in s 183 of the LPUL, may also be
the common law.
No power to make a Solicitors'
made, the Solicitors' CFO provides for the Solicitors to be remunerated "by
payment of such percentage of the Resolution Sum as
may be approved by
the Court", that being an amount payable which is calculated by reference
to the amount of any award or settlement
or the value of any property that
may be recovered. If the Solicitors' CFO were made, the Court would be giving
effect to an agreement
that was entered into contrary to s 183 of the LPUL
and would be enabling the Solicitors to recover amounts which they are
disentitled
from recovering under s 185 of the LPUL. Such an order cannot
be within the power of the Federal Court under s 33V(2) or
s 33Z(1)(g).
It cannot be "just" to make an order that gives effect to an
agreement that was unlawfully entered into and to enable a solicitor
amounts to which they are not entitled. Put another way, the Court cannot
authorise what the LPUL forbids.
prohibition in s 183 of the LPUL is a protective measure. It provides that
a law practice must not enter into a costs agreement
"under which the amount
payable to the law practice, or any part of that amount, is calculated by
reference to the amount of any
award or settlement or the value of any property
that may be recovered in any proceedings to which the agreement relates".
there was the Banton Costs Agreement, which included a funding
Solicitors, with the agreement of the Applicants, sought to remove and replace
with the Costs Reimbursement and the Solicitors'
CFO. The Solicitors were
instructed by the Applicants to seek orders in the Federal Court seeking the
Costs Reimbursement and the
Solicitors'
Applicants who asked the Court to approve the Proposed Notice which contained
the proposed amendments to the Banton Costs
Agreement. Once approved by the
Court, the costs agreements between the Solicitors and their clients would
be amended to reflect
the Court's orders. That amendment would replace the
litigation funder with the result that the Solicitors would finance the
Consolidated
Proceeding. Further, if orders were not made in the terms
sought, the Applicants agreed to seek orders for the transfer of the
Consolidated
Proceeding to the Supreme Court of Victoria to obtain a GCO (being
the only statutory exception to the prohibition on contingency
alternatively, to seek commercial litigation funding.
was proposed and what was sought to be achieved, if approved by the Court,
was that the amended costs agreements would provide
for the payment to the
Solicitors of two amounts: the Costs Reimbursement and
the Solicitors' CFO. The amended costs agreements would
contain a term
"under which the amount payable to the [Solicitors] is calculated by
reference to the amount of any award or settlement
or the value of any property
that may be recovered in any proceedings to which the agreement[s] relate[]",
within the meaning of
s 183(1) of the LPUL.
costs agreements would relate to legal costs and, in turn, legal services,
as those terms are defined in the
Taken together,
those terms extend to encompass amounts charged for
business undertaken by the law practice "in the ordinary course of
legal practice". In these appeals, the Solicitors were retained
Applicants to engage in the ordinary course of legal practice of prosecuting the
Consolidated Proceeding to the point of recovery.
Put in different, but
related, terms the Solicitors' CFO was not "otherwise" than as payment for costs
and disbursements incurred
in relation to the Solicitors' conduct of the
Consolidated Proceeding. The Solicitors' CFO was to be a reward for the
entering into the amended costs agreements and then continuing to
prosecute the Consolidated Proceeding to the point of recovery
on the terms set
out in those agreements. The consideration for the Solicitors' agreement to
continue to prosecute the Consolidated
Proceeding to a successful outcome was to
be more than whatever sum is given the badge "costs and disbursements" or "Costs
Reimbursement";
it was all of the stipulations in the amended costs
agreements. No sum that would be paid under those agreements was "otherwise than
as payment for costs and disbursements incurred in relation to the conduct of
the proceeding". All sums that comprise the Solicitors'
CFO were to be reward
for, or, at the very least, in relation to, the performance of
"legal services" (as defined).
Applicants' reference to the provision of "risk services" –
including contingent or conditional costs, providing security
for costs and
indemnifying for adverse costs
– in contradistinction to the
provision of legal services is artificial. The so‑called "risk services"
were work and business
proposed to be undertaken by the Solicitors in the course
of their legal practice. That is why the supposed distinction drawn in
reserved question between legal "costs and disbursements" and amounts "otherwise
than as payment for costs and disbursements
incurred in relation to the conduct
of the proceeding" was illusory.
Applicants' contention that the "risk services" provided by the Solicitors
were not captured by the prohibition in s 183 of the
LPUL cannot be
accepted for another reason. If that contention was correct, then law practices
that charge legal costs and disbursements
and then seek an additional fee (being
the so‑called "risk service") by way of a percentage of the judgment or
settlement sum
would not be captured by s 183, but law practices that
charge legal costs and disbursements
by way of a percentage of the
judgment or settlement sum would be captured. For s 183 to operate in that
manner would prioritise form
over substance. Further, conditional costs
agreements or "no win, no fee" costs agreements, which are expressly provided
181, apply to costs for the provision of legal services, yet
inherently involve what the Applicants contend are "risk services".
strengthens the conclusion that there is no distinction between legal services
and the asserted "risk services".
reasons provide a complete answer to the Applicants' further submission that the
amount payable to the solicitors is referable
to a court order and not the
Banton Costs Agreement, so that there would be no costs agreement "under which"
the amount payable to
the solicitors was calculated in the
proscribed manner. The Solicitors' CFO and the court order are inextricably
linked. Put another
way, the order sought authorises or gives effect to the
proposed Addendum to the Banton Costs Agreement. Neither the specific order
sought, nor recourse to the provisions of Pt IVA of the FCA Act, can
be used to circumvent the express prohibition on contingency
fees in s 183
of the LPUL.
construction of s 183 of the LPUL is reinforced by the fact that the
purposes of Pt 4.3 include to protect clients of law practices
by ensuring that
costs are fair and reasonable. The prohibition in s 183 is one
specific aspect of that objective, which is reinforced
by the Uniform Rules.
Contrary to the Applicants' argument, s 183 is not purely directed to the
mischief of "undue influence". Section
183 is also about preventing
conflicts and ensuring solicitors act in line with their fiduciary obligations.
In sum, to read s 183
as not extending to costs agreements which
are entered into, or amended, by application to the Court for orders which,
order, would be unlawful would not be consistent with those
objectives. The prohibition in s 183 must also be read in the context
the fact that a law practice must, in charging legal costs, charge costs
that are no more than fair and reasonable in all the
circumstances and that, in
considering whether legal costs are fair and reasonable, regard must be had to
whether the legal costs
conform to any applicable requirements of Pt 4.3 and the
Uniform Rules.
sole exception to the prohibition in s 183(1) is expressly provided for in
Supreme Court Act 1986
those reasons, the orders in each appeal are:
aside paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Orders of the Full Court of the Federal Court of
Australia made on 5 July 2024 and, in their place,
order that:
(a) the question reserved in paragraph 1 of the Orders of the Full Court made
on 5 July 2024 be answered:
"Where the solicitor acting for the representative party or a group member is
subject to the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(NSW), then the Federal Court
of Australia may not make an order under
s 33Z(1)(g)
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) that an amount be paid
to or for the benefit of the solicitor calculated by reference to the amount
that might be or is to
be paid under a settlement or an award of damages or the
value of any property that may be recovered in the proceedings. The question
otherwise inappropriate to answer."; and
(b) the applicants pay the second, ninth and twelfth respondents' costs of
and incidental to the hearing of the reserved question.
first and second respondents pay the appellant's and the fourth and fifth
respondents' costs of the appeal.
Litigation funding and alphabet soup: CFOs, FEOs, GCOs, and SCFOs
funding in Australia has been a means by which justice can be sought in some
proceedings, often group litigation where
justice would otherwise have been
unavailable because members of the group could not afford, or could not
individually justify, the
vindication of their rights. Litigation funding of
group litigation requires funders to have a means of remuneration for the costs
they bear and the risk they take when funding such litigation. By a combination
of legislative innovation and practitioner creativity,
modern Australian law has
come to recognise a variety of procedures for group litigation to enhance access
to justice.
procedure is a
common fund order
("CFO"), which has a number of typical
characteristics
the essence of which is usually that all group members contribute equally to the
litigation funder's commission, which is taken
as a percentage of the settlement
or judgment sum. CFOs have been made as interim orders (after the commencement
of a proceeding)
upon settlement.
can also be made upon judgment. They are usually made independently of the
orders concerning the party or parties who will bear
the costs of the
second procedure is a
funding equalisation order
("FEO"), which is a
court order that seeks, by various possible means, to equalise the position
between those group members who have
entered funding agreements with a
litigation funder ("funded group members") and those who have not ("unfunded
group members"). Upon
the making of an award at settlement or judgment, an FEO
reduces the amount of the award payable to unfunded group members so as
spread the litigation funder's commission across all group members.
third procedure is a
group costs order
("GCO"). In Victoria, the GCO is a
legislative innovation that took effect from 1 July 2020 with the
introduction of
Supreme Court Act 1986
section empowers the Supreme Court of Victoria to make an order that the legal
costs payable to a law practice that represents
the plaintiff and group members
in a group proceeding be calculated as a specified "percentage of the amount of
any award or settlement
that may be recovered in the proceeding" with the
liability for legal costs to be shared among the plaintiff and all group
fourth procedure is a
solicitors' common fund order
("SCFO"), which is a
CFO made in favour of a solicitor or solicitors who have funded the litigation
including by the provision of
the legal services. In this sense, an SCFO is just
a CFO where the funder is the solicitor providing the legal services. That is
how the proposed SCFO in this case was described in the form of a proposed Opt
Out Notice which the applicants in this representative
proceeding ("the Class
Action Applicants", being the first and second respondents to these appeals)
seek to have issued by the Federal
"The solicitors for the Applicants are financing these proceedings, by paying
lawyers in their employ as well as barristers and other
experts, and by taking
on the financial risks of conducting the proceeding, including by indemnifying
the Applicants against adverse
costs, and furnishing any security for costs
ordered by the Court.
If a settlement or judgment in the Class Action results in compensation being
payable to you, the Applicants will ask the Court (who
has the power to make the
below orders) to make an order that a portion of the compensation be used to
remunerate the lawyers for
the value of their work, the expenses and outgoings
(disbursements) they incurred, and the financial risks they took, in running
Class Action (a
Solicitors' CFO
). If it makes a Solicitors' CFO, the
Court has power to decide what portion of the compensation should be paid to the
solicitors,
and will set a proportion that the Court considers fair and
reasonable in all the circumstances. The solicitors will not ask the
approve an amount that is greater than what a third party litigation funder
would seek for funding this proceeding, which
is up to 30% of the total recovery
plus reimbursement of its out-of-pocket costs."
the other hand, the draft amendment to the existing costs agreement between the
first respondent to these appeals ("R&B Investments")
and its solicitors
contemplates a proposed SCFO ("the Addendum SCFO") which does not entirely
reflect the SCFO described in the proposed
notice. That amendment treats the
legal costs and disbursements incurred by the solicitors separately from the
Addendum SCFO. Legal
costs and disbursements would be shared among the group
members (including the Class Action Applicants) "pro rata in proportion to
respective recoveries as a result of the proceeding or otherwise as the Court
may direct" and, separately, the solicitors would
be "remunerated for [their]
risks in funding the legal costs and disbursements" by payment of a percentage
of the sum recovered as
a result of the proceeding.
one interpretation of the Addendum SCFO, which appears to match the terms of the
question reserved, that SCFO could involve a
fixed amount for legal costs and
disbursements subtracted from any recovery by group members together with a
further subtraction
of a percentage of the recovery to "remunerate[]" the
solicitors for their risk, with the percentage to be authorised by the Federal
Court. There are three aspects to that risk to be remunerated: the risk that the
proceedings will fail and the solicitors will have
to bear all of the costs
incurred in advancing the group litigation; the risk of providing security for
costs and losing that money
if the action fails; and the risk of an adverse
costs order.
view of an SCFO, which attempts (with some strain) to separate the components of
risk from the legal costs and disbursements
incurred, need not be considered on
these appeals. As senior counsel for the Class Action Applicants properly
accepted, the intention
was not to seek a percentage recovery only for the risk
borne by the solicitors separately from the cost of the legal services (assuming
that such a separation could be clearly made). Instead, the legal costs and
disbursements as well as the remuneration for risk were
sought as a percentage
of any recovery by group members.
The parties to these
present appeals are brought from the whole of the judgment of the Full Court of
the Federal Court of
answering a reserved question in a representative proceeding commenced by the
Class Action Applicants (namely, R&B Investments
and Mr Furniss)
against the third respondent ("Blue Sky", which is a company in liquidation),
some of Blue Sky's former directors
(Mr Kain and Mr Shand), and Blue
Sky's former auditor ("Ernst & Young"). Mr Kain, Mr Shand, and
Ernst & Young are the respective
appellants in the separate appeals ("the
respective appellants").
The dead letter of this Court in
Australia Ltd v Brewster
BMW Australia Ltd v Brewster
majority of this Court poured cold water upon CFOs. Relevantly for the Federal
Court of Australia, the majority held that
Court of Australia Act 1976
(Cth) did not provide power for a CFO to be made
prior to settlement or
Despite the
extraordinary breadth of that provision, empowering the Court to make "any order
the Court thinks appropriate or necessary
to ensure that justice is done in the
proceeding", the plurality judgment of Kiefel CJ, Bell and Keane JJ
held that the power to
make a CFO prior to settlement or judgment could never
fall within the provision. Their Honours identified
concerned with an asserted "radically" different question from "whether an
proceed at all", namely "
an action should proceed
in order to do
explaining this asserted radical difference based (apparently) on the words
requiring justice to be done "in the
proceeding",
plurality relied heavily upon assertions of context and purpose. As Mr Kain
and Ernst & Young submitted, many of those contextual
and purposive
considerations are equally applicable to the time of settlement or judgment as
they are to the early stages of a proceeding.
The plurality accepted that the
Court had power to make an FEO under
but observed that "a CFO seeks
to impose an additional cost by imposing new obligations on the unfunded group
Honours held that
was a "supplementary or gap-filling
limited to the power to make orders that would "advance the effective
determination by the court of the issues between the
parties to the
proceeding".
above remarks by the plurality, and other remarks by the
suggest that the reasoning of the plurality was intended to apply also to the
making of a CFO at the time of settlement
or judgment. But if the essential
reasoning of the plurality were to be understood as preventing the making of a
even at the time of
neither that
essential reasoning nor the question being addressed by the plurality was
concerned with the application of other provisions
Federal Court of Australia Act
formed a part) at
settlement or judgment.
other members of the majority were Nettle J and Gordon J. Like the
plurality, Nettle J reasoned that the broad terms of
suggested that the provision was only in the nature of a "supplementary
Federal Court of Australia Act
did not empower the Court to make a CFO at any
Although this
aspect of her Honour's reasoning reflected the general tenor of the
plurality's reasons, it was not a matter that was
essential to the reasons of
the plurality and was not part of the ratio decidendi of
these appeals it was submitted, with some force, that there were "many examples"
that show why the reasoning of the plurality
was "plainly wrong" as a matter of
law as well as "factually wrong" to the extent that the reasoning suggested that
an FEO will always
involve less cost for group members (compared with a
It was submitted
that the plurality's reasons did not address important features of the
dissenting judgments. In the course of these
submissions, this Court was also
referred to a powerful decision of the Court of Appeal of New
rejected the reasoning of the plurality in
. Moreover, the Court
was shown how the Federal Court has spent the last five years developing
informal techniques to manoeuvre around
the decision, reducing the effect of the
majority judgments in
to the point where, as Beach J
astutely observed, "one can only wonder what the practical difference is"
between the unauthorised
CFOs proscribed by
and the informal
premise of the informal techniques is that, contrary to the tenor of the
majority judgments in
although not contrary to the ratio
decidendi of that case, the Federal Court has power to make a CFO upon
settlement or judgment.
On that premise, the most obvious informal technique is
for judges to give indications "at case management hearings that they may
favourably disposed to making a settlement CFO in due course if the occasion
indication is not binding as to the terms of any final CFO made. But neither is
an interlocutory CFO binding as to the terms
of any final CFO made. Indeed, the
parties might obtain more clarity and certainty by a strongly expressed informal
view about the
terms of a CFO that might be made on settlement or judgment than
a weakly expressed view supporting the terms of an interlocutory
reasoning of the majority of this Court in
has thus been reduced
almost to a dead letter.
The attempts on these appeals to inject
life back into
background to these appeals is conveniently set out in the reasons of Gordon,
Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones JJ. The respective
appellants' submissions
in relation to the reserved question essentially involved two steps. First, the
respective appellants sought
to extend the ratio decidendi of this Court in
, submitting that the Federal Court of Australia has no power to
make a CFO upon settlement or judgment under any provision of
Federal Court of Australia Act
. Secondly, the respective appellants
submitted that even if there is power to make a CFO upon settlement or judgment,
s 183 of the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(NSW) ("the LPUL")
prohibits the Federal Court of Australia from making an SCFO.
Class Action Applicants resisted this Lazarus-like attempt to inject life back
. First, they submitted that notwithstanding the tenor, or
express reasoning, of the majority judgments in
, the Federal
Court has power to make a CFO on settlement or judgment under
the case of a settlement) or
s 33Z(1)(g)
(in the case of a judgment) of the
Federal Court of Australia Act
. For abundant caution (which was
unnecessary for the reasons explained above), the Class Action Applicants
submitted that, to the
extent that
decided otherwise, it should
be re-opened and overruled. Secondly, the Class Action Applicants said that
s 183 of the LPUL does not
prohibit the making of an SCFO.
the reasons below, the Class Action Applicants' powerful submissions should
generally be accepted. The tenor of the reasoning
be applied and the decision should not be extended. The ratio decidendi of
should be left as a dead letter and not extended to the power to
make CFOs upon settlement or judgment. The open-textured provisions
s 33Z(1)(g)
Federal Court of Australia Act
empower the grant of a CFO on, respectively, settlement or judgment. But
although s 183 of the LPUL does not directly prohibit the
making of an
SCFO, neither
s 33Z(1)(g)
empowers the making of an SCFO.
Both of those provisions must be applied in a manner that ensures coherence
between s 183 and the
Federal Court of Australia Act
A power to make a CFO upon settlement or judgment
Section 33V(2)
Federal Court of Australia Act
relevantly provides that if the
Court gives approval for a settlement, "it may make such orders as are just with
respect to the distribution
of any money paid under a settlement or paid into
the Court".
Section 33Z(1)
provides that in "determining a matter in a
representative proceeding" (where, in context, "matter" means nothing more than
in the proceeding), the Court may determine issues of law and fact and
make various remedial orders including, in
s 33Z(1)(g)
, "such other order
as the Court thinks just".
Federal Court of Australia Act
(1)(g) might also attract the descriptions used by the plurality in
"supplementary" or "gap-filling". But, with respect to the reasoning of the
plurality, those descriptions are question-begging.
Describing the provisions as
supplementary says nothing about how far the supplement extends. So too does
describing the provisions
as "gap-filling" say nothing about the gaps that need
to be filled. Indeed, for the same reasons that I gave in
wide terms of
(1)(g) fall within the category of powers
that are "not to be read by making implications or imposing limitations not
found in the
words used". The Class Action Applicants sought refuge in the words
(1)(g) in separate ways.
to the power in each of
(1)(g) to make orders that are
"just", Mr Kain and Ernst & Young in particular submitted that the
concept of justice which is
applied in the identification of the scope of the
power is confined by reference to context and purpose. It is not "palm tree
submission echoed the approach of the plurality in
their Honours said, in support of a conclusion that the making of a CFO
prior to settlement or judgment was beyond the scope
"[i]t is not appropriate or necessary to ensure that justice is done in a
representative proceeding for a court to promote
the prosecution of the
proceeding in order to enable it to be heard and determined by that court".
is not appropriate to confine an intentionally broad reference to justice by
having regard to individual perceptions of an appropriate,
or preferred, policy
effect of legislation. For the reasons I gave in
making of CFOs can comfortably fall within the broad conception of justice. To
the extent that the reasoning to the contrary
by the plurality was an essential
part of their reasons in
, that reasoning was based upon the
association of "justice" in
with the words "in the
proceeding".
very least, that reasoning, which I continue to
should not be
applied to confine the application of any other provision of
Federal Court of Australia Act
which does not contain the words "in the
proceeding".
relation to
specifically, the respective appellants submitted that
the word "distribution" was concerned only with payments to group members,
the same sense as "distribution" is used in
submitted, in different ways, that a "distribution" is concerned with giving
effect to pre-existing entitlements rather than
with creating new legal rights
or new legal relationships that are not inter partes. In that respect, the
respective appellants relied
upon the statement in the Explanatory Memorandum
for the legislation that introduced
Federal Court of
Australia Act
that the provisions were not intended to confer "new legal
word "distribution" cannot be confined in this way. Each of
combines a reference to "distribution" with a reference to "group members".
But the omission of any reference to "group members"
wider scope for distribution. Most obviously, for example, the Court might order
payment of some of the settlement funds
to occur as a distribution to the
administrator of the fund for the costs of administration. There is no basis to
recognise an implication
confining "distribution" only to
"group members".
is there any basis to accept the submission of the respective appellants that an
explication of a meaning of the word "distribution"
should confine the word's
ambit to apply only to orders that give effect to payments based upon
pre-existing legal rights and exclude
orders that create new legal rights. There
is some ambiguity in this submission since almost every legal order creates or
legal rights. But it seems that the concept of impermissibly creating
new legal rights was intended by the respective appellants
to describe the
creation by the Court of rights to a fund in favour of a party who had no
pre-existing contractual entitlement to
passage from the Explanatory Memorandum which refers to the absence of an
intention to create "new legal rights" continues by
saying that the procedural
reforms "build on the existing centuries old representative action procedure
which is already available
in the Federal Court and State and Territory Supreme
made in those centuries old representative action procedures created new legal
rights in the same sense as the rights created
by a CFO. For instance, the FEO,
in its original form in decrees of the Court of
created new
rights for solicitors against group members with whom they had no agreements.
Equity has also long recognised powers
to make orders for payment to a plaintiff
from a common fund for the benefit of others where the fund had been realised by
reference in the Explanatory Memorandum to the provisions of
conferring new legal rights must be understood as meaning that
not change the substantive law governing the issues joined between the parties
to the dispute.
relation to
s 33Z(1)(g)
, the respective appellants, in particular
Mr Shand, sought to confine the application of the words of that paragraph
by reference
to the unfortunately
principle",
provides that one principle in the interpretation of a provision conferring a
general power is that the provision should generally
be interpreted so that it
does not contradict the scope of an overlapping specific power in the same
instrument. In other words,
the so-called
Anthony Hordern
principle (that
is, a specific power principle) is no more than an example of the ordinary
language convention that general statements
are not usually intended to
contradict specific ones.
specific powers that Mr Shand submitted should confine the application of
s 33Z(1)(g)
were the powers to make inter partes orders in
ss 33Z(1)(a)
Federal Court of Australia Act
. Most pertinently, the
provides that "[i]n making an order for an award of damages, the
Court must make provision for the payment or distribution of the
money to the
group members entitled". This refers back to the specific powers in
ss 33Z(1)(e)
(1)(f), which empower the Court respectively to "make
an award of damages for group members ... being damages consisting of specified
amounts or amounts worked out in such manner as the Court specifies" and to
"award damages in an aggregate amount without specifying
amounts awarded in
respect of individual group members".
simple answer to the submission about
plainly not exhaustive. The specific powers in
ss 33Z(1)(a)
not exhaust the universe of monetary remedies in representative proceedings. For
instance, orders for payment of a debt
or for restitution of money based on a
common law cause of action are remedies that fall only within
s 33Z(1)(g).
Even with respect to damages,
does not require that in every case
the whole of the award of damages must be paid to group members. For instance,
empowers the Court to order payment from an award of damages of
the whole or part of the excess of costs reasonably incurred by a
person above
the costs recoverable from the respondent by that person.
Section 33Z(1)(g)
might overlap with
s 33Z(1)(g)
is not confined by
, particularly since
provides that on an
application under
, "the Court may also make any other order it
thinks just".
these reasons,
(1)(g) of the
Federal Court of
Australia Act
empower the Court to make a CFO on settlement or judgment.
No power in New South Wales to make an SCFO that includes
solicitors' costs
respective appellants submitted that it was not "just" for an SCFO to be made in
New South Wales under
(1)(g) of the
Federal Court of
Australia Act
due to legislative prohibitions in New South Wales, most
relevantly s 183 of the LPUL. The respective appellants relied upon an
of a "legislative intent that the ... power must be exercised
conformably with applicable prohibitions and requirements of State
This is not a
Judiciary Act 1903
(Cth) picking up and
applying s 183 of the LPUL as Commonwealth law. Rather it is a submission
that the scope of what is "just" under
ss 33V(2) and 33Z(1)(g) must be
determined, consistent with the context and purpose of those provisions, by
reference to common law
principle as well as the requirements of the relevant
State law where those provisions are being applied. That submission should
accepted: "State and Territory schemes of regulation of the legal profession
form part of the context in which federal jurisdiction
is exercised, and have an
impact upon the practical circumstances in which the rule of law is
maintained."
be explained, the requirements of State law include both statutory provisions
and statutory policy.
principle, there is no longer any reason why the powers to make a CFO upon
settlement or judgment, respectively deriving from
Federal Court of Australia Act
cannot be exercised in
favour of solicitors. Different views were taken in the 19th century. In
1896, reasoning of the Master of the
Rolls was reported as
"In order to preserve the honour and honesty of the profession it was a rule of
law which the Court had laid down and would always
insist upon that a solicitor
could not make an arrangement of any kind with his client during the litigation
which he was conducting
so as to give him any advantage in respect of the result
of that litigation. That might be said to be on account of the fiduciary
relation between the solicitor and the client. But the doctrine was founded upon
a higher rule. The responsibility of persons engaged
in the profession of the
law was very great, and their conduct must be regulated by the most precise
rules of honour. The Court thought
that, unless the rule was carried out to its
fullest extent, there would be a temptation to solicitors which they should not
be subjected
have changed. That so-called rule of law and the policy ideas that underpinned
it were concerned with agreements between solicitors
and clients for
remuneration where the remuneration would be affected by the outcome of the
client's litigation. The rule of law,
as expressed, extended to prohibit even
no-win-no-fee arrangements. This rule of law has been rejected in Australia.
This rule of
law supported the crimes and torts of maintenance and champerty. As
Gummow, Hayne and Crennan JJ said in their comprehensive historical
analysis of these crimes and torts in
Campbells Cash and Carry Pty Ltd v
Fostif Pty Ltd
"Maintenance is the act of assisting the plaintiff in any legal proceeding in
which the person giving the assistance has no valuable
interest, or in which he
acts from any improper motive. Champerty is maintenance in which the motive of
the maintainor is an agreement
that if the proceeding in which the maintenance
takes place succeeds, the subject matter of the suit shall be divided between
plaintiff and the maintainor."
crimes and torts of maintenance and champerty, and the rule supporting them,
were always unstable and "[b]y the early twentieth
century, the law of
maintenance and champerty depended upon the application of qualifications and
exceptions hinged, for the most
part, about what was an item of property as
distinct from a bare right to
this Court described a no-win-no-fee agreement as one that might be reached, in
appropriate circumstances, "with perfect
propriety", although there remained at
that time a prohibition against remuneration in proportion with the amount
recovered in the
litigation.
principle, the solicitor is interested in the outcome of the litigation in cases
of no-win-no-fee as well as cases where
remuneration is expressed to be on the
basis of a proportion of the amount recovered in the litigation.
to New South Wales, in 1993 legislation was enacted which abolished the crimes
and torts of maintenance and
that legislation did not affect contracts that were contrary to public policy or
otherwise illegal,
abolition of the crimes and torts of maintenance and champerty left no room for
a "wider rule of law" or "wider rule of public
policy" that included, without
more, a policy against maintenance or
As the Full
Court of the Federal Court said in this
"[B]y a series of faltering steps, we have reached the position where open class
proceedings grouping the claims of all persons affected
by an alleged wrong are
now the norm and there is a mature competitive market in which funders and
solicitors are in competition
for carriage of class actions which they
subjectively perceive as having prospects of success (and hence bring the
prospect of delivering
a commercial return). This is the world any
considerations based on public policy must now confront."
Nevertheless,
in a "cognate measure"
to the legislative abolition of maintenance and champerty in 1993, the New South
Wales Parliament enacted legislation which included
a precursor to what is now
s 183 of the
The Explanatory
Note that accompanied the Bill containing the precursor provision explained that
conditional costs agreements would
be allowed but "fees may not be charged as a
proportion of an amount
recovered".
second reading debate for the precursor legislation, the Shadow Minister for
Family, Community and Disability Services, the
Hon R D Dyer,
"In the United States of America it is possible to take a slice of the action,
so to speak – it is quite common for that to
happen. However, it is not
the view of the Government or the Opposition that that should be contemplated in
this State ... It is
necessary for this cognate legislation to be introduced
because there is a provision in the main measure to the effect that it is
permissible for a legal practitioner and his client to enter into a conditional
cost agreement, that is, an agreement where a fee
is payable only if the matter
is successful. In those circumstances, the legal practitioner is permitted to
charge a premium of up
to 25 per cent above the normal cost that would be
payable. However – and this is a very important gloss on that doctrine
fees may not be charged as a proportion of the amount recovered. That
will continue to amount to champerty, a slice of the action.
But to the extent
that the law is now to provide that a conditional cost agreement can permit a
fee payable, encompassing a premium
up to 25 per cent, it is necessary for this
cognate measure to be brought before the House."
Section 183(1)
of the LPUL, which is the successor to the relevant provision in that cognate
1993 legislation,
provides as follows:
"A law practice must not enter into a costs agreement under which the amount
payable to the law practice, or any part of that amount,
is calculated by
reference to the amount of any award or settlement or the value of any property
that may be recovered in any proceedings
to which the agreement relates."
civil penalty for a contravention of s 183(1) is 100 penalty units.
Further, by s 183(3), a contravention "by a law practice
is capable of
constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional misconduct on
the part of any principal of the law
practice or any legal practitioner
associate or foreign lawyer associate involved in the contravention".
Section 183
is contained within Div 4 of
of the LPUL, entitled "Costs
agreements". That Division regulates costs agreements, including, in ss 181
and 182, "conditional costs
agreements". A conditional costs agreement, by
s 181(1), "may provide that the payment of some or all of the legal costs
is conditional
on the successful outcome of the matter to which those costs
relate" and, by s 182, may provide for the payment of an "uplift fee"
"must not exceed 25% of the legal costs (excluding disbursements) otherwise
reasoning upon which the Class Action Applicants relied in these appeals, the
Full Court held that s 183 did not prohibit the
making of an SCFO because
the SCFO would be an order of the Court, not an agreement between the parties;
any payment made would not
be under a costs agreement but would be pursuant to
the court order.
reasoning should be accepted. It can immediately be accepted that the policy
concern of the New South Wales Parliament was to
prevent a law practice
receiving contingency fees as a proportion of a client's recovery in litigation.
But the manner in which that
policy was sought to be vindicated was by the
regulation of costs agreements. Indeed, the relevant objectives of
of the LPUL concerning the costs agreement provisions are to ensure that clients
of law practices can make informed choices about
their legal options, and the
costs associated with pursuing those options, and "to provide that law practices
must not charge more
than fair and reasonable amounts for legal
particular, it would require s 183(1) to be rewritten for the terms of that
provision to prohibit an agreement to make an application
to a court for an
SCFO. Such an agreement is not "a costs agreement under which the amount payable
... is calculated ...". If a court
makes an SCFO, the amount payable is
"under" the court order in the broad and ordinary sense that it is "governed,
controlled, or
bound by; in accordance with" the court
It is not, in
anything other than the most attenuated
"under" the
agreement to make an application to the court. If there is power for a court to
make an SCFO, then any agreement to seek
an SCFO creates no "amount payable";
nor does it say anything about how that amount payable is calculated.
course, the meaning of a provision is not confined by the semantic content of
its words where the intention of Parliament is sufficiently
clear. But although
the New South Wales Parliament had a broad policy of prohibiting contingency
fees, that policy was vindicated
through a prohibition upon terms of costs
agreements, not upon agreements to seek orders to that effect from a court. The
was vindicated by proscribing particular terms (however expressed) of a
costs agreement ("under which the amount payable ..."), and
by enforcing that
proscription by the threat of a civil penalty of 100 penalty units and the
possibility of findings of unsatisfactory
professional conduct or professional
misconduct.
an agreement to apply to a court for an SCFO does not fall within the terms of
s 183, there is an immediate tension between
the clear policy of s 183
(to prohibit contingency fees) and the process by which the SCFO in this case is
proposed to be sought.
As the respective appellants correctly submitted, the
"implicit legislative policy" is one "tending against the payment of contingency
fees". The scope of what is "just" under
(1)(g) of the
Federal Court of Australia Act
is broad, and is not confined by the terms
of the legislation of the State or Territory in which the concept of justice is
However, the application of justice, and thus the scope of what is
"just", must also respect the policy of such legislation. Whether
this dimension
of justice is described as the "policy of the law" independent of any "express
or implied prohibition in the statute
"coherence" of the
that policy can
have substantive effect in shaping legal rules, particularly where "the
statutory purpose is protective of a class
in which considerations of coherence are raised in this case concerns
consistency between, on the one hand, the "underlying
normative reasons or
justifications"
adopted by the New South Wales Parliament in regulating costs agreements and, on
the other hand, the application of open-textured
provisions of Commonwealth
legislation by reference to justice in New South Wales.
coherent application in New South
of the policy
upon which the terms, in context, of s 183 of the LPUL are based precludes
the broad concept of justice in
(1)(g) of the
Court of Australia Act
from empowering the Federal Court to make an SCFO.
Notwithstanding
that most of the submissions of the Class Action Applicants should otherwise be
accepted, the coherence of the law
precludes the application of the powers in
(1)(g) of the
Federal Court of Australia Act
make an SCFO in New South Wales. Future development of any power to make an SCFO
in that State must be left to occur as a matter
of legislative innovation. The
appeals should be allowed and orders made as proposed by Gordon, Steward,
Gleeson and Beech-Jones
The question in the appeals
sole question in the present matter is best defined as whether, in a
representative proceeding under
Federal Court of Australia
(Cth) ("the FCA"), upon the settlement of or the giving of judgment
in the proceeding under
the Federal Court
of Australia may make an order of the kind known as a "common fund order"
("CFO") providing for the distribution
of funds to a "law practice" subject to
Legal Profession Uniform Law
NSW LPUL") other than as payment for costs and disbursements incurred in
relation to the conduct of the proceeding.
the purpose of answering this question, which is a re-worked version of the
question which was reserved for the Full Court of
the Federal Court of Australia
to consider, the parties agreed that a CFO should be understood to mean: an
order the effect of which
is to require all group members (including those who
have not entered into a funding agreement) to contribute equally to a payment
the litigation funder in respect of the "funder's commission", being an amount
calculated as a percentage of the settlement or
judgment sum including a premium
for litigation risk, such an order being generally made at the same time as
orders dealing with
other expenses incurred in the conduct of a class action,
the most significant usually being legal costs.
Full Court (Murphy, Beach and Lee JJ) answered the version of this question
which had been reserved for its consideration in
affirmative.
following reasons, the question must be answered in the
The terms of the question
terms of the question as reformulated reflect several important
considerations.
the reformulated question is confined to the availability of the power under
Australia Ltd v
Court held by majority that
of the FCA and
Civil Procedure Act
(NSW) ("the CPA") (to the effect that
"... the Court may ... make any order the Court thinks appropriate or necessary
to ensure that
justice is done in the proceeding") did not empower the Federal
Court of Australia or the Supreme Court of New South Wales, respectively,
make a CFO before settlement or discontinuance of, or judgment in, the
representative proceeding.
the reformulated question concerns the power of the Federal Court to make a CFO
under s 33V or s 33Z of the FCA providing
for the distribution of
funds to a "law practice" subject to the NSW LPUL other than as payment for
costs and disbursements incurred
in relation to the conduct of the proceeding.
While the question does not in terms extend to the power to make a CFO under the
provisions in favour of a litigation funder which is not a law practice
under the NSW LPUL, it is necessary to determine the meaning
and operation
of the provisions, which inevitably raise this question.
the reformulated question refers to the distribution of funds to a "law
practice" subject to the NSW LPUL rather than to a
"solicitor" as proposed
in the question the Full Court considered because, under the NSW LPUL, a
"solicitor" is a kind of "Australian
legal practitioner" (a kind whose
Australian practising certificate is not subject to a condition that the holder
is authorised to
engage in legal practice as or in the manner of a barrister
only), "Australian legal practitioner" means "an Australian lawyer who
current Australian practising certificate", and "Australian lawyer" means "a
person admitted to the Australian legal profession
in this jurisdiction [New
South Wales] or any other jurisdiction".
In contrast, "law
practice" is defined in a manner that covers all forms of "legal
the reference in the reformulated question to a distribution of funds to a law
practice "other than as payment for costs
and disbursements incurred in relation
to the conduct of the proceeding" is intended to reflect that the NSW LPUL
defines "legal
services" to mean "work done, or business transacted, in the
ordinary course of legal practice" and "legal costs" to mean, relevantly,
"amounts that a person has been or may be charged by, or is or may become liable
to pay to, a law practice for the provision of legal
services ... including
disbursements".
follows that a distribution of funds to a law practice "other than as payment
for costs and disbursements incurred in relation
to the conduct of the
proceeding" is intended to mean a payment to a law practice other than a payment
of legal costs for legal services.
the reformulated question arises in a context where
NSW LPUL provides as follows:
"(1) A law practice must not enter into a costs agreement under which the
amount payable to the law practice, or any part of that
amount, is calculated by
reference to the amount of any award or settlement or the value of any property
that may be recovered in
any proceedings to which the agreement relates.
Civil penalty: 100 penalty units.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to the extent that the costs agreement adopts
an applicable fixed costs legislative provision.
(3) A contravention of subsection (1) by a law practice is capable of
constituting unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct on
the part of any principal of the law practice or any legal practitioner
associate or foreign lawyer associate involved
in the contravention."
applicable "fixed costs legislative provision", as referred to in
of the NSW LPUL, means a "determination, scale, arrangement or other
provision fixing the costs or maximum costs of any legal services
that is made
by or under the Uniform Rules [the Legal Profession Uniform Rules made under Pt
] or any other
legislation".
it will be apparent from these matters that the reformulated question involves
resolving the relationship between the apparently
plenary terms of ss 33V
and 33Z of the FCA (being Commonwealth legislation) and s 183(1) of the
NSW LPUL (being State legislation),
albeit in a context where both
statutory schemes (the regulation of representative proceedings and Australian
lawyers and law practices)
form part of laws intended to facilitate uniformity
across jurisdictions in Australia.
Factual context
reasons of the Full Court record that the "issue as to power arose because the
applicants [representing the group members] and
two firms of solicitors (Banton
Group and Shine Lawyers) negotiated arrangements for the conduct and funding of
this class action".
The Full Court noted that: "
, there is a part-heard application
under ss 33X and 33Y of the [FCA], filed by the applicants, seeking orders
notifying group members
as to the basis upon which remuneration for the funding
and conduct of the proceeding will be sought;
, if the proposed
notice is approved, the arrangements between the applicants and their solicitors
contemplate amendments to costs
agreements, so as to oblige the solicitors to
finance the proceeding (including by provision of security, and indemnity
against adverse
costs orders) and an acknowledgment that the applicants agree
that the solicitors' remuneration will be in the form and value as
determined by
a subsequent order of the Court; and
, as is evident from the
above, if the answer to the question posed is in the negative (that is, the
Court lacks power to make a Solicitors'
), the applicants
have foreshadowed an application to cross-vest this proceeding to the Supreme
Court of Victoria in order to seek
what has been described as a 'Group Costs
) pursuant to
Supreme Court Act
(Vic) ... or will proceed to attempt to obtain commercial litigation
reference to
Supreme Court Act 1986
(Vic) ("the
Victorian SCA") is to the unique provision in that Act which provides that on
application by the plaintiff in any group
proceeding, the Supreme Court, if
satisfied that it is appropriate or necessary to ensure that justice is done in
the proceeding,
may make an order "(a) that the legal costs payable to the
law practice representing the plaintiff and group members be calculated
percentage of the amount of any award or settlement that may be recovered in the
proceeding, being the percentage set out in
the order; and (b) that
liability for payment of the legal costs must be shared among the plaintiff and
all group members".
follows from
of the Victorian SCA that a law practice subject to
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(Vic) ("the Vic
which contains
s 183(1), must be able to take and act on an instruction from a plaintiff
to obtain an order under
without contravening s 183(1) of the
Vic LPUL. As laws of the same State legislature (Victoria),
Victorian SCA, as the later legislation, would be taken to prevail over
s 183(1) of the Vic LPUL to the extent of the inconsistency
between the
two. Beyond that, no question arises in these appeals as to the relationship
between s 183(1) of the NSW LPUL (as a law
of the State of New South
of the Victorian SCA (as a law of the State of Victoria)
of the NSW LPUL provides for its extraterritorial
original costs agreement between one of the law practices, Banton Group, and one
of the applicants representing the group members
records that the document,
together with the General Terms of Business attached, "set out the terms of
[Banton Group's] offer to
provide legal services to [the applicant] and
constitutes [Banton Group's] costs agreement and disclosure pursuant to the
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(NSW)". The original costs agreement also
discloses, in cl 3, the then understanding of the law practice that the
applicant intended
to enter into a funding agreement with a litigation funder,
pursuant to which the litigation funder would pay the law practice's
The original costs agreement contains an acknowledgment of the applicant that
"this engagement is an offer to enter into
a costs agreement under s 180(3)
Legal Profession Uniform Law
(NSW) ...". The attached General
Terms of Business include cl 26.1, which provides that "[t]his Engagement
Agreement and [the applicant's]
rights are governed by the
Legal Profession
Uniform Law
Legal Profession Uniform General Rules
". The appeals were conducted on the basis that the other law
practice, Shine Lawyers, was also subject to the same New South Wales
legislation.
proposed amendment to the original costs agreement between Banton Group and the
applicant consists of a document styled "Addendum
to Cost Agreement". The
Addendum involves the insertion of a new cl 3A after cl 3 of the
original costs agreement, including these
provisions:
3A. ALTERNATIVE FUNDING ARRANGEMENTS
3A.1 You have instructed us to seek Court orders establishing a funding
arrangement in substitution for the ILP Funding Agreement
described in Section 3
3A.2 Specifically you have instructed us to:
(a) seek Court orders that or to the effect that your proceeding (NSD 665/2022)
and proceeding NSD 948/2022 be consolidated (
Consolidated Proceeding
upon terms that:
i. you remain one of two co-applicants in the Consolidated Proceeding and
ii. we and Shine Lawyers jointly be appointed as solicitors on the record to
have carriage of the Consolidated Proceeding;
(b) negotiate terms with Shine Lawyers for the two firms' joint carriage of the
Consolidated Proceeding (
Consolidation Agreement
(c) at an appropriate stage of the proceeding – to the extent permitted
by law seek orders that or to the effect that:
i. legal costs and disbursements be shared between the co-applicants and the
group members in the Consolidated Proceeding (together
and severally
) pro rata in proportion to their respective recoveries as a
result of the proceeding or otherwise as the Court may direct (
Reimbursement
ii. we and Shine Lawyers be remunerated for our risks in funding the legal
costs and disbursements (pursuant to the agreement described
in this clause 3A)
by payment of such percentage of the sum recovered as a result of the
Consolidated Proceeding (
) as may be approved by the
Solicitors' Common Fund Order
Solicitors' CFO
(d) as soon as practicable in the proceeding – seek orders that notice be
given to the Claimants of the matters in 3A.2(c).
3A.3 In the event that orders are made as described in clause 3A.2(d) then the
following terms shall apply:
(a) Banton Group will finance the Consolidated Proceeding (including security
for costs and payment of any adverse cost orders ordered
against you) as
required by the Consolidation Agreement;
(b) Banton Group will indemnify you against any liability in respect of legal
costs and disbursements, security for costs or adverse
costs in or in connection
with the Consolidated Proceeding;
(c) In the event that a Resolution Sum (as defined below) is obtained in the
Consolidated Proceeding or otherwise in connection
with the claims that are the
subject of the Consolidated Proceeding (
) then Banton Group will
seek Costs Reimbursement and a Solicitor's CFO as described above;
(d) Resolution Sum means any amount or amounts, or the value of goods or
services, to which you or a group member becomes entitled
in connection with or
satisfaction or part satisfaction of the Claims, including such amount/s or
i. as a result of a settlement, judgment or arbitration; and
ii. provided by a respondent in the Consolidated Proceeding or any other
person, including a person against whom any respondent
claims any indemnity,
apportionment or contribution.
3A.4 For the avoidance of doubt, by entering into this agreement:
(a) you agree that we are to seek orders as described in this Section 3A;
(b) you do not agree to any particular remuneration, or form of remuneration,
to be paid to Banton Group from the Resolution Sum;
(c) you agree that the form and value of remuneration to be provided to Banton
Group will be determined by, and take effect pursuant
only to, any order for
Costs Reimbursement or Solicitor's CFO."
appeals were conducted on the basis that the other law practice, Shine Lawyers,
proposed amending its costs agreement in terms
to the same effect.
proposed notice to group members under ss 33X and 33Y of the FCA (CPA,
ss 175 and 176) contains the following:
"The solicitors for the Applicants are financing these proceedings, by paying
lawyers in their employ as well as barristers and other
experts, and by taking
on the financial risks of conducting the proceeding, including by indemnifying
the Applicants against adverse
costs, and furnishing any security for costs
ordered by the Court.
If a settlement or judgment in the Class Action results in compensation being
payable to you, the Applicants will ask the Court (who
has the power to make the
below orders) to make an order that a portion of the compensation be used to
remunerate the lawyers for
the value of their work, the expenses and outgoings
(disbursements) they incurred, and the financial risks they took, in running
Class Action (a
Solicitors' CFO
). If it makes a Solicitors' CFO, the
Court has power to decide what portion of the compensation should be paid to the
solicitors,
and will set a proportion that the Court considers fair and
reasonable in all the circumstances. The solicitors will not ask the
approve an amount that is greater than what a third party litigation funder
would seek for funding this proceeding, which
is up to 30% of the total recovery
plus reimbursement of its out-of-pocket costs.
Some group members have previously entered 'litigation funding agreements' with
International Litigation Partners No 10 Pte Ltd.
If the Solicitors' CFO is made,
it will wholly replace the ILP funding agreements."
Sections 33V and 33Z of the FCA and s 183(1) of the NSW LPUL
Brewster distinguishable
contrast to s 33ZF of the FCA and s 183 of the CPA, which were the
subject of consideration in
, s 33V of the FCA (CPA,
s 173) is a power available on approval by the Court of a settlement or
discontinuance of a representative
proceeding and s 33Z (CPA, s 177)
is a power available on the Court making an order for an award of damages. To
the extent relevant,
these provisions of the FCA (which are in substantially the
same terms as those in the CPA) are as follows:
33V [CPA, s 173]
(1) A representative proceeding may not be settled or discontinued without the
approval of the Court.
(2) If the Court gives such an approval, it may make such orders as are just
with respect to the distribution of any money paid under
a settlement or paid
into the Court."
33Z [CPA, s 177]
(1) The Court may, in determining a matter in a representative proceeding, do
any one or more of the following:
(e) make an award of damages for group members, sub-group members or individual
group members, being damages consisting of specified
amounts or amounts worked
out in such manner as the Court specifies;
(f) award damages in an aggregate amount without specifying amounts awarded in
respect of individual group members;
(g) make such other order as the Court thinks just.
(2) In making an order for an award of damages, the Court must make provision
for the payment or distribution of the money to the
group members entitled.
33ZF [CPA, s 183]
(1) In any proceeding (including an appeal) conducted under this Part, the Court
may, of its own motion or on application by a party
or a group member, make any
order the Court thinks appropriate or necessary to ensure that justice is done
in the proceeding.
first and second respondents, by a notice of contention, sought leave to re-open
the decision in
and submitted that the decision should be
overturned on the basis that, properly construed, s 33ZF of the FCA enables
the Federal
Court of Australia to make a CFO before settlement or discontinuance
of, or the making of an order for an award of damages in, a
representative
proceeding.
is insufficient justification in the circumstances of the present case to grant
leave to re-open
. The primary argument of the first and second
respondents is that
is distinguishable as the reasoning in
depended on the specific terms of s 33ZF of the FCA, which
are different from the terms of ss 33V and 33Z of the FCA. This primary
argument must be accepted.
proposed order in
was to be made at an early stage of the
proceeding, before settlement, discontinuance or judgment. As such, neither
s 33V nor s 33Z
of the FCA was available. Rather, power to make such
an order, if it existed, depended on s 33ZF of the FCA. Whatever the merits
of the competing views disclosed in the judgments in
, there is a
material difference between (on the one hand) a CFO being made as part of a
settlement or discontinuance of, or the giving
of a judgment including an award
of damages in, a representative proceeding, the effect of each of which is the
finalisation of the
substance of the proceeding, and (on the other hand) a CFO
being made at an early stage in the representative proceeding to ensure
funding of the conduct of the proceeding.
a court making orders to provide for the settlement or discontinuance of, or the
giving of a judgment including an award of damages
in, a proceeding, it is not
uncommon for orders to be made incorporating adjustments for costs and expenses
between the parties,
which can extend to adjustments reflecting liabilities of
parties to other persons at least to the extent those other liabilities
sufficiently connected to the matters in controversy between the parties. Such
orders by way of adjustment are within the scope
of s 22 of the FCA
Supreme Court Act 1970
(NSW) ("the NSW SCA"),
provides that the Court "shall ... grant, either absolutely or on such terms and
conditions as the Court thinks just, all
remedies to which any of the parties
appears to be entitled in respect of a legal or equitable claim properly brought
him or her in the matter, so that, as far as possible, all matters in
controversy between the parties may be completely and finally
determined and all
multiplicity of proceedings concerning any of those matters avoided".
33V(2) of the FCA, in providing that on approval of settlement or discontinuance
of a representative proceeding the Court
"may make such orders as are just with
respect to the distribution of any money paid under a settlement or paid into
the Court",
and s 33Z(1)(g) of the FCA, in providing that in determining a
matter in a representative proceeding the Court may "make such other
the Court thinks just", are to be understood in the broader context of
of the FCA (NSW SCA,
Accordingly, neither s 33V(2) nor
s 33Z(1)(g) is to be construed as confining the Court to the making of
orders providing for payments
only to the parties to the proceeding. The power
to make other orders as the Court thinks just in each provision ensures that, in
furtherance of the powers in
of the FCA (NSW SCA,
Court can also make orders adjusting the payments to any party by, amongst other
things, determining liabilities of that party
to another person, at least to the
extent the liability to be determined is sufficiently connected to the
representative proceeding.
This power extends to circumstances in which there is
an existing quantifiable liability and in which the terms of the order both
constitute and quantify the liability. There can be no real doubt that the
making of a CFO (understood as defined above) satisfies
the required sufficiency
of connection.
did not concern the making of a CFO in favour of a law
practice regulated by the NSW LPUL but, rather, the making of a CFO before
settlement, discontinuance or judgment in favour of a litigation funder which
was not a law practice.
Accordingly,
the correctness of
does not arise for direct consideration in
this matter. Given the "strongly conservative cautionary principle, adopted in
the interests
of continuity and consistency in the law, that such a course
[granting leave to re-open a decision] should not lightly be
the factors
identified as relevant to the grant of leave to re-open a decision of this
do not carry
enough weight to result in that course being adopted. The outcome in
depended on ordinary principles of statutory construction, the
application of which may be reasonably contestable. The differences
in reasoning
between those Justices forming the majority is not particularly significant. The
may be somewhat inconvenient but the first and second
respondents' submissions recognise that, in practice, the result has not stymied
the evolution of case management strategies appropriate to representative
proceedings. Given that
is a recent decision of this Court in
which five of seven Justices decided that s 33ZF of the FCA and s 183
of the CPA did not enable
the making of a CFO, the interests of continuity and
consistency in the law outweigh such interest as might exist in this Court
and re-deciding the very same question of statutory
construction.
Overview of responses to key arguments
will be explained, the five key arguments of the first and second respondents
supporting a positive answer to the question in
the appeals involve several
misconceptions which seek to negate the relevance of the fact that the law
practices, unlike any other
litigation funder, are subject to specific
regulation including by the NSW LPUL, s 183(1) of which provides that
a law practice subject
to the NSW LPUL must not "enter into a costs
agreement" under which "the amount payable to the law practice" is "calculated
by reference
to the amount of any award or settlement or the value of any
property that may be recovered in any proceedings to which the agreement
even if a "costs agreement" in s 183(1) of the NSW LPUL means a costs
agreement for "legal costs" as defined in the NSW LPUL
(which, as will be
explained, it does not), a law practice's risks in funding a representative
proceeding (both in terms of not recovering
funded costs and expenses and in
being subjected to adverse costs orders) are within the definition of "legal
costs" in the NSW LPUL
as those risks are part of "business transacted, in
the ordinary course of legal practice".
and in any event, a "costs agreement" as referred to in s 183(1) of the
NSW LPUL is not confined to "legal costs". So much
is plain from the
reference in s 183(1) to "a costs agreement under which the amount payable
to the law practice, or any part of
that amount ...". Properly construed, in
context, such an "amount" is not confined to "legal costs".
it is not to the point that the proposed addendum to the costs agreement does
not itself embody an agreement by force of which
there will be an amount payable
to the law practice calculated by reference to the amount of any award or
settlement or the value
of any property that may be recovered in any proceedings
to which the agreement relates. The proposed addendum to the costs agreement
an agreement "under which" an amount payable to the law practice is to be
calculated by reference to the amount of any award or
settlement or the value of
any property that may be recovered in any proceedings to which the agreement
relates. The interposition
of the client agreeing to the law practice applying
to the Court for the making of an order by which an amount to be paid to the
practice is calculated by reference to the amount of any award or settlement or
the value of any property that may be recovered
in any proceedings to which the
agreement relates does not take the costs agreement outside of the scope of the
prohibition in s
the prohibition in s 183(1) is not just a matter relevant to the exercise
of a discretion by the Court whether to make a
CFO providing for the
distribution of funds to a law practice subject to the NSW LPUL other than
as payment for costs and disbursements
incurred in relation to the conduct of
the proceeding. Leaving aside the express power vested in the Supreme Court of
Victoria by
s 33ZDA of the Victorian SCA, ss 33V and 33Z of the FCA
cannot be construed as enabling the Court to give effect to a costs agreement
which the law practice has contravened the prohibition in s 183(1) of the
NSW LPUL, exposing the law practice to both the imposition
penalty and a finding of unsatisfactory professional conduct or professional
misconduct.
the provisions of the FCA concerning proceedings, including representative
proceedings, are to be construed in a context which
assumes the existence of
State and Territory legislation regulating the conduct of Australian lawyers and
law practices. Once this
is recognised, there is no inconsistency between the
FCA as Commonwealth legislation and the State and Territory legislation
the conduct of Australian lawyers and law
"Risk services", "legal costs", "costs agreement":
first and second arguments
is not in doubt that a law practice conducting litigation may act as a
litigation funder. It may do so consistently with the NSW
LPUL including by
negotiating with a client a conditional costs agreement under s 181 of the
NSW LPUL and a conditional costs agreement
with provision for the payment
of an uplift fee (meaning "additional legal costs (excluding disbursements)
payable under a costs
agreement on the successful outcome of the matter to which
the agreement
exceeding 25% of the legal costs (excluding disbursements) as provided for in
s 182 of the NSW LPUL. A law practice may not do
so, however, in
contravention of s 183(1) of the NSW LPUL.
agreement" is not defined in the NSW LPUL. Rather, s 179 provides that
a "client of a law practice has the right to require
and to have a negotiated
costs agreement with the law practice" and s 180 provides for the making of
a costs agreement. Apart from
the fact that a "costs agreement must be written
or evidenced in writing" (s 180(2)) and a "costs agreement cannot provide
legal costs to which it relates are not subject to a costs assessment"
(s 180(4)), s 180 does not regulate the content of a costs
The further regulation is in ss 181-183.
first and second respondents submitted that the sole concern of
the NSW LPUL, in which s 183 is located, is "legal costs". On that
basis, they contended that in referring to "a costs agreement
under which the
amount payable to the law practice ...", s 183(1) is confined to such
amounts as constitute "legal costs".
According to this argument, the
proposed amendment to the original costs agreement provides for the payment of
"legal costs" for "legal
services" in cl 3A.2(c)(i) and the payment of
non-legal costs for other services which the first and second respondents
characterised
as the "risk services" in cl 3A.2(c)(ii). The first and
second respondents submitted that the "risk services" were not "work done,
business transacted, in the ordinary course of legal practice" and therefore did
not form part of the "legal services" because
there was no evidence that the
risk of a law practice "funding the legal costs and disbursements" (as referred
to in cl 3A.2(c)(ii)
of the proposed amendment to the original costs
agreement) would occur in the ordinary course of legal practice.
for the moment, that s 183(1) is confined to a costs agreement dealing only
with "legal costs", the purported distinction
between "legal services" and "risk
services" is spurious. That the NSW LPUL recognises that a law practice may
provide "legal services"
does not mean
that a law practice is free to label some services as "legal services" and other
services as non-legal services, merely
because a client is prepared to accept
that label to obtain the "legal services".
183(1) does not refer only to work done in the ordinary course of legal
practice. It refers to work done
or business transacted
in the ordinary
course of legal practice. The words "business transacted" are of broad scope,
and deliberately so. They recognise
that the provision of "legal services" is
not confined to doing "legal work" and contemplate that aspects of the provision
services" will evolve. A law practice can no more avoid s 183(1)
of the NSW LPUL by characterising a service it provides as a non-legal
service of taking on risk for liability to pay costs and expenses in litigation
(be it of the law practice's own client or another
party) than it can
characterise a service it provides as a non-legal photocopying, printing or
binding service or electronic document
management service.
particular, the mere fact that a thing has not been done before in a law
practice does not mean it is not part of the "work done,
or business transacted,
in the ordinary course of legal practice". Technological and financing
developments have transformed the
provision of legal services over the last few
decades. One or other law practice will have been the first to provide many
of the provision of legal services which have now become commonplace.
Being the first mover in some aspect of the market for the
provision of legal
services does not take that aspect outside of the scope of "work done, or
business transacted, in the ordinary
course of legal practice". Nor, logically,
could it do so. If a technological, financing or other evolution in the
provision of legal
services is advantageous it will be adopted by many law
practices. Section 183(1) of the NSW LPUL is not to be construed on the
that the first law practice to adopt an innovation in the provision of
legal services is not doing work or transacting business in
the ordinary course
of legal practice, but subsequent adopters of the innovation are doing work or
transacting business in the ordinary
course of legal practice.
any event, ss 181 and 182 of the NSW LPUL recognise that it is an
ordinary part of legal practice for a law practice to provide
legal services
based on conditional costs agreements including the conditional payment of an
uplift fee. It is inherent within such
agreements that the law practice is
providing a so-called litigation "risk service". While the law practices in this
case may be
proposing to accept a greater risk of exposure to liability than
under a conditional costs agreement, the magnitude of the risk is
point. The point is that it is part and parcel of the ordinary course of legal
practice that a law practice may enter
into a costs agreement under which the
law practice accepts both the risks of incurring costs and expenses and the
risks of being
exposed to adverse costs orders which the law practice cannot
recover. Indeed, risks of the former nature are inherent in the ordinary
business of any law practice in which the law practice does not require the
payment of a fee into its trust account before providing
the service. The
additional risk of a law practice being exposed to an adverse costs order does
not transform the risk from one which
is part of "work done, or business
transacted, in the ordinary course of legal practice" into something else.
183(1) of the NSW LPUL also cannot be avoided by a law practice providing
for legal costs under a costs agreement and costs
for purported other services
under another agreement. If, as a matter of objectively determined fact, the
costs are an amount that
has been or may be charged to "a person" or "a person"
is or may become liable to pay to a law practice an amount "for the provision
legal services", the amounts are "legal costs" irrespective of the label by
which the law practice or the law practice and the
person may choose to describe
those amounts.
the statutory language by which "legal costs" is defined involves amounts a
person has been or may be charged by, or is
or may become liable to pay to, a
law practice "
the provision of legal services". The word "for"
operates as a preposition indicating a relationship between the charging of or
to pay the amount and the provision of the legal services. As the term
is relational, its meaning depends on its
of the NSW LPUL. Section 169, in
specifies that the objectives of that Part are:
"(a) to ensure that clients of law practices are able to make informed choices
with pursuing those options;
(b) to provide that law practices must not charge more than fair and reasonable
amounts for legal costs; and
(c) to provide a framework for assessment of legal costs."
to both the second and the third of the responses to the key arguments
identified above is that s 169(a) refers to clients
making "informed
choices about their legal options and the costs associated with pursuing those
options", whereas s 169(b) and (c)
refer to the charging and assessment of
"legal costs". This distinction, between
a client may incur in
pursuing legal options and the charging and assessment of "legal costs",
reflects the structure and provisions
Accordingly, Div 2 of
is specifically concerned with legal costs, which, by s 172(1),
must be no more than is fair and reasonable in all the circumstances.
is concerned with "costs disclosure", with s 174(1)
providing that the required disclosure to the client is of "information
the basis on which legal costs will be calculated in the matter and
an estimate of the total legal costs". Division 4 of
is concerned
with "costs agreements". Division 5 of
is concerned with "billing".
Division 6 of
is concerned with "unpaid legal costs". Division 7 of
is concerned with "costs assessment" and under s 196 that
Division "applies to legal costs payable on a solicitor-client basis".
183(1) is in
, as are ss 181 and 182. In contrast to
ss 181(1) and 182(2), which refer to "the payment of ... legal costs" and
the payment of an
"uplift fee" (meaning certain "additional legal costs")
respectively, s 183(1) does not refer to "legal costs". It refers to
payable to the law practice under a costs agreement. The reason it
does so is readily ascertainable. By referring to amounts payable
under a costs
agreement, meaning all such amounts, the prohibition in s 183(1) against
contingency fees is both clear in its terms
and unambiguous in its scope.
overall context of
of the NSW LPUL, the regulation of lawyers'
charging, reflects a legislative intention to ensure that the object in
of the NSW LPUL of "the protection of clients of law practices
and the protection of the public generally" is not undermined by a
law practice
being able to exploit a client's need to obtain "legal services" by any form of
excessive charging in connection with
the provision of legal services. This
context reinforces that the required relationship between the amount charged and
and the provision of the legal services need not be direct and
immediate. If, in exchange for the legal services, the client must
there will be payable to the law practice an amount calculated by reference to
the amount of any award or settlement or
the value of any property that may be
recovered in any proceedings to which the agreement relates, the amount so
calculated will
be for the provision of legal services and therefore will be
within the definition of "legal costs" if the work done or business
is in the ordinary course of legal practice.
noted, and in any event, even if the law practice did provide some service which
was other than work done or business transacted
in the ordinary course of legal
practice, that would not prevent the application of s 183(1) to any costs
agreement under which the
client agrees that any amount will be payable to the
law practice calculated by reference to the amount of any award or settlement
the value of any property that may be recovered in any proceedings to which the
agreement relates. As may be accepted, the primary
"legal costs" and it is "legal costs" alone which are subject to the disclosure
and assessment regimes. However, that is no reason
to construe s 183(1) as
confined to legal costs when: the NSW LPUL recognises that some law
practices may provide non-legal
confines a costs agreement to legal costs; s 183(1) does not
refer to "legal costs" but to "a costs agreement under which the amount
to the law practice ..."; and not confining s 183(1) to legal costs ensures
the effective operation of the prohibition that
provision embodies in
furtherance of the overall objects of the NSW LPUL.
s 183(1) operates in this manner is reinforced by the terms of
s 182(2) of the NSW LPUL. Section 182(2) of the NSW LPUL
a law practice to enter into a conditional costs agreement (that is, an
agreement that the payment of some or all of the legal costs
is conditional on
the successful outcome of the matter to which those costs relate) which provides
for the payment of an uplift fee
(being additional legal costs (excluding
disbursements) payable under a costs agreement on the successful outcome of the
which the agreement relates) if the law practice has a reasonable
belief that a successful outcome of the matter is reasonably likely
uplift fee does not exceed 25% of the legal costs (excluding disbursements)
otherwise payable. By s 182(3) a conditional
costs agreement that includes
an uplift fee must: identify the basis on which the uplift fee is to be
calculated; and include an
estimate of the uplift fee or, if that is not
reasonably practical, a range of estimates for the uplift fee and an explanation
the major variables that may affect the calculation of the uplift fee. By
s 182(4) a law practice must not enter into a costs agreement
contravention of s 182 or of the Uniform Rules relating to uplift fees,
under pain of a civil penalty.
182 represents a carefully worked out scheme by which a law practice may be paid
an amount exceeding the legal costs which
would otherwise be payable to it if
the law practice has taken on the risk of funding the proceeding. That risk
includes the law
practice not recovering any part of the amount it paid to fund
the proceeding by obtaining a costs order in favour of its client
and can extend
to the risk of being liable to pay an adverse costs order against its client (as
nothing in the NSW LPUL prohibits
a law practice taking on that risk in a
conditional costs agreement). Section 182 expressly: confines the circumstances
payment of such an additional amount may be agreed (only if the law
practice has a reasonable belief that a successful outcome of
the matter is
reasonably likely); imposes additional disclosure obligations on the law
practice; and specifies that the amount of
the uplift fee must not exceed 25% of
the legal costs (excluding disbursements) otherwise payable.
the face of this carefully prescribed scheme it is unlikely, to say the least,
that the legislature intended that a law practice
would be able to enter into a
costs agreement under which any amount payable to the law practice could be
calculated by reference
to the amount recovered in the proceeding by
characterising that amount as non-legal costs or the underlying agreement
and its client as mere "instructions" to obtain a court order, or by
not reducing the costs agreement to writing, or by agreeing
that the client's
liability to pay any such amount depends on the obtaining of an order of a court
to that effect. The statutory
scheme would be incoherent if a law practice, on
the one hand, could not obtain more than a 25% uplift fee of legal costs in a
conditional
costs agreement and yet, on the other hand, could obtain far more
than an additional payment of 25% of the legal costs by any of
the mechanisms on
which the first and second respondents relied in the present case.
Costs payable by court order not by costs agreement: third
noted, the first and second respondents submitted further that s 183(1) of
the NSW LPUL would not be engaged in this case because
the law practices
were not entering into a costs agreement by which the client agrees to pay to
the law practice a contingency fee.
Rather, the law practices were proposing to
enter into a costs agreement by which the client would agree that the law
practice will
seek an order from the Court that the law practice be paid a
contingency fee.
prohibition in s 183(1), however, is against a law practice entering into a
costs agreement under which the amount payable to
the law practice, or any part
of that amount, is calculated by reference to the amount which is recovered in
the proceeding. The
words "under which" are important. Again, like the word
"for" in the definition of "legal costs", the words "under which" denote
relationship between the costs agreement and an amount being payable to the law
practice calculated as a percentage of that which
is recovered in the
proceeding, and the nature of the required relationship depends on the context
of the provision. Again, the protective
purpose of the NSW LPUL,
particularly s 183, indicates that "under which" in that provision should
not be construed narrowly as meaning,
for example, "by which" or "by force of
which". Rather, to satisfy the requirement of "under which" in s 183(1) it
will suffice if
an amount of the prohibited kind is or will become payable by
reason of, as a result or consequence of, or in pursuance of the costs
agreement. That the amount is not determinable at the time of the costs
agreement does not take the costs agreement outside the scope
of s 183(1).
That the amount is not and may never become payable if a contingency does not
occur (the making of an order by the Court)
does not take the costs agreement
outside the scope of s 183(1). That the person liable to pay the amount is
not the "client" of
the law practice (such as a group member in a representative
proceeding who is not the applicant) is immaterial. The contrary reasoning
the Full Court, that the present case involves nothing more than a promise by
the law practices to make an application for remuneration
as approved by the
Court and that any payment made would not be pursuant to any bargain struck
between the law practice and the
irreconcilable with the objective character of the business being transacted
between the law practice and the client and the terms
of s 183(1).
summary, a "costs agreement" within the scope of s 183(1) of the
NSW LPUL means any agreement between a client and a law practice
which any amount is or will be payable to the law practice by any person being
an amount calculated by reference to the amount
of any award or settlement or
the value of any property that may be recovered in any proceedings to which the
agreement relates,
irrespective of whether the obligation or liability of the
person to pay any such amount is conditional or contingent on another
(including the making of an order by the Court to constitute the liability and
to determine the amount of the liability). By
s 180(2) such a costs
agreement must be written or evidenced in writing. But if not so written or
evidenced in writing, that merely
involves a failure of the law practice to
comply with s 180(2) of the NSW LPUL; it does not mean that there is
no "costs agreement"
as referred to in s 180(3). Further, no matter what
language is used as between a client and a law practice to describe their
the objective character of the business being transacted will be
determinative of the existence of a costs agreement which contravenes
follows that the precise terms of the proposed amendment to the costs agreement
are not determinative but conveniently expose
the problem. By proposed
cl 3A.4 the client is to agree that, by entering into the agreement, the
law practice is to seek the orders
as described in proposed cl 3A. The
orders in proposed cl 3A are a costs reimbursement order (as explained in
cl 3A.2(c)(i)) and
the so-called "Solicitors' CFO" (as explained in
cl 3A.2(c)(ii)). The latter order, in terms, is for the law practice to be
by group members a percentage of the sum recovered as a result of the
proceeding (defined as the Resolution Sum). The proposed amendment
to the costs
agreement therefore involves a costs agreement under which (in the sense of by
reason of, as a result or consequence
of, or in pursuance of the costs
agreement) an amount will be payable calculated by reference to the amount of
any award or settlement
or the value of any property that may be recovered in
any proceedings to which the agreement relates. The proposed amendment to the
costs agreement, accordingly, would contravene s 183(1) of the
objective character of the business proposed to be transacted in the present
case is obvious. In exchange for the law practices
providing the legal services
in conducting the representative proceeding the client is to agree that, if the
Court so orders, the
law practice will be paid an amount prohibited by
s 183(1). Neither: (a) the interposition of an order of the Court as
the mechanism
by which that payment is to be achieved; (b) the contingent
and conditional nature of the payment, which may not in fact be required
order may be made; nor (c) the indeterminacy of the amount to be paid
unless and until the Court makes the order, changes the
nature of the agreement
or takes it outside the scope of the prohibition in s 183(1) of the
Prohibition conditions power not discretion to
make CFO: fourth and fifth arguments
principle was identified which supports the argument that s 183(1) of the
NSW LPUL may be relevant to the exercise of power by
the Court to make the
CFO in favour of a law practice but not to the existence of that power.
it is "inappropriate to read provisions conferring jurisdiction or granting
powers to a court by making implications or imposing
limitations which are not
found in the express
does not mean
that a law of the Commonwealth conferring power on a court automatically
prevails over a law of a State which may condition
the exercise of that power.
This is because, in terms of the operation of
Constitution
, by which a law of the Commonwealth prevails over an
inconsistent law of a State, "the starting point for determining whether such
inconsistency exists lies in an identification of the intended scope and
operation of the Commonwealth law". In the ordinary course,
if the legislative
intent is that the jurisdiction or power under the Commonwealth law is not to be
"confined or constrained by the
prohibition or requirements of State laws",
will operate so that the Commonwealth law is not so confined or
constrained. If the legislative intent is that the jurisdiction or
power under
the Commonwealth law "must be exercised conformably with applicable prohibitions
and requirements of State law, the jurisdiction
conferred will, as a matter of
construction, be accordingly confined with the result that there is no
inconsistency for the purposes
is apparent that the FCA, including ss 33V and 33Z, assumes the existence
of State and Territory legislation regulating the conduct
of Australian lawyers
and law practices. Equally, the CPA and the NSW SCA assume that regulation by
other laws of New South Wales.
It is for this reason that, for example,
s 37N(2) of the FCA (CPA,
provides that a party's lawyer
must, in the conduct of a civil proceeding before the Court, conduct the
proceeding in a way that
is consistent with the overarching purpose set out in
s 37M(1). This reflects, amongst other things, r 3.1 of the
Profession Uniform Law Australian Solicitors' Conduct Rules 2015
which a "solicitor's duty to the court and the administration of justice is
paramount and prevails to the extent of inconsistency
with any other duty". The
same duty underlies the power of the Court to order a lawyer to bear costs
personally because of a failure
to comply with the duty imposed by
s 37N(2). The assumption is also apparent in several provisions of the
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth) ("FCR") and the
Uniform Civil Procedure
(NSW) ("UCPR"), including, for example: (a) that a person
may be represented in the court by a lawyer (FCR, r 4.01(1); UCPR,
r 7.24(1));
and (b) the authority of a lawyer to accept service (FCR,
r 10.22(1); UCPR, r 10.13).
explained in
APLA Ltd v Legal Services Commissioner
the "entire
system of State regulation of the provision of services which include
representing people in courts exercising federal
such regulation is not of itself inconsistent with the
Constitution
with federal law. ... Whatever system exists in relation to the structure,
organisation and regulation of the legal profession,
it forms part of the
context in which federal laws operate, and in which the judicial power of the
Commonwealth is
exercised."
assumption is embodied in
Judiciary Act 1903
by which, relevantly, a person entitled to practise as a barrister or solicitor,
or as both, in the Supreme Court of a State
or Territory "has the like
entitlement to practise in any federal court".
the context within which ss 33V(2) and 33Z(1)(g) of the FCA operate, there
is no inconsistency between the vesting of power
in the Court to "make such
orders as are just with respect to the distribution of any money paid under a
settlement or paid into
the Court" and "make such other order as the Court
thinks just", respectively, and the prohibition in s 183(1) of the
NSW LPUL on
a law practice entering into a costs agreement under which the
amount payable to the law practice, or any part of that amount, is
calculated by
reference to the amount of any award or settlement or the value of any property
that may be recovered in any proceedings
to which the agreement relates.
Accordingly, s 183(1) operates according to its terms. In so operating, it
can never be just within
the meaning of s 33V(2) or s 33Z(1)(g) of the
FCA for the Court to make an order which gives effect to an agreement between a
practice and a client which contravenes s 183(1) of the NSW LPUL.
That is, the making of such an order is outside the scope of the
power so vested
in the Court.
is unnecessary to deal with the other arguments raised in the appeals. Those
arguments do not directly arise for determination
and in any event are incapable
of providing a cogent answer to the properly determined scope of s 33V(2)
and s 33Z(1)(g) of the FCA
(CPA, ss 173 and 177) not extending to a
power to make a CFO providing for the distribution of funds to a law practice
the NSW LPUL calculated as a percentage of the settlement or
judgment sum, including a premium for litigation
s 183(1) of the NSW LPUL the law practices cannot enter into an
agreement with their clients the effect of which would be that
any amount is or
will be payable to the law practice calculated by reference to the amount of any
award or settlement or the value
of any property that may be recovered in any
proceedings to which the agreement relates irrespective of whether the
obligation or
liability of the client to pay any such amount is conditional or
contingent on another event (including the making of an order by
the Court to
constitute the liability and to determine the amount of the liability). The
Court cannot make an order that would give
effect to any such agreement in
contravention of s 183(1) of the NSW LPUL under s 33V(2) or
s 33Z(1)(g) of the FCA.
these reasons, the reserved question should be answered "No" and the orders
proposed by Gordon, Steward, Gleeson and Beech-Jones
JJ should be
[2006] HCA 41
; (2006) 229 CLR 386.
R&B Investments Pty Ltd v
Blue Sky Alternative Investments Ltd (In liq)
(2024) 304 FCR 395.
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574. See, eg,
Uren v RMBL Investments Ltd [No 2]
[2020] FCA 647
Webster (Trustee) v
Murray Goulburn Co-operative Co Ltd [No 4]
[2020] FCA 1053
Asirifi-Otchere v Swann Insurance (Aust) Pty Ltd [No 3]
[2020] FCA 1885
; (2020) 385 ALR
Bradshaw v BSA Ltd [No 2]
[2022] FCA 1440
Haswell v The
Commonwealth [No 3]
[2023] FCA 1093
Ghee v BT Funds Management Ltd
[2023] FCA 1553
Ingram v Ardent Leisure Ltd
[2024] FCA 836
Seven Eleven Litigation Holdings LLC v Davaria
[2024] FCAFC 54
; (2024) 302 FCR 493;
v Western Australia
[2024] FCA 1368
Boulos v M.R.V.L. Investments Pty
[2024] FCA 1377.
Davaria Pty Ltd v
7-Eleven Stores Pty Ltd
[2020] FCAFC 183
; (2020) 281 FCR 501 at 506
Impiombato v BHP
Billiton Ltd [No 2]
[2018] FCA 2045
; (2018) 364 ALR 162 at 176
, 194 [133],
considered in
Klemweb Nominees
Pty Ltd (as trustee for the Klemweb
Superannuation Fund) v BHP Group Ltd
[2019] FCAFC 107
; (2019) 369 ALR 583 at 587-588
, 612 [139].
(2024) 304 FCR 395 at 423
[2023] FCAFC 162
; (2023) 301 FCR 1.
(2024) 304 FCR 395 at 407
(2024) 304 FCR 395 at 406-407
[53], 410 [69], 412 [72], 414 [85], 421 [120].
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574 at 589
Davaria Pty Ltd v
7-Eleven Stores Pty Ltd
[2020] FCAFC 183
; (2020) 281 FCR 501 at 506
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574 at 589
599-600 [47], 624 [125], 633 [153]-[154].
Owners of "Shin Kobe Maru" v
Empire Shipping Co Inc
(1994) 181 CLR 404 at 421;
Australasian Memory Pty
Ltd v Brien
(2000) 200 CLR 270 at 279 [17].
[1999] HCA 48
; (1999) 199 CLR 255 at 260-261
[1993] HCA 56
; (1993) 178 CLR 408.
[1993] HCA 56
; (1993) 178 CLR 408 at 433.
[1993] HCA 56
; (1993) 178 CLR 408 at 434.
Batten v Wedgwood
Coal and Iron Co
[1884] UKLawRpCh 244
; (1884) 28 Ch D 317 at 325;
In re New Zealand Midland
Railway Company
[1901] UKLawRpCh 106
; [1901] 2 Ch 357 at 362, 367.
[1994] HCA 20
; (1994) 181 CLR 583 at 602.
Patrick Stevedores
Operations No 2 Pty Ltd v Maritime Union of Australia
(1998) 195 CLR 1 at
35-36 [41]-[43].
APLA Ltd v Legal Services
Commissioner (NSW)
[2005] HCA 44
; (2005) 224 CLR 322 at 396
Legal Practitioners Complaints Committee
[2000] FCA 335
; (2000) 97 FCR 575 at 596
Sections 55B
Jackson v Sterling
Industries Ltd
[1987] HCA 23
; (1987) 162 CLR 612 at 616.
Section 183(1).
(2025) 99 ALJR 619.
Section 183(1).
Section 183(3).
Section 185(1).
Section 180(4).
Section 6(1) (definition of
"legal costs").
Section 6(1) (definition of
"legal services").
(2024) 304 FCR 395 at 414 [85]
(emphasis in original).
Section 169.
Chan v Cresdon Pty
[1989] HCA 63
; (1989) 168 CLR 242 at 249.
APLA Ltd v Legal
Services Commissioner (NSW)
[2005] HCA 44
; (2005) 224 CLR 322 at 352
The LPUL is applied as a law of
New South Wales by the
Legal Profession Uniform Law Application Act 2014
R&B Investments Pty
Ltd (Trustee) v Blue Sky Alternative Investments Ltd (Administrators Appointed)
(In liq) (Carriage Application)
[2022] FCA 1444
R&B Investments
Pty Ltd (Trustee) v Blue Sky Alternative Investments Ltd (Administrators
Appointed) (In liq) (Carriage Application
[2023] FCA 142.
See [44] below.
Bogan v Estate of
(2025) 99 ALJR 619 at 623 [1].
Banton Costs Agreement,
Addendum to Banton Costs
Agreement, cl 3A.3(d).
R&B Investments Pty Ltd
(Trustee) v Blue Sky Alternative Investments Ltd (Administrators Appointed) (In
liq) (Reserved Question)
[2023] FCA 1499.
The Full Court of the Federal
Court excised from the reserved question the underlined words:
Investments Pty Ltd v Blue Sky Alternative Investments Ltd (In liq)
(Reserved Question)
(2024) 304 FCR 395 at 397-398 [4]-[6].
[2020] FCAFC 183
; (2020) 281 FCR 501 at 506
506-509 [22]-[30].
Some of the examples provided
of CFOs were inapposite because they were "commencement CFOs", an issue
addressed at [66]-[67] below.
Caason Investments Pty Ltd v
[2018] FCA 527
, Order 12 and
Uren v RMBL Investments Ltd [No
[2020] FCA 647
, Order 8(a)(ii).
[2020] FCA 647
, Order 8(a)(ii).
Caason Investments
[2018] FCA 527
, Order 12.
FCA Act, s 33V(2).
[2023] FCAFC 162
; (2023) 301 FCR 1 at 28
Elliott‑Carde
[2023] FCAFC 162
; (2023) 301 FCR 1 at 28
and the authorities cited.
Elliott‑Carde
[2023] FCAFC 162
; (2023) 301 FCR 1 at 28
Elliott‑Carde
[2023] FCAFC 162
; (2023) 301 FCR 1 at 28
Blairgowrie Trading Ltd v Allco
Finance Group Ltd (In liq) [No 3]
[2017] FCA 330
; (2017) 343 ALR 476 at 503
[2024] FCA 1036.
Clime Capital Ltd v UGL Pty
[2020] FCA 66
, Order 9 and
Wetdal Pty Ltd as Trustee for the BlueCo
Two Superannuation Fund v Estia Health Ltd
[2021] FCA 475
Clime Capital
Order 9(c);
[2021] FCA 475
Equity Financial Planners
[2024] FCA 1036
, Order 12.
Wong v Silkfield
[1999] HCA 48
; (1999) 199 CLR 255;
BMW Australia Ltd v Brewster
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269
BHP Group Ltd v Impiombato
[2022] HCA 33
; (2022) 276 CLR 611;
Carnival Plc
[2023] HCA 39
; (2023) 98 ALJR 45; 415 ALR 491. See also
Mobil Oil Australia
Pty Ltd v Victoria
(2002) 211 CLR 1;
Timbercorp Finance Pty Ltd (In liq)
[2016] FCA 44
; (2016) 259 CLR 212;
Wigmans v AMP Ltd
[2021] HCA 7
; (2021) 270 CLR 623;
Lendlease Corporation Ltd v Pallas
[2025] HCA 19
; (2025) 99 ALJR 834.
A further ground of the notice
of contention argued this power extended to a power to make a Solicitors' CFO.
The Applicants abandoned
the other grounds in their notice of contention.
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574.
[2020] FCAFC 183
; (2020) 281
FCR 501 at 511-512
Elliott-Carde
[2023] FCAFC 162
; (2023) 301 FCR 1 at 81-82
Galactic Seven Eleven Litigation Holdings LLC v Davaria
[2024] FCAFC 54
; (2024) 302 FCR 493 at 509
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574 at 588
589 [3], 624 [125], 628 [135].
Money Max Int Pty
Ltd v QBE Insurance Group Ltd
[2016] FCAFC 148
; (2016) 245 FCR 191 at 195
[2016] FCAFC 148
; (2016) 245 FCR
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574 at 588
628 [135]; see also 617 [104], 640 [178]; cf Nettle J. See also
[2025] HCA 19
; (2025) 99 ALJR 834 at 843-844
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR
, 600 [49]-[50], 624 [125], 631-632 [146]‑[148]. See also
[2025] HCA 19
; (2025) 99 ALJR 834 at 854
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR
574 at 604-605
[2025] HCA 19
; (2025) 99 ALJR 834 at 844
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574 at 588
628 [135]; see also 617 [104], 640 [178]. See also
[2025] HCA 19
; (2025) 99
ALJR 834 at 843
, 854 [66].
North Australian
Aboriginal Justice Agency Ltd v Northern Territory
[2015] HCA 41
; (2015) 256 CLR 569 at
NZYQ v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
(2023) 280 CLR 137 at 150 [17], quoting
Wurridjal v The
Commonwealth
(2009) 237 CLR 309 at 352 [70];
MJZP v Director-General
of Security
[2025] HCA 26
Elliott-Carde
[2023] FCAFC 162
; (2023) 301
FCR 1 at 78
Owners of "Shin Kobe Maru" v Empire Shipping Co
(1994) 181 CLR 404 at 421. See also
[1999] HCA 48
; (1999) 199 CLR 255 at
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269
CLR 574 at 606
, 632 [147].
Elliott-Carde
[2023] FCAFC 162
; (2023) 301
FCR 1 at 79
Elliott-Carde
[2023] FCAFC 162
; (2023) 301
FCR 1 at 20
Galactic Seven Eleven Litigation Holdings LLC v Davaria
[2024] FCAFC 54
; (2024) 302 FCR 493 at 509
Elliott-Carde
[2023] FCAFC 162
; (2023) 301
FCR 1 at 80
; see also 25-26 [134]-[138].
[2005] HCA 44
; (2005) 224 CLR 322
[2005] HCA 44
; (2005) 224 CLR 322
[1994] HCA 20
; (1994) 181 CLR 583 at 602
LPUL, s 3(a)-(e).
LPUL, s 126.
LPUL, s 6(1) definition of
"legal services".
LPUL, s 6(1) definition of
"legal costs".
LPUL, s 169(a) and
LPUL, s 172(1).
LPUL, s 172(3).
LPUL, s 179.
LPUL, s 180(2).
LPUL, s 181(1).
LPUL, ss 181 and 182.
LPUL, s 182(1).
LPUL, s 185(3).
LPUL, s 185(4).
LPUL, s 185(1).
LPUL, s 185(2).
LPUL, s 172(3).
LPUL, s 182(4).
Uniform Rules, Pt 2, r
Uniform Rules, Pt 2,
Uniform Rules, Pt 2,
r 2.3. See also rr 3 to 6 of Pt 2, prescribing the fundamental
duties of solicitors, and r 12.2 of Pt 2, prohibiting
a solicitor
seeking any benefit in excess of fair and reasonable remuneration for legal
(2025) 99 ALJR 619
at 623 [1] fn 1, citing, relevantly,
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Legal Practitioners Act 1981
(SA), Sch 3, cl 27;
Profession Act 2007
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Legal Profession Act 2007
Profession Act 2006
Legal Profession Act 2006
Supreme Court Act 1986
(2025) 99 ALJR 619 at 623 [1].
(2025) 99 ALJR 619
at 623 [1].
Australia, Parliamentary Joint
Committee on Corporations and Financial Services,
Litigation funding and the
regulation of the class action industry
Australia, Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services,
Litigation funding
and the regulation of the class action industry
(2020) at 248 [14.173];
see also 248‑251 [14.174]-[14.192].
Australia, Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services,
Litigation funding
and the regulation of the class action industry
(2020) at xix.
Australia, Parliamentary
Joint Committee on Corporations and Financial Services,
Litigation funding
and the regulation of the class action industry
(2020) at xxxi,
360 [18.37] (Recommendation 31).
Campbells Cash and Carry
Pty Ltd v Fostif Pty Ltd
[2006] HCA 41
; (2006) 229 CLR 386 at 425
, 433 [86]. See
Wrongs Act 1958
Criminal Law Consolidation Act
(SA), Sch 11, cll 1(3) and 3(2)(b)-(c);
Civil Procedure
(Representative Proceedings) Act 2022
Civil Liability
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
[2006] HCA 41
; (2006) 229 CLR
, 433 [86]. See fn 103 above but cf
Civil Liability Act
Civil Law (Wrongs) Act 2002
[2006] HCA 41
; (2006) 229 CLR 386 at 433
Abolition Act
were re‑enacted with minor modifications by cl 2 of
Sch 2 to the
Civil Liability Act 2002
[2006] HCA 41
; (2006) 229
CLR 386 at 425
[1960] HCA 40
; (1960) 104 CLR 186 at
See [42] above.
See [43] above.
See [84]-[85] above.
See [85] and [90] above.
See [91] above.
Campbells Cash and Carry
Pty Ltd v Fostif Pty Ltd
[2006] HCA 41
; (2006) 229 CLR 386.
Westpac Banking
Corporation v Lenthall
[2019] FCAFC 34
; (2019) 265 FCR 21 at 30-32
Australia Ltd v Brewster
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574 at 640
Asirifi-Otchere v Swann
Insurance (Aust) Pty Ltd
(2019) 139 ACSR 171 at 174 [15], 175-176 [22].
Caason Investments Pty
Ltd v Cao [No 2]
[2018] FCA 527
, Order 12;
Uren v RMBL Investments Ltd
[2020] FCA 647
, Order 8(a)(ii).
Justice Legislation
Miscellaneous Amendments Act 2020
Supreme Court Act 1986
s 33ZDA(1).
R&B Investments Pty
Ltd v Blue Sky Alternative Investments Ltd (In liq)
(2024) 304 FCR 395.
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574.
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269
CLR 574 at 589
, 624 [124]-[125], 625 [128], 631 [145]-[146], 638 [170]. See
also at 628 [135], 632 [149].
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269
CLR 574 at 589
(emphasis in original).
Federal Court of
Australia Act 1976
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269
CLR 574 at 613
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269
CLR 574 at 606
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269
CLR 574 at 600
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269
CLR 574 at 612
, 613 [90].
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269
CLR 574 at 613
. But compare 602 [54].
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269
CLR 574 at 624
. See also at 624 [125], 625 [128].
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269
CLR 574 at 628
, 632 [149]. See also at 630 [141], 631 [145]-[146], 638
[2019] HCA 45
269 CLR 574 at 612-613
Simons v ANZ Bank New
Zealand Ltd
[2024] NZCA 330
; [2024] 3 NZLR 485 at 518
. See also at 514
[112]-[114].
Elliott-Carde v
McDonald's Australia Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 162
; (2023) 301 FCR 1 at 25
Elliott-Carde v
McDonald's Australia Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 162
; (2023) 301 FCR 1 at 25
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574 at 606
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574 at 641
Wong v Silkfield Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 48
; (1999) 199 CLR 255 at 260-261
R v Watson; Ex parte
[1976] HCA 39
; (1976) 136 CLR 248 at 257-258.
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574 at 589
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574 at
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574 at 589
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269
CLR 574 at 655-658
[2019] HCA 45
269 CLR 574 at 652
Australia, Senate,
Federal Court of Australia Amendment Bill 1991
, Explanatory Memorandum at 2
Australia, Senate,
Federal Court of Australia Amendment Bill 1991
, Explanatory Memorandum at
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269
CLR 574 at 642
National Bolivian Navigation Co v Wilson
(1880) 5 App Cas 176 at 211-212.
Morgan and Wurtzburg,
Treatise on the Law of Costs in the Chancery Division of the High Court of
, 2nd ed (1882) at 201-203; Williams and Guthrie-Smith,
Chancery Practice, being a Treatise on the Practice of the Chancery Division,
and on Appeal Therefrom
, 8th ed (1914), vol 2 at 1081-1083.
China Life Trustees
Ltd v China Energy Reserve and Chemicals Group Overseas Co Ltd
HKCFAR 359 at 394 [103]-[104], citing
Chief Executive Officer, Aboriginal
Areas Protection Authority v Director of National Parks
[2024] HCA 16
; (2024) 98 ALJR 655
; 418 ALR 202 at 233 and Stevens,
The Laws of Restitution
(2023) at 98.
Anthony Hordern &
Sons Ltd v Amalgamated Clothing and Allied Trades Union of Australia
[1932] HCA 9
47 CLR 1 at 7.
[1994] HCA 20
; (1994) 181 CLR
583 at 602.
APLA Ltd v Legal Services
Commissioner (NSW)
[2005] HCA 44
; (2005) 224 CLR 322 at 352
Pittman v Prudential
Deposit Bank (Ltd)
(1896) 13 TLR 110 at 111.
[2006] HCA 41
; (2006) 229 CLR 386 at 426
fn 137, quoting Stephen,
A Digest of the Criminal Law (Crimes and
Punishments)
(1877) at 86.
Campbells Cash and Carry
Pty Ltd v Fostif Pty Ltd
[2006] HCA 41
; (2006) 229 CLR 386 at 430
Clyne v New South Wales
Bar Association
[1960] HCA 40
; (1960) 104 CLR 186 at 203.
Maintenance, Champerty
and Barratry Abolition Act 1993
(NSW), Sch 3, cl 5 and
Civil Liability Act 2002
Sch 2, cl 2.
Maintenance, Champerty
and Barratry Abolition Act 1993
Campbells Cash and Carry
Pty Ltd v Fostif Pty Ltd
[2006] HCA 41
; (2006) 229 CLR 386 at 433
R&B Investments Pty
Ltd v Blue Sky Alternative Investments Ltd (In liq)
(2024) 304 FCR 395 at
418 [104], citing
Perera v GetSwift Ltd
[2018] FCA 732
; (2018) 263 FCR 1 at 10-15
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 27 October 1993 at 4513.
Legal Profession Reform
(NSW), Sch 3, inserting s 188 into the
Profession Act 1987
New South Wales,
Profession Reform Bill 1993
, Explanatory Note at 5.
New South Wales, Legislative
Parliamentary Debates
(Hansard), 27
October 1993 at
R&B Investments Pty
Ltd v Blue Sky Alternative Investments Ltd (In liq)
(2024) 304 FCR 395 at
414 [85]-[86].
LPUL, s 169.
Rinehart v Welker
[2012] NSWCA 95
; (2012) 95 NSWLR 221 at 248
BTR Engineering (Aust) Ltd v
Dana Corporation
[2000] VSC 246
March v E & M H
Stramare Pty Ltd
[1991] HCA 12
; (1991) 171 CLR 506 at 523:
"possession of a head is
an essential precondition of decapitation".
Yango Pastoral Co Pty Ltd
v First Chicago Australia Ltd
[1978] HCA 42
; (1978) 139 CLR 410 at 432.
Sullivan v Moody
(2001) 207 CLR 562 at 581 [55];
Miller v Miller
[2011] HCA 9
; (2011) 242 CLR 446 at
Equuscorp Pty Ltd v Haxton
(2012) 246 CLR 498 at 518
Equuscorp Pty Ltd v
(2012) 246 CLR 498 at 518 [34].
Fell, "The Concept of
Coherence in Australian Private Law"
[2018] MelbULawRw 6
; (2018) 41
Melbourne University Law
1160 at 1200.
Supreme Court Act
, discussed in
Bogan v Estate of Smedley
(2025) 99 ALJR 619.
Civil Procedure Act 2005
Legal Profession
Uniform Law Application Act 2014
, which provides that the
"Legal Profession Uniform Law set out in Schedule 1 to the
Legal Profession
Uniform Law Application Act 2014
of Victoria – (a) applies as a
law of this jurisdiction, and (b) as so applying may be referred to as the
Legal Profession Uniform Law (NSW)
, and (c) so applies as if it were
By extension of the
reasoning in
Elliott-Carde v McDonald's Australia Ltd
[2023] FCAFC 162
; (2023) 301 FCR 1
concerning a payment to a third party litigation funder, not being a law
Provisions equivalent to the
Civil Procedure Act
[2019] HCA 45
; (2019) 269 CLR 574.
Legal Profession
Uniform General Rules 2015
Legal Profession Uniform Law
Australian Solicitors' Conduct Rules 2015
R&B Investments Pty
Ltd v Blue Sky Alternative Investments Ltd (In liq) (Reserved Question)
(2024) 304 FCR 395 at 398 [10].
Defined as an order to the
effect that, in addition to legal costs and disbursements, "Banton and Shine be
further remunerated for
their risks in funding the legal costs and disbursements
by payment of such percentage of the Resolution Sum [sum recovered as a
of the proceeding] as may be approved by the Court":
R&B Investments Pty
Ltd v Blue Sky Alternative Investments Ltd (In liq) (Reserved Question)
(2024) 304 FCR 395 at 398-399 [11].
R&B Investments Pty
Ltd v Blue Sky Alternative Investments Ltd (In liq) (Reserved Question)
(2024) 304 FCR 395 at 399 [14].
Legal Profession Uniform
Law Application Act 2014
NZYQ v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
(2023) 97 ALJR 1005 at
1011 [17]; 415 ALR 254 at 259, quoting
Wurridjal v The Commonwealth
(2009) 237 CLR 309 at 352 [70].
John v Federal
Commissioner of Taxation
(1989) 166 CLR 417 at 438-439.
See, eg, NSW LPUL,
R v Khazaal
[2012] HCA 26
; (2012) 246 CLR 601 at 613
See, eg, NSW LPUL,
R&B Investments Pty
Ltd v Blue Sky Alternative Investments Ltd (In liq) (Reserved Question)
(2024) 304 FCR 395 at 414 [85]-[86].
Owners of "Shin Kobe
Maru" v Empire Shipping Co Inc
(1994) 181 CLR 404 at 421. See also
Partners Pty Ltd (In liq) v Australian National Parks and Wildlife Service
[1995] HCA 36
; (1995) 184 CLR 301 at 316;
Wong v Silkfield Pty Ltd
[1999] HCA 48
; (1999) 199 CLR 255 at
[1994] HCA 20
; (1994) 181 CLR
583 at 601-602.
[2005] HCA 44
; (2005) 224 CLR 322.
[2005] HCA 44
; (2005) 224 CLR 322 at
BHP Group Ltd v Impiombato
[2022] HCA 33
; (2022) 276 CLR 611
RTF format (793 KB)
Signed PDF/A format