The Master Plumbers' and Mechanical Services Association of Australia - re s.576H - Commission may vary modern awards - application to vary the Plumbing and Fire Sprinklers Award 2010 [2009] AIRCFB 952 (31 December 2009)
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Workplace Relations Act 1996
—Commission may vary modern awards
The Master Plumbers’ and Mechanical Services Association of Australia
(AM2009/85)
PLUMBING AND FIRE SPRINKLERS AWARD 2010
JUSTICE GIUDICE, PRESIDENT
VICE PRESIDEN LAWLER
VICE PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT WATSON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT HARRISON
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT ACTON
COMMISSIONER SMITH
MELBOURNE, 31 DECEMBER 2009
This decision deals with an application by The Master Plumbers’ and Mechanical Services Association of Australia (MPMSAA) to
Plumbing and Fire Sprinklers Award 2010
(modern award). It also deals with a separate application to vary by the Master Plumbers’ Association of Queensland (MPAQ),
made in the form of a submission in respect of the MPMSAA application.
The MPMSAA submitted that its application is supported by the National Fire Industry Association (NFIA). The MPMSAA also submitted
that the application is supported by the Plumbing Division of the Communications, Electrical, Electronic, Energy, Information, Postal,
Plumbing and Allied Services Union of Australia (CEPU - Plumbing) save for the variation sought in respect of cl.18—Industry
specific redundancy scheme. In the absence of any submissions to the contrary, we have proceeded on the basis that the MPMSAA has
accurately reflected the position of those organisations. We accept also that the CEPU – Plumbing is completely opposed to
the application in relation to the industry specific redundancy scheme. We shall deal with the parts of the application under the
relevant subject matter.
Classification definitions
The MPMSAA proposes a number of variations to Schedule B—Classification Definitions:
(a) Clause B.1.2
(line 4): The MPMSAA application will replace “National Training Board/Australian National Training Authority” with “National
Quality Council
in order to up-date reference to the relevant training body.
(b) Clause B.1.3: The MPMSAA application will replace the existing subclause with the following:
means a module of training as defined within the relevant National Training Package. Training Packages are flexible national products
developed by industry through the relevant National Skills Council to ensure quality training outcomes and meet current and emerging
vocational skill needs. They form one of the foundation stones of the national training system. Designed to support a range of training
pathways, including workplace and school-based, and to provide for a more flexible approach to training delivery, they also play
a critical role in underpinning Australian Apprenticeships. All Training Packages incorporate national units of competency, assessment
guidelines and national qualifications. These components, endorsed by the National Quality Council (NQC), form the basis for the
assessment of competencies attained and the issuing of related national qualifications.”
This variation was said to be necessary to provide a contemporary meaning of “module”.
(c) Clause B.1.9(b): The MPMSAA application will replace “CTA”, which it submitted was obsolete, with “CPSISC”
in order to up-date reference to the relevant training body.
(d) Clause B.2.1(a): The MPMSAA application will place the sprinkler fitter’s assistant at Level l(d), rather than Level l(b),
as reflected in the award, to correct an error. It submitted that the sprinkler fitter’s assistant should be the same competency
classification as a plumber’s labourer, which is Level l(d).
(e) Clause B.2.l(c): The MPMSAA application substitutes “Tradesperson Level 1” for “Level 2”, to correct an
error and reflect the position in the existing award.
(f) Clause B.3.1(d): The MPMSAA submitted that “Plumber’s labourer” and “Sprinkler fitter’s assistant”
should replace “Victoria-plumber’s labourer”, to correct an error.”
We will make each of the variations sought to the Schedule B—Classification Definitions. The variations are supported by the
major industry parties and not otherwise opposed. They reflect either the replacement of obsolete references or the correction of
Clause B.2.1 will now read:
“Existing employees will translate into the new structure as follows:
Level l(d): Sprinkler fitter’s assistant;
Level l(d): Plumber’s labourer; or
Tradesperson Level 1: Plumber and Gasfitter—All States, Registered Drainer—South Australia, Roof Plumber (SA) and all
others, Irrigation Installer—All States, Drainer-Tasmania, Drainer—South Australia and First class sprinkler fitter.”
Clause B.3.1(d) will now read:
“The Plumbing and mechanical services worker/Sprinkler fitting worker Level l(d) classification incorporates the following translated
award classifications:
plumber’s labourer
sprinkler fitter’s assistant.”
Daily hire lost time loading
The MPMSAA proposed to correct errors in cl.20.4 by adding “and” to the end of roman numeral points within subclauses
(a)-(d), where they do not already appear, to ensure that the cumulative nature of the allowance is properly reflected in the award
in a manner which is clear and avoids misapplication. We will vary the modern award as sought.
Service work and on call
The MPMSAA submitted that the wording of the modern award has the potential to inadvertently extend the benefits which previously
only applied to fire sprinkler fitter employees to all employees. It proposes that the words “fire sprinkler fitter employee”
should be added to the clause headings and inserted in the first line of each clause. We agree. The variation will be made.
The clauses will read as follows:
31.2 Service work—fire sprinkler fitter employee
(a) A fire sprinkler fitter employee required to perform service work outside normal working hours for breakdown, accident or other
emergency work must be paid at the rate of double time.
(b) The calculation of the period of time of duty will include only the time reasonably occupied in travel or work between the time
of the employee’s departure from their normal place of residence and the time of their return thereto provided that:
(i) in the case of the first call-back in any one day an employee must be paid for at least a period of two hours at the rate of double
(ii) in the case of each subsequent call-back in the same day as for at least a period of one hour whether occurring within two hours
of the first call back or not.”
31.3 On call—fire sprinkler fitter employee
Where a fire sprinkler fitter employee is required to be on call outside the ordinary hours of work they will be readily contactable
by telephone at all relevant times during such stand-by and will be entitled to:
(a) Permanent stand-by on roster—an additional 6.8% of the weekly standard rate per week of seven days.
(b) For other than permanent stand-by on roster, each Monday to Friday on call—an additional 0.7% of the weekly standard rate
per night, and for each Saturday, Sunday or public holiday on call an additional 5% of the weekly standard rate per day.
(c) An employee’s telephone rental must be paid for by the employer.”
The MPMSAA sought to vary cl.10—Types of employment, to make it clear that plumbing and mechanical services apprentices are
not engaged on daily hire. We will vary the modern award as sought to replace the current cl.10.1 with:
Employees under this award will be employed in one of the following categories:
daily hire employees (plumbing and mechanical services classifications only);
full-time weekly hire employees (includes apprentices, both plumbing and mechanical services and fire sprinkler fitter apprentices
as required by clause 15.3);
part-time weekly hire employees; or
casual employees.”
The MPMSAA application seeks to vary cl.18—Industry specific redundancy scheme, to exclude the application of the clause to
small business employers within the meaning of
Fair Work Act 2009
Fair Work Act
The variation is in the form of a new subclause in cl.18 in the following terms:
“Provided further that in accordance with
s.121(l)(b)
of the Act the provisions of this clause and
of the Act shall not apply to an employer that is a small business employer as defined by
of the Act.”
The MPMSAA submitted that the legislative exemption from the redundancy provision for small business employers has operated since
March 2006 and has been preserved in the
Fair Work Act
. It submitted that whilst the terms of cl.18.1 properly apply the National Employment Standards (NES) as they existed at the time
the exposure draft of the modern award was published, they are inconsistent with the terms of the NES in relation to redundancy as
ultimately enacted in the
Fair Work Act
. The MPMSAA submitted that
Fair Work Act
excludes the payment of redundancy pay if the employer is a small business employer. Whilst acknowledging that
s.123(4)(b)
Fair Work Act
provides that Subdivision B does not apply when an industry specific redundancy scheme in a modern award applies to an employee (in
a similar way to
of the draft NES), it submitted that it was the intention of Parliament that small businesses should be exempted from the redundancy
requirement and that the industry specific scheme should apply to businesses other than small businesses. It submitted that the modern
award should incorporate a small business exemption in cl.18 in the form of its proposed new subclause.
The variation is supported by the NFIA.
The Australian Council of Trade Unions (ACTU), however, took issue with the application and the MPMSAA interpretation of the Act,
pointing out that the issue has ramifications for any award containing an industry specific redundancy scheme. The ACTU submitted
that the MPMSAA has misapplied the Act and ignored the Commission’s decision of 19 December 2008.
In relation to the operation of the
Fair Work Act
, the ACTU submitted that:
“Redundancy matters are dealt with in the NES, found at Chapter 2 –
– Division 11 of the FW Act.
Subdivision B of that Division deals specifically with the amount of redundancy pay and exclusions from the obligation to pay redundancy
Subdivision C deals with limits on the scope of Division 11 of the FW Act. In particular section 123(4) in subdivision C deals with
the circumstances in which subdivision B does not apply.
Section 123(4) states that:
(4) Subdivision B does not apply to
(b) an employee to whom an industry-specific redundancy scheme in a modern award applies.”
The ACTU submitted that there is nothing ambiguous about the effect of
Fair Work Act
. Subdivision B of the Act does not apply to an employee to whom an industry specific redundancy scheme applies and there is no construction
of the Act that suggests that industry specific redundancy schemes were intended to exclude from their application employees of small
business employers where this was not currently the case.
The ACTU also submitted that the terms of cl.18 are consistent with the decision of the Commission
to maintain the small business exemption as a general rule, subject to an exception for federal awards and industries in which there
was no small business exemption prior to the
Redundancy Case 2004.
The CEPU – Plumbing also opposed this variation. It advanced similar arguments as the ACTU and also submitted that the MPMSAA
was seeking to argue matters which were dealt with, or could have been dealt with in the consultations which preceded the making
of the award.
Master Builders Australia (MBA) foreshadowed a similar application to modify the industry specific redundancy scheme in the
Building and Construction Industry On-site Award 2010
in which it would rely on the Full Federal Court decision in
Yirra Pty Ltd (t/as Richmond Demolition and Salvage) v Summerton
We have reservations about the MPMSAA submissions concerning the interpretation of the NES, as enacted in the
Fair Work Act
. It is clear from
of that Act that Subdivision B, which deals with both the amount of redundancy pay and exclusions from the obligation to pay redundancy
does not apply to “an employee to whom an industry-specific redundancy scheme in a modern award applies”. This conclusion
is consistent with the Full Bench’s reasoning in its 3 April 2009 decision concerning redundancy provisions in building industry
awards. That decision was based on the NES as it was prior to its enactment in the
Fair Work Act
. That decision contains the following:
“Clause 64, which is in Subdivision C—Limits on scope of this Division – of the NES, provides that Subdivision B
does not apply to an employee covered by a modern award which includes an industry-specific redundancy scheme. While Subdivision
B sets out the circumstances in which the NES entitlement to redundancy pay arises and to the amount of the entitlement that sub-division
does not apply to an industry-specific redundancy scheme. It follows that an industry-specific redundancy scheme can deviate from
the NES redundancy prescription in relation to both the circumstances in which the benefits arise and the amount of the benefits.”
The argument foreshadowed by MBA was raised in the consultations and considered by the Full Bench in its 3 April 2009 decision.
Clause 18 of the modern award, in its current form and without the additional subclause proposed by the MPMSAA, is also consistent
with the Commission’s general approach to the question of small business exemption from redundancy pay in the making of modern
awards, recorded in the 19 December 2008 decision.
We see no reason to alter that approach or its application to the industry specific redundancy scheme in the building and construction
industry modern awards.
Updating references
The MPMSAA also applied to vary the references to the National Employment Standards throughout the modern award to reflect the provisions
Fair Work Act
. The modern award will be varied to that effect. An order will be issued separately.
Fire sprinkler fitters
The MPAQ proposed that the consolidated cl.21.1(f) should read as follows:
“21.1(f) Industry disability allowance and space, height and dirt money allowance—fire sprinkler fitter employees
Adult fire sprinkler fitter employees will receive the following additional weekly allowances for all purposes:
of weekly standard rate per week
Industry disability allowance
Space, height and dirt money
The variation was sought on the basis that the current wording has the potential to extend the benefits which under the relevant
pre-reform award only apply to fire sprinkler fitter employees to all employees. It sought to overcome this unintended effect by
adding the words “fire sprinkler fitter employees” to the clause headings and an insertion in the first line of the clause.
The allowance has its origins in cl.11.1.4—Industry disability allowance and space, height and dirt money allowance, in
Sprinkler Pipe Fitters’ Award 1998
The allowance was shown, in cl.21.2(b)(ii) of the exposure draft, as a fire sprinkler fitting allowance and appears to have been
translated in the final award as an allowance applying generally. In the absence of any submission contesting the MPAQ application,
we accept that the allowance, as currently stated, inadvertently extends its application. We will vary the modern award as sought
We will vary the modern award to give effect to the MPMSAA application in all respects, save for the proposal to vary cl.18 in relation
to the redundancy pay and small business employers, and to give effect to the variation sought by the MPAQ.
BY THE COMMISSION:
Print P6660.
Print P6658.
[2008] AIRCFB 1000
[2008] AIRCFB 1000
, at para 60.
, 26 March 2004.
[2009] AIRCFB 50
, at para 41.
[2009] FCAFC 50.
[2009] AIRCFB 345
at para 81.
[2008] AIRCFB 1000
, at para 60.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code C, MA000036 PR991656>
No downloadable files available