Khalil v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs [2025] HCA 33 (3 September 2025)
HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
GAGELER CJ,
EDELMAN, STEWARD, GLEESON, JAGOT AND BEECH‑JONES JJ
MOHAMED YOUSSEF HELMI KHALIL APPELLANT
MINISTER FOR
IMMIGRATION, CITIZENSHIP,
MIGRANT SERVICES AND MULTICULTURAL
& ANOR RESPONDENTS
Khalil v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant
Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2025] HCA 33
Date of Hearing: 1
Date of Judgment: 3 September
Appeal dismissed with costs.
On appeal from the Federal
Court of Australia
Representation
D J Hooke SC with J R
Murphy for the appellant (instructed by Zarifi Lawyers)
S P Donaghue KC,
Solicitor-General of the Commonwealth, with R S Francois and
W C H Randles for the first respondent (instructed by
Submitting appearance for the second
Notice: This copy of the Court's Reasons for Judgment is subject to formal
revision prior to publication in the Commonwealth Law
Khalil v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
Immigration – Visas
– Ministerial directions under s 499(1) of
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) – Where delegate of Minister refused to grant appellant partner
visa on character grounds – Where ministerial direction
in force at time
of refusal was Direction 65 – Where Direction 65 subsequently
revoked – Where appellant applied to then
Administrative Appeals Tribunal
("Tribunal") for review of delegate's decision – Where Direction 90
in force at time of Tribunal's
decision – Where Tribunal applied
Direction 90 and not Direction 65 – Whether Tribunal was
required to comply with direction
in force at time of its decision –
Whether appellant had accrued right to have Tribunal determine his review in
with direction in force at time of delegate's decision.
and phrases – "accrued right", "affected Act", "character grounds",
"family violence", "laws governing the exercise of
powers and discretions",
"legislative instrument", "merits review", "ministerial direction", "repeal or
amendment", "time of the
decision under review", "time of the exercise of the
relevant function or power".
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act
Legislation Act 2003
s 13(1)(a).
Migration Act 1958
GAGELER CJ,
GORDON, EDELMAN, STEWARD, GLEESON, JAGOT AND BEECH-JONES JJ. The
appellant is an Egyptian national who exercised his
statutory right to apply to
the then Administrative Appeals Tribunal ("the Tribunal") for a review of a
decision to refuse to grant
him a visa. The decision under review was made by a
delegate of the Minister administering the
Migration Act 1958
(Cth) ("the
Migration Act
") exercising the discretion conferred by
of that Act
to refuse to grant a visa on character grounds.
Section 499(2A)
required the Tribunal to comply with written directions about the
performance of its functions and the exercise of its powers given
Minister under
of that Act.
issue presented by this appeal is whether the Tribunal was required to comply
with the directions in force at the time of its
as the Full Court
of the Federal Court held in the decision under appeal, or with the directions
in force at an earlier point in
The appellant contends
that earlier time to be either the time of the making of the decision under
review or the time of the making
of the application for review.
reasons to be explained, the Full Court correctly construed
Migration Act
, read with Direction 90 as in force at the time of the Tribunal's
decision, to have required the Tribunal to comply with the direction
in force at
the time of its decision and correctly rejected the appellant's claim to have
accrued a right to have the Tribunal determine
his review in accordance with
earlier directions, so that
Acts Interpretation Act 1901
(Cth) ("the AIA") had no relevant operation. It follows that the appeal must be
Legal framework for decisions under s 501(1)
power conferred on the Minister by
Migration Act
to refuse to
grant a visa on character grounds is delegable pursuant to
of the Act.
, the delegate is, in the exercise of a power delegated under
, subject to the directions of the Minister.
Migration Act
empowers the Minister to give written directions to
a person or body having functions or powers under the Act if the directions are
Tribunal was such a body.
Section 499(2)
clarifies that
empower the Minister to give directions that would be inconsistent with the
Migration Act
or regulations made under the Act.
Section 499(2A)
states that
"[a] person or body must comply with a direction under [s 499(1)]".
relevant times,
Administrative Appeals Tribunal Act 1975
(Cth) ("the
") provided that an enactment may provide that
applications may be made to the Tribunal for review of decisions made in the
of powers conferred by that enactment.
Section 500(1)(b)
Migration Act
duly provided that applications may be made to the Tribunal for
review of decisions of a delegate of the Minister under
Section 25(6)
addressed the possibility of conflict between the
providing for Tribunal review, by stating that, if an Act provided for
applications to the Tribunal:
"(a) that Act may also include provisions adding to, excluding or modifying the
operation of any of the provisions of this Act in
relation to such applications;
(b) those provisions have effect subject to any provisions so included."
set out the Tribunal's powers in the following
"For the purpose of reviewing a decision, the Tribunal may exercise all the
powers and discretions that are conferred by any relevant
enactment on the
person who made the decision and shall make a decision in writing:
(a) affirming the decision under review;
(b) varying the decision under review; or
(c) setting aside the decision under review and:
(i) making a decision in substitution for the decision so set aside; or
(ii) remitting the matter for reconsideration in accordance with any directions
or recommendations of the Tribunal."
Background to the Tribunal's decision
April 2013, the appellant applied for a partner visa, sponsored by his then
spouse. Between November 2013 and January 2016, he
was convicted of several
offences. Of particular significance, in February 2014, he was convicted of an
offence of unlawful assault
occasioning bodily harm with circumstances of
aggravation and sentenced to undertake an Intensive Supervision Order ("ISO")
months. The assault was committed against his then spouse. In August
2014, he was found guilty of breaching the ISO and given a suspended
imprisonment order for six months and fined $500.
In January 2016, he was
convicted of possessing prohibited drugs with intent to sell or supply
(cannabis) and sentenced to 16 months'
imprisonment.
appellant's visa application was first refused by a delegate of the Minister in
November 2014, on the basis that he and his then
spouse were not in a genuine
and continuing relationship. In May 2016, the Tribunal set aside that decision
and remitted the application
for reconsideration. In November 2017, a
delegate of the Minister again refused the visa application, this time in the
exercise of
the discretion in
Migration Act
the delegate's decision was made, the direction in force under
Migration Act
was Direction 65. Among other things, Direction 65 specified
that, in deciding whether to refuse to grant a visa under
, there were
three primary considerations, being: (1) protection of the Australian community
from criminal or other serious conduct;
(2) the best interests of minor children
in Australia; and (3) expectations of the Australian community. The delegate
applied Direction
65 in making the decision.
appellant applied to the Tribunal for review of the delegate's decision in
December 2017. In December 2018, the then Minister
revoked Direction 65 and
replaced it with Direction 79 with effect from February 2019. Subsequently, in
March 2021, the then Minister
revoked Direction 79 and replaced it with
Direction 90 with effect from April 2021. Direction 90 identified, as a fourth
consideration in making a decision under
, whether conduct
engaged in by the visa applicant constituted "family violence". Direction 90
defined "family violence" to mean "violent,
threatening or other behaviour by a
person that coerces or controls a member of the person's family ... or causes
the family member
to be fearful", and specified an assault as an example of
behaviour that may constitute family violence. Direction 90 also contained
following guidance concerning family violence:
8.2 Family violence committed by the non-citizen
(1) The Government has serious concerns about conferring on non-citizens who
engage in family violence the privilege of entering
or remaining in Australia.
The Government's concerns in this regard are proportionate to the seriousness of
the family violence engaged
in by the non-citizen ...
(2) This consideration is relevant in circumstances where:
a) a non-citizen has been convicted of an offence, found guilty of an offence,
or had charges proven howsoever described, that involve
family violence; ..."
October 2022, applying Direction 90, the Tribunal decided to affirm the
delegate's decision of November 2017. The reasons for
the decision stated that,
"[h]aving weighed all relevant considerations individually and cumulatively",
the Tribunal decided to refuse
to grant the appellant a visa because the primary
considerations of protection of the Australian community, family violence
by the non-citizen, and expectations of the Australian community
"considerably outweigh[ed]" the combined weight to be given to the
consideration of the best interests of minor children in Australia and other
countervailing considerations. Concerning the
appellant's conduct constituting
family violence, the Tribunal found that the seriousness of the offending
conduct, coupled with
the Tribunal's assessment of the appellant's incomplete
insight into and rehabilitation regarding family violence offending, weighed
"moderately in favour of exercising the discretion to refuse" the appellant's
Judgments of the courts below
appellant applied to the Federal Court of Australia for judicial review of the
Tribunal's October 2022 decision. His grounds
of review included, relevantly,
that the Tribunal made a jurisdictional error by failing to comply with
Direction 65. The primary
judge, Moshinsky J, in deciding as a separate question
whether this ground of review was established, answered the question in the
Applying the
reasons of the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia in
Minister for Immigration and Border
primary judge rejected the appellant's argument that he had an accrued right to
have his application for review determined in
accordance with the substantive
law in force at the time of the appellant's application to the Tribunal,
including Direction 65.
Full Court (McDonald J, Katzmann and Dowling JJ agreeing) dismissed the
appellant's appeal, rejecting the appellant's submissions
was distinguishable or wrongly
and therefore
rejecting the appellant's argument that he had an accrued right to have his
application to the Tribunal determined
in accordance with the content of any
particular ministerial direction.
The general principle
power conferred on the Tribunal by
to exercise "all the
powers and discretions that are conferred by any relevant enactment" on the
original decision-maker indicated
that the Tribunal's task was to apply the laws
governing the exercise of powers and discretions in force at the time of the
as stated by Brennan J in
Esber v The
Commonwealth
on a rehearing de novo, the question for decision is whether an applicant should
be granted a right, the law as it then
exists is applied, not the law as it
existed at an earlier time". His Honour cited
Costello and Secretary, Department of
which the Tribunal applied air navigation orders that governed a statutory power
to issue a pilot's licence which were in force
at the time of the Tribunal's
decision, rather than the previous orders in force at the time of the decision
under review.
principle stated by Brennan J in
is consistent with the general
principle stated by Mason J in
Minister for Aboriginal Affairs v
Peko-Wallsend Ltd
that "an administrative decision-maker is required to make
[their] decision on the basis of material available to [them] at the time
decision is made".
Honour explained that principle as a "reflection of the fact that there may be
found in the subject-matter, scope and purpose
of nearly every statute
conferring power to make an administrative decision an implication that the
decision is to be made on the
basis of the most current material available to
the decision-maker".
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural and Indigenous Affairs; Ex
parte Applicants S134/2002
, Gaudron and Kirby JJ considered it "well
settled" that a review body invested with a review power similar to that
conferred by
"is required, in conducting that review, to apply the law
as it stands at the date of the
Shi v Migration Agents Registration Authority
Kirby J applied
Mason J's reasoning in
Peko-Wallsend
to conclude that the "merits review"
provided for by the
was to be conducted on the basis of the most up to
date evidence available.
"[I]t necessarily follows that the Tribunal is able to utilise all of the powers
enjoyed by the Authority at the time the Tribunal
makes its decision, including
powers that may have accrued to the Authority in the interval of time since the
original decision was
made. So much follows not only from general principles
governing the accretion of powers affecting dispositions of bodies such as
Tribunal but also from the power of 'substitution' granted by
s 43(1)(c)(i)
, Hayne and Heydon JJ likewise considered that, where nothing in the
provisions of the
Migration Act
fixed a particular time as the point at which a
migration agent's fitness to provide immigration assistance was to be assessed,
question for the Tribunal invited attention to the state of affairs as they
existed at the time the Tribunal made its
To the extent
that the dissenting reasons of Kiefel J can be read as stating that the Tribunal
was ordinarily required to apply the
law as it stood at the time of the decision
under review, her Honour's reasons must be rejected as inconsistent with those
v Australian Securities and Investments
not authority contrary to the proposition stated by Brennan J in
That case did not involve a repeal or amendment of the law applied by the
original decision-maker, but rather the different question
of whether the
Tribunal's powers extended to considering spent convictions that the original
decision-maker was prohibited from considering.
statement by
three of the Justices in
, that the Tribunal "should ordinarily
approach its task as though it were performing the relevant function of the
original decision-maker
in accordance with the law as it applied to the
decision-maker at the time of the original
replicated in the judgment of the other four Justices
principle that the Tribunal was to apply the laws governing the exercise of
powers and discretions in force at the time of the
Tribunal's decision may be
displaced by a provision of an enactment excluding or modifying
, as contemplated by
of that Act. If not displaced, the
principle requires the Tribunal to apply all relevant laws in force at the time
of the Tribunal's
decision including any relevant saving or transitional
Section 499(2A) conforms to the general
Migration Act
conforms to the principle stated by Brennan J in
. Importantly, the provision applied to the Tribunal directly, not
derivatively by reason of the Tribunal standing in the shoes of
the delegate.
The requirement of
that a body, which included the Tribunal, "must
comply with a direction" under
, cast as it is in the present tense, can
only be understood as a requirement to comply with a direction in force at the
time of the
exercise of the relevant function or power. Through
direction-making power conferred by
facilitates the consistent, but not
inflexible, application of government policy and practice as it may be expected
to change from
time to time.
90 provided, in terms, that "[t]his Direction commences on 15 April 2021".
Being required by
to comply with a direction under
Tribunal that made the October 2022 decision was required to comply with
Direction 90, being the direction then in force. The
Tribunal was not required
to comply with Direction 65, which had been revoked and had no legal effect
on and from the date of its revocation. There is nothing in the
statutory provisions or any relevant direction that made the direction
in the decision under review applicable to the Tribunal's
Absence of an accrued right
follows that the appellant's contention that he had an accrued right to a review
by the Tribunal in accordance with Direction
65 must fail. In the absence of
such a right, the appellant's attempt to rely upon
of the AIA goes
Section 7(2)
of the AIA provides that "[i]f an Act ... repeals or
amends an Act (the
affected Act
) or a part of an Act, then the
repeal or amendment does not ... (c) affect any right, privilege,
obligation or liability acquired,
accrued or incurred under the affected Act or
part; or ... (e) affect any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in
any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture
or punishment".
Section 7(2)
continues by providing that "[a]ny such
investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or
enforced ... as
if the affected Act or part had not been repealed or
of the AIA relevantly provides that "[i]f a provision confers ... the
power to make an instrument other than a legislative instrument
... then: [the
AIA] applies to any instrument so made as if it were an Act". For that purpose,
"legislative instrument" has the same
meaning as in the
Legislation Act
(Cth) ("the
makes parallel provision to
of the AIA in respect of a provision
which confers the power to make a legislative instrument.
recognised in
those provisions is engaged by the repeal or amendment of a direction under
Migration Act
Section 7(2)(c)
and (e) of the AIA are plainly not
engaged for the reason that the repeal or amendment of a direction is not the
repeal or amendment
of an Act or a part of an Act. Neither
of the LA is engaged, as the legal effect of a direction under
Migration Act
is limited to the obligation to comply imposed by
of that Act. A direction confers no legal right or privilege and imposes
no legal obligation such as might be said to be acquired,
appeal must be dismissed with
Direction No 90 – Visa
refusal and cancellation under
section 501
and revocation of a mandatory
cancellation of a visa under
section 501CA
dated 8 March 2021.
Relevantly, Direction No 65
– Visa refusal and cancellation under
and revocation of a mandatory
cancellation of a visa under
dated 22 December 2014.
Khalil v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
Khalil (FCA)
") at [3]-[7].
[2016] FCAFC 48
; (2016) 241 FCR 461.
Khalil (FCA)
Khalil v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2024] FCAFC 119
305 FCR 26 at 35
, 39 [61], 54 [129]-[130].
Subject to any provision excluding
or modifying
in another enactment, as contemplated by
[1992] HCA 20
; (1992) 174 CLR 430 at 448.
[1979] AATA 184
; (1979) 2 ALD 934.
[1979] AATA 184
; (1979) 2 ALD 934 at 944.
(1986) 162 CLR 24 at 45.
(1986) 162 CLR 24 at 45.
(2003) 211 CLR 441 at 464
[2008] HCA 31
; (2008) 235 CLR 286 at 300
[2008] HCA 31
; (2008) 235 CLR 286 at 304
[2008] HCA 31
; (2008) 235 CLR 286 at 315-316
[2019] HCA 16
; (2019) 266 CLR 250.
[2019] HCA 16
; (2019) 266 CLR 250 at 257
Acts Interpretation Act
[2016] FCAFC 48
; (2016) 241 FCR 461 at 474
RTF format (293 KB)
Signed PDF/A format