Shergil v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship [2025] FedCFamC2G 1864 (13 November 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 2)
Shergil v Minister for Immigration and
Citizenship
[2025] FedCFamC2G 1864
File number(s):
SYG 1024 of 2022
Judgment of:
JUDGE D HUMPHREYS
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
MIGRATION –
Administrative Appeals
Tribunal – Employer Nomination (Permanent) (Class EN) (subclass 186) visa
– Two grounds of judicial
review – Whether the Tribunal's decision
was unreasonable – Whether the Tribunal failed to consider relevant
information
– Grounds of judicial review have no merit – Remitting
the matter would be futile – Application dismissed with
Legislation:
Migration Act 1958
Migration Regulations 1994
(Cth) Reg 5.19, cl 187.233 of Schedule
Cases cited:
Djokovic v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 3
Kaur v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2023] FedCFamC2G 45
Minister for Immigration & Citizenship v Li
[2013] HCA 18
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS
[2010] HCA 16
Shah v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2022] FedCFamC2G 882
Singh v MIBP
[2017] FCAFC 105
SZBYR v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(2007) 235 ALR
WZATH v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2014] FCCA
Division 2 General Federal Law
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicants:
Self-represented Litigant
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Ms Chandra, Hunt & Hunt Lawyers
Solicitor for the Second Respondent:
Submitting appearance, save as to costs
SYG 1024 of 2022
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 2)
SUKHJEEVAN KAUR SHERGILL
CHAMKAUR SHERGILL
Second Applicant
(and another named in the Schedule)
Third Applicant
MINISTER FOR IMMIGRATION AND
CITIZENSHIP
First Respondent
ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS
Second Respondent
JUDGE D HUMPHREYS
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
name of the First Respondent be amended to ‘
Minister for Immigration
and Citizenship
Application is dismissed.
First Applicant is to pay the First Respondent costs fixed in the sum of
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: The Court may vary or set aside a judgment or
order to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 24.04(g)
Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 2) (General Federal Law) Rules 2025
or to record a variation to the order pursuant to
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 2)
(General Federal Law) Rules 2025
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUDGE D HUMPHREYS
INTRODUCTION
is an Application for judicial review of a decision of the then Administrative
Appeals Tribunal
(the Tribunal) dated 15 June 2022, affirming a decision
of a delegate of the first respondent (the delegate) to refuse to grant the
applicants an Employer Nomination (Permanent) (Class EN) (subclass 186) visa
(the visa).
the reasons set out below, the Application must be dismissed.
first applicant (the applicant) is a citizen of India. The secondary applicants
are the applicant’s husband and two children.
23 February 2018, the applicant lodged an application for the visa to work in
the nominated position of Human Resource Manager
for Tarose Resources Pty Ltd
(the Nominator).
14 October 2019, the delegate refused to grant the nomination made by the
1 November 2019, the Nominator applied to the Tribunal for review of the
delegate’s refusal of its nomination application.
14 November 2019, the delegate refused to grant the applicants the visa as the
applicant did not meet cl 187.233 of Schedule 2
Migration Regulations
Regulations
1 December 2019, the applicants applied to the Tribunal for review of the
delegate’s decision to refuse to grant the applicants
12 October 2021, the Tribunal affirmed the delegate’s decision not to
grant the Nominator’s nomination in respect of
the Human Resources Manager
position for the applicant.
24 February 2022, the Tribunal invited the applicants to attend a hearing on 8
April 2022. The applicants were advised to provide
evidence they intended to
rely on by 1 April 2022.
3 March 2022, the Tribunal sent the applicants a letter pursuant to
Migration Act 1958
inviting them to comment on, comment on, or respond to, information which would,
subject to their comments or respond to,
information which would be, subject to
their comments or response, the reason or a part of the reason, for affirming
the decision
under review to refuse their Subclass 186 visa application. The s
359 A letter invited the applicant to provide further information.
31 March 2022, the applicants’ representatives responded to the
letter by providing submissions outlining the applicant’s understanding of
the circumstances leading to refusal of the Company’s
nomination and the
fact that she wished to proceed with another employer who was ready and willing
to provide her with a nomination.
31 March 2022, the Tribunal advised the applicants that the submissions provided
did not address the issues raised in the
letter. The Tribunal advised the
applicants that it would allow them to formally address the issues raised in the
letter at the hearing on 8 April 2022. The Tribunal also invited the
applicants to submit further evidence in support of a possible
referral of the
matter to the Minister pursuant to
8 April 2022, the Tribunal notified the applicants that the scheduled hearing
was cancelled.
12 April 2022, the Tribunal invited the applicants to attend a rescheduled
hearing on 3 May 2022. On 3 May 2022, the applicant
and her representative
appeared before the Tribunal.
12 May 2022, the applicants’ representatives provided further written
submissions and documentary evidence to the Tribunal.
15 June 2022, the Tribunal affirmed the delegate’s decision to refuse to
grant the applicants the visa and made a referral
to the Minister pursuant to
THE TRIBUNAL’S DECISION
the commencement of the Tribunal hearing, the Tribunal outlined the information
set out in its
letter and the fact that, as there was no approved
nomination, and given a nomination is a once-off process as confirmed by the
Court’s decision in
Singh v MIBP
[2017] FCAFC 105
), it had no discretion and must affirm the delegate’s
decision to refuse the applicants’ Subclass 186 visa application
applicant acknowledged the Tribunal’s comments in this regard [12].
applicant informed the Tribunal that her current employer was willing and able
to sponsor her [13]. The Tribunal reiterated that,
consistent with the decision
, nomination is a one-off process, and that the position to which
the visa application related to was the position nominated by the
under reg 5.19 of the
Regulations
. The applicant acknowledged the
Tribunal’s comments in this regard.
[19], the Tribunal outlined that as the nomination application made by the
Nominator for the position of Human Resource Manager
to which the
applicant’s visa application related to had not been approved, it followed
that she did not meet the criteria
in cl 186.223(2) of Schedule 2 to the
Regulations
the applicant made no claims in respect of the other visa streams, the Tribunal
noted that the decision under review must be affirmed
[21], the Tribunal noted that as the secondary applicants relied on being
members of the family unit of a person who met the primary
criteria, the
Department’s decision to refuse the applications of the second named
applicant, the third named applicant and
the fourth named applicant must also be
found that the delegate’s decision must be affirmed, as the applicant
could not meet cl 186.223 of Schedule 2 to the
Regulations
, the Tribunal
considered whether this was an appropriate case to refer to the Minister.
[22] – [32], having regard to the circumstances of the matter, including
that the applicant’s two young children had
been born in Australia, had
grown up in Australia, and the fact that they both attend a local school in
Blacktown, as well as the
applicants’ conversion to Christianity and,
thereby, the potential for persecution should they return to India, the Tribunal
accepted that this matter may have involved unique or exceptional circumstances.
Accordingly,
at [33], the Tribunal affirmed the decision not to grant the applicants the visa
and referred the matter to the Minister.
GROUNDS OF JUDICIAL REVIEW
applicants advance two grounds of judicial review contained in an Originating
Application filed with the Court on 11 July 2022.
They are as follows:
decision of the Tribunal not to grant a visa subclass 186 (employer nomination)
is unreasonable.
visa arrived without considering information relevant to the applicant’s
case, and thereby, the second respondent’
affirmed, that the
Delegation’s decision was unjustified and unreasonable and was decided
without the applicant being provided
with due process of law.
THE APPLICANT’S SUBMISSIONS
applicant appeared before the Court unrepresented. She also appeared on behalf
of the other applicants, being her husband and
children. She was not assisted by
an interpreter. The Court was satisfied that the applicant’s English
skills were more than
sufficient for her to fully participate in the
to the hearing commencing, the Court ensured that the applicant was in
possession of a copy of the relevant Court Books and
that the respondent’s
written submissions had been provided to her and she understood them. The Court
also ensured that the
applicant had access to a pen and paper so she could take
notes during the course of the hearing, should she wish to.
the commencement of the hearing, the Court explained that it was undertaking
judicial review, not merits review, and the difference
between the two types of
review. The Court also explained the procedure by which the hearing would be
undertaken.
Court orders, no written submissions or other material were provided to the
Court by the applicant in support of her case.
The Court carefully explained
that there was a significant difficulty with her case in that, without an
employer sponsor, the applicant
could not be granted an employer-sponsored
even if a jurisdictional error did exist in the Tribunal’s decision, which
was not at that point apparent to the Court,
it would be futile to send the
matter back to the Tribunal for reconsideration, as the Tribunal would be bound
to make the same decision.
applicant was taken to the grounds of judicial review and asked to articulate
what jurisdictional error was present in the Tribunal’s
decision. The
applicant was unable to articulate any error. At best, she felt the decision was
the conclusion of the respondent’s oral submissions, the applicant was
asked if she wished to state anything in reply. She
THE FIRST RESPONDENT’S SUBMISSIONS
Ground One, the applicants allege that the Tribunal's decision was unreasonable.
No particulars have been provided. The failure
to provide particulars is a
sufficient basis for the ground to be dismissed:
WZATH v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2014] FCCA 612.
a decision which lacked “an evident and intelligible justification”
can be drawn as unreasonableness:
Minister for Immigration & Citizenship
[2013] HCA 18
; a decision cannot be said to be unreasonable, simply
because one conclusion has been preferred to another possible conclusion:
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship v SZMDS
[2010] HCA 16.
Tribunal affirmed the delegate’s decision on the basis that the associated
nomination application submitted by the Nominator
had been refused. The
applicants were afforded multiple opportunities to respond to that adverse
information.
the visa application, the applicant was nominated for the position of Human
Resources Manager under Reg 5.19. The Tribunal correctly
noted at [17] of its
decision that cl 186.223 of the
Regulations
requires that the nominated
position be the subject of an approved nomination under the Temporary Residence
Transition stream, and
that position must be one that was the subject of the
declaration that was required to be made as part of the current visa
application.
the circumstances where the company's nomination was refused, the Tribunal
correctly made the finding that there was no approved
nomination related to the
applicants' visa application. Consequently, the first applicant did not meet the
criteria in cl 186.223(3)
of Schedule 2 to the
Regulations
Tribunal further noted that the applicant had only sought to satisfy the
criteria for subclass 186 visa in the Temporary Residence
Transition stream and
made no claims under any other visa stream. Accordingly, the Tribunal was
correct in affirming the decision
under review.
such, there is no indication that the Tribunal's decision appears to be
unreasonable, illogical, or legally flawed.
Ground Two, the applicants allege that the Tribunal failed to consider relevant
information.
a failure to take into account a relevant consideration can constitute a
particulars as to which
considerations were allegedly overlooked.
visa criteria operate cumulatively, a failure to satisfy any one of the criteria
means the overall criteria cannot be met:
Shah v Minister for Immigration,
Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FedCFamC2G 882.
The only issue
before the Tribunal was whether the applicant satisfied the requirements of cl
186.223 at the time of the decision,
which does not contain any discretionary
considerations that would have allowed the Tribunal to consider other matters:
Kaur v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2023] FedCFamC2G 45.
Tribunal considered the applicants' evidence before it and found that there was
no approved nomination. Nevertheless, the Tribunal
invited the applicants to
provide additional information after the hearing so that it could consider
whether to refer the matter
to the Minister. The Tribunal did consider the
applicants' evidence submitted following the hearing in the context of potential
Ministerial
intervention.
the extent that Ground Two relates to the decision of the delegate, the Court
has no jurisdiction to review the delegate's decision
by reason of ss 476(2)(a)
and (4)(a) of the
CONSIDERATION
Djokovic v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCAFC 3
, the task of a court conducting
judicial review was described in this manner:
... An application for judicial review is one in which the judicial branch of
government reviews, by reference to legality or lawfulness,
the decision or
decisions of the Executive branch of government, here in the form of a decision
of the Minister. The Court does
not consider the merits or wisdom of the
decision; nor does it remake the decision. The task of the Court is to rule
upon the lawfulness
or legality of the decision by reference to the complaints
made about it.
difficulty in this case is that the applicant lacks an essential criterion for
the grant of the visa sought. Pursuant to cl 186.223
Regulations
to be granted an Employer Nomination (Permanent) (Class EN) (Subclass 186) visa,
the applicant must have an approved employer nomination.
The applicant does not.
The Tribunal refused the nomination application made by her employer on 12
October 2021.
is common ground that the applicant lacks such a nomination. In these
circumstances, the Tribunal had no option other than to affirm
the decision
under review.
even if jurisdictional error exists, which is denied by the first respondent, it
would be futile to remit the matter back
to the Tribunal for further
consideration, as it would be required to make the same decision.
accept the submission of the first respondent that the Court should not exercise
its discretion in remitting the matter as it would
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
(2007) 235 ALR 609.
applicants’ claim cannot be cured by lodging a new nomination application:
at [82]–[90]. As there is no evidence that the nominator had
sought judicial review of the nomination refusal, the applicant
cannot satisfy
cl 186.223 of Schedule 2 to the
Regulations
. The Court agrees with this
submission.
grounds of judicial review simply plead that the Tribunal's decision was
unreasonable or that it was arrived at without the applicant
being provided with
due process of law. No particulars are provided. The applicant was unable, in
oral submissions, to point to any
grounds have no merit. There is nothing legally unreasonable in the Tribunal
arriving at the decision it did. It was the only
decision open to it in the
factual circumstances of the case.
am further satisfied there was no procedural error in the manner in which the
Tribunal considered the matter. The applicant was
invited to a hearing, which
she attended. She had the opportunity to give evidence and make submissions. She
was clearly aware of
the issues in her case, as evidenced by the provision of a
s 359A letter. The Application must be dismissed.
the applicant is unrepresented, the Court has perused the relevant Court Books
and associated documentation. No other jurisdictional
error is apparent.
the secondary applicant’s visas are dependent upon the applicant being
granted her visa, their Applications must also be
DETERMINATION
these circumstances, the Application must be dismissed.
I certify that the preceding fifty-six (56)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of Judge D
Dated: 13 November 2025
SYG 1024 of
Fourth Applicant:
PRABHSIMAR SHERGILL
RTF format (381 KB)
Signed PDF/A format