Review and Visa Applicant: Min Seok Hur IRT Reference: Q98/02565 #number 13390 [1999] IRTA 13390 (27 January 1999)
IMMIGRATION REVIEW TRIBUNAL
STATEMENT OF DECISION
AND REASONS FOR DECISION
IRT REFERENCE Q98/02565 13390.doc
Mr Min Seok HUR
VISA APPLICANT:
Steve KARAS
Presiding Member
DECISION: The Tribunal pursuant to
Section 349
Migration Act 1958
this matter for reconsideration with the direction that the Applicant has
satisfied all the prescribed criteria for a Subclass
560 Student visa with the
exception of the prescribed public interest criteria.
APPLICATION FOR REVIEW
This is an application by Mr Min Seok Hur (the Applicant) made on 4 November
1998 for the review of a decision dated 3 June 1998
by a delegate of the
Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs refusing to grant him a
Student (Temporary) (Class TU) Subclass
560 visa to enable him to remain in
Australia. This decision was affirmed by the Migration Internal Review Office
(MIRO) on 8 October
The Applicant arrived in Australia on 19 August 1994 as the holder of a Student
Subclass 560 visa enabling him to remain in Australia.
Extensions of his
student visa were granted to him until 15 March 1998.
The Applicant was born in Korea on 1 July 1978 and is a citizen of that
country. He is not married.
On 11 February 1998 the Applicant lodged an application Form 157Y for a Student
(Temporary) (Class TU) visa, at the office of the
Department of Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs (the Department). Attached to the Application was a copy
confirmation of his
enrolment with TAFE Queensland International to do a
Certificate II course in Hospitality (Food and Beverage) and a Diploma in
Hospitality
Management to conclude on 30 June 2000. An undated letter from the
Applicant referred to his and his parents past difficulties that
improving and of his
"need of study harder and get into University"
On 26 February 1998 the Bond University English Language Institute notified the
Department that the Applicant had
"not satisfied course requirements"
However his current student visa at the time was not cancelled.
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
On 24 March 1998 a delegate of the Minister, in Southport, advised the
Applicant that his application for a Subclass 560 visa had
been refused. The
delegate was unable to find that the Applicant satisfied clauses 560.213 and
560.224 of the Migration Regulations.
A copy of the decision was handed to the
Applicant on 3 June 1998.
On 22 June 1998 the Applicant applied to MIRO for a review of the decision to
refuse his application for a Subclass 560 (Student)
Further material was submitted to the Department by the Applicant's
The earlier decision to refuse the Applicant's visa application was affirmed by
MIRO on 8 October 1998.
The Tribunal's jurisdiction to review the decision refusing the Applicant's
visa arises from the provisions of the
Migration Act 1958
as amended by the
Migration Reform Act 1992
which entered into force on 1 September 1994.
of the Act as amended deals with the review of decisions and creates several
categories of reviewable decisions. These categories
listed in section 337 are
reviewable by Departmental officers whilst others are subject to
both internal review and review by this Tribunal, and a further
category are
reviewable only by the Tribunal. Section 346 of the Act describes the
decisions which may be reviewed by the Tribunal
346.(1) Subject to subsection (2), the following decisions are IRT-reviewable
(a) decisions made by a review officer under section 341;
reviewable decisions made by the Minister personally;
(c) decisions covered by paragraph (c) or (d) of the definition of
reviewable decision;
(d) other decisions prescribed to be IRT-reviewable decisions.
In the present case the decision is a
reviewable decision and was
subject to internal review. Therefore, as the decision is one made by a review
officer pursuant to section
341, it becomes an IRT-reviewable decision under
subsection 346(1) (a) of the Act.
LEGISLATION
Item 1222 of
of Schedule 1 of the Regulations sets out the various
subclasses of visas in respect to the Student (Temporary) (Class TU) visa as
560 (Student)
562 (Iranian Postgraduate)
563 (562 Dependant)
The criteria for these subclasses are set out under Schedule 2 of the
Regulations. So far as is relevant to the Applicant, Subclass
560 which deals
with the student subclass provided that:
560.21 Criteria to be satisfied at time of application
560.211 . . .
(1) If the application is made in Australia, the applicant:
(a) is the holder of a visa of one of the following classes:
(M) a Student (Temporary) (Class TU);.....
(b) is not the holder of a substantive visa and meets the
requirements of subclause (2) or (3).
(2) An applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the last substantive visa held by the applicant was a Student (Temporary)
(b) documents relevant to the establishment of the applicant's eligibility for
the grant of the substantive visa applied for were
given to Education or to an
Australian educational institution before the expiry of the substantive visa
mentioned in paragraph
(c) the application is made within 12 months of the expiry of that visa.
(3) An applicant meets the requirements of this subclause if:
(a) the last substantive visa held by the applicant was:
(i) a visa of one of the following classes:
(A) Border (Temporary) (Class TA);
(B) Business (Temporary) (Class TB);
(C) Cultural/Social (Temporary) (Class TE);
(D) Educational (Temporary) (Class TH);
(E) Electronic Travel Authority (Class UD);
(F) Expatriate (Temporary) (Class TJ);
(G) Family Relationship (Temporary) (Class TL);
(H) Interdependency (Temporary) (Class TM);
(I) Long Stay (Visitor) (Class TN);
(J) Medical Practitioner (Temporary) (Class UE);
(K) Retirement (Temporary) (Class TQ);
(L) Short Stay (Visitor) (Class TR);
(M) Student (Temporary) (Class TU);
(N) Supported Dependent (Temporary) (Class TW);
(O) Temporary Business Entry (Class UC);
(P) Working Holiday (Temporary) (Class TZ); or
(ii) a Diplomatic (Temporary) (Class TF) visa granted to diplomatic or
consular representative of a foreign country; or
(iii) a special purpose visa; or
(iv) a visa of one of the following subclasses:
(A) Subclass 303 (Emergency (Temporary Visa Applicant));
(B) Subclass 427 (Domestic Worker (Temporary) - Executive); and
(b) the applicant satisfies Schedule 3 criteria 3001 and 3005.
560.213 If the application is made in Australia, the applicant has complied
substantially with the conditions to which the visa (if
any) held, or last
held, by the applicant is, or was, subject.
560.22 Criteria to be satisfied at time of decision
560.222 The applicant:
(a) produces to the Minister evidence of enrolment to undertake a
full-time course of study that:
(i) is a registered course; or
(ii) comprises a unit or units of a registered course but does
not lead to the grant of an award in Australia, or
(b) produces to the Minister evidence of enrolment to undertake a
full-time course of study:
(i) as an exchange student; or
(ii) as a student under a scholarship scheme or training
program approved by AusAID; or
(iii) as a private subsidised student, with the approval of the
Education Minister, or
(c) if the application is made in Australia, the applicant:
(i) was, at the time of application, the holder of a subclass
560 or 562 visa; and
(ii) satisfies the Minister that, in connection with a
registered course or with a matter arising from that
(A) the relevant educational institution requires the
applicant to remain in Australia during the
marking of a post-graduate thesis; or
(B) the applicant is required to gain practical
employment experience after graduation to
obtain registration in a profession in which
registration is a prerequisite for the practice of
the profession in the applicant's usual country of
residence. . . . .
(1) Subject to subclauses (4) and (5), the Minister is satisfied that the
applicant is a genuine applicant for entry and stay as
a student, having
(a) to the financial ability of the applicant to undertake the
course without contravening any condition of the visa
relating to work ;
(b) subject to subclauses (2) and (3), to the applicant's
comprehension of English for the purposes of the course;
(c) to whether the applicant intends to comply with any
conditions subject to which the visa is granted; and
(d) to any other relevant matter.
(2) If the Minister has regard to the applicant's comprehension of English, the
Minister may require the applicant to undertake an
English language test that
is conducted by an agency other than Immigration.
(3) If the applicant is required to undertake a test and does not undertake it,
or does not pass it, the Minister is not to grant
the visa. . . . .
560.225 The applicant:
(a) satisfies public interest criteria 4001 to 4005, 4013 and 4014;
(b) if the applicant seeks to stay in Australia for 12 months or
more, satisfies public interest criterion 4010; and
(c) if applying outside Australia and the applicant has previously
been in Australia, satisfies special return criteria 5001, 5003,
5005 and 5007 to 5009.
560.226 The applicant produces to the Minister evidence of adequate
arrangements in Australia for health insurance during the period
applicant's intended stay in Australia.
560.227 If the application is made in Australia, the applicant continues to
satisfy the criterion in clause 560.213.
The Department's file relating to this application has been made available to
the Tribunal and along with the various submissions
and documents lodged in
support of the application for review form part of the evidence in this
A hearing was held in Brisbane on 23 December 1998. The Applicant attended and
gave sworn oral evidence to the Tribunal. He was
assisted by his adviser, a
registered migration agent and an interpreter was present to assist the
The Applicant referred to his past
and how he had transferred
courses. He had completed a Foundation course at Bond University in 1997.
Reference was made to his coming
to Australia and attending high school before
enrolling in another Foundation course. He has completed some TAFE subjects as
The Applicant referred to his and his families difficulties and how he was
unable to concentrate on his studies. He has not worked
in Australia and
relies on his parents support from Korea.
Reference was made to robberies at his place of residence and how he has
reported the earlier robberies to the Police. He was living
in a flat with
other Korean students on the Gold Coast.
The Applicant's parents reside in Korea with his sister and his older brother
is now a student in Australia. The Applicant had also
suffered ill health and
this affected his attendances and studies. The Applicant spoke of his stay,
studies and the like in Australia
and of his future intentions. With his
brother now here, his position is more
"comfortable"
. His attendances
in 1998 at his place of study were good he stated.
The adviser referred to the Applicant's situation and how his attendances had
been good earlier on. The attendances suffered when
he was experiencing
difficulties and ill health and have improved again. His parents are able to
support him and his brother here.
The Applicant understands his position and
wishes to continue his studies in Australia.
Further material was provided to the Tribunal including medical documentation,
police reports and certificates of attendance by the
After the hearing the Applicant's advisers in a letter dated 24 December 1998,
indicated that he was now enrolled at Martin College
for a one year Diploma of
Business course and that he had purchased current medical insurance cover with
Medibank Private.
At the time of the Application the Applicant was the holder of a Subclass 560
(Student) visa. He therefore satisfies clause 560.212
of the Regulations.
The Tribunal notes that the Applicant has been accepted as a student with
Martin College. He has paid his fees for the Diploma of
Business course and
the College has issued him with a
"confirmation of enrolment for overseas
on 23 December 1998.
The Applicant had referred to past difficulties involving himself and his
family. His flat had been robbed a number of occasions
and police reports
confirmed this. He has suffered some ill health. However the Tribunal notes
that his and his family's situation
has improved. His older brother is
presently with him in Australia and last year his course attendances were
satisfactory.
The Applicant is a young man over 20 years of age who is now determined to
complete his studies here. Should he transgress in the
future the possible
cancellation of his visa would mean the end of his studies here and his
inability to complete his intentions
and expectations. He accepts the
seriousness of his predicament. He needs to continue to satisfy his course
requirements to maintain
his student visa and honour the conditions imposed on
it. He is aware of the need to study to achieve his ambition and is thankful
'another chance"
to complete his studies.
In the circumstances the Tribunal finds on balance that the Applicant satisfies
the criteria for the visa applied for except for
the public interest criteria
referred to in clause 560.225.
In accordance with usual practice the Tribunal will remit this matter to the
Department for further processing.
The Tribunal remits this matter for reconsideration with the direction that the
Applicant has satisfied all the prescribed criteria
for a Subclass 560 Student
visa with the exception of the prescribed public interest criteria.
I certify that this and the 9 preceeding pages are a true copy of the Decision
and Reasons for Decision of Steve Karas.
Tribunal Officer
Date: 27 January 1999
RTF format (53.2 KB)
Signed PDF/A format