Mohammadi and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs (Migration) [2025] ARTA 2413 (13 November 2025)
Mohammadi and Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs (Migration) [2025] ARTA 2413 (13 November
Applicant/s: Hadi Mohammadi
Respondent: Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
Tribunal Number: 2025/4727
Tribunal: General Member R Cameron
Place: Melbourne
Date: 13 November 2025
The Tribunal sets aside the decision under review and in
substitution decides:
The Applicant’s Class BC, Subclass 100 Partner Visa is
....................
.................
General Member R Cameron
Migration Act 1958-501(2) – Character test s 501(6)(e) –
Applicant convicted of a sexually based offence involving a child
cancelled – whether the discretion in s 501(2) to cancel the visa should
be exercised – reviewable decision
Legislation
Migration Act 1958
Crimes Act 1958
Sex Offenders Registration Act 2004
LGC 24 v Minister for Immigration & Citizenship
[2025] FCA 1023
Plaintiff M1/2021 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 27
(2022) 275 CLR 582
, [30] and [38]
FYBR v Minister for Home Affairs
(2019) 272 FCR 454
YNQY v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2017] FCA 1466
Kelly v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services and
Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCA 396
Plaintiff M1/2021 v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 27
(2022) 275 CLR 582
, [30] and [38]
Secondary Materials
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (“DFAT”) Thematic Report
on Political and Security Developments in Afghanistan
(August 2021 to January
UNHCR Guidance Note on Afghanistan (Update11), September 2025
“Country Policy and Information Note Afghanistan: Fear of the
Version 5.0, August 2025, United Kingdom, Home Office.
DFAT COUNTRY INFORMATION REPORT AFGHANISTAN
, 27 June 2019
Statement of Reasons
INTRODUCTION
Applicant seeks a review of a decision made on 18 August 2025 under s 501(2) of
Migration Act 1958
(“the Act”) to cancel his
Class BC, Subclass 100 Partner Visa (“the
visa”) (“the reviewable decision”).
Applicant is a citizen of Afghanistan. Following the grant of the visa, he
arrived in Australia on 10 August 2017 with his mother
and two brothers. He is
presently 28 years of age.
THE EVIDENCE BEFORE THE
was both documentary and oral evidence before the Tribunal.
following witnesses gave oral evidence:
The Applicant;
Mohammad Mohammadi;
Mehdi Mohammadi;
Habibullah Mohammadi; and
Dr Kwok, a clinical and forensic phycologist.
for documentary evidence, there was tendered in evidence the hearing book
prepared by the Respondent’s lawyers (‘HB’).
The HB was a
collation of the “G” documents, the Applicant’s bundle of
annexures, the Respondent’s bundle,
and the Respondent’s
supplementary bundle together with a report prepared by Dr Kwok dated 6 October
2025. Additionally, the
parties tendered a copy of the “
DFAT THEMATIC
REPORT ON POLITICAL AND SECURITY DEVELOPMENTS IN AFGHANISTAN (AUGUST 2021 TO
JANUARY 2022)
also tendered a bundle prepared by the Applicant’s lawyers containing
three articles concerning, amongst other things,
human rights and fear of the
Taliban in Afghanistan.
RELEVANT SECTIONS OF THE ACT
501(2) of the act provides as follows:
(2) The Minister
may cancel a visa that has been granted to a person if:
(a) the Minister reasonably suspects
that the person does not pass the character test; and
(b) the person does not satisfy the Minister that the person
passes the character test.”
s 501(6)(e)(i) a person does not pass the character test if a Court in Australia
or a foreign country has convicted the person
of one or more sexually-based
offences involving a child. It is appropriate to observe that the Applicant
concedes that he does not
pass the character
499 of the Act provides that the Minister may make directions which a person or
body must consider in performing a function
or exercising a power under the Act.
Any such direction cannot be inconsistent with the Act, but a decision-maker
must, under section
499(2A) of the Act, comply with a relevant direction.
Currently, the applicable direction that the Tribunal as decision-maker must
apply when considering whether to exercise the discretion in s 501(2) of the
Act, is that made by the Minister on 7 June 2024, which
Direction No. 110 –
Migration Act 1958
– Direction under
section 499
Visa refusal and cancellation under
and revocation of a mandatory cancellation of a visa under
(‘Direction
DIRECTION 110
this stage reference should be made to several of the provisions which guide
decision-makers such as the Tribunal, and to note
the considerations to be taken
into account as articulated in Direction 110. This overview is of course in no
way exhaustive, and
no substitute for careful consideration of the language used
in each of its provisions. Several of those provisions warrant mention
stage of the process.
Interpretation
’ provides a definition of several
expressions or terms that are referred to in the ‘
’ considerations that the Tribunal is obliged to
articulates the objectives of
the relevant provisions of the Act. Amongst other things, the objectives
(1) To regulate, in the national interest, the coming into, and the presence in,
Australia of non-citizens. Relevantly, a non-citizen
who does not pass the
character test (see Annex A for explanation) is liable for refusal of a visa or
cancellation of their visa;
(2) Specifically, under
of the Act, non-citizens may be refused a visa
if they do not satisfy the decision-maker that they pass the character test.
the discretion to refuse to grant or to cancel a visa is enlivened, the
decision-maker must consider the specific circumstances of
the case in deciding
whether to exercise that discretion; and
(3) The purpose of this Direction is to guide decision-makers in performing
functions or exercising powers under
of the Act. Under
of the Act, such decision-makers must comply with a direction made under
’ provide the framework within which
decision-makers should approach their task of deciding whether to refuse or
cancel a non-citizens
section 501
, or whether to revoke a mandatory
cancellation under
of the Act. These principles include the
(1) Australia has a sovereign right to determine whether non-citizens who are
of character concern are allowed to enter and/or remain
in Australia. Being able
to come to or remain in Australia is a privilege Australia confers on
non-citizens in the expectation that
they are, and have been, law-abiding, will
respect important institutions, such as Australia’s law-enforcement
framework, and
will not cause or threaten harm to individuals or the Australian
(2) The safety of the Australian community is the highest priority of the
Australian Government.
(3) Non-citizens who engage or have engaged in criminal or other serious
conduct should expect to forfeit the privilege of staying
in, Australia.
(4) The Australian community expects that the Australian Government can and
should cancel non-citizens visas, if they engaged in conduct,
in Australia or
elsewhere, that raises serious character concerns. This expectation of the
Australian community applies regardless
of whether the non-citizen poses a
measurable risk of causing physical harm to the Australian community.
(6) With respect to decisions to refuse, cancel, and revoke cancellation of a
Visa, Australia may afford a higher level of tolerance
of criminal or other
serious conduct by non-citizens who have lived in the Australian community for
most of their life, or from a
very young age.
(7) Decision-makers must take into account the primary and other
considerations relevant to the individual case. In some circumstances,
nature of the non-citizen’s conduct, or the harm that would be caused if
the conduct were to be repeated, may be so serious
that even strong
countervailing considerations may be insufficient to justify not revoking a
mandatory cancellation.
(8) The inherent nature of certain conduct such as family violence is so
serious that even strong countervailing considerations may
be insufficient to
justify revoking a mandatory cancellation, even if the information available at
the time of consideration suggests
that the non-citizen does not pose a
measurable risk of causing physical harm to the Australian community.
Making a decision
’ provides that informed by the
principles in paragraph 5.2, a decision-maker must take into account the
considerations identified
, where relevant to the
Taking the relevant considerations into account
provides that:
(1) In applying the considerations (both primary and other), information and
evidence from independent and authoritative sources should
be given appropriate
(2) The primary consideration at 8.1 below (protection of the Australian
community) is generally to be given greater weight than other
considerations. Otherwise, primary considerations should generally be given
greater weight than the other considerations.
(3) One or more primary considerations may outweigh other primary
considerations.
Primary considerations
’, provides that in making a
decision under, amongst others,
, the following are primary
considerations:
(1) protection of the Australian community from criminal or other serious
(2) whether the conduct engaged in constituted family violence;
(3) the strengths, nature and duration of ties to Australia;
(4) the best interests of minor children in Australia;
(5) expectations of the Australian community.
Other considerations
’, provides that in making a
decision under, amongst others,
, the considerations below must also
be taken into account, where relevant, in accordance with the following
provisions. These considerations
include (but are not limited to):
a) legal consequences of the decision;
b) extent of impediments if removed;
c) impact on Australian business interests.
ISSUES BEFORE THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal considers that the following issues arise for its determination in this
application:
(a) whether the Applicant passes the character test; and
(b) if not, whether
the discretion in
the Act to cancel the Applicant’s visa should be exercised.
THE CHARACTER TEST
Applicant concedes that he does not pass the character
This is because he has been
convicted of a sexually based offence involving a child
(s 501(6)(e)
by reason of the Applicant not passing the character test, the remaining issue
for determination by the Tribunal is whether
the discretion in
Act to cancel the Applicant’s visa should be
SOME INITIAL OBSERVATIONS ON THE APPLICANT’S
Applicant gave his evidence with the assistance of an interpreter at all times.
It is appropriate to make some initial observations
concerning the way the
Applicant gave his evidence. Specific observations about several matters that
were put to him both in his
evidence-in-chief, and then cross-examination will
be addressed in the appropriate part of these reasons. He was in the witness box
for quite some time.
things emerged from his time in the witness box. Notwithstanding that the
Applicant has had relatively limited and fragmented
formal education, he
presented as articulate and a quite intelligent individual. There was absolutely
no doubt that at all times
he completely understood the questions that were
being asked of him. Unfortunately, notwithstanding that he fully comprehended
nature of the questions put to him and the answer required, he adopted
several tendencies in his responses. At times he was quite
loquacious, on a
number of occasions rather than answer the question put to him, he would descend
into making a speech or statement
that he felt would advance his case.
Frequently, his answers were non-responsive to a simple question put to him that
been answered with “yes” or “no” or other
very short response. From time to time, he also responded when
he understood the
question, but was seeking to deflect from having to accurately answer such a
question by responding with a question.
The Tribunal infers that this approach
to his evidence, apart from his misguided view that it might advance his case,
also was adopted
by him in an effort to downplay the gravity of his
Additionally,
another unfortunate feature of his evidence was where, on occasion, he asserted
that he had a lack of recollection of
a particular event or matter. This was
contrary to statements made on several occasions such as in his most recent
statutory declaration
lodged in support of this application. Insofar as there
was an inconsistency between his evidence in the witness box on such topics
the contents of his declaration, it does not reflect well upon him. Once again,
more will be said about these inconsistencies
where appropriate later in these
Applicant, in response to questions asked of him from time to time would assert
that his recollection of critical events was hampered
by reason of the mental
health conditions from which he suffers. More will be said about these
conditions later in his reasons. However,
having had the opportunity to observe
the Applicant carefully in the witness box, despite these mental health
conditions, the Tribunal
was not satisfied that his recollection of key events
was so inhibited as he sought to portray.
PARAGRAPH 8.1 OF
DIRECTION 110 – PROTECTION OF THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY
8.1(1) of Direction 110 provides that when considering protection of the
Australian community, decision-makers should keep
in mind that the safety of the
Australian community is the highest priority of the Australian Government. To
that end, the Government
is committed to protecting the Australian community
from harm as a result of criminal activity or other serious conduct by
non-citizens.
In this respect, decision-makers should have particular regard to
the principal that entering or remaining in Australia is a privilege
Australia confers on non-citizens in the expectation that they are, and have
been, law-abiding, will respect important institutions
and will not cause or
threaten harm to individuals or the Australian community.
8.1(2) of Direction 110 provides that decision-makers should also give
consideration to:
a) the nature and seriousness of the non-citizen’s conduct to date;
b) the risk to the Australian community, should the non-citizen commit
further offences or engage in other serious conduct.
Paragraph 8.1.1 of Direction 110 – The nature and
seriousness of the Applicant’s conduct
8.1.1(1) of Direction 110 mandates that in considering the nature and
seriousness of the non-citizen’s criminal offending
or other conduct to
date, decision-makers must have regard to several factors, amongst others,
including the following:
a) without limiting the range of conduct that may be considered very serious,
amongst other things, the types of crimes or conduct
viewed very seriously by
the Australian Government and the Australian community include:
(i) violent and/or sexual crimes;
(ii) crimes of a violent and/or sexual nature against women or children,
regardless of the sentence imposed; and
(iii) acts of family violence, regardless of whether there is a conviction
for an offence or sentence imposed;
b) without limiting the range of conduct that may be considered serious, the
by the Australian
Government and the Australian community to be serious:
crimes committed against vulnerable members of the community (such as the
elderly and the disabled), or government representatives
or officials due to the
position they hold, or in the performance of their duties;
the exception of crimes or conduct mentioned in subparagraph (a)(ii), (a)(iii)
or (b)(i) the sentence imposed by the courts for
d) the impact of the offending on any victims of offending or other conduct
and their family, where information in this regard is
available and the
non-citizen whose Visa is being considered for refusal or cancellation, or who
has sought revocation of the mandatory
cancellation of their isa, has been
afforded procedural fairness;
e) the frequency of the non-citizen’s offending and/or whether there is
any trend of increasing seriousness;
f) the cumulative effect of repeated offending
The Applicant’s offending
of the Applicant’s offending are contained in several documents that were
in evidence before the Tribunal. They include
Check Results Report contained in
the G documents. That document reveals that on 25 October 2018 at the Melbourne
Magistrates’
Court the Applicant was convicted of the offence of sexual
assault of a child under the age of 16 years by touching in contravention
Crimes Act 1958
was convicted and placed on a Community Correction Order for a term of 18 months
were several conditions attached to the CCO. Those conditions were as follows:
(a) Supervision
(iv) He was to be supervised by the Secretary;
(v) Such condition commencing on 25 October 2018 for 18 months.
(b) Treatment and Rehabilitation
(i) The Applicant was to undergo the following treatment and rehabilitation:
(i) Offending behaviour programs as directed;
(i) Any other treatment and rehabilitation as directed;
(i) SOATS assessment and treatment as directed;
(i) English Language Course.
reason of the Applicant being convicted of a sexual offence, he was, pursuant to
the powers contained in
Sex Offenders Registration Act 2004
(Vic), placed on the Register of Sex Offenders for a period of eight years. As
he had been placed on the Register of Sex Offenders,
he was subject to reporting
obligations which included, amongst other things, a requirement that he report
to Victoria Police in
person and make an Initial Report of personal details and
thereafter provide Annual Reports for the duration of his reporting
precise details of the Applicant’s offending are summarised in a
Preliminary Brief prepared by a member of Victoria Police.
The Tribunal is
satisfied that this document accurately records details of the offences
committed by the Applicant. Dr Kwok in her
evidence stated that she read the
contents of this document aloud to the Applicant and he did not dispute or
challenge its contents.
At no time when in the witness box did he challenge the
contents of this statement. Usually, when parts of it were referred to him,
response was that he could not recall. At times, he contended that his inability
to recall was due to a mental health condition
he has been diagnosed
The statement that the
Applicant was unable to recall the circumstances of his offending was
inconsistent with the relatively detailed
account that he provided in his most
recent statutory declaration made 3 October 2025. Notwithstanding his evidence
from time to
time about alleged mental health conditions affecting his ability
to recall what happened on the bus and his interactions with the
young girl, on
other occasions his evidence shifted where he sought to offer an explanation for
his offending and doing so in some
detail. As noted earlier, he appeared to the
Tribunal to fully comprehend the questions that were being put to him, but at
was evasive in his responses and sought to deflect the gravity of his
offending by tailoring his answers accordingly.
approximately 3:59 PM on a Saturday in February 2018 the Applicant boarded a bus
in the suburb of Hampton Park which was travelling
in the direction of the
Fountain Gate Shopping Centre in the adjacent suburb of Narre Warren. Upon
boarding the bus, he took a seat
towards its rear. The complainant or victim was
sitting on the opposite side of the bus to him. It should be borne in mind that
victim was a young girl of approximately 15 years old at the time the
offences were committed.
after he boarded the bus, the victim spoke to the Applicant asking him whether
he knew if the Fountain Gate Shopping Centre
was still open. She also asked
another male passenger on the bus the same question. After asking those
questions she turned around
and proceeded to take in the view from the window of
Approximately
80 seconds after the victim asked the question about whether the shopping centre
was still open, the Applicant moved
forward one seat from the seat that he had
occupied, to immediately adjacent to where the victim was sitting. She described
uncomfortable when the Applicant moved towards her and moved closer to
the window whilst continuing to observe what was going on
Applicant then at about 4:12 PM stood up, moved across the aisle and sat in the
seat next to the victim. She described feeling
squashed up against the window by
the Applicant but continued to look out such window. The Applicant then asked
her whether she was
saving a seat for him to which she replied
sitting next to the victim for approximately 2 minutes at 4:14 PM the Applicant
placed his hand on the victim’s upper
right thigh rubbing the thigh on the
outside of her leggings. Her response immediately was to tell the Applicant to
get his hand
off her. His response was to ask the victim if she wanted to hold
his hand, to which she replied “no”. Shortly after
this exchange,
the Applicant placed his left arm around the victim and began touching her left
shoulder. He then placed his hand
on the victim’s bareback and then moved
his hand down her back placing it on the top part of her underwear.
this exchange at approximately 4:15 PM, the victim attempted to get up and leave
her seat. The Applicant struck her in the
stomach. He then stated, words to the
effect, “No, no, sit, sit” when she tried to get up and leave her
seat. She described
managing to struggle past the Applicant and then sat near
the front of the bus.
bus then arrived at the Fountain Gate Shopping Centre at approximately 4:18 PM.
The victim and the accused both alighted from
the bus at that time.
the incident, the victim was said to be crying, nervous, shaky and
uncomfortable. She expressed the sentiment or view that
she felt that something
bad was going to happen and was very concerned that he might have dragged her
off or done something else.
alighting from the bus on its arrival the Fountain Gate Shopping Centre, the
victim was concerned that she was being followed
by the Applicant.
Unfortunately, whilst making away into the shopping centres she tripped and
fractured her wrist. It was also reported
that she has had multiple counselling
sessions for the incident.
victim relatively soon after the events reported the matter to police. They
commenced investigations and, not unsurprisingly,
obtained CCTV footage which
when examined produced fairly clear images of the Applicant. The police issued a
media release to the
public including one of those images seeking information as
to his identity. The media release prompted a commercial television network
broadcast some images derived from the CCTV footage.
Applicant became aware of the media release from his father. His father became
aware of the Applicant’s offending from one
of his sons who had been
informed by a friend that he had seen the Applicant on a TV news broadcast which
advised that he was wanted
by the police. Not unsurprisingly, the
Applicant’s father was rather bewildered by this revelation and saw the
footage for
himself which confirmed that it was the Applicant who was wanted by
the police. He had a discussion with the Applicant who gave him
an explanation
of what occurred. The Applicant and his father agreed that he should hand
himself in to the police. He did so after
retaining the services of a solicitor
who contacted investigating detectives. Arrangements were made for him to
present himself at
a suburban police station for the purposes of conducting an
interview. During that interview he identified himself in the images
in question including what occurred on the bus that had been obtained from
various CCTV sources.
the interview, the Applicant made full admissions to touching the victim on the
right leg, shoulder and lower back. He made the
observation that he thought the
victim was nice. He denied striking her in the stomach when she tried to get up
and move seats.
in the interview, the Applicant admitted that he did not believe the victim was
consenting to the touching. He was specifically
asked the question, “did
she want you to touch her?”. He replied, “no, I don’t think
so”. He was also
asked about the victim’s age. His response to that
question was that he did not even think about her age.
the Applicant stated to the police that his actions were a mistake and that if
he had known it was illegal in Australia,
he wouldn’t have done it. He
further stated, “it was just a mistake, it happened, that’s all and
for that”. When asked his opinion of his behaviour on the
bus, the Applicant replied, “I know it’s not good behaviour,
it’s bad”. During his evidence, the Tribunal specifically put this
part of the police summary to the Applicant, and he
admitted that he had made
those statements.
is perhaps appropriate at this juncture to also observe that the Tribunal asked
the Applicant if he thought that it was all right
to touch a member of the
opposite gender without their consent, to which he categorically said
This response is
also consistent with other evidence before the Tribunal. One of his brothers, in
a statutory declaration, stated
that the Applicant has a clear understanding of
what is right and wrong. Further, he stated that in their community and religion
this type of offence is forbidden, and they were shocked to find out about the
Applicant’s offending. By reason of these matters,
the Tribunal concludes
that the Applicant knew his actions on that day in the bus were wrong, not
permitted in Australia, and probably
should also be made at this stage to the Applicant’s evidence concerning
the frequency of his prior bus travel before
the day that he offended. At one
stage when in the witness box, the Applicant stated that at the time of his
offending, it was the
first occasion on which he had used public transport
including a bus. He said he was not familiar with it having never previously
travelled by bus. This evidence was false. The falsity of such statement can be
established by reference to several other evidentiary
sources which are
inconsistent with such a statement.
paragraph 49 of his most recent statutory declaration made 3 October 2025 he
conceded he had used the bus “a few times”
previously.
cross-examination he conceded that he had taken the bus to and from work
including when he was working in a bakery at Dandenong
when his father, who
customarily drove him there, was unable to do so. He was also taken to an
extract from Ms Gilbert’s report
It will be recalled as
Gilbert was the clinician who conducted an extensive interview of him on 5 March
2019. She recorded in that
report prior to his offending the Applicant had
travelled by public transport to and from the different worksites as he did not
have his car licence. Also, the police seized from the Applicant a Myki
card. Subsequent investigations revealed multiple use of
such card, presumably
by the Applicant.
Tribunal infers that the Applicant’s evidence that the day of the
offending was the first time he had used bus, was given
in a misguided attempt
to, in some way, downplay or deflect from the gravity of his offending. Such an
attempt failed miserably.
It does not reflect well upon
Consideration of the nature and seriousness of the
Applicant’s offending
addressing the nature and seriousness of the Applicant’s offending, of
course, the Tribunal is guided by the language itself
of paragraph 8.1.1 of
Direction 110. Paragraph 8.1.1(1)(a)(i) and (ii) of the Direction prescribes
that violent and/or sexual crimes
and crimes of a violent and/or sexual nature
against children regardless of the sentence imposed are viewed very seriously by
Australian Government and the Australian community.
Applicant in his submissions, whilst acknowledging that the relevant paragraph
of Direction 110 as noted (8.1.1(1)(a)(ii)) characterises
his offending as very
serious, contended that such offending falls at the lowest end of seriousness
for this type of offending. It
was described as a “continuum” in
which the Tribunal could consider the sentence imposed in the context of other
crimes. The grounds relied upon in support of this contention were that
the offence was an indictable offence that carries a maximum
penalty of 10 years
imprisonment. However, it was dealt with summarily in the Magistrates’
Court where the Applicant was sentenced
to a CCO and not a term of imprisonment.
Presumably, also relying upon the frequently proffered contention that to
imprison someone
is a relatively extreme step and of course the last option in
the sentencing hierarchy.
the Applicant in submissions made on his behalf concerning this primary
consideration relied on several other grounds. It
was submitted that he has
acknowledged the seriousness of his offending and also recognised the negative
impact that such offending
had on his victim who was, as noted earlier, 15 years
of age at the time such offences occurred. He further contended that by pleading
guilty at the earliest opportunity, he prevented potential further harm to his
victim, one assumes by reason of the fact she would
not be required to attend
court, give evidence, and be subjected to cross-examination. Also, there is, as
is often recorded in criminal
proceedings of this type, that there was the
utility to all concerned of avoiding a lengthy and contested criminal trial in a
Court before a Judge and jury.
this context, reference was also made to the Applicant’s rehabilitation.
The concept of rehabilitation was considered, and
reference made to the decision
LGC 24 v Minister for Immigration &
Citizenship
referred to several paragraphs of that decision from Collier J which provide an
accurate statement of the concept of rehabilitation.
As was noted by the Judge,
rehabilitation contemplates restoration of a person to a good condition or an
improved form. Evidence
of unblemished conduct of a person in the community in
the years following a conviction is suggestive of rehabilitation. Similarly,
successful completion of rehabilitation programs undertaken by an offender with
a criminal conviction would be further evidence of
rehabilitation as
contemplated. The Tribunal acknowledges that the Applicant has, save for one
failure for which he was dealt with
in the Magistrates’ Court at
Dandenong, adhered to his reporting obligations under the
Sexual Offences
, about which more will be said later, he has had an unblemished record
since his conviction, and this is evidence of rehabilitation
in the relevant
the Applicant also contended that he has experienced shame and humiliation as a
result of the Court processes and the obligations
cast upon him, both in terms
of the stigma attaching to the conviction, which will remain on his record
forever, the obligations
under the CCO, and his continuing reporting
requirements as a registered sexual offender under the
Sex Offenders
Registration Act 2004
Tribunal cannot accept the contentions of the Applicant which seek in some way
to perhaps downplay, or otherwise diminish the
seriousness of his offending on
the day concerned. There are several reasons for this.
should be repeated that the language of paragraph 8.1.1 (1)(a)(ii) of Direction
110 prescribes that crimes of a violent and straight
or sexual nature against
children regardless of the sentence imposed are viewed very seriously. This is
understandable and the Tribunal
does not consider that because the Applicant was
sentenced to a non-custodial CCO that it in some way lessens the seriousness of
what he did on that day.
that note, it should not be forgotten that the victim was going about her
business, as she was entitled to do, on a Saturday afternoon
travelling to a
major suburban shopping centre. She was entitled to believe, if not expect, that
she would be able to undertake that
journey in a safe and secure environment.
The Applicant grossly violated that expectation. It was indefensible
it should not be overlooked that the victim was a 15-year-old girl. The
Applicant was an adult. Given the admissions that the
Applicant made to the
police and when questioned in cross-examination and by the Tribunal, it
considers that he knew what he did
on that day to his victim was demonstrably
wrong. It also accepts the evidence of his brother that this type of offence was
which the Applicant clearly knew. The victim was clearly in a position
of vulnerability vis-a-vis him. It was a gross exploitation
of that position of
vulnerability by the Applicant on his victim, who was clearly a stranger to him.
It was opportunistic offending.
should also be made to aspects of the Applicant’s evidence, which was also
touched on in some of the expert evidence
before the Tribunal, that in some way
his offending should be downplayed or diminished because of him not being aware
of such things
as the “culture and lifestyle” in Australia. At
various times in his evidence, the Applicant went so far as to say that
heard when he was in Pakistan that in some way one could “make friends
with girls” or that there was a more relaxed
attitude towards male
interaction with women, as if to justify or excuse his behaviour on the bus on
that day in February 2018. As
is apparent from the matters canvassed above
concerning the Applicant’s admissions as to what was right or wrong, the
cannot accept this evidence from the Applicant.
factor that highlights the seriousness of the Applicant’s offending which
the Tribunal must have regard to is specified
in paragraph 8.1.1(1)(d) of
Direction 110, that is the impact of the offending on the victim. Whilst details
of the impact are limited,
there was some evidence contained in the Preliminary
Brief that was before the Tribunal. There was the fact that after both she and
the accused alighted from the bus the victim believed she was being followed by
him. The Tribunal infers that she was probably attempting
to run in a
comparatively distressed state. This is understandable. In that state of
distress, believing that she may have been followed,
it is not difficult to see
how she did trip over causing her to fracture her wrist. The Tribunal considers
that this is a direct
and significant impact on the victim caused by his
other impact on the victim that emerges from the Preliminary Brief prepared by
Victoria Police is that the complainant, following
the commission of the offence
against her, undertook multiple counselling sessions. One can fully understand
that as a vulnerable
young girl subjected to such an experience that it would
have had a traumatic and lasting effect on her which would have required
counselling sessions as indicated. It is reasonably well known that victims of
this kind of offending can frequently endure ongoing
difficulties for some time
after the event
Conclusions on the nature and
seriousness of the Applicant’s offending
these reasons, the Tribunal concludes that the Applicant’s offending must
be viewed very seriously. It must, therefore,
weigh heavily against the
Paragraph 8.1.2 of Direction 110 – The risk to
the Australian community should the non-citizen commit further offences or
in other serious conduct
8.1.2(1) of Direction 110 provides that in considering the need to protect the
Australian community (including individuals,
groups or institutions) from harm,
decision-makers should have regard to the Government’s view that the
Australian community’s
tolerance for any risk of future harm becomes lower
as the seriousness of the potential harm increases. Some conduct and the harm
that would be caused, if it were to be repeated, is so serious that any risk
that it may be repeated may be unacceptable.
8.1.2(2) of Direction 110 provides that in assessing the risk that may be posed
by the non-citizen to the Australian community,
decision-makers must have regard
to cumulatively:
a) the nature of the harm to individuals or the Australian community should
the non-citizen engage in further criminal or other serious
conduct; and
b) the likelihood of the non-citizen engaging in further criminal or other
serious conduct, taking into account:
information
and evidence on the risk of the non-citizen reoffending; and
of rehabilitation achieved by the time of the decision, giving weight to time
spent in the community since their most recent
offence (noting that decisions
should not be delayed in order for rehabilitative courses to be
undertaken).
nature of the harm to individuals and all the Australian community should the
Applicant engage in further criminal or other serious
conduct is fairly well
identified in several of the learned articles before the Tribunal. One article
gave a fairly accurate summary
of the nature of the harm likely to be caused by
such offending. It recorded that victim survivors can experience immediate or
physical and mental health problems, which can negatively impact
employment, economic well-being, ability to return to school, coping,
relationships, and a sense of normalcy.
another passage, specifically referring to experiences of childhood sexual
abuse, it observed that there can be immediate, short
and long-term harm to a
child’s health and well-being. Such harm can lead to developmental,
mental, physical, and social problems
with casual impacts on other aspects of
life such as education and employment. These manifestations are relatively
well-known these
Applicant contends that he does not pose a real risk of harm to the Australian
community and is highly unlikely to reoffend. He
goes so far as to contend that
he is a low risk of reoffending for a variety of reasons. These will be
addressed below.
the other hand, the Respondent identifies a number of factors which it is
contended establish that the Applicant remains a risk
of reoffending or engaging
in other serious conduct. The argument goes so far as to say that his
contentions about being a low risk
of reoffending should be rejected.
is worthwhile when addressing this aspect of this primary consideration to
briefly consider the planks or limbs of the Respondent’s
contention.
part of the CCO posed on the Applicant, he was required to undertake a
“SOATS Assessment and Treatment as Directed”.
He did not undertake
this program. The reason was that he was found to be ineligible due to the
language barrier.
Supervision Plan from Corrections Victoria of 19 November 2018 revealed that the
Applicant had on numerous occasions requested
that he be exempt from
participating in the SOATS program due to the location and the potential for it
to impact on his employment.
This is surprising indeed. He was instead referred to a psychologist fluent in
the Hazari language. This was a recommendation made
by Ms Gilbert, a Clinician
with Corrections Victoria, who conducted an assessment of the Applicant and
completed a report on him
dated 23 May
Eventually he was referred
to a psychologist, Mr Monterio. Apparently both the psychologist and the
Applicant confirmed his attendance.
However, there was no evidence from Mr
Monterio either orally or in writing confirming this. The Applicant, when in the
witness box,
confirmed that he had several sessions with him. He was unable to
recall precisely how many.
Considerable
emphasis was placed by the Respondent on a recommendation made by a
psychologist, Ms Ferrari, who conducted an assessment
of the Applicant during a
clinical interview on 7 May 2018. She prepared subsequently a report on 10 May
This report was prepared
in anticipation of the Applicant’s appearance in the Magistrates’
Court for sentencing. Ms Ferrari
in that report, amongst other things, expressed
the opinion that the Applicant should be encouraged to engage in psychological
intervention
to assist him in building his social skills, understanding how to
form appropriate friendships and relationships, and how this differs
culturally bound practices, as well as to learn acceptable boundaries. She
further opined that if he did so, it would assist
in reducing his risk of
recidivism while the same time improving his ability to evaluate and make
appropriate choices in the future.
Respondent then, understandably, focused on the observations made by Dr Kwok in
her report on this topic. She reported that the
Applicant informed her that he
had seen a psychologist up to 3 times in the years 2018, 2019 or 2020. Further
told her that this
consultation was for legal matters. He stated to her that he
had never seen a psychologist for treatment
Also, she recorded
that the Applicant had completed the SOATS program as part of his CCO. This
statement was of course demonstrably
reason of these matters, the Respondent contended that most of the steps
required by him in terms of treatment had not been undertaken,
and therefore,
identified risks had not been addressed. It was also contended that the report
of Dr Kwok should not be preferred
because by reason of her concluding, amongst
other things, that the Applicant had completed the SOATS program her report was
on incorrect assumption, or as was described in the Respondent’s
submission, a flawed understanding of the Applicant’s
rehabilitation in a
critical respect.
being so, the Respondent placed significant emphasis on the conclusions
expressed by Ms Gilbert in her report of 23 May 2019.
That report was titled
“Intervention Pathways and Planning Assessment and Recommendations
compiled her report after considering a significant amount of documentary
information, including the report of Ms Ferrari
dated 10 May 2018 and conducting
a clinical interview with the Applicant together with the assistance of an
interpreter for three
and a half hours on 5 March 2019. Whilst that report is
extensive and reference is made to it in its entirety, it concluded that
applying the Actuarial Risk Assessment-Static 99 that the Applicant was in the
High-Risk category relative to other male sexual offenders.
She stated that
individuals with these characteristics, on average, sexually reoffending 26%
over five years, and 31% over 10 years
and 36% over 15 years.
Applicant’s expert evidence concerning the likelihood or risk of him
reoffending is to be found in two reports prepared
by Ms Ferrari of 10 May 2018
and 17 August 2020 together with the report of Dr Kwok of 6 October 2025
supplemented by her oral evidence
of the hearing of the application. Those
reports are also referred to in their entirety and considered by the
aspects of Ms Ferrari’s first report of 10 May 2018 have already been
mentioned. Some other aspects of it are worthwhile
referring to. She
administered what is described as the “Sex Offending Needs Assessment
Rating” (“SONAR”).
She explained that it is a nine-item tool
designed to assess change in risk for sexual recidivism among charged and
convicted sex
offenders. She concluded after administering this test that the
Applicant’s results did not demonstrate any stable or dynamic
risk factors
which would elevate his risk of future sex offending. Further, she reported that
the Applicant scored within the low-risk
category in relation to each area of
focus. Further, Ms Ferrari emphasised that the Applicant did not endorse
statements supportive
of violence, molestation or sexual offences against women
or children.
Additionally,
with respect to the results of the SONAR tests that she administered to the
Applicant, they did not reveal any indication
of poorly controlled expression of
sexual impulses, nor did he exhibit any tendency to use sexuality as a method of
coping with negative
emotions. She also found that there were no other
indications of preoccupation with sex, and certainly no indication of deviant
fantasies or preoccupation with sex crimes or excessive use of
pornography.
was also recorded by Ms Ferrari as a result of administering the SONAR test that
there were no concerns evident with regard to
the Applicant’s ability to
self-monitor and conform to the demands of community supervision. Therefore, as
already noted overall,
he was considered a low risk of reoffending in relation
to sexually based offences.
Ferrari’s second report of 17 August 2025 arose from an opinion being
sought by the Applicant’s lawyers concerning
his then current mental
health and any applicable
She administered
several tests to him following an interview or consultation she conducted with
him to give the assistance of an
interpreter. Once again, the contents of that
report are referred to in their entirety. In assessing this primary
consideration,
that portion of the second report from Ms Ferrari in which she
undertook a Risk Assessment warrants mention. In undertaking a risk
assessment,
she administered a Sexual Violence Risk-20 (“SVR-20). She described this
testing tool as a twenty-item checklist
of clinician-rated risk factors for
sexual violence She explained that the twenty factors essential in a
comprehensive sexual violence
risk assessment fall into three main categories:
Psychosocial Adjustment, History of Sexual Offences, and Future Plans.
administered the SVR-20 test, Ms Ferrari included and expressed the opinion that
the Applicant was rated a low-risk across
each of the applicable risk factors,
and therefore is considered to be a low-risk of future sexual recidivism. This,
she observed,
was consistent with her initial assessment in a previous report of
10 May 2018.
Respondent contended less weight should be placed on the opinions of Ms Ferrari
and the opinions of Ms Gilbert preferred. The
dominant factor relied upon by the
Respondent in making this submission arises from Ms Ferrari recording in several
places in her
initial report of May 2018 that the Applicant stated he was not
aware that his actions would cause distress was acceptable at time
incident occurred. Further, she recorded that had he known such behaviour was
against the law and been aware of the issues around
his consent, he would never
have acted in such a way as it is stark opposition to his beliefs, values and
attitudes. It was, in essence,
Ms Ferrari’s adoption of the assumption
that the Applicant was in denial or had denied his offending which is the
fundamentally
flawed assumption relied upon by her.
there is some attraction in this contention, the Tribunal was not persuaded that
this sufficiently justifies either placing
less weight on her conclusions or not
accepting her professional opinion as expressed in both reports. There are
several reasons
for this. These reasons will be briefly outlined in no
particular order of priority.
both her reports where Ms Ferrari applied these specific tests to the Applicant,
she referred to and it seems apparent that she
did so with full and accurate
knowledge of the particulars of his offending. She was retained with the
contents of the hand up brief
prepared by Victoria Police including the
preliminary brief containing the statement made by the informant, which of
course was referred
to frequently in the hearing of this application. Several
comments about the accuracy of the preliminary brief have already been
earlier in these reasons. There is nothing in either of Ms Ferrari’s
reports to indicate that she did not accept
the facts recorded in those
documents. There is nothing to indicate anywhere in her report that, although
she noted his statements,
that he was not aware that his actions were are
acceptable or against the law, that she accepted such statements and included
as an evidentiary platform, foundation or valid assumption when
administering the tests that she did.
in each of her reports, Ms Ferrari explained the tests that she was
administering and how she did so. Her methodology was
logically laid out. This
Tribunal considers that Ms Ferrari has expressed genuine expert professional
opinions based upon the material
available to her, the consultations she had
with the Applicant and as a result of the several recognised tests used to
risk of recidivism, particularly with respect to sexual offending
that she administered to him.
does take the Tribunal to Dr Kwok’s report and her evidence that she gave
to the Tribunal and the hearing of the
application.
The contents of her
report are also referred to in their entirety. She also administered several
tests to the Applicant. They included
the Static-90 9R. Having applied those
test results she concluded that the Applicant was a low-moderate risk of further
sexual offending
(i.e. the lower end of moderate risk). She identified the
factors that contributed to his risk were his age, that the victim was
unrelated, and a stranger to him. The factors that reduced his risk were, no
nonsexual violence, no prior sex offences, no prior
nonsexual violence, no prior
sentencing dates or convictions.
her observations concerning the application and administration of the Static-90
9R test to the Applicant, Dr Kwok also stated that
with regards to offenders
with a history of sexual crime, the highest rates of reoffending are found
during the first few years after
release from prison and the likelihood of new
sexual offences declines the longer individuals with a history of sexual
remain sexual offence free in the community.
Kwok also administered a test known as the “Level of Service/Case
Management Inventory” (“LS/CMI”). She
described this as a Risk
and Need Assessment tool. The results of that test can be used in formulating a
case management plan for
the person concerned. She explained that the General
Risk/Need score reflects what is described in the literature as the “big
eight” risk/need factors. These factors are Criminal History,
Education/Employment, Family/Marital, Leisure/Recreation, Companions,
Alcohol/drug Problem, Pro-criminal Attitude/Orientation, and Antisocial Pattern.
She concluded that the LS/CMI results suggests that
the Applicant’s
general risk/need is in the low range.
is another aspect of Dr Kwok’s report that warrants mention. She expressed
the opinion based upon her assessment of the
Applicant and his symptoms criteria
for Major Depressive Disorder as defined by the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders,
Fifth Edition (“DSM-5”). She recorded
the Applicant symptoms including low moods on most days, markedly diminished
in social activities and social interactions, loss of interest in
previously enjoyed activities, somatic symptoms (e.g. headaches),
forgetfulness
and diminished memory and sleep disturbance.
Kwok, in conclusion, apart from repeating that the Applicant suffers from Major
Depressive Disorder, stated that the Applicant
as a low risk of further sexual
offending and is a low risk for general offending. Finally, she noted that if
the Applicant’s
visa was restored, it would affect his mental psychosocial
well-being.
the witness box, Dr Kwok presented as an arms-length professional who understood
her obligations to genuinely assist the Tribunal.
She reiterated the contents of
her report and expressed a clinical opinion that the Applicant is of a low-risk
of further sexual
offending. She candidly acknowledged that the Applicant
reported to her that he had never seen a psychologist for treatment purposes.
His account of seeing a psychologist to her she described as vague but that it
seemed to her it was more through assessment rather
than treatment. Presumably,
for the purposes of his pending hearing in Court to be sentenced for his
her credit, Dr Kwok readily conceded that she was wrong when she concluded that
the Applicant had completed the SOATS program.
She stated that she got that from
the material. She readily conceded that the Applicant would benefit from further
intervention.
She stated that she fully agreed the Applicant needs treatment for
his mental health conditions and also for his socialisation. She
also stated
quite candidly and in reaching the conclusion that the Applicant was low risk it
was certainly not “no risk.”
cross-examination Dr Kwok also expressed the opinion that the Applicant
understands now that there are legal consequences of such
behaviour and that the
impact of all this on him over the last seven years has been significant. She
also emphasised in cross-examination
what she considered to be important factors
contributing to his low-risk of reoffending, including that there had been no
prior sexual
offences, there have been none since, he is free of drug and
alcohol abuse, has a stable family support network and, until recently,
employment. She also emphasised that he had access to some social support
through his ethnic community.
differences between the conclusions adopted by Ms Gilbert were explored in some
detail in cross-examination. Dr Kwok believed
she had read it and did not
recall. She did say that the Static 99 test factors had changed since Ms
Gilbert’s report. She
also stated there had been updates in terms of
taking a standardised sample which could explain differences. She also explained
their levels had changed with the Static 99 test which changed the risk
evaluation.
Kwok steadfastly maintained her opinion that the risk of recidivism declines
over time. She emphasised that the longer the time
a person has not reoffended,
the lower the risk. To her credit, she conceded she had not cited case studies
in the report or refer
to some in her evidence. She also acknowledged in
response to questioning cross-examination that recidivism rates with respect to
sexual offending are frequently underestimated due to the fact that there is an
underreporting of sexual related crimes.
considered all the material, the Tribunal accepts Dr Kwok’s opinion that
the Applicant has a low-risk of reoffending,
whilst acknowledging her evidence
that low-risk is not “no risk”.
accepts Dr Kwok’s evidence for several reasons. They will be briefly
explained in no particular order of priority.
she is a highly qualified, experienced and expert Clinical Psychologist.
she has conducted the most recent assessment of the Applicant which she did on
26 August 2025 and then produced her report.
she was the only expert witness to give oral evidence of the hearing of the
application and be cross-examined.
in both her report and evidence from the witness box, she explained what her
assessment of the Applicant involved. She also
described the psychometric tests
that she administered to him together with the results of those tests. As has
already been observed,
she understood her role as an expert was to assist the
Tribunal, which she did. She readily made concessions when they were called
and certainly was not an advocate for the party who called her to give evidence.
to a significant degree, her conclusions derived from the psychometric tests
that she administered to the Applicant accorded
with the conclusions reached by
Ms Ferrari in her two reports. Whilst this is not a determinative factor, it is
nonetheless, a relevant
consideration.
the opinions expressed by Dr Kwok were to a considerable degree fortified by the
fact that the Applicant has not reoffended.
Over seven years have elapsed since
then. On this note, of course, it will be recalled that Ms Gilbert’s
report of 23 May 2019
followed her interview with the Applicant in March of that
year. This is a significant time-lapse. Whilst not criticising Ms Gilbert,
as a matter of course is more likely to refer the most recent, or up-to-date
report, which in this case is that of Dr Kwok whom
the Tribunal had the benefit
of hearing from in her oral evidence.
are other reasons that the Tribunal considers that the Applicant is a
comparatively low-risk of reoffending, apart from the
opinions of the experts
that have been touched on above.
fact that he has not reoffended, as noted above, is evidence pointing to
rehabilitation. He has been blameless since his conviction,
completed his CCO
and until the reviewable decision was made, was gainfully employed. It is a
pointer to his likely future conduct.
from one lapse, he has complied with his reporting obligations under the
Sexual Offenders Registration Act 2004
(Vic). Reference should be made to
the lapse. On 25 August 2022 in the Dandenong Magistrates’ Court, the
Applicant was found
to have failed to comply with his reporting obligations.
Without conviction, he was assigned an aggregate of
In cross-examination,
he admitted this breach. The Respondent properly conceded that this matter
cannot be counted against him in
terms of a criminal record.
in paragraph 51 of his statutory declaration made on 3 October 2025, he stated
that he had never breached such
conditions.
By reason of the
breach, which was proven to the Magistrates’ Court in August 2022, this
paragraph of his statement was false.
When confronted with this in
cross-examination, his response was not very satisfactory, and he offered no
explanation for making
the false statement as he did. He sought to deflect from
this line of questioning by saying that he had paid the fine and since that
occasion had not subsequently breached the condition. Whilst this well may be
so, the fact that he made a false statement in such
a way does not reflect well
on him. However, given the obvious language difficulties that the Applicant
faces and probably difficulty
navigating his way through the legal system
because of that fact, the Tribunal, whilst strongly condemning what he said on
in his most recent statutory declaration, does not believe that the
breach of the reporting conditions concerned are indicative of
him being a
higher risk of reoffending.
some extent, the fact that the sentencing Court considered the risk of the
Applicant reoffending to be low is reflected in the
fact that a CCO was imposed
and not a custodial sentence. The sentencing Court presumably had the benefit of
careful submissions
made by Counsel on his behalf relying on, amongst other
things, the report of Ms Ferrari and any other witnesses, including character
witnesses who may have given references for him.
Tribunal also, notwithstanding its views of the Applicant’s evidence
before it in the witness box, does accept that the
consequences of his offending
have had a profound effect on him. Having the visa cancelled drove home to him,
if it otherwise needed
to be, the significant difficulties on a multitude of
fronts that he has faced, and no doubt would face again were he to reoffend.
This is a powerful factor and motive for him to avoid future offending.
submissions made on behalf of the Respondent it was contended that the Applicant
has demonstrated remorse, but that his insight
into his offending is limited,
which is indicative of a potential risk factor of him reoffending in the future.
Emphasis was placed
on the fact that a sexual assault is an abuse of power,
which it clearly is. It was further contended that the Applicant does not
insight into his offending, nor the tools to prevent such offending in the
longer term. It was highlighted that he had requested
an exemption from
participation in the SOATS program and that he had not sought any real treatment
as suggested. The evidence concerning
his attendances on the psychologist Mr
Monterio was limited. Therefore, it is contended that his lack of engagement in
the past is
a pointer towards potential future offending.
is always a difficult concept to accurately assess. Frequently, offenders in the
position of the Applicant profoundly express
their recently acquired insight to
the Tribunal. This is understandable. Often the insight that they do gain into
their offending
is based upon an appreciation of the predicament that they find
themselves in.
Tribunal has no doubt that the Applicant has reflected deeply on his offending
and knows full well that it was wrong. He has certainly
engaged with Ms Ferrari,
and latterly Dr Kwok, which such sessions appear to have given him greater
insight into his offending than
he probably had before. Those sessions were
obviously beneficial to him in terms of gaining insight into his offending.
Having observed
him in the witness box it considers that he has gained some
reasonable appreciation of the impact on his victim. It is understandable
his, and his broader family’s history, that his insight, is more likely
than not, to be viewed initially from his perspective
rather than his
victim’s. That he has not had much in the way of treatment is unfortunate,
but the Tribunal does not consider
it determinative. It concludes, therefore,
that notwithstanding the submissions of the Respondent he has gained significant
into his offending.
terms of risks some reference should be made to the impact that the
Applicant’s offending has had on his family and what
this may mean in
terms of influencing the Applicant with respect to the potential for future
offending. Tribunal accepts that the
Applicant comes from a very tight knit,
loving, multigenerational family, who, uniquely for this country, live under the
and have done for years. His family have faced significant adversity
and tribulations over many years. His father embarked upon a
endeavour travelling more than halfway around the world, which ultimately
enabled him to permanently settle in Australia
and bring his broader family to
this country. They live under the one roof, clearly love one another and have a
very tight bond.
To use a layman’s terms, the Applicant’s offending
and his behaviour has really “let the side down”. His
placed in jeopardy for him so much of what his father had sought to achieve with
his family and, in particular, to give
the Applicant the opportunity of a
better, peaceful and prosperous life. Whatever views the Tribunal has on some
aspects of the Applicant’s
evidence, it does emerge that what he has been
through for many years now has been a profound wake-up call for him. He well
that if he were to commit serious offending again, such as he did in 2018,
he will wear out his welcome in this country. He does
not want to let his family
down. This is a powerful motivating factor for him to remain obedient to the
laws of this country.
Conclusions on paragraph 8.1 of
Direction 110, Protection of the Australian community
Tribunal now has to decide what weight to attach to this primary
consideration.
undertaking this task, Tribunal has regard to several sections of Direction 110
which provide a framework within which the Tribunal
as decision-maker approaches
this task. Several of these applicable paragraphs have already been referred to.
The Tribunal notes
that under paragraph 5.2(2)
Direction 110, the safety of the Australian community is the highest priority of
the Australian government. It is quite apparent
from the details of the
Applicant’s offending, which have been outlined above, that the safety of
the Applicant’s victim
was profoundly affected by his offending.
Additionally,
paragraph 5.2 (5)
of Direction 110 records Australia
has a low tolerance of any criminal conduct by non-citizens who have been
participating in, and
contributing to the Australian community only for a short
period of time. This directly applies to the Applicant as he had only been
Australia for a matter of months prior to these offence being committed by
Taking the relevant considerations into account,
Direction 110 provides that this primary consideration is generally to be given
greater weight than other primary considerations.
Tribunal accepts contentions of the Respondent very heavy weight should attach
to this primary consideration in favour of affirming
the reviewable decision
which cancelled the visa. It does so notwithstanding that it has reached the
conclusion, as explained, that
the Applicant is a low-risk of reoffending.
reaches this conclusion several reasons. It is guided by the applicable
paragraphs of Direction 110 already referred to. These
reasons may be briefly
summarised as follows:
(a) The Applicant’s offending was of a sexual nature against a child and
clearly very serious indeed. By reason of such offending,
he was placed on the
Register of Sex Offenders for a period of eight years under the provisions of
Sex Offenders Registration Act 2004
(b) The offending occurred relatively soon after his arrival in Australia;
(c) The offending was opportunistic;
(d) It was an abuse of power by the Applicant, who was an adult, against a
vulnerable young girl;
(e) The Applicant’s victim was going about her business in a public place,
on a Saturday afternoon, as she was entitled to
do. She was entitled to
undertake such a journey in a safe and secure environment. The Applicant’s
behaviour was a gross violation
of that expectation;
(f) There was the impact of the Applicant’s offending on his victim, which
it will be recalled required her to undergo counselling,
and of course led to
her tripping over when she sought to escape from him, believing that he may have
been following her, leading
to her fracturing her wrist; and
(g) Notwithstanding that he had recently arrived in Australia, he knew that his
actions on the day that he offended in the bus with
the young girl were wrong,
not permitted in Australia, and probably illegal.
Primary consideration 8.2 of Direction 110 - Family violence
committed by the non-citizen
have been no acts of family violence committed by the Applicant. As such, both
parties accept that this primary consideration
is not relevant to this
application. Therefore, no weight is attached to this primary
consideration.
Primary consideration 8.3 of Direction 110 - The
strength, nature and duration of ties to Australia
8.3 of Direction 110 provides as follows:
(1) Decision makers must consider any impact of the decision on the
non-citizen’s immediate family members in Australia, where
those family
members are Australian citizens, Australian permanent residents, or people who
have a right to remain in Australia indefinitely.
(2) Where consideration is being given to whether to cancel a
non-citizen’s visa or whether to revoke the mandatory cancellation
their visa, the decision-maker must also consider the strength, nature and
duration of any other ties that the non-citizen has
to the Australian community.
In doing so decision-makers must have regard to:
a) how long the non-citizen has resided in Australia, including whether the
non-citizen arrived as a young child, noting that:
weight should be given where the non-citizen began offending soon after arriving
in Australia; and
weight should be given to the time the non-citizen has spent contributing
positively to the Australian community
b) the strength, duration and nature of any family or social links with
Australian citizens, Australian permanent residents and/or
people who have an
indefinite right to remain in Australia.
Applicant relies on a number of grounds to contend that this primary
consideration must weigh heavily against cancellation of
the visa. In summary,
they include the presence in Australia of a significant number of his immediate
family members and the length
of time that he has resided in Australia.
family members are as follows:
(a) His father, presently 68 years of age, and an Australian citizen;
(b) His mother, who is also presently 68 years of age, and an Australian
(c) His older brother, who is presently 30 years of age, and an Australian
(d) His younger brother, who is presently 27 years of age, and an Australian
(e) His sister-in-law, his eldest brother’s wife, who is presently 33
years of age, and an Australian permanent resident; and
(f) His two nieces who are presently 3 years, and 4 months old respectively, who
are both Australian citizens.
already noted, the Applicant arrived in Australia in August 2017 at the age of
20. His offending occurred relatively soon after
his arrival in February
from his sister, who lives in Pakistan, all the Applicant’s other
immediate family members reside in Australia.
Tribunal accepts that he has no family members left residing in
Afghanistan.
reason of the comparatively short time that passed between his arrival and his
offending, as will be observed from the language
used in paragraph 8.3 (2)(a)(i)
of Direction 110, less weight should be given to this primary consideration.
the Tribunal did not understand that submissions made on the Applicant’s
behalf went so far as to say that the provisions
of subparagraph 8.3 (2)(a)(i)
of Direction 110 should in some way be diminished, or not so rigorously applied,
it was contended that
the close connection he has with his broader family who
all live under the one roof, the distress his removal from Australia would
them, the time that he has lived in Australia making a positive contribution
whilst working and engaging in volunteer work,
do to some extent ameliorate the
impact of this provision.
impact of a potential removal of the Applicant to Afghanistan on his family
members was canvassed in the evidence before the Tribunal.
The Applicant stated
both in his statutory declaration, and from the witness box, that the prospect
of his removal from Australia,
not to mention the legal processes, both criminal
and the visa process, that have now gone on for many years, have caused pain,
and discomfort to both his mother and father. In particular, the
Applicant’s mother has been significantly impacted. Whilst
precisely clear what condition she now suffers from, apparently, she has
experienced significant mental health issues since
the Applicant’s
offending was exposed and the process concerning the visa has taken its course.
She was described as being
quite depressed. To address these issues, she attends
a psychologist regularly to assist with a mental health management plan. Ms
Ferrari, in her first report, stated that his mother has attended a psychiatrist
and a psychologist recently as well as being prescribed
antidepressant
medication due to her stress related to this
She did not explain
where this information came from. However, the Tribunal sees no reason not to
accept it. It seems unlikely she
would include such references unless she had
been appropriately briefed and instructed about such questions.
the Applicant’s father explained in his evidence that his psychological
and mental health deteriorated. He explained
that both he and his wife have
difficulty sleeping, for which they require medication, experience
forgetfulness, anxiety and emotional
impact on the Applicant’s parents was also corroborated by evidence from
his two brothers who gave evidence.
Tribunal sees no reason not to accept the evidence, as outlined above,
concerning the impact on his parents, which is clearly
significant.
Applicant’s elder brother also explained that it would have a devastating
impact on him if the Applicant were removed from
Australia. In short, he stated,
understandably, that he did not want to lose his brother, as his brother is his
“right hand”.
He stated that the Applicant should be permitted to
remain in Australia. Further, he gave evidence that , if he is to stay here,
is their intention to start a roof tiling business which they believe would be
very successful due to the buoyant demand for roof
tilers in the construction
sector. This is quite understandable. All the brothers have worked as roof
tilers. The Tribunal accepts
that they have all worked hard and have a long-term
objective to start their own business with a view to significant growth. The
Tribunal accepts that if the Applicant were to be removed from Australia it
would have a significant impact on his brothers also.
terms of social links to the Australian community, Australian citizens and
permanent residents, there was evidence of his active
involvement in the Hazara
community and his local mosque. There was a letter of support from Dr Latify, a
resident of the Alim of
Taha Association of Victoria and Clevic of Jummah Prayer
in South-east of Victoria.
recorded the Applicant’s contribution to those associations in several
ways. These included volunteering on significant
religious occasions such as
Ramadan and Muharram. He has also been a financial contributor to that
organisation. The contents of
that letter of support from Dr Latify were also
corroborated by the Applicant’s father when he was in the witness box at
hearing of this application.
matter that the Tribunal considers is appropriate to take into account in
assessing this primary consideration is the Applicant’s
work history. To
his credit, he obtained gainful employment reasonably soon after his arrival and
until the reviewable decision was
made cancelling the visa worked hard and
contributed to his broader family unit. In more recent years, he has had regular
as a roof tiler, an occupation that he seems to enjoy, and one in
which he works with people of Afghan origin, particularly Hazaras.
He has worked
hard in this occupation. To this extent, during the working day there is clearly
social interaction between him and
his fellow workers, which he enjoys.
Respondent drew the Tribunal’s attention to certain aspects of Dr
Kwok’s report which led to a conclusion that the
Applicant is socially
isolated and has been so since the time of his offending in 2018. Further, in
support of this contention, it
was noted that the Applicant has not availed
himself of means available to him, such as counselling, sexual education and
activities more generally, to address his feelings of shame, or
normalising relations with women and girls. Therefore, it is contended
matters significantly limit the extent of the Applicant’s ties to
Australia and the Australian community.
Dr Kwok in passages of her report recounted that the Applicant did not make
friends before his offending, and he became
more socially withdrawn following
his conviction. She expressed the opinion that although the Applicant has family
support and sometimes
engages with the Muslim community, he would benefit from
having opportunities to increase in prosocial leisure activities and social
interactions.
addressing these submissions from the Respondent, the Tribunal considers that in
this instance it must be viewed with a degree
of realism. The comparatively
unusual family arrangement where three generations live under the one roof, will
almost of necessity
mean that the Applicant is less likely to have social
interaction with the broader community than might otherwise be the case were
to live on his own, or even with a life partner. Given the family history, which
has been recounted in detail earlier, it is quite
understandable that this
close-knit multigenerational family unit will draw primary social support from
each other.
some latitude should be given to the Applicant when assessing this primary
consideration from the fact that the process both
with respect to his reporting
obligations under the
Sex Offenders Registration Act 2004
(Vic), and of
course the process leading to the cancellation of the visa, more probably than
not, would have had a chilling effect
on his capacity and inclination to more
actively engage with the broader Australian community.
these reasons, the Tribunal does not accept the contention of the Respondent
that his comparative social isolation, particularly
as described in Dr
Kwok’s report, significantly limited the extent of his ties to Australia
and its people.
the evidence before it the Tribunal considers that the strength, nature and
duration of the Applicant’s ties to Australia
are substantial.
Accordingly, very significant weight must attach to this primary consideration
in favour of setting aside the reviewable
consideration 8.4 of Direction 110 - Best interests of minor children in
Australia affected by the decision
Applicant has no minor children. He does however have two nieces, one born in
December 2021, and another one born in May 2025.
They are both Australian
citizens and are daughters of his older brother, Mehdi. They are affected by any
decision to cancel the
visa as contemplated by paragraph 8.4 of Direction
Applicant his parents, his brother and his brother’s wife all live under
one roof at a residence in Cranbourne East.
was limited evidence concerning the Applicant’s nieces. The Applicant
stated that they all happily live in the same home,
in what he described as a
joined family setting. He explained that his nieces have become an important
part of his life because of
the fact that they live under the one roof. He
explained how he has developed close connections with both of them, but in
the eldest niece, who he said has a strong emotional connection to
him. So much so, that when it is suggested, the Applicant might
live apart from
her, it causes her to become upset. Some of that has already been touched on
when the strength, nature and duration
of ties to Australia were considered
previously. To that extent, those matters are referred to and repeated for the
purposes of the
analysis of this primary consideration.
Applicant’s brother gave evidence that he is a very good uncle to his
nieces. He corroborated the Applicant’s evidence
relationship that has developed with his eldest daughter. Apparently, the
Applicant regularly gives her toys and
treats. Additionally, he takes her to the
playground and quite regularly looks after her. In his evidence from the witness
explained that his eldest daughter, in more recent times, has questioned
him about “what is wrong with my uncle”. Apparently,
she is able to
deduce that there is some difficulty that the Applicant is facing without fully
comprehending what that might be.
8.4 of Direction 110 requires the decision-maker to make a determination about
whether refusal of a visa under s 501 is,
or is not, in the best interests of
minor children affected by the decision.
factors are articulated in paragraph 8.4(4) of Direction 110 which must be
considered by the Tribunal as decision-maker when
applying this primary
consideration. Although the evidence concerning the Applicant’s nieces is
comparatively spartan, the
Tribunal will do its best to address each of these
8.4.4(4) requires the Tribunal to consider the nature and duration of the
relationship between each of his nieces and the
Applicant. Less weight should
generally be given where the relationship is nonparental, and/or there is no
existing relationship
and/or there have been long periods of absence, or
meaningful contact.
is apparent that these somewhat unconventional living arrangements of the
Applicant and his family, as previously recorded, where
they all live under the
one roof in Cranbourne East, means that as a matter of course the relationship
between the Applicant and
each of his nieces, who it will be recalled are both
under the age of 5 years, is more likely than not to be a stronger one than
they were not living under the one roof. Additionally, the Tribunal is mindful
of the fact that the Applicant, his parents and
brothers have all come to
Australia in difficult circumstances having left Afghanistan due to the
difficulties there and then lived
for some years in Pakistan. The vicissitudes
of life that the family have experienced, as recounted in their evidence, would
likelihood mean that the family unit, or perhaps more accurately, the
extended family unit would be closer than those of conventional
families”. Even though the Applicant is not the parent of his nieces, the
Tribunal is prepared to accept that
he probably has a stronger relationship with
them than would otherwise be the case.
to the extent which the Applicant is likely to play a positive parental role in
the future with his nieces as contemplated by paragraph
8.4(4)(b) of Direction
110, it seems that he has played a positive role in their lives in the past and
will continue to do so, although
it is nonparental.
is no evidence to suggest that the impact of the Applicant’s offending has
had a negative impact on his nieces given their
relatively young ages and also
probably because he did not receive a custodial
As for any future
conduct on his part, the impact, if any, would depend on the nature of any
future offending together with whether
or not he continues to reside with them
under the same roof. Obviously, if he does not continue residing under the same
he were to offend in the future, the impact on his nieces is likely to
be less significant.
likely effect of any separation from the Applicant on his nieces once again is
somewhat difficult to assess. Given their comparatively
tender years, the impact
may be a little less than if they were substantially older. However, the
Tribunal has accepted the evidence
before it that the Applicant has developed
some level of special relationship with his eldest niece. Therefore, it is more
than not that she would be more affected by his absence both from the
household in which they all live, and her life when compared
to the younger
niece. Presumably, if the Applicant is removed from Australia there would be
options for him to maintain contact in
other ways, most likely via the Internet.
Depending on where he was to go to, it seems given the close family bonds that
brother would probably bring the nieces to see him on occasion for
visits at a suitable time when they are old enough.
has already been observed that there are the nieces’ parents who fulfil a
parental role. There are no known views of the
children other than as noted
above that with respect to the eldest niece she does appear to have a special
relationship with the
Applicant and is concerned about what is happening to him,
although she does not precisely know what. To the extent that this reflects
view on her part, it is taken into account by the Tribunal.
as aforesaid, there are no other factors in paragraph 8.4(4) of Direction 110
concerning the best interests of minor children
in Australia affected by the
decision that should be considered by the Tribunal with respect to this
Applicant contends that significant weight should be attached by the Tribunal to
this primary consideration in favour of setting
aside the reviewable decision.
Emphasis was placed on the matters been articulated above and what was described
as the significant
impact on the intergenerational family dynamic within which
the Applicant lives.
Respondent, on the other hand, not unsurprisingly, emphasises that he does not
play a parental role in either of his nieces’
lives. This is readily
apparent. Therefore, it is submitted this consideration should only carry very
limited weight in favour of
setting aside the reviewable decision.
Tribunal is persuaded that given the unique living circumstances of the
Applicant, and that he does live under the one roof with
his nieces, and by
reason of this fact has developed a closer relationship with his eldest niece
than might otherwise be the case,
that more weight than one might otherwise
attached to this primary consideration applies.
all circumstances, significant weight should be attached to this primary
consideration in favour of setting aside the reviewable
Primary consideration 8.5 of Direction 110 -
Expectations of the Australian Community
8.5(1) of Direction 110 provides that the Australian community expects
non-citizens to obey Australian laws while in Australia.
Where a non-citizen has
engaged in serious conduct in breach of this expectation, or where there is an
unacceptable risk that they
may do so, the Australian community, as a norm,
expects the Government not to allow such a non-citizen to enter or remain in
is also provided in paragraph 8.5(2) of Direction 110 that in addition, visa
cancellation or refusal, or non-revocation of the
mandatory cancellation of a
visa, may be appropriate simply because the nature of the character concerns or
offences is such that
the Australian community would expect that the person
should not be granted or continue to hold a visa. In particular, the Australian
community expects that the Australian Government can and should refuse entry to
non-citizens, if they raise serious character concerns
through conduct, in
Australia or elsewhere of the following kind, amongst others:
c) commission
of serious crimes against women, children or other vulnerable members of the
community such as the elderly or disabled;
in this context, “serious
crimes” include crimes of a violent or sexual nature, as well as other
serious crimes against
the elderly or other vulnerable persons in the form of
fraud, extortion, financial abuse/material exploitation or neglect
8.5(3) of Direction 110 provides that the above expectations of the Australian
community apply regardless of whether the
non-citizen poses a measurable risk of
causing physical harm to the Australian community.
is also provided in paragraph 8.5(4) of Direction 110 that this consideration is
as a whole, and in this
respect, decision-makers should proceed on the basis of the Government’s
views as articulated above,
without independently assessing the
community’s expectations in the particular case.
applying this primary consideration, it is instructive to refer to several
passages from the decision in
FYBR v Minister for Home Affairs
frequently referred to in cases before this Tribunal and the
Several passages from
that decision explain that, as is apparent from an examination of a paragraph of
the earlier Ministerial Direction,
Direction 99, which expressed similar
language, to the extent it contains a statement of the expectations of the
Australian community,
the clause is
Charlesworth J also explained, the clause imputes or ascribes to the whole of
the Australian community an expectation that wholly
aligns with the expectation
of the executive government of the day in respect of its subject
These expectations are
established and are to be applied as norms.
Mortimer J (as she then was) in
YNQY v Minister
for Immigration and Border
observed, in
substance, this consideration is adverse to any Applicant where they have failed
the character test and have been convicted
of serious crimes.
expectations of the Australian community should be determined by reference to
the provisions of Direction 110 itself, not by an
independent assessment
conducted by the Tribunal. The weight to be applied in undertaking the balancing
exercise prescribed by Direction
110 is ultimately a matter for determination by
the decision-maker, in this case the Tribunal, taking into account all relevant
factors including countervailing factors from the person’s
specific circumstances.
Applicant contends that limited weight should attached to this primary
consideration in favour of the exercises the discretion
to cancel the visa.
the other hand, the Respondent contends that this consideration should be
assigned very significant weight in favour of affirming
the reviewable
Tribunal considers that when one construes the language contained in paragraph
8.5 of Direction 110, which articulates the expectations
of the Australian
community as a norm and applies it to the facts before it in this application,
that expectation would be that the
discretion in s 501(2) of the Act to cancel
the visa should be exercised. There are several factors which give rise to this
conclusion.
is the fact that when one applies the language of Direction 110, and in
particular paragraph 8.1.1(1)(a), the Applicant’s
offending is viewed very
seriously by the Australian Government and the Australian community because it
was of a sexual nature against
of the Australian Community is the highest priority of Australian Government as
articulated in paragraph 5.2(2)
of Direction 110.
under paragraph 5.2(3)
of Direction 110 it is
prescribed that non-citizens who engage in criminal or other serious conduct
should expect to forfeit the
privilege of staying in Australia.
comparatively short time the Applicant was in Australia before he offended is a
situation that invokes the language used in paragraph
of Direction 110 which prescribes that Australia has a
low tolerance of any criminal or other serious conduct by non-citizens who
been participating in and contributing to, the Australian community for a short
period of time.
Tribunal has earlier in these reasons stated why it has concluded that the
Applicant knew when he offended that what he was doing
was wrong and
offending was opportunistic and committed against a vulnerable young girl
entitled to go about her business while travelling on
public transport in a safe
environment. It was plainly unacceptable, and he knew better. It has already
been mentioned that the Applicant’s
father and his brother explained that
the Applicant had a clear understanding of what was right and wrong. Further in
their community,
religion, and their household this type of offending is
question then becomes the Tribunal what weight to attach to this primary
consideration. Undertaking that assessment is not an
Tribunal is not persuaded that very significant weight should be attached to
this primary consideration in favour of affirming
the reviewable decision, as
contended for by the Respondent. However, it is not persuaded that such little,
if any, weight be attached
to it as contended by the Applicant.
the Applicant’s offending was clearly very serious and plainly
unacceptable, the Tribunal considers that more latitude
than usual in favour of
an Applicant should be granted in this instance. There is the evidence of his
rehabilitation and that he
has not offended since the one day in question in
February 2018. The unique position of his intergenerational family living
arrangements
do place him in a slightly different category. Additionally, his
removal to Afghanistan, about which more will be said later, when
consideration
Extent of impediments if removed
is considered,
would be particularly difficult for him as he has not lived there for many years
and would clearly be an outsider.
The Tribunal is also mindful of the impacts on
his family, particularly his mother, and to a lesser degree his father, which
be devastating for them. The profound effect on his mother should not be
underestimated. The Applicant’s relatively commendable
work history, also
in this instance, does warrant some acknowledgement in his favour.
the reasons explained Tribunal has concluded that he is a low-risk of
reoffending.
Tribunal is also mindful of the risks that the Applicant will face if he is
removed from Australia and returned to Afghanistan.
He left when he was a
comparatively young boy, he is a Hazari, clearly identifiable as such and has no
family or other connections
with that country. More about the risks that the
Applicant might face if he were to return to Afghanistan will be addressed later
in these reasons in the section addressing the other consideration namely,
Legal consequences of decision under section 501
expectations of the Australian community, as contemplated by this primary
consideration, it seems for the reasons explained, is
likely to extend some
latitude in the Applicant’s favour by reason of these matters.
all these considerations the Tribunal considers that, even though the weight
attached to this primary consideration is in favour
of affirming the reviewable
decision and cancelling the visa, for the reasons explained only limited such
weight will be attached
Paragraph 9.1 of Direction 110
– Legal consequences of the decision
9.1.2 Direction 110
Non-citizens not covered by a protection
, identifies several elements. All the subparagraphs comprising
this paragraph of Direction 110 are referred to for their full force
and effect.
However, briefly the substance of some of them will be outlined below.
paragraph 9.1.2(1) claims which may give rise to international
non-refoulment
obligations can also be raised by a non-citizen who is not the subject of a
protection finding in responding to a notice of intention
to consider
cancellation of a visa under s 501 of the Act. Where such claims are raised,
they must be considered.
paragraph 9.1.2 notes, however, where it is open to the non-citizen to apply for
a protection visa, it is not necessary at the
s 501 stage to consider
non-refoulement
issues in the same level of detail as those types of
issues are considered in a protection visa application.
Respondent contends, or perhaps more accurately, notes that the Tribunal can
elect to proceed on the basis that even when the
Applicant applies for a
protection visa any protection claims he has will be assessed through the
appropriate statutory process.
Quite understandably, reliance is placed on the
decision of the High Court in
Plaintiff M1/2021 v
Minister for Home Affairs
The Tribunal will not go into an excursion surrounding the analysis of the High
Court in that matter, other than to observe that
although it involved a
consideration of a different section of the Act (s 501CA(4)), nonetheless one
available outcome for the Tribunal
as decision-maker is to defer assessment of
whether the Applicant is owed
non-refoulement
obligations on the basis
that it is open to him to apply for a protection visa.
Tribunal will not defer such an assessment. There is a significant amount of
material before it concerning the Applicant’s
non-refoulement
Given this material including the evidence not only of the
Applicant, but that of his father, which does assume considerable importance
the purposes of assessing this other consideration, it sees no reason not to
address the material before it. In doing so, it
should read, identify,
understand and evaluate the Applicant’s representations.
this context, it is important to note that the Applicant’s father came to
Australia as an unauthorised maritime arrival at
Christmas Island in March 2010.
He made a claim for protection which was assessed and determined. A protection
visa was granted to
him, and he was released into the community in June 2011.
The Tribunal considers this to be an important factor, amongst others,
the pendulum against deferring an assessment of whether the Applicant is owed
non-refoulement
obligations. Presumably, were the Applicant to make an
application for a protection visa, the same or similar grounds to those made
by his father in relation to his application would similarly be relied on by him
the Applicant’s Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions the essence of
his claims for protection within the meaning of
s 36(5) of the Act are
identified as follows:
(a) Race and/ethnicity: Hazara;
(b) Religion: Shia Muslim;
(c) Actual or imputed political opinion: Pro-Western, Anti-Taliban and
Anti-Islamic extremist; and
(d) Membership of a particular social group: Hazara Shia males, returnees from
the West and a male with psychological
useful starting point in assessing the Applicant’s claims for protection
it seems to the Tribunal is to briefly record some
of the observations on these
topics contained in the
DFAT Thematic Report on Political and Security
Developments in Afghanistan (August 2021 to January 2022)
the DFAT report”). That document
contains a very useful overview of relevant conditions concerning these matters
in Afghanistan.
to the DFAT report, Afghanistan is an ethnically, linguistically and religiously
diverse country. Insofar as the Hazara
are concerned, they are described as an
ethnic group of distinctive East Asian appearance, native to the Hazarajat
region of Afghanistan.
Their language, Hazaragi, is a writing of version that is
mutually intelligible with Dari. The majority of Hazara are Shia.
DFAT report stated that the takeover of Kabul and most of Afghanistan by the
predominantly Sunni and Pashtu Taliban in 1996 marked
a period of considerable
repression and hardship for the Hazara nationwide: the worst single recorded
massacre in the country’s
recent history took place in Mazar-e-Sharif in
August 1998, when the Taliban massacred at least 2,000 Hazara. Many Hazara fled
Afghanistan
during this period to escape Taliban oppression. Of course, the
Taliban in August 2021 reclaimed control of Afghanistan.
return of the Taliban in 2021 was met with great fear by the Hazara community.
Further, 2 of ISKP’s mass-casualty terror
attacks, along with smaller
attacks since mid-August 2021, have directly targeted Shi’te mosques
chiefly used by the
DFAT report further noted that since its takeover in August 2021, the Taliban
has summarily executed Hazaras who were former members
of the security forces.
Furthermore, hundreds of Hazara families have been forcibly evicted from their
The Taliban claim such evictions are property
disputes. However, the DFAT report states that NGO’s have described such
as a form of ethnic cleansing. Therefore, DFAT assesses that Hazaras in
Afghanistan face a high risk of harassment and violence from
both the Taliban
and ISKP on the basis of their ethnicity and sectarian affiliation.
from what has already stated, there is the question of religion. The DFAT report
noted that the overwhelming majority of Afghan
Shi’a are Hazara. It
assesses that the Shi’a face a high risk of being targeted by the ISKP and
other militant groups
on the basis of their religious filiation when assembling
in large and identifiable groups, such as during demonstrations or attending
mosques during major religious festivals. Such risk is said to increase those
living in Shi’a majority or ethnic Hazara neighbourhoods
in major cities
such as Kabul and Herat. The Tribunal should pause to observe that were the
Applicant to be returned to Afghanistan
the likelihood of him living in such a
neighbourhood would be very high indeed.
UNHCR Guidance Note on Afghanistan (Update11),
September 2025
makes similar observations to that of the DFAT report. The
contents of that note are referred to again in its entirety. It reports
Shi’as frequently live in hiding or fear, have been beaten and harassed
and faced restrictions, physical violence, arbitrary
arrest and detention. In
particular, Hazaras face discrimination mistreatment from other ethnic groups,
and often from local de facto
officials. Similarly, it noted that Shi’a
who are Hazara have been targeted in widespread and systematic attacks by ISKP,
repeated attacks on mosques and the Hazara neighbourhood of Dasht-e-Barchi
in Kabul causing hundreds of casualties.
matter of concern arises from the UNHCR Guidance Note is that in the light of
available information about widespread human
rights violations committed by the
de facto authorities, and in the absence of an independent judiciary or court
system, the UNHCR
does not consider that the de facto authorities are willing or
able to provide protection to Afghans at risk of persecution, such
Applicant might be facing were he returned to Afghanistan.
United Kingdom, Home Office
“Country Policy and Information Note
Afghanistan: Fear of the Taliban”
Version 5.0, August 2025, has also
been considered. Once again, that Information Note has been read by the
Tribunal. Several things
emerge which support the Applicant’s claims. It
includes that ethnic Hazaras continue to face abuse by the Taliban and are,
general, likely to face a real risk of persecution. Similar to the other reports
considered and referred to above, it observes
that Hazaras are also a major
target for ISKP. Also, where a person has a well-founded fear of persecution
from the Taliban, which
it seems the Applicant almost certainly would have were
he to return to Afghanistan, they will not, in general, be able to obtain
protection. This is of much concern.
Shia and Hazara’s
”. It states that Hazara
loss of employment and
education, denial of humanitarian aid, forced
displacement. Further, it stated that Hazaras are specifically targeted not only
tribal and ethnic reasons, but because of anti-Shia sectarianism as well. It
observes that they have continuously, since the Taliban’s
inception, been
victims of unbelievable human rights violations. Another source recorded in that
note stated that it is difficult
to believe that today’s Taliban with such
intense genocidal hatred in its past could be capable of reform. This is a
significant
and compelling warning.
prospect of the Applicant also being targeted because he is perceived to be
“Westernised” or “Pro-Western”
is also a risk to someone
such as the Applicant. Taliban reactions can vary from place to place. There
have been examples of the
Taliban arbitrarily detaining individuals whose
clothing and appearance have a Western style to them. Specific examples or
why this occurred, included such things as not having a compliant beard
length, hair style or wearing Western clothes. Certainly,
it appears that this
would more likely than not occur if the Applicant returned to Afghanistan
dressed as he no doubt regularly does
in Australia, or similar to it, he is
highly likely to be targeted.
UNHCR Guidance Note records that given the volatility of the situation
throughout Afghanistan, coupled with the grave economic
and humanitarian
situation in Afghanistan internal relocation is not a viable alternative or
is another matter that is relevant to an assessment of this other consideration.
It will be recalled that the Applicant was
assessed by Dr Kwok as suffering from
Major Depressive Disorder. The symptoms of that condition have been previously
explained. The
Applicant has not undertaken any treatment for this mental health
condition. He has not taken any medication for it. It appears that
suffered from such conditions for quite some years, and probably to a greater or
lesser degree, since he offended.
Ferrari in her second report of 17 August 2020, which it will be recalled was
sought specifically for an opinion regarding his
then current mental health and
applicable diagnosis, diagnosed him as suffering from 2 mental health
conditions.
Those conditions
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
ultimately the result of experiences he was exposed to after fleeing the war in
Afghanistan, living in uncertain circumstances
in Pakistan, and on making his
way to Australia. She also stated he developed
Major Depressive Disorder with
anxious distress
in the context of his criminal offending and stress of this
on him, his family, particularly due to guilt, shame, and remorse that
actions which were largely a result of the circumstances of his upbringing,
misunderstanding due to cross-cultural differences
and poor knowledge of
societal norms and laws. She also observed he had experienced a further episode
of depression since being informed
that the visa may be cancelled.
access to mental health treatment overlaps with another consideration of
Direction 110, namely paragraph 9.2
Extent of impediments if
, nonetheless the Tribunal considers that the submissions made on
his behalf that the question is relevant in assessing this other
consideration
is well-made.
evidence before the Tribunal indicates that in Afghanistan, for the vast
majority of the population, there are significant barriers
to accessing
treatment for mental health issues. Coupled with this difficulty, there is also
a considerable cultural stigma surrounding
mental illness and a corresponding
lack of outpatient medical
The reality is, it
seems to the Tribunal, that if the Applicant were to be returned to Afghanistan,
he simply will not be able to
access any treatment at all for his Major
Depressive Disorder. This on top of his removal to Afghanistan, in any event,
highly likely to only lead to an exacerbation of his already existing
mental health conditions. He would be subjected to the stigma
attaching to
people with mental health conditions. It is another factor that weighs in his
Applicant contends that in assessing the weight to be applied to this other
consideration, Tribunal should include that it weighs
strongly in favour of
setting aside the reviewable decision and not cancelling the visa.
the other hand, the Respondent submits limited weight should be placed on this
other consideration in the Applicant’s favour.
Tribunal accepts the contentions of the Applicant that the weight to be applied
to this other consideration should be strongly
in favour of setting aside the
reviewable decision. It does so after having considered the substantial material
before it concerning
the Applicant’s
non-refoulement
claims. The
substance of the independent material placed before the Tribunal and considered
by it have been articulated above. Given
the analysis contained in that
material, which are from reputable sources, the Tribunal concludes that there is
a distinct and real
risk that the Applicant will face harm, as contemplated by
this paragraph of Direction 110. On their face, they trigger
non-refoulement
obligations. These claims need to be viewed with a degree
of understanding and realism. The Applicant has not lived in Afghanistan
many years, more probably than not, were he to return there he would be readily
identifiable as Hazara and at great risk, as
already noted. He has no family or
social network there, who may in some way be able to offer him limited
protection, if possible.
it has already been noted that the Applicant’s father made a claim for
protection which was assessed and granted. He
was issued with a protection visa.
No doubt, if the Applicant were to apply for a protection visa, the same grounds
would be relied
upon by him. Whilst one cannot speculate, then would have to be
a significant probability that such claims on the part of the Applicant
Paragraph 9.2 of Direction 110 – Extent of
impediments if removed
9.2(1) of Direction 110 provides that decision-makers must consider the extent
of any impediments that the non-citizen may
face if removed from Australia to
their home country, in establishing themselves and maintaining basic living
standards (in the context
of what is generally available to other citizens of
that country), taking into account:
(a) the non-citizen’s age and health;
(b) whether there are substantial language or cultural barriers; and
(c) any social, medical, and/or economic support available to them in that
previously noted, the Applicant is presently 28 years of age.
is fluent in Hazaragi, a language spoken in certain parts of Afghanistan,
including a select neighbourhood of Kabul where people
of Hazara ethnicity
congregate or reside. There are significant Hazara populations in several
provinces of Afghanistan including
Bamiyan, Daykundi and Ghazni. In other
provinces the Hazara population is much smaller.
for his physical health he appears to be in relatively good condition. He was
for many years able to work in a bakery and as a
roof tiler. Roof tiling is
demanding physical work that requires the employee to carry out a variety of
tasks in a range of weather
conditions. It includes lifting significant weights
and course repetitive actions throughout the working day. From the evidence
the Tribunal, it was apparent that the Applicant did his job diligently
and without succumbing to the physical demands of such work.
Also, his skills as
a roof tiler may, although the Tribunal is not certain, assist him in obtaining
some kind of meaningful employment
were he to return to Afghanistan.
Applicant’s mental health has been addressed in several parts of these
reasons previously. It should be repeated that Dr
Kwok diagnosed him as
suffering from a Major Depressive Disorder which remains untreated. Similarly,
Ms Ferrari in August 2020 diagnosed
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Major Depressive Disorder with anxious distress
as outlined in
the analysis of the other consideration in paragraph 9.1 of Direction 110,
Legal consequences of decision under s 501
That analysis
is referred to and repeated for the purposes of this other consideration. Whilst
when it comes to seeking treatment
for his mental health issues were he to be
removed, he will be in the same position as other citizens of Afghanistan, in
the context
of what is generally available to them in that country, the
realities are that his conditions would more probably than not remain
Ferrari in her second report of 17 August 2020 also emphasised the likelihood
that removal to Afghanistan would cause a severe
decline in his mental health
and functioning, (which is already not particularly good) particularly as he is
an individual already
susceptible to a depressive
This conclusion on the
part of Ms Ferrari seems highly likely and is accepted by the Tribunal.
terms of any social support available to the Applicant were he to be removed to
Afghanistan, the Tribunal considers that there
is unlikely to be any. As best
the Tribunal can assess the evidence on this topic, the remainder of the
Applicant’s extended
family left Afghanistan quite some years ago. In
evidence before the Tribunal was an “
Attachment to
Personal Circumstances
document in tabular form identifies many aunts, uncles and cousins. Apart from
one who was since passed on, the remainder are
in Pakistan. The Applicant and
his father were probed on this question when they were in the witness box. It
was suggested that they
might in some way be able to assist the Applicant were
he returned to Afghanistan. Both the Applicant and his father said there had
been no contact with these relatives for many years and they would be unlikely
to be able to render any assistance to him. The Tribunal
accepts this evidence.
It should not be lost sight of that the Applicant has no legal right to reside
in Pakistan in any event. It
seems that the Pakistani authorities are taking a
harder approach to Afghan citizens seeking refuge in their country. In these
circumstances,
there can be no guarantee that if the Applicant were to travel to
that country that he would be able to stay there, obtain support
relatives and re-establish himself to a reasonable level. It seems an
unrealistic expectation.
sister is in Pakistan but seeking to move to Australia, which most likely will
occur sooner rather than later. The evidence was
that she has been supported by
the Applicant’s broader multigenerational family in Melbourne for some
years. One cannot see
that she would be able to assist the Applicant whether he
relocated to either Afghanistan or Pakistan.
Respondent placed some emphasis both in cross-examination of the Applicant and
his father, plus in submissions, on the expectation
that if the Applicant were
removed to Afghanistan his broader family would provide some level of financial
assistance to him. They
stated that they would be unlikely to as they have
enough commitments to meet here. Whilst this response was understandable in the
circumstances, given the family’s consistent pattern of supporting each
other in adversity and those present in Australia sending
money to Pakistan as
the Applicant’s father firstly did, then the Applicant and his brothers
have continued to do, it seems
unlikely were he removed to Afghanistan that they
would leave him destitute in Afghanistan. Most likely they would assist him in
some way even if it caused them some level of financial difficulty.
is the matter for the Tribunal to determine what weight to attach to this other
consideration. Not unsurprisingly, the Applicant
contends that significant
weight attaches to this consideration in favour of setting aside the reviewable
Respondent candidly acknowledges that this factor weighs very significantly in
favour of not cancelling the visa, or perhaps put
the other way, setting aside
the reviewable decision.
Tribunal considers that very significant weight should attach to this other
consideration in favour of setting aside the reviewable
decision. It has
outlined the difficulties of the Applicant will face if he returns to
Afghanistan. They are significant impediments.
One should not lose sight of the
fact that he has not been to Afghanistan for a very long time. He has no family
or social network
there. Additionally, his significant mental health conditions
are highly likely to be exacerbated by a return there and in any event,
have no access to any problem mental health treatment.
9.3 of Direction 110 – Impact on Australian business interests
was no evidence before the Tribunal that related to this other consideration.
The parties acknowledged that it was not applicable
to this application.
Therefore, no weight will be attached to it.
reaching a final decision on this application when assessing collectively the
weight in favour of cancellation of the visa against
the cumulative weight of
those considerations in favour of setting aside the reviewable decision, the
Tribunal considers that it
is a matter that is very finely balanced.
are two primary considerations that are in favour of the exercise of the
discretion contained in s 501 of the Act to cancel
the reasons explained, the nature and seriousness of the Applicant’s
offending, which is simply deplorable, weighs very
heavily against the
Applicant. This is understandably so and arises not only from the facts of the
offending engaged in by the Applicant
but of course applying the relevant
paragraphs of Direction 110 to the circumstances surrounding that offending.
Ample details have
been provided earlier explaining why the Tribunal reached the
conclusions that it did with respect to the Applicant’s offending.
very serious offending against a vulnerable young girl. The Applicant knew
to the expectations of the Australian community, the Tribunal has found that
although weight in favour of cancellation of the visa
should be applied, it has
concluded that only limited weight should be attached to it. Some latitude has
been given, more than usual
has been extended in his favour.
then remains for the Tribunal to consider the primary and other considerations
that are in the Applicant’s favour.
Significant
weight has been attached by the Tribunal in favour of the Applicant with respect
to the primary consideration concerning
the strength, nature and duration of
ties to Australia on this part. This is understandable given that, save for his
sister residing
in Pakistan, his entire intergenerational family has moved to
Australia. They have successfully made their way and established themselves.
Applicant has to a significant degree, contributed to his family’s
positive progress. It is likely that if he is permitted
to stay in Australia he
will continue to contribute towards his family and its progress here.
and perhaps somewhat unusually, with respect to the primary consideration of the
best interests of minor children affected
by the decision, for the reasons
explained by the Tribunal it has attached significant weight in favour of
setting aside the reviewable
decision. He has a somewhat unique and different
bond with his oldest niece, which the Tribunal recognises.
the other considerations assessed by the Tribunal have weighed in the
Applicant’s favour. It has found with respect to
the legal consequences of
the decision that significant weight should be applied to that other
consideration in favour of setting
aside the reviewable decision. It has found
that there is a distinct and real risk of the Applicant facing harm were he to
to Afghanistan, a country that he has not lived in for many years, having
left is a comparatively young boy.
the question of the extent of impediments if the Applicant was removed to
Afghanistan significant weight has been attached to this
other consideration.
Clearly, the Applicant would face major obstacles to re-establishing himself
were he to return to Afghanistan.
Apart from the fact that he has no remaining
family in Afghanistan and no social network, his significant mental health
would not be treated, and more probably than not, would be exacerbated
by such a return.
Tribunal includes that the weight cumulatively attaching to those primary
considerations and other considerations in favour of
setting aside the
reviewable decision exceeds that applied to the two primary considerations that
weigh in favour of exercising the
discretion in s 501(2) of the Act to cancel
the visa. Accordingly, the reviewable decision will be set aside. It is setting
the reviewable decision the necessary consequence of it is that the visa
is restored. However, insofar as it is necessary to make
such a finding, the
visa is restored.
SOME FINAL OBSERVATIONS
Tribunal considers it is appropriate to make some final observations in
conclusion of these reasons.
wishes to state that in making the findings that it has, it should not be
inferred or in some way implicitly concluded, that it
is critical of the
decision of the Delegate. It should be recalled that this application is a
hearing de novo. The Delegate did not
have the benefit of approximately two and
a half of extensive evidence, together with detailed written and oral
submissions. Additionally,
the Delegate did not have the benefit of the report
of Dr Kwok, nor hearing from her, as this Tribunal did, when she was in the
box. It was an important factor.
the Tribunal would like to acknowledge the considerable assistance it obtained
from the advocates for both parties. The application
was conducted occasionally
in a spirited fashion, but always in an environment of professionalism and
goodwill. Both advocates put
their best foot forward. The written and oral
submissions were of a high standard, accurately identified the matters needed to
addressed by the Tribunal and were of much
assistance.
CONCLUSION AND DECISION
reviewable decision is set aside, and the Applicant’s visa
.....................
...............
Member R Cameron
Dated: 13 November 2025
Date of hearing:
28-30 October 2025
Representative for the Applicant:
Solicitors for the Applicant.
Ruth Hamnet of Counsel
Carina Ford Immigration Lawyers
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Catherine Oppel, Australian Government Solicitor
Published on 14 January 2022.
It should be observed, that in paragraph 1.5 of that document it states that it
updates and replaces
the DFAT Country Information Report on Afghanistan
published on 27 June 2019. That document was included in the HB at 14.
Paragraph 3 of the Statement of
Facts, Issues and Contentions lodged on behalf of the Applicant dated 3 October
Direction 110 commenced on 21
This concession is contained in
paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Applicant's Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions
lodged with the
Tribunal on 3 October 2025. Further, such concession was made by
Counsel for the Applicant in their opening and closing submissions.
A copy of the CCO is at HB, 88.
The Applicant signed the document acknowledging he understood the effect and
conditions of such Order
and consented to it being made.
The Notice of Reporting
Obligations pursuant to the
Sex Offenders Registration Act 2004
See for instance the report of
Dr Kwok of 6 October 2025 at paragraph 41 where she stated the Applicant's
symptoms meet the criteria
for a Major Depressive Disorder as defined by the
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5).
Dr Kwok in her evidence stated
that she asked a question of the Applicant is similar terms when she conducted
her assessment of him
and he also replied, "no".
[2025] FCA 1023
Paragraphs 18 and 28 of Dr
Kwok's report of 6 October 2025 are referred to.
Dr Kwok’s report is at
Ms Ferrari's first report of
10 May 2018 at paragraph 38. HB, 98.
Paragraph 8.4(4)(c) of
Direction 110.
(2019) 272 FCR 454.
[2017] FCA 1466
, 27-8 [76].
Kelly v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship,
Migrant Services and Multicultural Affairs
[2022] FCA 396
[2022] HCA 27
(2022) 275 CLR 582
, [30] and [38].
Paragraph 61 of the
Applicant's Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions dated 3 October 2025.
Islamic State in Khorasan
HB, 104 at [83] and
DFAT COUNTRY
INFORMATION REPORT AFGHANISTAN” 27 June 2019
. Although such document
is some years old it seems that its observations concerning mental health issues
in Afghanistan are still
relevant. (HB, 126, paragraph 2.27.)
Paragraphs [85], [86], [87]
and [88] of Ms Ferrari’s report of 17 August 2020 are referred to. (HB,
RTF format (13.5 MB)
Signed PDF/A format