Granato & Granato (No. 2) [2021] FamCA 635; (27 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Granato & Granato (No. 2)
File number(s):
BRC5179 of 2017
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
FAMILY LAW - CHILDREN
– Unacceptable
risk of sexual harm - Where the mother alleges the father is an unacceptable
risk of sexual harm to the child
due to historical allegations, alleged child
pornography in the father’s possession and allegations made by the child
Where it is found the father does not pose an unacceptable risk of harm
to the child - Where little weight can be placed on historical
allegations
– Where it is likely that the mother has fabricated allegations that the
father possessed child pornography –
Where the child’s allegations
of sexual abuse are unreliable and made in the context of being enmeshed in the
parental conflict.
FAMILY LAW – CHILD ABUSE
- Where the
mother will not promote the child’s relationship with the father –
Where the mother has involved the child
in the parental dispute and this
involvement amounts to abuse - Where the impact on the child being involved in
the dispute is likely
to have long term impacts – Where the child has
aligned with the mother and fully rejected the father.
– What parenting order is proper – Where
despite the father not presenting an unacceptable risk of harm, the child
to see him and demonstrates strong resistance that places her at risk in
the event of removal from her mother – Where the father
lacks judgment and
insight - Where a third party was proposed to care for the child - Where it is
found not to be in the child’s
best interests to remove her from the care
of her mother – Where the child is to live with the mother.
Legislation:
Child Protection Act 1999
Evidence Act 1995
Family Law Act 1975
Cases cited:
Bant & Clayton
[2019] FamCAFC 198
(2019) FLC 93-924
Banks & Banks
[2015] FamCAFC 36
(2015) FLC 93-637
Baghti & Baghti
[2015] FamCAFC 71
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
(1938) 60 CLR 336
Johnson & Page
[2007] FamCA 1235
(1988) 166 CLR 69
N and S and the Separate Representative
[1995] FamCA 139
(1996) FLC 92-655
[1997] FamCA 48
(1997) FLC 92-776
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submissions:
Date of hearing:
12 – 16 July 2021
Counsel for the Applicant:
Mr Linklater-Steele
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Parker Family Law
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Power Legal
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Legal Aid Queensland
BRC5179 of 2017
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. X (“the child”) born ... 2009 live with Ms Granato (“the
2. The mother is restrained from changing the child’s surname.
3. The mother is restrained from:
(a) Audio recording the child; or
(b) Audio recording any conversations involving the child; or
(c) Video recording the child; or
(d) Video recording any conversations involving the child;
Where such recordings involve the child speaking about:
(a) Allegations in relation to the father; or
(b) Allegations about the father's conduct or behaviour towards the child and/or
the mother.
4. The mother is restrained from causing or permitting a third party
(a) Audio recording the child; or
(b) Audio recording any conversations involving the child; or
(c) Video recording the child; or
(d) Video recording any conversations involving the child;
Where such recordings involve the child speaking about:
(a) Allegations in relation to the father; or
(b) Allegations about the father's conduct or behaviour towards the child and/or
Unless such recordings are permitted by law for the protection of the
5. The mother is restrained from providing to any school the child
(a) A copy of any affidavit filed in the family law
proceedings or the domestic violence proceedings between the mother and the
or between the father and any other person; or
(b) A copy of any document (including any recording) produced to a court in
response to a subpoena; or
(c) A copy of any document (including any recording) received as an exhibit in
any court proceedings between the mother and the father
or the father and any
other person; or
(d) A copy of any document (including any recording) disclosed in any court
proceedings between the mother and the father or between
the father and any
other person.
6. The mother shall keep the child informed of the father's contact details,
in the event the mother is advised of a change to the
father's contact
7. The mother shall keep the father informed of:
(a) The name and address of the school attended by the
(b) The names and addresses of any treating medical or other health
practitioners who treat the child; and
(c) Any serious medical condition or illness suffered by the child.
8. The mother and the father shall keep each other informed at all times of
their respective residential address, email address, telephone
numbers and shall notify the other within twenty-four (24) hours of any change
9. The mother and the father are restrained from denigrating the other or
their respective family members to, or in front of, or within
the hearing of,
the child and shall direct third parties to refrain from denigrating either
party or their family to, or in front
of, or within hearing of, the child and
failing that third party’s compliance with such a direction, shall remove
from that environment immediately.
10. The father is at liberty to attend the child's school at all such times
as permitted by the school but in particular:
(a) For the purpose of attending interviews with the
child's classroom teacher/s, or other school staff, provided the interview
on a date and time that the mother would not reasonably be expected to be
in attendance; or
(b) Upon invitation from the child to attend events at the school that parents
ordinarily attend.
11. This Order authorises any treating medical practitioner to release to the
father any information or documentation about the child’s
condition and/or treatment that they are lawfully authorised to release to a
12. This Order authorises any school attended by the child to provide to the
father on his request, and at his expense, information
educational progress and other school related activities including copies of
school reports, photographs, certificates
and awards obtained by the child.
13. The mother is restrained from applying for a passport in the name of or
including the child X born ... 2009 until the child attains
the age of 16 years
on ... 2025.
14. This Honourable Court requests that until ... 2025 the Australian Federal
Police place X born ... 2009 on the family law watch
list at all points of
international arrivals and departures in Australia for the purpose of preventing
removal of the child from
Australia in breach of this Order.
15. The Marshal and all officers of the Australian Federal Police and the
police forces of the States and Territories are requested
and authorised to give
effect to this Order.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED BY CONSENT
16. Until the child attains the age of 16 years of age on ... 2025, the
mother and her servants and agents are restrained from taking
or sending or
attempting to take or send the child X born ... 2009, a female, from the
Commonwealth of Australia.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED
17. Pursuant to s 65DA(2) and
Family Law Act 1975
the particulars of the obligations this Order create and the particulars of the
consequences that may follow if a person contravenes
this Order and details of
who can assist parties adjust to and comply with an order are set out in the
Fact Sheet attached hereto
and these particulars are included in this Order.
18. Any outstanding application be otherwise dismissed.
Order does not prevent the father from spending time with or communicating with
the child if there is agreement between the mother
and father for that to occur
or if there is agreement between the father and the child for that to occur.
This Order does not prevent
the father from visiting the child at her school if
agreed to by the child and permitted by the school.
Order does not change the lawful rights of each parent to exercise parental
responsibility in relation to the child. The parents
are not required to make
decisions jointly about major long terms issues as that term is defined in
Family Law Act 1975
is noted that pursuant to the Order made by this Honourable Court on 16 July
2021 the mother is required to bring the child to
the Child Dispute Services on
level 3 of the Commonwealth Law Courts Building North Quay Brisbane to
facilitate a family consultant
explaining this Order and the reasons to the
further noted that this Honourable Court has arranged for an interpreter to be
present when judgment is delivered to translate
the order and the reasons to the
strongly recommended that the father engage with Dr B, or such other
psychologist that he chooses, prior to attempting any communication
child or the school and for that purpose he is at liberty to provide to her a
copy of the reasons for judgment dated 27
August 2021.
strongly recommended that the mother engage with a psychologist to assist her to
gain some insight into the damaging impact
of her behaviour on the child and for
that purpose she is at liberty to provide to the psychologist a copy of the
reasons for judgment
dated 27 August 2021.
respectfully requested that the Independent Children’s Lawyer bring [106]
– [116] of the reasons for judgment dated
27 August 2021 to the attention
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
Section 121
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it
an offence, except in very limited circumstances, to publish proceedings that
identify persons, associated persons,
or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Granato & Granato
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
1 Mr Granato (“the father”) and Ms Granato (“the
mother”) have been in dispute about parenting matters for
at least the
last four years. They have one child together. X will be 12 years of age in
2 Until November 2020 the child was spending alternate weekends with the
father from after school Friday until before school Monday
and in the other week
from Wednesday after school until Friday before school. The father has not spent
any time with the child since
13 November 2020. The child refuses to see the
father. Even with reassurance from the family consultant, Ms D, on 3 June 2021,
child refused to participate in the family report interview process and no
observation of the father and child was possible.
3 The mother contends that the father poses an unacceptable risk of harm to
the child and that any future time spent by the father
with the child needs to
be supervised or in a public place. The father denies all allegations against
him and contends that the child
should live with him.
4 For the reasons which follow, I propose to order that the child continue to
live with the mother. I do not propose to make any order
for the father to spend
time with the child but nor do I intend to restrain him from doing so. However,
the father would be well
advised to heed advice (previously received by him)
not intend to make any order varying the statutory rights of each parent to make
major long term parenting decisions. The reality
is that the mother has largely
been making those decisions in any event.
PROPOSALS OF THE PARTIES
5 The father’s primary proposal is for the
child to live with him and spend no time and have no communication with the
for nine months before resuming time with her on a supervised basis, but
only if she has completed successful
The father’s
alternative proposal is for the child to live with a friend, Ms N, and for both
he and the mother to spend supervised
time with the child after therapy has been
commenced with Dr B.
6 The mother’s primary position is for the child to continue to live
with her and spend supervised time with the father. In
the alternative, she
proposes that the father spend unsupervised time with the child in a public
7 The Independent Children’s Lawyer (“ICL”) proposes that
the child continue to live with the mother and that she
have sole parental
responsibility. Further, that the father spend no time with the child, not
because he poses an unacceptable risk
of harm to the child but because the child
refuses to see him.
8 At the time the matter was set down for trial, the
parties identified the significant issues for determination and confirmed during
the trial that the following list accurately and adequately identify those
(1) Does the father pose an unacceptable risk of sexual
harm to the child?
(2) Does the mother have the capacity/willingness to promote the relationship
between the child and the father?
(3) Has the mother involved the child in the dispute between the parents and
what impact, if any, has that had on the child?
(4) Will the mother comply with court orders and ensure that the child spend
time with the father, if ordered?
(5) Can the child have a relationship with both parents if she continues to live
with the mother?
(6) If the child remains in the primary care of the mother, should she be able
to travel to Country E with the mother on holiday?
(7) Do the parents have the capacity to make joint parenting
9 There were some unusual procedural features in this case.
10 Firstly, on day four of the trial, the mother
was granted leave to tender historical material from family law proceedings
the father and his first wife, Ms F. The material for which leave was
granted comprised the following:
(a) Affidavit of Ms F filed 7 April
(b) Affidavit of Ms F filed 9 February 1983;
(c) Affidavit of Ms F filed 4 March 1983;
(d) Affidavit of Dr G filed 11 February 1983;
(e) Affidavit of Dr G filed 4 March 1983;
(f) Affidavit of the father filed 11 March 1983; and
(g) Orders made on 22 September 1980, 11 March 1983, 23 January 1984, 11 July
1985 and 13 January 1987 (there was no formal order
taken out on 13 January 1987
but it is common ground that the father’s application to spend time with
his first child, H, was
struck out).
11 Although there was most certainly prejudice to the father by the late
reliance upon this material, it was determined to be relevant
to the assessment
of the magnitude of any risk posed by the father to the child. As a consequence,
the father was granted leave to
tender a number of documents filed by him in the
1980’s family law proceedings and the father’s counsel had the
opportunity
to cross-examine the father’s first wife at some length.
12 The material the father was granted leave to tender from those earlier
proceedings comprised the following:
(a) Affidavit of Ms J (the first
wife’s sister) filed 9 February 1983;
(b) Paragraphs 1 – 11 of the affidavit of Ms F filed 13 January 1984;
(c) Affidavit of Mr K (General Practitioner) filed 16 January 1984;
(d) Affidavit of Mr I Granato (the late paternal grandfather) filed 20 January
(e) Paragraphs 7 and 8 of the affidavit of Ms J filed 16 January 1984;
(f) Affidavit of Ms L (the father’s cousin-in-law) filed 24 January
(g) Affidavit of the father filed 31 August 1983;
(h) Affidavit of the father filed 22 June 1981; and
(i) Affidavit of Ms M (General Practitioner) filed 17 January
13 Secondly, when it became obvious during the trial that I had misgivings
it led me to raise the
possibility of placing the child with a person other than either parent, if a
suitable person could be found.
The father was granted leave to adduce further
evidence in chief from a witness called in his case, Ms N. In particular, Ms N
she would be prepared to provide short or long term care for the child if
it were determined that it was not in the best interests
of the child to
currently live with either parent. The father was also granted leave to amend
his application by including an alternative
to the primary order sought by him,
namely, that the child live with Ms N and spend supervised time with each of the
father and the
mother for a period.
14 Thirdly, on the last day of the trial the mother was unable to be present
to hear submissions, for reasons apparently beyond her
control. The mother was
provided with a transcript of each party’s submissions and her counsel was
granted leave to file supplementary
written submissions which was done on 27
15 Before turning to consider the identified issues, it will be helpful to
set out some background to the dispute and to set out the
legal principles that
will be applied.
16 The parties met via an
internet dating site in 2008 and began living together in December of that year.
They married in 2009 and
separated in February 2016. They have one child
together. X (“the child”) was born in 2009.
17 The father was born in 1957 in Country A and is 63 years of age. He moved
with his family to Australia in 1969. The father operates
his own business.
18 The father has had three previous marriages and has one other child. Ms H
was born in 1978 and is the child of the father and the
first of his spouses, Ms
F (“first wife”). The father and his first wife lived together
between January 1977 and January
1980. The father has seen Ms H on only one
occasion since 1983. On that occasion, the father says that Ms H would have been
20 years of age and he had a conversation of about five minutes duration
with her in the presence of the preacher from his local
church. The father has
had no contact with Ms H since then.
19 The mother was born in 1974 in Country E and is 46 years of age. She moved
to Australia in 2008. The mother is not employed. The
mother’s extended
family remain in Country E. The mother twice returned to Country E with the
child during the marriage. The
first time was in 2011 and the second time was in
20 The parents and child live in South East Queensland approximately 30
minutes apart.
21 The child currently attends P School where she is in grade six. For most
of her schooling, the child attended Q School at Suburb
R and for a brief period
in early 2020 she attended S School. The mother and child lived in the former
matrimonial home at Suburb
R until 23 August 2020.
22 On 12 February 2017 police applied for a protection order against the
mother for the protection of the father. The application
was made as a result of
the mother assaulting the father at his home on 11 February 2017 in front of the
child. The father recorded
the incident and provided the recording to police.
The mother was charged with assault. The police records include the following
assessment:
Police believe the [father] is unable to protect himself
from the [mother] as he has such a fear of losing his child that he will
into any demands made by the [mother]. The [mother] has shown a tendency for
violence against the [father] when the [father]
is in his home. Police ask that
an order be made to protect the [father], and that the [mother] may not be
allowed to be within 100
metres of the [father’s]
23 The mother filed her own application for a protection order against the
father on 13 February 2017.
24 While the evidence is somewhat unclear it seems that the mother stopped
the father spending time with the child for a period from
January 2017. In order
to see the child, the father commenced attending upon the child’s school
to spend time with her.
25 A final protection order was made in favour of the father against the
mother on 3 May 2017 for a period of two years. The mother
pleaded guilty to
assaulting the father and was placed on a good behaviour bond upon entering into
a recognisance in the sum of $500.
26 On 26 May 2017, the father filed an Initiating Application for final
parenting orders in the Federal Circuit Court of Australia
Circuit Court”), seeking an order for equal shared parental responsibility
and that the child live with him
and spend time with the mother.
27 On 1 June 2017 the mother made a complaint to police that on 20 March 2017
the father had touched the child in a sexually inappropriate
way. The mother
told police that the father was a paedophile because he watched adult
pornography and that she had been told by a
psychologist that men who watch
pornography become paedophiles.
28 As part of their investigation, the child was interviewed by police on 9
June 2017. The police concluded that the complaint was
likely to be vexatious.
29 On 5 July 2017, the Magistrate dismissed the mother’s application
for a protection order against the father and the mother
was ordered to pay the
father’s costs. The magistrate found the mother’s application to
have been malicious and that
the mother had been unrelenting in her insulting
and threatening behaviour towards the father. It was also found that the
conduct in recording the child for the purposes of the
proceedings was abusive and that the mother had threatened to prevent the
from spending time with the child unless she met his financial demands.
30 On 18 July 2017 an ICL was appointed and the parties were ordered to
attend upon a family consultant pursuant to
Family Law Act
(Cth) (“the Act”).
31 For reasons that remain unclear (given that a protection order was already
in force) a further protection order was made in favour
of the father against
the mother on 30 August 2017. The order was later varied on 16 October 2019 and
remains in force until 16 October
32 An interim parenting order was made on 6 October 2017 providing for the
father to spend alternate weekends with the child from
after school Friday until
before school Monday. With the consent of the parties, the order included
non-denigration provisions, restraints
on the parties posting information about
the court proceedings on social media, a requirement for each parent to
encourage the child’s
relationship with the other parent and for the
father to spend half holidays with the child.
33 On 29 December 2017 the mother made a complaint to police that she had
been punched in the face by the father and thrown against
a metal shed. When
police attended they noted a small amount of dried blood around the
mother’s nose. They listened to the
audio recording the father had made
from the time of his arrival at the mother’s home (to return the child to
the mother) to
when the police arrived. The police records include the following
assessment:
There is no possibility that [the father] could have
caused the injuries to the [mother]. The audio recording is not consistent with
the alleged struggle, punch and throwing of the [mother] into a metal shed.
There is no recording of a struggle in the audio.
34 As a consequence of the mother’s actions, she was dealt with for
breaching the protection order and fined.
35 The parties and child attended interviews for a family report with Ms T on
14 March 2018. The mother had the assistance of an interpreter
interview process. Ms T opined that the child was at risk of being alienated
from the father and recommended that she
spend significant time with him i.e.
either week about or alternate weeks from Wednesday to the following Monday.
36 On 6 June 2018 the mother was convicted of breaching the protection order
for a second time by sending denigrating messages to
the father and stalking him
in December 2017.
37 The father commenced defamation proceedings against the mother in the
Queensland District Court on 25 June 2018 relating to Facebook
posts by the
mother about the father. In early December 2019 the mother signed an apology
letter retracting the comments made on
social media.
38 On 6 August 2018 the mother was fined $500 for breaching the protection
order between 30 April 2018 and 13 May 2018.
39 On 24 September 2018 a consent order was made extending the father’s
time with the child to alternate weekends from Friday
to Monday and in the other
week from Wednesday to Friday. In November 2018 the matter was set down for a
final hearing in mid-2019.
40 A second application by the mother for a protection order against the
father was dismissed on 22 May 2019 with the Magistrate finding
application was malicious and that the mother appeared to have “falsified
evidence”. The falsified evidence
related to the doctoring of email
communications from the father. It was further found that the mother had sought
to use domestic
violence proceedings as leverage over the father’s ongoing
relationship with the child and that the mother was “prepared
41 Unfortunately, the father was diagnosed with cancer in 2019 and he
underwent treatment over several months. The hearing dates in
July 2019 were
vacated and alterative dates for both parenting and financial matters were
listed for December 2019.
42 The father is currently in remission and otherwise in good health.
43 The parents and child participated in further interviews with Ms T for an
updated family report on 13 November 2019. Ms T noted
that the child was
“enmeshed in the parental dispute” and that she had
““chosen a side” as a way of
opting out of the conflict
between her parents”.
44 At the December 2019 trial the parenting matter was transferred to this
Court due in large part to the mother seeking to rely upon
controversial
evidence involving allegations made against the father in the 1980’s. A
final property order was made by consent
on 2 December 2019, requiring the
mother to vacate the former matrimonial home in which she and the child were
living, upon the payment
of $300,000 from the father. The payment was made to
the mother in or about late February 2020. The mother was required to leave
property by 28 March 2020. The mother did not vacate the property until a
warrant for possession was obtained by the father and
a bailiff engaged. Upon
the mother’s departure from the property, it was noted to be in a filthy
and damaged state which included
writing, with permanent marker on walls, that
was disparaging of the father (which the mother contends was done by the child).
mother disputes that she caused the damage to the property and contends that
when she left the property it was clean and tidy.
45 On 31 August 2020, when the child next came into his care, the father
refused to return the child to the mother. The mother attended
father’s home and took the child.
46 On 14 October 2020, the child ran away from her father while spending time
with him. The child alleged to police that the father
had scratched and punched
her. Police records include a notation that officers noted scratches on the
child’s legs consistent
with cat scratches and some minor bruising. There
is no record of the child making any allegation of sexual assault. The father
the child from the police station that same day and the child remained
in his care until 16 October 2020. Contrary to police advice,
attended the police station and caused a scene outside the station, resulting in
police directing the mother to leave
47 The child continued to spend time with the father each week (alternate
weekends Friday to Monday and Wednesday to Friday in the
other week) until 13
November 2020. The night of 12 November 2020 was the last overnight the child
spent with the father and the
13 November 2020 is the last occasion the child
spent time with him. The father concedes that his attempts to persuade the child
to spend time with him after 13 November 2020 have failed, some
spectacularly.
48 On 20 November 2020 an order was made that the child spend her five nights
per fortnight with the father in one block rather than
broken up to time each
week. The mother was also ordered to ensure the child return to Q School for her
schooling. The mother had
unilaterally changed the child’s school. The
child did not return to Q School nor did the child spend time with the father.
49 In December 2020 the father conceded the issue of the child’s
schooling and she remains at P School.
50 On 20 January 2021 the matter was again listed for final hearing to
commence on 12 July 2021. A mandatory order was also made pursuant
the Act banning cross-examination of parties personally.
51 On 5 February 2021, the father went to the child’s school to collect
her pursuant to the operative order of 20 November 2020.
The child evaded the
father and caught a bus. Upon alighting the bus, the child ran from the father
and he chased her. Third parties
and police became involved. It is common ground
the child was screaming in protest and refused to accompany the father. When
to by police at her home the child alleged the father had digitally raped
her in the shower.
52 The child took part in a recorded interview with police on 22 February
53 The father has not been charged with any offence. The police investigation
concluded that the allegations were vexatious and made
in the context of
contested parenting proceedings.
54 On 24 February 2021 the ‘spend time with order’ was suspended
and the parties were ordered to undergo psychiatric assessment.
The mother did
not participate in that assessment.
55 On 3 June 2021 the parties and child attended upon Ms D for an updated
family report. The child was hostile and disdainful during
her interactions with
Ms D and ultimately refused to speak to Ms D and would not participate in the
process. As a consequence, Ms
D was unable to assess the child’s
relationship with the father or her reasons for refusing to spend time with him.
APPLICABLE LEGAL PRINCIPLES
56 Every parenting decision requires the application
of the relevant parts of
of the Act which sets out the objects,
principles and matters that must be considered when determining what parenting
order is proper.
57 A ‘parenting order’ is defined in
of the Act and may
deal with matters including:
(a) The person or persons with whom a child
is to live;
(b) The time a child is to spend with another person or other persons;
(c) The allocation of parental responsibility; and
(d) The communication a child is to have with another person or persons.
58 The objects and principles of
of the Act are set out in
(1) and (2) and those sections make it clear that the court is concerned with,
among other things, a child’s right to be cared
for by both parents when
it is safe for that to occur.
59 In deciding whether to make a particular parenting order, the court must
regard the best interests of the child as the paramount
consideration
60 The best interests of the child are determined by reference to primary
considerations, namely, the benefit to the child of having
a meaningful
relationship with both parents and the need to protect the child from physical
or psychological harm from being subjected
to or exposed to abuse, neglect or
family violence, and additional considerations including: any views expressed by
the child, the
nature of the relationship between the child and each parent and
other persons, the past involvement of each parent with the child,
effect of any changes in the child’s circumstances, the practical
difficulty and expense of the child spending time
with a parent, the capacity of
each parent to provide for the intellectual and emotional needs of the child,
any family violence
involving the child or a member of the child’s family,
whether it would be preferable to make the order that would be least
lead to the institution of further proceedings in relation to the child and any
other fact or circumstance considered relevant
61 In considering the primary considerations the court must give greater
weight to the need to protect the child from physical or
psychological harm from
being subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family violence
62 ‘Abuse’ is defined in
of the Act and means:
(a) An assault, including a sexual assault
of the child; or
(b) A person (the first person) involving the child in a sexual activity with
the first person or another person in which the child
is used, directly or
indirectly, as a sexual object by the first person or the other person, and
where there is unequal power in
the relationship between the child and the first
(c) Causing the child to suffer serious psychological harm, including (but not
limited to) when that harm is caused by the child
being subjected to, or exposed
to, family violence; or
(d) Serious neglect of the child.
63 ‘Family violence’ is defined in
of the Act and means
violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a
member of the person’s
family or causes the family member to be fearful.
Particular examples of such behaviour include assault, repeated derogatory
intentional damage or destruction of property etc.
Section 60CG
imposes a statutory imperative to ensure that a parenting
order does not expose a person to an unacceptable risk of family violence
empowers the court to include in the order any safeguards that it considers
necessary for the safety of those affected by the
65 In cases involving allegations of abuse or family violence a positive
finding of abuse should not be made unless the court is satisfied
on the balance
of probabilities
having regard to
the “inherent unlikelihood of an occurrence of a given description, or the
gravity of the consequences flowing
from a particular
and proof to the
reasonable satisfaction of the court “should not be produced by inexact
proofs, indefinite testimony or indirect
inferences”.
Where it is not
possible to positively reject an allegation as groundless the court is required
to assess and evaluate the magnitude
of any risk to determine whether the risk
of harm is unacceptable.
components which go to make up a finding of unacceptable risk “need not
each be established on the balance of probabilities.
The court may reach a
conclusion of unacceptable risk from the accumulation of factors, none or some
only of which, are proved to
“a Judge may be cautious in coming to a finding of unacceptable risk if
none, rather than some only, of the accumulation
of factors considered, satisfy
the standard of
66 The Full Court of the Family Court recently reviewed the role of the court
in assessing risk in
and said from
(1988) 166 CLR 69
) the plurality of the High Court considered the assessment of the
existence and magnitude of a risk in the context of sexual abuse
of a child and
Efforts to define with greater precision the magnitude of the risk which will
justify a court in denying a parent access to a child
have resulted in a variety
of formulations. ... courts are striving for a greater degree of definition than
the subject is capable
of yielding. In devising these tests the courts have
endeavoured, in their efforts to protect the child’s paramount interests,
to achieve a balance between the risk of detriment to the child from sexual
abuse and the possibility of benefit to the child from
parental access. To
achieve a proper balance, the test is best expressed by saying that a court will
not grant custody or access
to a parent if that custody or access would expose
the child to an unacceptable risk of sexual abuse.
It is to be remembered that the concept of “unacceptable risk”
referred to in
was within the framework of resolving “the
wider issue” namely what is in the best interests of the child and to
the resolution of the existence of an “unacceptable risk” is
subservient (see
[1993] FamCA 143
(1993) FLC 92-357).
The process by which a risk is identified and its magnitude measured cannot, in
parenting cases, be subject to rigid mathematical
or empirical assessment. As
the High Court said in
(1998) 197 CLR 172 (
...Given the nature of applications for parenting orders, there must often be a
real chance that the order under appeal is not in
the best interests of the
child. Such applications necessarily involve predictions and assumptions about
the future which are not
susceptible of scientific demonstration or proof.
Perceptions, predictions and even intuition and guesswork can all play a part in
the making of an order. ...
As long ago as 1995, in
N and S and the Separate Representative
[1995] FamCA 139
at 82,713 – 82,714, Fogarty J said of this determination:
Thus, the essential importance of the unacceptable risk question as I see it is
in its direction to judges to give real and substantial
consideration to the
facts of the case, and to decide whether or not, and why or why not, those facts
could be said to raise an unacceptable
risk of harm to the
67 The Full Court in
went on to stress
the importance of the whole of the evidence in assessing risk and said at
The conclusion of the existence and magnitude of a risk
was based on all of the facts and circumstances to which his Honour referred.
It would not be proper to approach that task by analysing each fact or
circumstance to see whether that particular fact would support
the conclusion to
which his Honour came, in the words of counsel for the father, to
“atomise” that evidence (see
Shepherd v The Queen
[1990] HCA 56
R v Baden-Clay
[2016] HCA 35
(2016) 258 CLR 308).
Rather, it was a conclusion
formed by a consideration of all those aspects taking into account the necessary
elements of prediction
and assumptions about the future to which the court spoke
68 The court is not required to make findings of fact on every factual
dispute raised by the parties.
The paramount issue for the court is to determine what order is in the best
interests of the subject child in the particular circumstances
of the case and
in the process of that determination the court “cannot be diverted by the
supposed need to arrive at a definitive
determination”
on each and every factual
69 Each parent has parental responsibility (i.e. all the powers,
responsibilities and authority which, by law, parents have in relation
child), for a child subject to any order made by the court
Section 61DA
provides that when making a parenting order, the court must
apply a presumption that it is in the best interests of the child for
child’s parents to have equal shared parental responsibility. The
presumption does not apply where there are reasonable
grounds to believe that a
parent has engaged in abuse of the child or another child who, at the time, was
a member of the parent’s
family or where there are reasonable grounds to
believe a parent has engaged in family violence as defined in
presumption may be rebutted if the court is satisfied that an order for equal
shared parental responsibility would not be in
the child’s best interests.
71 Where the presumption does apply, the court is required to consider
whether equal time or substantial and significant time is in
the child’s
best interests and reasonably practicable
Section 65DAC
makes clear that an order for shared parental responsibility
requires decisions about major long-term issues to be made jointly after
consultation. Major long-term issues mean issues about the care, welfare and
development of the child of a long-term nature and includes
issues about
education, religious and cultural upbringing, health, name, changes to living
arrangements that make it significantly
more difficult for the child to spend
time with a parent
73 Although I may not specifically discuss in these reasons each subparagraph
of each relevant section I have considered all sections
as required when making
my determination.
74 I turn now to consider the issues in this matter.
DOES THE FATHER POSE AN UNACCEPTABLE RISK OF SEXUAL HARM TO THE
75 The determination of this issue involves an
examination of all evidence relevant to the assessment of risk of sexual harm.
76 A factor to which I have had regard when considering the mother’s
evidence, is that English is her second language. The mother
utilised the
services of an interpreter throughout the trial. I am satisfied that the mother
understood the questions she was asked
and responded accordingly. The mother
indicated during her oral evidence that she could understand English both in
written and oral
form but felt more comfortable for her cross-examination to be
translated. Consistent with the mother’s evidence as to her
understanding
of English, I note that there is no jurat to her affidavit indicating that it
had to be translated to her before she
was able to swear to the truthfulness of
its contents.
77 The allegations relevant to this issue can be summarised as follows:
(a) Historical allegations made in the early
1980’s that the father sexually interfered with another daughter who is
(b) The alleged discovery by the mother of child pornography in the
father’s possession;
(c) An alleged statement by the child in 2017 that the father had touched her
genitals; and
(d) Allegations by the child in 2020 and 2021 of sexual
Historical allegations
78 The evidence relied upon by the mother is set out
79 The first wife alleged in an affidavit filed on 9 February 1983 that:
(a) On 6 February 1983, H returned from
spending time with the father and started to cry, and told her the following:
(i) Her stomach hurt; her father
made her drink milk that was bad; she was feeling sick (at [11]);
(ii) Papa had hurt her; he had hurt her “bottom” and
“pussy” and put his finger inside her bottom and inside
she did not want to see him anymore because he hurt her (at
(b) The child vomited and had a very loose
bowel movement (at [11]);
(c) She gave the child a bath and noticed that she was red around her anus (at
(d) At about 7.00pm that same day, the mother took the child to a party attended
by numerous members of H’s extended family.
H’s aunt Ms J (the first
wife’s sister) told her that H had said that the father had put his finger
in her front and
in her backside (at [14]);
(e) She was extremely upset (at [15]) and tried to contact the father by
telephone but he was not at home (at [16]);
(f) She took H to the U Hospital in the company of her mother, and H was
examined by a Dr V who told them to return the following
day (at [17],
(g) On 7 February 1983 H was examined by Dr G and said in the first wife’s
presence that the father had put his finger inside
her bottom real hard (at
(h) On the same day, a police woman spoke to H and she heard her say that the
father had tied her legs and her hands and tied her
mouth so she could not
scream; he put his fingers inside her; she was crying because her bottom hurt;
the father put ice on it; the
father said he would kill her if she said anything
and that he would put her in the fire; and that the father had bent her fingers
back and hurt them (at [23]).
80 Dr G provided evidence by affidavit filed 11 February 1983 which included
the following:
6. On examining H, I found her to be very quiet and
withdrawn. The only abnormality I discovered was that the anus showed a recent
tear or split about 1 centimetre long in the anterior mid-line. There was no
infection nor induration. The hymen was definitely intact
and the fourchette was
open and there was no evidence of trauma to the fourchette.
7. Following my examination, I asked H what had happened and she said that
Daddy put his finger where she did poos.
8. I asked H if she slept in the same bed as her father and she said that she
did. H then told me that her father would smack her
if she told anyone.
9. My examination of and interview with H leads me to believe that there was
some act which had taken place which had split the
skin of H’s anal canal
in its anterior aspect and this lesion was recent and not repeated.
10. The lesion is not consistent with normal toilet motions nor is it
consistent with a fall as it is my experience that this type
of lesion can only
be caused by abnormal anal dilation.
81 H was further examined by Dr G on 18 February 1983 and the doctor reported
he again interviewed and examined H and in particular:
(a) H was prepared to discuss the episode
provided he was alone and said;
(i) “Daddy was
dirty” (at [3]);
(ii) “Daddy’s pussy was big and hard and hurt me” (at
(iii) “Daddy had a shower with me and tried to make me suck his pussy. He
then sat me on his pussy and this hurt very much.
He hurt my arms and legs
because he held me so tight. He pushed his pussy in and out. His pussy went dead
and Mr Granato fell over”
(iv) “Daddy said I am not beautiful and put me in the rubbish bin”
(b) This story was repeated countless times
but was always consistent (at [6]); and
(c) H complained of pain with defaecation and micturition; a local anaesthetic
cream was ordered for the pain (at [7]).
82 In a further affidavit by the first wife filed on 4 March 1983, she
(a) H was having frequent nightmares
indicating that she was fearful her father would kill her (at [3], [4],
(b) H said the father picked up a knife and put it at her neck and threatened to
cut her throat; he put the knife on her forehead
and said he would cut her head;
told her he would put a knife in her pussy and in her bottom (at [7]);
(c) On 1 March 1983, H told her, her father had threatened to kill her with a
knife and that he got a rifle and put it on her pussy
and said they he would
blow it up if she told anyone what he had done (at [10]);
(d) H told her of an occasion when her father made her get undressed and he took
his clothes off and tied her up; he put his big
finger inside her bottom and
that he made her touch his pussy (the first wife said that H also referred to
male genitalia as “pussy”)
(at [11]); and
(e) When H was examined by Dr G on 18 February 1983, H’s anus and around
her vagina were still inflamed and he prescribed an
ointment to be applied daily
83 The first wife provided an affidavit in the mother’s case filed on
28 November 2019 in which she alleged that on 6 February
1982 (although not
corrected, it seems this date should be 1983):
(a) She was with her sister, Ms J, at the
mother a number of things. She said:
(i) Mr Granato had made her
drink bad milk;
(ii) Mr Granato had hit her hard when she refused;
(iii) Mr Granato had “hurt her in the bottom, and hurt her there”
pointing to her vaginal area; and
(iv) Mr Granato had hurt her in the “bottom and pussy” put his
finger inside her “bottom real hard” (at
(b) H had tears in her eyes when she was
recalling this (at [11]);
(c) H said to police that Mr Granato had tied her legs and her hands and had
tied her mouth so she could not scream; that he had
put his finger inside her;
he had hurt her foot bending it back (at [16]);
(d) At a later consultation, H told Dr G that her father had made her shower
with him and had abused her in the shower (at [18]);
(e) The father was charged with indecent dealing but the charges were dropped
because H was too young to give evidence (at [19]).
84 While denying the allegations of abuse levelled against him by the first
wife, the father at that time, accepted the opinion of
a psychiatrist, Dr W, who
interviewed the child on 2 March 1983 and concluded:
The child has obviously been questioned about this
repeatedly and is overwhelmed by anxiety, fear, confusion and guilt about what
has happened. Children do not suffer long term emotional consequences of sexual
abuse unless the contact has been violent. Their
worst problems come after the
event, with repeated questioning and the surrounding emotionally charged family
environment.
Whatever H’s relationship was with her Father, it is now in a very tenuous
state. She does not want to see him. The state of
tension in the family after
the incident is such that H is unable to tolerate even the mention of her
Father. There is no point in
insisting on access at present, whatever the
outcome of the charge against her Father.
If he is exonerated, it will take some time before any sort of relationship
could be tolerated by H, let alone by the very protective
family. ...
85 After the charges against the father were withdrawn he brought a further
application to spend time with H. Ultimately the father
did not pursue his
application.
86 It is difficult to place any significant weight
on the historical evidence for the following reasons:
(a) At the time of the alleged disclosures H
was only 4 ½ years of age and it is difficult to determine precisely what
(b) At the time the first wife made the allegations against the father, there
was a considerable history of animosity between the
father and the first
(c) If it is the case that H was subjected to the horrendous abuse alleged, it
is entirely possible that she would still have some
memory of the abuse as an
adult but, despite being in contact with H and indicating to the father in a
letter dated 25 November 2019
that a subpoena may issue to H, the mother did not
call her as a witness and gave no explanation for her absence;
(d) The accounts of what H allegedly said to the first wife and Ms J do not
purport to be set out verbatim. The actual words used
by any child in such
circumstances is very important because words and context are often the subject
of interpretation by the adult
and the interpretation may be incorrect;
(e) The questions the first wife and Ms J each asked the child are not
(f) Ms J says the child spoke to her in Country A language with a bit of
(g) The child’s fluency in either language at the time is unknown;
(h) There are inconsistencies in the first wife’s evidence about the
initial ‘disclosure’ e.g.:
(i) The first
‘disclosure’ was made at the first wife’s home shortly after
the child returned from spending time
with the father (Affidavit of Ms F filed
9 February 1983 at [12]);
(ii) The first ‘disclosure’ was made to the first wife and Ms J at
the same time (Affidavit of Ms F filed 28 November
2019 at [10]);
(iii) There is no mention in the first wife’s historical affidavits of H
having tears in her eyes when she made the ‘disclosure’
phrase appears in the affidavit of her sister, Ms J, and then appears in the
first wife’s affidavit filed 28 November
(i) There are inconsistencies about what H
is alleged to have said to Ms J. Ms J said that “H said her father had
hurt her there,
pointing to vaginal area” (Affidavit of Ms J filed 9
February 1983 at [3]) whereas the first wife says Ms J told her that “H
said the father had put his finger in her front and backside”;
(j) Another witness who was present at the party on 6 February 1983 gives a
different account to what occurred and says that she
was called over to a group
of people including the first wife and her father with the first wife saying to
her “Listen, ...
to what H says that her father has done to her” and
H then said, “Dad put his finger in my front” (Affidavit of
filed 24 January 1984 at [7]). This witness had a good relationship with the
father, the first wife and H. She says that H and
the father always appeared to
have a close and loving relationship;
(k) There were other reasons that might have explained H’s reluctance to
see the father. He had been in Country A for five
months in 1982, not returning
until October of that year;
(l) There is no evidence of what the examination by Dr V revealed, if
(m) There is no evidence that Dr G was informed that the child had been vomiting
that day, had passed a very loose bowel motion or
that she had a history of
thrush and constipation;
(n) There is no way of knowing if constipation or the passing of a loose bowel
motion could account for the tear, noting Dr G opined
that it was not consistent
toilet motions” (emphasis added);
(o) The medical evidence is inconsistent with digital or penis penetration of
H’s vagina;
(p) There is no evidence of any questions asked of H by Dr G;
(q) By 2 March 1983 (when H was interviewed by Dr W) she opined that the child
had already been questioned about this repeatedly;
(r) The ‘disclosures’ made by H became more and more outlandish;
(s) There was no evidence that the child had been tied up and gagged despite
being medically examined proximate to the alleged incident;
(t) At the time the incident was alleged to have occurred, the father was living
with his father and he was present during the time
the incident was said to have
occurred. He describes having been present at all times during this visit which
included an outing
to a farm and his observations of the child were that she
appeared to be happy and contented throughout;
(u) Apart from the first wife, none of the other witnesses were made available
for cross-examination;
(v) The father denied and continues to deny all allegations made against him by
the first wife;
(w) The criminal charges against the father were withdrawn; and
(x) Apart from the allegations made in these proceedings there is no evidence
the father had a sexual interest in children or had
harmed a child in the
intervening 28 years.
Child pornography
87 In her trial affidavit filed 21 June 2021, the
mother contends that she suspected something odd about the father almost as soon
as they started living together. She alleges that:
115. ... First, while cleaning the house, I found a
large box with porn photos. In these photos, he was naked with a very young
(15-16 years old). There were more than 20 – 30 photos and in them
he had sex with different very young girls. I was already
pregnant at the time
... Another time he told me about his previous marriage and that he had been
arrested for paedophilia. I had
already given birth to a daughter and he had
been changing her nappies. On one occasion, I went to throw the nappy in the
then stayed in the kitchen and when I returned to the baby’s
bedroom after about 15 minutes, he was still standing and looking
daughter’s genitals and touching her with his finger. I pushed him away
(As per original)
88 During the mother’s oral evidence she said the girls she saw in the
pornographic photos looked 14 years of age.
89 On 13 February 2017 the mother filed an application for a protection order
in the local Magistrates Court. The mother details in
considerable particularity
many allegations against the father including the following:
13. I know that [the father] looks at porn in the
internet every day and I’m afraid that when my daughter is with him, she
may accidentally go to the office with the computer and see all it. ...
(As per original)
90 Significantly, there is no mention of child pornography.
91 In a mental health assessment report of the mother by Ms Y dated 15 May
2017 it is noted that:
... [The mother] reported first incident of emotional
abuse took place when she accidentally found box with porn pictures belonging
her husband and when she showed it to him he got very angry and was yelling at
(As per original)
92 There is no mention of the mother reporting the father’s possession
of child pornography which one would expect if indeed
that is what the mother
93 On 9 June 2017, after the child had been interviewed by police in a
recorded interview, the police had a lengthy conversation with
the mother and
the police records state:
Police had a
lengthy conversation pre and post
93A at the request of the [mother]. [The mother] stated that she is scared to
let the child go to
her fathers as she doesn't know what happens there and she
cannot protect her there. Stated that her child is having nightmares and
recently been seeing a psychologist. Informant states that her ex-husband is a
paedophile because he watches pornography (adult
pornography) and she was told
by the psychologist that men who watch porn become paedophiles.
94 There is no mention of the mother reporting the father’s possession
of child pornography to police even though the topic
of pornography was
discussed in the context of the mother’s allegations that the father was a
paedophile. It is significant
that the words of limitation i.e. “adult
pornography”, appear in the police record.
95 Despite the mother having been interviewed for three family reports (on 14
March 2018, 13 November 2019 and 3 June 2021), she made
no reference to having
found child pornography in the father’s possession.
96 I reject the mother’s allegation that she found child pornography in
the father’s possession. This allegation is more
likely to have been a
recent invention of the mother.
The 2017 allegation
97 In her trial affidavit filed 21 June 2021 the
mother says the following:
115. ... I raised the issue of paedophilia when [the
child] complained that he touched her genitals and put some cream there in
98 It was not until 1 June 2017 (only days after the father commenced
parenting proceedings) that the mother made a complaint to police
March 2017 the father had touched the child in a sexually inappropriate way. The
mother further told police on 9 June
2017 that the father was a paedophile
because he watches adult pornography and that she had been told by a
psychologist that men
who watch pornography become paedophiles.
99 The child was interviewed by police on 9 June 2017. The child recounted
witnessing numerous incidents of family violence between
her parents (and both
parties concede that the child has witnessed family violence, although they each
blame the other). The child
said she was scared of her father due to the
incidents she had witnessed and due to what her mother had told her. The child
her father was bad and that “He doesn’t give money. I see he
doesn’t give money to mum”. The child indicated
to police that the
father had applied cream to her genital area after she complained of it being
sore. Police records include the
following assessment:
It is highly evident from speaking with all parties
concerned that these allegations are vexatious and it is highly probable that
although this incident may have occurred, it would not have been indecent and
not of a sexual nature.
100 When counsel for the mother was asked whether it was still part of the
mother’s case that the 2017 incident involving the
father allegedly
applying cream to the child’s genital area was supportive of a finding of
unacceptable risk of sexual harm,
he replied:
Well, I can’t make that submission.
101 In any event, I accept the father’s denial of touching the child in
an inappropriate way on or about 20 March 2017. Quite
apart from it being common
ground that at about this time the child required the application of a soothing
cream in her genital area,
the father by this time was acutely conscious of what
he believed was the mother’s propensity to make unfounded allegations
against him. I accept his evidence that he was vigilant in protecting himself
from allegations by mother, even going to the extreme
of having the child wear
her swimming costume in the shower before he assisted her to shampoo her hair. I
also accept that on the
occasion that the child required the application of the
cream in his care, he put the cream on the child’s finger and guided
finger in order to apply the cream.
102 Before leaving the 2017 allegation, and although not referred to by the
mother, I note that the ICL refers to a report by Ms Y
dated 23 June 2017 in her
written submissions, in which the child said that on one occasion (no timeframe
specified), while the father
was giving her a bath he touched her private parts
and was looking at her which made her “uncomfortable”. I note that
Ms Y’s report goes on to observe that, “every session [the child]
would start talking about the father, sharing her concerns
and fears without any
prompting – even when she is asked about something not related to her
father, she would come to the point
of talking about those concerns”. In
my view, this evidence raises a greater concern about the mother priming or
coaching the
child than it does about the any inappropriate behaviour by the
Allegations by the child in 2020 and 2021 of sexual
103 In her trial affidavit filed 21 June 2021 the
mother alleges that on the day the child was returned to her care, after running
away on 14 October 2020, the child said the following:
Dad comes into the bathroom with me,
scrubbing my body whilst I am in the shower, he touched me, rubbed my back and I
like it, I tell him I don’t want him to see me naked, but he
just laughs’
(Emphasis in original)
104 On 16 October 2020, the mother took the child to her General Practitioner
(“GP”) and a document produced by the doctor
includes the following
information:
[The child] was having a shower at the father’s
house. [The child] says that the father asked whether she needs any help in
shower to scrub her body and came in to the shower and rubbed her upper back.
Then [the child] says he wanted to rub the front lower body and she said [to]
the father that she doesn’t want him to do that.
105 In her trial affidavit the mother goes on to
say the following:
87. While X has not complained of sexual abuse, outside
of the privacy concerns set out in paragraph 84 herein and similar complaints
raised in my earlier affidavits, she did tell me on several occasions that the
father pushed her onto the ground, and she incurred
injuries as a result of this
rough treatment. She has also made disclosures to her psychologist, Ms
106 Ms C is a clinical psychologist but she was
not engaged by the mother to provide any assistance to the child. Rather, the
retained her for the sole purpose of obtaining a report in the hope it
would assist her court case. Disturbingly, Ms C made it clear
during her oral
evidence that she did as she was asked by the mother, without it would seem, any
proper regard to her professional
obligations. This is so, despite the referral
from the child’s GP, Dr Z, requesting Ms C to provide psychological
to the child for “anxiety, stress and adjustment issues
secondary to parental separation and school problems”.
107 Ms C saw the child on 9 December 2020, 17 December 2020 and 24 December
2020 (by video link on this last occasion). Ms C was provided
some background by
the mother including her view that the father had a history of paedophilia.
108 The interviews conducted with the child took place largely in the
presence of the mother. Ms C noted that the child “appeared
sad and tense
when she was prompted to talk about her experiences with her father as well as
her former school”.
109 In her first interview with the child Ms C says that the child complained
of the father touching her private parts such that it
caused her physical pain
and she cried. Ms C says she was told about the child running away from the
father in October 2020 but there
was no mention of it being linked to an
incident in the shower. Ms C attributes the following complaint to the
I do not like to be at his place. He is in the shower.
Touched me by private parts. I cried. It did hurt. He takes underwear off.
this way at home. I don’t like this at all. I want to be with Mum. I do
not believe the police.
110 Ms C refers to this complaint in her report dated 15 January 2021 (in
relation to the child) but does not believe the child said
that the father had
pushed his finger into her vagina or caused her to bleed. If the child did so,
one would expect to see some record
of it in Ms C’s report or in her
111 Ms C also says the child complained about her school life at Q School
alleging that the teachers did not like her and gave her
low grades despite her
high efforts and ignored her when she asked for help. The child also alleged
that the teachers hit her in
the head on occasions. By contrast the child spoke
glowingly about her new school. In her second interview with the child, Ms C
the following information to the child:
I do not want to go to dad. He all the time enters the
shower and rubs my back. I tell him leave me alone. I do not want him to cause
me pain again. I don’t want to go that side.
112 Ms C says that she formed the view that the child had been sexually
abused by the father. Although not a mandatory reporter under
child protection
legislation,
Ms C did not elect
to contact the Department of Children, Youth Justice and Multicultural Affairs
(“the Department”).
When Ms C told the mother what the child had
told her, she says the mother said she already knew about the child being hurt
shower. Ms C says that she thinks she encouraged the mother to contact
the police. In response to a question from Ms C about her
three wishes, the
child responded “having peace and him [her father] leaving me and Mum
alone, more friends and more good grades
at school”.
113 In compliance with the mother’s request for a report to assist her
court case, Ms C included in her report a recommendation
that the child obtain
protection from “further sexual victimisation from her father”; that
the child continue to attend
her new school; and that the child access
psychological therapy to assist her to cope with “psychological symptoms
to ongoing family conflict and assisting her with better adjusting to
the negative effects of recent traumatic and stressful events”.
114 Despite having formed the view that the child had been sexually abused by
the father, Ms C, inexplicably, provided a separate
report in relation to the
mother in which she opined:
[The mother] has shown good insight into her and her
daughter’s current stressors and fair judgment of what modifications need
to be done to reduce the effects of the stressors. She stated being well aware
of the ongoing conflict and poor relationship between
[the child] and her
father. [The mother] demonstrated her willingness to mitigate these issues by
encouraging [the child] to continue
seeing her father ... She presented as a
sensible and proactive individual and responsible parent willing to work on
improvement
of her communications with her daughter’s father to ensure
workability of the shared care parenting arrangements for her daughter.
115 In circumstances where she says she thought
the child had been sexually abused by the father, Ms C applauds the mother for
encouraging
the child to continue to see the father. One might have thought this
alone would have been a reason for her to contact the Department
raising concern
consideration to her conduct in such matters
in the future and I propose to
request the ICL to bring the relevant parts of this judgment to her attention.
116 In relation to the child’s allegations of sexual abuse, it is
important to note that when the child ran away from the father
on 14 October
2020 she went to the police and made a complaint that the father had repeatedly
punched her in the legs and scratched
her. She made no complaint about sexually
inappropriate conduct by the father. However, I do take into account the
possibility that
there may have been reasons for the child not disclosing sexual
abuse other than that it did not occur. It is not uncommon for children
embarrassed, confused or even guilty about sexual acts done to them.
117 On the occasion when the child ran away from the father on 5 February
2021 a witness to the incident told police that the father
grabbed the child by
the arm in an attempt to stop her fleeing and placed his hand over her mouth in
an attempt to stop her screaming.
The father concedes that the child was
screaming at him to get away from her and that he then chased the child 300 or
400 metres.
He contends that she slipped and he grabbed her to see if she was
alright. The father further concedes that “thugs” told
the child go and then threatened him using “very, very violent, filthy,
disgusting language”. As a consequence,
the father left.
118 Police records from the 5 February 2021 include the following
information:
Police spoke [with the child] at her home address where
she made the disclosure to police of digital rape. She stated that she was
the shower and her father came into the shower also. She stated that he then
started poking her hard and it hurt. She then stated
that she started to bleed,
and he got out and left the shower. ... The child victim’s mother was
informed about the disclosure
and she stated that the victim child had mentioned
that the [father] had done something to her but whenever she tried to get more
information the child would shut down and not speak further. Following this the
victim child’s mother took her to a psychologist
but has not been told
further information. She was shocked when told that the victim child disclosed
that she had bled as a result
of the incident. ...
119 There was no allegation by the child that the father “beat”
her as alleged by the mother in her trial affidavit. The
mother contends that
the child was on crutches for weeks after the incident as a result. The mother
provided a statement to police
on 22 February 2021 in which she alleged that the
child’s foot had been injured when loose bricks had fallen on her foot
the incident. This accords with what the child also told police on a
later occasion.
120 The child attended upon her GP on 7 February 2021 where she described the
incident on 5 February 2021. It is recorded in the medical
records that the
child was refusing to go to school and was suffering panic attacks. There is no
mention of any injury to the child’s
foot. It is not until 15 March 2021
that the medical records indicate that the child attended upon her GP with an
injury to her left
ankle and noted to be “in moon boot due to high grade
strain”. A referral was made for the child to attend physiotherapy.
121 The child took part in a recorded video interview with police on 22
February 2021 where she initially alleged the sexual assault
had occurred on the
day that she had run away from the father on 14 October 2020. The child
described having been in the shower
at the father’s house at Suburb O when
the father came in naked and asked to rub her back. The child said her father
her with his fingers in her private parts causing her to
bleed. She alleged that after she left the bathroom, the father was sitting
the lounge room naked and touching his private area and that she ran away from
his house. She described catching a bus into the
city and that she spoke to
police. Later in the interview the child said that the incident occurred in
December 2020.
122 The police investigation noted “significant inconsistencies in the
victim child’s version which raise[d] concerns
complaint and possible coaching of child witness”.
123 Some of the inconsistencies include the
(a) The child initially said the incident in
the shower occurred on 14 October 2020 (i.e. the day she ran away from the
(b) Later the child said the incident occurred in December 2020 but the child
had not spent any time with the father since 13 November
(c) The child said the incident occurred at the father’s Suburb O home and
that she then ran away from this house. The father
and child were not at the
Suburb O home when she ran away but at the former matrimonial home at Suburb R
where the father was undertaking
some repairs. The child caught the number 100
bus which does not operate near the Suburb O home;
(d) The child said that it was night time when she ran away but police records
for 14 October 2020 note that the bus driver contacted
them at 5.00pm;
(e) The child insisted she had told the police about the sexual assault on 14
October 2020 but there is no record of such an allegation
having been made;
(f) The child said she was made to sit in a room at the police station for five
hours or more which is not supported by the police
records; and
(g) The child had not previously alleged that she was bleeding in her
conversations with Ms C.
Conclusion about risk of sexual harm
124 I do not find that the father represents an
unacceptable risk of sexual harm to the child for the following reasons:
(a) Little weight can be placed on the
historical allegations for the reasons identified at [
(b) The mother’s allegations that the father possessed child pornography
is likely to be a recent fabrication;
(c) It is conceded on behalf of the mother that the 2017 allegation is not
supportive of sexual abuse;
(d) The child’s allegations of sexual abuse are unreliable for the reasons
identified in [
(e) The child’s allegations are made in the context of a long history of
“enmeshment” in the parental conflict;
(f) The child has been persistently used by the mother to obtain evidence on
audio and video recording. For example, in one recording
the child said:
Papa is always very bad. I don’t want to live with
him. My dad is bad. He pushed my mum. He hurt my mum. My papa didn’t
The recordings were described by a presiding
magistrate in the domestic violence proceedings as “abusive”;
(g) The child is no doubt acutely aware of the mother’s poor opinion of
the father. Some examples of the hundreds of text messages
that the mother was
found to have sent to the father during the domestic violence proceedings
included the following:
(i) “Scumbag”,
“big fat, shitty animal”, “old piece of shit”,
“animal without a brain”,
“fucking vampire”, “a
wild beast, happy in your dirty smelly kennel”, “shitty father and
“bastard”, “arsehole”;
“scoundrel”;
(ii) “Remember, I will take revenge for wrongs caused to me”;
(iii) “You are on my blacklist. Fuck you, shit, Fuck you, goat. Kill you,
bastard. You will cry tears of blood. Do not open
your filthy dogs mouth. Shove
your tongue inside your arse”;
(iv) “My hatred for you is so strong, it will be better if you die like a
dog. I hate you. I hate you, piece of shit. I wish
you would die today. If you
say anything, I will pull your tongue and put it on the barbeque”;
(v) “I hate you with all my heart”;
(vi) “Scared coward? Go change your panties. You stink of shit. Shit, I
will grind you into powder”;
(vii) “Bastard, I’m waiting for an apology from you now. Make it
immediate, or I will call the police and destroy you”;
(viii) “I can kill you this time. You better be careful. I’m not
(h) The mother has made numerous threats to
take revenge on the father;
(i) The mother has a history of using the child as leverage to obtain money from
the father;
(j) The child has made allegations against the father that were not only false
but that could only have come from the mother e.g.
that the father had evicted
them from their home. The child allegedly wrote messages of hate on the walls of
the home she left in
August 2020 e.g. “What kind of father can kick the
child from house”; “From X. I hate you. No other father will
to family”; “You pay one dollar for me”;
(k) There is no doubt that by at least the 14 October 2020 (if not long before)
the child was closely aligned with the mother;
(l) The child’s allegations against the father have become more outlandish
e.g. that he stabbed her with his fingers in her
private parts and caused her to
(m) The father denies the allegations;
(n) Witnesses to the father and child interaction over many years, including the
very impressive witness, Ms N, describe a previously
loving relationship between
the father and child with Ms N describing the father as “kind, caring and
generous”; and
(o) There is no evidence that the father has a sexual interest in children
(other than the historical allegations previously dealt
with in these Reasons).
125 Sadly, the predictions made by the family report writers in these
proceedings have proved correct. In order to survive, the child
aligned herself with the mother and rejected the father. The mother has
weaponised the child in her dispute with the father.
DOES THE MOTHER HAVE THE CAPACITY/WILLINGNESS TO PROMOTE THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE CHILD AND THE FATHER?
126 There can be no doubt that the mother will not
promote the child’s relationship with the father for reasons already
The mother hates the father with a passion and has consistently
exposed the child to her negative views of the father. Matters further
deteriorated after the mother left the former matrimonial home on 23 August
HAS THE MOTHER INVOLVED THE CHILD IN THE DISPUTE BETWEEN THE
PARENTS AND WHAT IMPACT, IF ANY, HAS THAT HAD ON THE CHILD?
127 There can be no doubt that the mother has
involved the child in the parental dispute. The mother’s use of recordings
the child, primed to make allegations against the father, in previous court
proceedings can only be described (and has been described
by another judicial
officer) as abusive. The impact on the child is likely to be profound.
128 During his submissions, counsel for the mother made the following
concession:
The mother, of course, ... has involved the child in the
dispute and (sic) the most appalling way and I can’t make any stronger
submission against my client’s conduct in that regard. The recording of
this young girl in that rote sense where she is, clearly,
with some degree of priming, is appalling ...
It’s a flagrant misuse of the child ...
129 Ms T opined in her family report dated 5 April 2018 that, “[t]he
child has been exposed to psychological abuse by the mother
by involving the
child in her conflict with the father, but the mother has no insight that this
constitutes an abuse to the child”,
“[t]he child appears to have an
enmeshed relationship with the mother” and that the mother demonstrates an
to detach from the child in an appropriate and emotionally
healthy manner”.
130 In her report dated 26 November 2019 Ms T opined:
82. ... The mother tends to see the child as an
extension of herself, and lacks boundaries around what to share with the child.
mother appears to be prone to win/lose, polarised thinking, and requires
that people demonstrate they are either for her, or against
her. This extends to
the child....
83. In my opinion the child has aligned herself with the mother, and
“chosen a side” as a way of opting out of the conflict
between her
parents....
85. ... a child who is treading the tightrope of pleasing each parent in a high
conflict situation. Each time she changes residence
she has to essentially
change her personality, let go of beliefs and attitudes, then re adopt certain
positions to again fit into
the other household. Quite apart from the immediate
psychological impact on the child, in my opinion the stage is being set for the
child to have to negotiate psychological challenges in the
131 Ms T’s observations are echoed by Ms D in her report dated 2 July
2021 where she noted that the mother described her relationship
with the child
as a friendship and said the child was an adult. Ms D opined that, “there
is a high level of risk that ... the
alignment between [the mother] and [the
child] is unhealthy, and emotionally abusive”.
132 One of the most appalling examples of the mother’s involvement of
the child in her dispute with the father, relates to her
resistance to leaving
the former matrimonial home in 2020, despite having agreed to an order that she
do so. The mother led the child
to believe that she and the child were being
evicted from the home. The state in which the mother left the home was
absolutely appalling.
Her attempts to deny her actions were totally
unconvincing. The mother left used sanitary products around the house. She left
shells in cupboards. The house was left in a filthy state. Even worse than
the vandalism caused by the mother was her likely encouragement
of child to
write vitriolic statements on the walls of the home, castigating the father for
throwing them out of the house. I certainly
do not believe the mother’s
evidence that she only saw the writing on the walls after the event.
133 The child now presents as wilful and dismissive of persons in authority.
Her behaviour towards police on 22 February 2021, to
the family report writer
and the ICL does not augur well. The child has shown a propensity to tell
untruths without fear of contradiction
from her mother e.g. that teachers at Q
School ignored her requests for assistance and hit her in the head.
134 Ms N describes having observed a very wilful streak in the child without
regard for risks to her personal safety e.g. the child
at least twice climbed
onto the roof of Ms N’s home and had to be coaxed down. The child also
ran away from the father on
14 October 2020 catching a bus into the city and ran
away from both parents in a car park at a changeover that was recorded by the
mother on a date the mother cannot recall.
135 In my view, the impact on the child being involved in her parents’
dispute is likely to have long term impacts on her psychological
functioning
including on her ability to make and sustain personal relationships, her ability
to trust others and to respect authority.
WILL THE MOTHER COMPLY WITH COURT ORDERS AND ENSURE THAT THE
CHILD SPEND TIME WITH THE FATHER, IF ORDERED?
136 It is highly unlikely that the mother will
comply with a court order for the child to spend time with the father. The
a long history of non-compliance with court orders.
137 The mother has repeatedly breached earlier ‘spend time with’
orders. She has breached domestic violence protection
orders. The mother did not
comply with the order to re-enrol the child at Q School. The mother breached the
order that she vacate
the former matrimonial home and breached the order
restraining her from denigrating the father on social media.
CAN THE CHILD HAVE A RELATIONSHIP WITH BOTH PARENTS IF SHE
CONTINUES TO LIVE WITH THE MOTHER?
138 Unfortunately, if the child remains living with
the mother, there is very little likelihood that she will have a relationship
with the father in the foreseeable future. Although the child has repeatedly
rejected the father and expressed a wish not to see
him, Ms D in her report
dated 2 July 2021 opined that while the child “sees herself as
sufficiently mature to make decisions
parents, her behaviour suggests she is not”.
139 There is perhaps a glimmer of hope that after these proceedings have
concluded the child may feel that some pressure has been
removed and she may
agree to see the father if he attends at her school, as he has done in the past.
IF THE CHILD REMAINS IN THE PRIMARY CARE OF THE MOTHER, SHOULD
SHE BE ABLE TO TRAVEL TO COUNTRY E WITH THE MOTHER ON HOLIDAY?
140 At the conclusion of the trial all parties
agreed that the mother should be restrained from travelling to Country E with
until after she turns
In those circumstances, I
see no reason for the child to have a passport before that time. The mother did
not address the issue of
the passport or raise any prospect of overseas travel
other than to Country E.
DO THE PARENTS HAVE THE CAPACITY TO MAKE JOINT PARENTING
141 While most of the focus of these Reasons have
been on the mother, there is no doubt that the father hates the mother as much
she hates him. His complete contempt for the mother was palpable during his
oral evidence. I do not suggest that he does not have
good reason for feeling
this way, but the consequence of their mutual enmity is that no parenting
decisions could be made jointly.
WHAT PARENTING ORDER IS PROPER?
142 Despite the father not presenting an
unacceptable risk of harm to the child, she refuses to see him and has taken
rather extraordinary
steps to demonstrate her resistance, thereby placing
herself at risk.
143 The process of the mother’s alienation of the child from the father
has unfortunately succeeded, to the point where the
father’s most recent
attempt to speak to the child led to her running hundreds of metres away from
him and thereby endangering
herself. Third party witnesses and police became
involved and the whole incident was no doubt traumatic for the child. One can
imagine the pressure the child is under. She has completely aligned herself
with the mother.
144 The mother has no insight into the damage she has caused the child. The
child has an enmeshed relationship with her mother and
is totally invested in
the dispute. I have no doubt the child will suffer long term emotional and
psychological damage as a result
of her involvement in the parental dispute. The
mother’s conduct, in particular, is indefensible and among the worst I
seen in my forty years of involvement in family law.
145 Despite my findings in relation to the mother, the father is not without
fault. Ms T opined in her report dated 5 April 2018 that,
“[t]he child has
been actively involved,
by the parents
, in the conflict between
them” (emphasis added). I agree.
146 Unfortunately, despite it being pointed out to the father in Ms T’s
report dated 5 April 2018, that his attempts to defend
himself against the
child’s repetition of the mother’s allegations were themselves
abusive, he has not tempered his reactive
responses to the child. In her report
Ms T opined:
108. The father ... appears to get caught up in
defending himself to the child against the mother’s allegations. In
calls to the child recorded by the father on 31 December 2017 and the
9 January 2018, the father argued with the child and appeared
increasingly agitated and talked at length, calling the mother bad, that the
mother says untrue things and lies, that the
mother makes trouble and makes
problems, and that "mama is a bad woman". The child says little other than
trying to defend the mother
and telling the father to stop talking.
113. The father appears to have little insight into the fact that the phone
calls were harassing and haranguing to the child, and
that the child was being
held responsible for lying, when she was repeating what the mother told her. The
child is placed in an impossible
situation defending the mother and pleasing
her, especially as she believes the things her mother is telling her, and also
herself against the father’s accusations that she is lying.
114. The father accuses the mother of traumatising the child by lying to her,
but appears to not realise that the phone calls themselves
were traumatising to
the child. Both parents put the child in the middle of the conflict in these
phone calls. The father lacks the
ability to properly engage with the child in
relation to the allegations the mother makes against him. In interview the
father presented
as reactive and incensed at the mother's allegations against
him, and blamed the mother for the ongoing conflict. The father would
from counselling to assist him in how to communicate with the child in relation
to false allegations and false memories that
the child may hold against him, and
to help him understand the child's perspective in the conflict, and the impact
of arguing with
the child, and denigrating the mother to the
147 The father really shows no sign of changing. A more recent example of his
continued lack of insight is demonstrated by the comments
he made to the child
on 14 October 2020 (the day the child ran away) that he was at the Suburb R
house to “clean up the filth
that your mother left behind”. A
further example is found in the recording made by the mother sometime between
September 2019
and August 2020 (Exhibit 5). I am conscious that the father did
not know he was being recorded, but his reactive and accusatory statements
the child resulted in her becoming very upset with the father and starting to
defend the mother. Such exchanges were the very
thing pointed out by Ms T as
problematic. During the father’s oral evidence he referred to statements
he had made to the child
to the effect that the mother was a liar and was bad.
There did not seem to be any recognition by the father that such comments place
the child in an invidious position and add to the pressure she is already
148 Ms T described the child, during the 2019 interview as “tense, on
high alert, and gave the impression of picking through
a minefield when
speaking”. Further, Ms T refers to the child stating that she “hates
being like a dog pulled backwards
and forwards”. Ms T again counselled
both parents against challenging the child “about statements she makes,
not reflect the facts. Challenging her only causes her further anxiety
and psychological distress”. Ms T’s advice appears
to have fallen on
149 A further example of the parents’ mutual disregard for the
child’s welfare can be seen in the video recording taken
by the mother of
a failed changeover in a car park where the child ran away (Exhibit 6). The
mother did not accompany the child to
a safe place to make the transition to the
father. She was too busy filming. The father just sat in the car while the child
across a car park to his car. She stood at his door while the mother
filmed and he made no attempt to get out of the car, even when
the child fled
from both parents. The child could have been knocked by a car. On this occasion
both parents put the child at risk.
150 I also have a real concern about the father’s judgment more
generally. On 16 October 2020 he said to a school teacher at
the child’s
school that he did not know what to do about the mother apart from killing her.
During his evidence the father
said that he was only joking, but clearly the
person to whom he made the statement did not regard the comment as a joke. A
was made to police. In this emotionally charged conflict it is
difficult to understand the father’s complete lack of insight
impact of making such a comment at the child’s school.
151 Despite Ms D being concerned about the emotionally abusive nature of the
mother’s relationship with the child she opined:
155. However, given the damage to her relationship with
her father, I am unsure of how well she would cope if she were removed from
mother's care entirely. As [the mother] has always been [the child’s] main
carer and their attachment is undeniably strong,
I believe [the child] would
experience her removal from her mother's care as traumatic and the loss of her
time with her mother,
even if temporary, as a loss of emotional support. I am
also unsure of [the father’s] ability to re-establish his relationship
with X in the face of the potential hostility and reticence he would likely
encounter from her. ...
152 Ms T in her report dated 26 November 2019 also expressed considerable
reservation about a change in residence opining that a change
in residence
“would place additional pressure on [the child] as she could be further
exposed to conflict, emotional manipulation
and possible reprisals by the mother
to the father involving the child”.
153 Despite concerns expressed by the family report writers about the nature
of the mother’s relationship with the child, it
has been assessed that the
child and mother have “an obvious close bond”, “a close
relationship” and “appeared
to have an extremely close
relationship”.
154 It is not as if the father has not had ample time to build up a secure
relationship with the child. For about the first year after
separation he spent
most weekends with her and the time he spent with the child increased such that
prior to all time stopping in
November 2020 he was spending five nights per
fortnight with the child. Despite the child generally taking time to settle in
household, I accept that the time the child spent with the father was
generally successful. The same was observed by Ms T in 2018
and 2019 during the
family report interviews i.e. the child was initially resistant but eventually
relaxed to a significant degree.
The father/child relationship was nevertheless
unable to withstand the concerted efforts made by the mother to destroy it and I
no doubt that the father’s own conduct contributed.
155 As Ms T explained in her report dated 5 April 2018:
122. By aligning with the mother, the child may be
trying to avoid the emotional toll of being involved in the middle of the
conflict. By choosing a "side" and rejecting the other parent, the
child may be trying to avoid the anxiety created by being exposed
156 Ms T’s opinion is strengthened by the child’s own comments to
Ms C in December 2020 that she just wanted “peace”.
157 By June 2021 Ms D opined that the child appeared to be “entrenched
in her alignment with her mother”.
158 Despite the child’s alignment with the mother and the emotional
damage that has likely be caused to the child by the mother,
I see no practical
means by which a change in residence to live with the father could be given
effect. I accept that the father would
do whatever it takes, but in his view
that would likely involve monitoring the child 24 hours a day and home schooling
her. The father
frankly acknowledges that if an order were made for the child to
live with him, she would run away and that police would need to
bring her back.
He expects that the child would likely run away more than once. As already noted
the child is already quite wilful
and a risk taker.
159 Despite the combined experience and wisdom of Ms D and Dr B they could
not offer a practical means by which the transition to
the father might be
effected and in particular to ensure the child did not run away. This is not a
case where I could be hopeful
let alone confident that once the child was in the
father’s care, she would remain there. I cannot put in place an outcome
doomed to fail and in the process put the child at potential risk of harm from
strangers when she inevitably runs away from the father.
160 Due to my concerns for the child continuing to live with the mother, I
have given serious consideration to removing the child
from the mother and
placing her with Ms N at least until the father and child can rebuild their
relationship. However, despite the
father’s counsel’s persuasive
arguments, I have come to the conclusion that removal of the child is not a
course I am
prepared to force on the child. The child will actively oppose
removal and it will no doubt be traumatic for her. The practicality
removal would remain problematic and likely involve police. While Ms N was a
most impressive witness, she has her hands full
caring for two young boys with
special needs. Further, the child has not had any contact with Ms N for over a
year. I simply do not
know what the child’s relationship with Ms N is
currently and further adjourning the proceedings is not likely to be in the
child’s best interests and is not supported by either parent.
161 I simply cannot in good conscience expose the child to the level of
trauma and risk that I know an order removing her from her
mother will cause.
162 The mother should nevertheless take heed of the warning given by Ms
149. ...Finally, it is certainly not unusual for
children who have been closely aligned to one parent and hostile towards the
to come to resent the influence of the parent who allowed or encouraged
this to happen, and in my view it is entirely possible that
this could damage
[the child’s] relationship with her mother in the
163 I understand that the father may well feel most aggrieved by this
decision. However, my focus must always be on the best interests
of the child in
the particular circumstances of the case. While the mother’s conduct in
‘weaponising’ the child
against the father is some of the worst I
have witnessed, I have no confidence that the father has the necessary parenting
to focus on the child rather than trying to convince the child that
the mother is in the wrong. The father has not taken the opportunity
to properly
address these challenges despite it being recommended he do so in the first
family report.
164 I am nevertheless hopeful that once the child realises that she is not
going to be removed from her mother’s care, she may
agree to see the
father. While I place little faith in the mother’s evidence that she would
facilitate the child seeing the
father in a public place, I hope, for the
child’s sake, that the mother is true to her word.
165 In relation to parental responsibility, the father sought an order for
sole parental responsibility in his favour and surprisingly,
disingenuously) the mother sought an order for equal shared parental
responsibility. The ICL recommended that the mother
have sole parental
responsibility. Parental responsibility in relation to a child means all the
duties, powers, responsibilities
and authority which parents have in relation to
their child and each parent has parental responsibility subject to any order of
court. Currently, decisions about major long term issues affecting the child
e.g. education, religious and cultural upbringing, health,
name, living
arrangements that make it significantly more difficult for a child to spent time
with a parent, can be made by each
parent individually and historically the
mother has largely made those decisions. It is often the case in parenting
proceedings that
an order is made for the parents to have equal shared parental
responsibility which requires such decisions to be made jointly. Given
history of family violence in this case the presumption that it is in the best
interests of the child for the parents to have
equal shared parental
responsibility does not apply. In any event given the contempt each party holds
for the other I do not consider
an order for equal shared parental
responsibility to be in the child’s best interests. However, I consider it
important for
the father to remain, at least formally, as a parent who can make
parenting decisions for the child. While it may, in a practical
sense, only be
symbolic, in my view it is an important symbol for a child who has had to choose
between her parents.
166 The ICL sought an order restraining the mother from changing the
child’s name and in circumstances of such high enmity I
propose to accede
to that request. I consider it important for the child to maintain at least a
connection by name to her father.
No submissions were made on behalf of the
mother in opposition to such an order.
167 Various mutual restraints are sought by the parents, and the ICL, to
restrain the parents from exposing the child to denigration
of the other parent
and while it might well be argued that such orders would be futile given the
history, I nevertheless propose
to so order. I consider it important for the
Court to make it abundantly clear that it disapproves of the past conduct of the
and an order as sought should at the very least remind them of their
obligations in this regard. They will be expected to comply
with the order.
168 The mother has a long history of involving the child in the dispute by
recording her and she will be restrained by injunction
from continuing to do so.
The mother should realise that any breach of the order in future may result in
her being fined or even
imprisoned.
169 Court material, other than the final parenting order, should remain
confidential. The mother should refrain from further involving
the child’s
school in the dispute and accordingly the mother will be restrained from
providing any of the court material or
documents disclosed in the proceedings to
the child’s school. The mother is reminded that it is an offence
punishable by imprisonment
for a period not exceeding one year, to disseminate
to the public or any section of the public any account of any proceedings or
part of any proceedings that identifies a party to the proceedings, a person who
is related to or associated with a party to
the proceedings or is in any other
way concerned in the matter to which the proceedings relate or a witness in the
proceedings.
170 The order proposed by the ICL in relation to the child spending time with
the father, or communicating with him, is directed to
the child i.e. that the
child spend time and communicate with the father as determined by the child. I
do not intend to make that
order. The child is of course free to contact her
father if she chooses to do so at some future time and, for her sake, I hope she
does so. As it seems the father has in the past been permitted by the
child’s school see the child at school on occasion, I
see no reason why
that should not occur in the future if the school permits it.
171 The father will be permitted by the order I propose to make, to obtain
information about the child from the child’s school
and medical
practitioners.
MISCELLANEOUS
172 On the last day of trial the ICL applied for an
adjournment of the trial as a consequence of the father having been granted
to amend the final order sought by him to include an order, in the
alternative, that the child live with a stranger to the marriage
and witness in
his case, Ms N.
173 I did not accede to the ICL’s request to adjourn the proceedings on
the last day of trial and indicated I would provide
reasons at a later time. My
reasons are as follows:
(a) Neither parent supported the
adjournment;
(b) The deficiencies in the evidence in relation to Ms N as the primary carer
for the child could be addressed in submissions and
would not necessarily be
overcome by an adjournment during which the ICL proposed an update family
(c) The child had previously refused to participate in the interviews for the
family report;
(d) If the matter were adjourned as sought by the ICL the trial would not be
able to resume until February 2022; and
(e) The parties and the ICL agreed that further delay would not be in the
child’s best interests.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
seventy-three (173) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for
Judgment of
the Honourable Justice
Dated: 27 August 2021
The father nominates Dr B or
another suitable therapist.
precise terms of the order sought by the father are as set out in his Amended
Initiating Application filed 14 June 2021 and in
the alternative as set out in
Exhibit 32.
The precise terms
of the order sought by the mother are set out in her Response to Initiating
Application filed 13 July 2017 as amended
by her Case Outline filed 7 July 2021.
The mother did not provide a minute of order setting out her alternative
The precise terms of
the order sought by the ICL are set out in Exhibit
Family Law Act 1975
Evidence Act
(1988) 166 CLR 69
”) at 77, citing
Briginshaw v Briginshaw
[1938] HCA 34
at 362 (Dixon J).
(n 7) at 77;
N and S and the Separate Representative
[1995] FamCA 139
(1996) FLC 92-655.
Johnson & Page
[2007] FamCA 1235
at 81,890 – 81,891, [68].
Ibid at 81,891,
[2019] FamCAFC 198
[2015] FamCAFC
[2015] FamCAFC 36
(2015) FLC 93-637.
Child Protection Act 1999
Counsel for the mother,
when addressing on this issue referred to “paragraph 6” and was
there referring to issue 6.
RTF format (775 KB)
Signed PDF/A format