Frederic & Brisset (No 2) [2025] FedCFamC1F 696 (3 October 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Frederic & Brisset (No 2)
FedCFamC1F 696
File number(s):
LNC 600 of 2022
Judgment of:
ALSTERGREN CJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– COSTS – Written
submissions – Application for indemnity costs when matter has settled by
consent on the first
day of trial – Where the Second and Third Respondents
seek costs against the Applicant – Where the Applicant’s
alleged to be flawed and lack merit – Consideration of s 117(2A) factors
– Where the Applicant’s conduct
justifies a costs order being made
on an indemnity basis as assessed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules
(Cth) rr 1.33, 12.13, sch 3.
Cases cited:
Baker & Bond (No 2)
[2023] FedCFamC1A
Bant & Clayton (Costs)
[2016] FamCAFC 35
Colgate Palmolive Co and Another v Cusson Pty Ltd
(1993) 46 FCR
Frederic & Brisset
[2024] FedCFamC1F 801
Kennon v Spry
[2008] HCA 56
(2008) 238 CLR 366
Kohan & Kohan
[1992] FamCA 116
[1993] FLC 92-340
Medlon & Medlon (No 6) (Indemnity Costs)
[2015] FamCAFC
Munday v Bowman
(1997) FLC 92-784
Parke & The Estate of the Late A Parke
[2016] FamCAFC 248
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of last submission/s:
Date of hearing:
On the papers
Solicitor for the Applicant:
McGrath & Company
The First Respondent:
No appearance
Counsel for the Second and Third Respondents:
Mr D. Sweeney
Solicitor for the Second and Third Respondents:
Lander & Rogers
LNC 600 of 2022
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
MR FREDERIC
First Respondent
Second Respondent
D PTY LTD ATF BRISSET FAMILY TRUST
FAMILY TRUST
Third Respondent
ALSTERGREN CJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
Applicant pay the Second and Third Respondent’s costs as and from 3
December 2024 on an indemnity basis as assessed within
twenty-eight (28) days of
these Orders.
outstanding applications otherwise be dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
CHIEF JUSTICE ALSTERGREN:
INTRODUCTION
5 May 2025, at the first day of trial and prior to hearing any of the evidence,
the parties resolved proceedings save for the issue
of costs. The Court made
final property orders by consent (‘consent orders’) between the
Applicant husband (‘Applicant’)
and First Respondent wife
(‘First Respondent’) together with orders removing the Second and
Third Respondents as parties
to the proceedings.
consent orders included procedural directions in respect of the costs
applications foreshadowed by the parties.
Applicant and First Respondent have since resolved their respective costs
applications by way of consent orders made on 26 May
Second and Third Respondents, however, seek an order that the Applicant pay
their costs of and incidental to these proceedings
in the sum of $358,237.48 on
an indemnity basis.
Applicant seeks an order that each party bear their own costs of the proceeding.
Second and Third Respondents rely upon the following documents:
(a) Costs submissions filed 19 May 2025; and
(b) Costs Agreements dated 5 June 2024 and 30 January 2025.
Applicant relies upon their Costs Submissions in Response filed 3 June 2025.
GENERAL COSTS PRINCIPLES
the case, the legislative provisions as they were prior to 10 June 2025 will
apply as the trial event was listed and written submissions
were filed prior to
this date. Pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
(‘the Act’), each party to the proceedings shall ordinarily bear his
or her own costs, unless, as set out in
of the Act, the Court is
of the opinion that there are circumstances that justify the Court departing
from the general rule.
of the Act sets out the matters to which the Court must consider when
making an order pursuant to
of the Act:
(a) the financial circumstances of each of the parties to the proceedings;
(b) whether any party to the proceedings is in receipt of assistance by way of
legal aid and, if so, the terms of the grant of that
assistance to that party;
(c) the conduct of the parties to the proceedings in relation to the proceedings
including, without limiting the generality of the
foregoing, the conduct of the
parties in relation to pleadings, particulars, discovery, inspection, directions
to answer questions,
admission of facts, production of documents and similar
(d) whether the proceedings were necessitated by the failure of a party to the
proceeding to comply with previous orders of the Court;
(e) whether any party to the proceedings has been wholly unsuccessful in the
proceedings;
(f) whether either party to the proceedings has made an offer in writing to the
other party to the proceedings to settle the proceedings
and the terms of any
such offer; and
(g) such other matters as the Court considers relevant.
CONSIDERATION
factors must be considered, with no one factor prevailing
over another (
Medlon & Medlon (No 6) (Indemnity Costs)
[2015] FamCAFC
of the Act is not relevant as none of the parties were in receipt of
legal aid assistance, and neither is
s 117(2A)(d)
of the Act.
remaining factors in
of the Act require closer
consideration.
Section 117(2A)(a)
subsection requires the Court to consider the financial circumstances of each
The Second and Third Respondent’s financial
circumstances
Second Respondent is 51 years old and is a company director. He participated in
the proceedings personally and in his capacity
as sole director and shareholder
of D Pty Ltd as Trustee for the Brisset Family Trust (being the Third
Respondent).
is no evidence before the Court regarding the income or financial circumstances
of the Second Respondent. The Applicant’s
written submissions include that
the Second Respondent received $19,980,000 gross from the sale of J Pty Ltd.
to the Second Respondent’s Costs Notice filed 2 May 2025 at item 13, the
“source of funds for costs paid and
to be paid is from personal
resources.”
is also no current information before the Court regarding the financial
circumstances of the Third Respondent, save that it
is a corporate trustee.
The Applicant’s financial circumstances
Applicant is 55 years old and is self-employed. He earns approximately $1,006
per week, being $52,312 per annum, and it is submitted
that he will earn a
modest income in the future.
Applicant’s legal fees were paid from his personal resources and by way of
litigation funding in the amount of $185,000.
consent orders effected a split of 33.2 percent of the net value of the asset
pool to the Applicant being the amount of $2,618,646
not including
superannuation.
Applicant has re-partnered and does not have any children under the age of 18 or
any dependants.
on the material before the Court, the Applicant would be able to meet any costs
order of the quantum sought.
Section 117(2A)(c)
parties make claims that the conduct of the other impacted the way in which the
proceedings progressed.
The Second and Third Respondent’s conduct
is the Applicant’s submission that there was a lack of disclosure provided
by the Second and Third Respondents. For example,
the Third Respondent did not
provide any Financial Statements after the financial year ending 30 June 2022,
and no documentation
was provided with respect to the Deed of Exclusion dated 16
June 2023 (‘the Deed’) the purpose of which was a controversy
proceedings.
Applicant also submits that the case advanced in the points of claim regarding
the improper exercise of trust powers was based
on admissions made by the Second
Respondent in his affidavit filed 18 September 2023 at paragraph [4]:
...[Ms Brisset] has never controlled the [BFT]. It has always been my entity.
I treated it as such. [Ms Brisset] had no input or
any management of the
[BFT]. This, and questions of ultimate ownership, are further evidenced by the
fact that [Ms Brisset] has never
been an Appointor of the [BFT]. I was made
a joint Appointor with my late father and mother in 2012. In addition, none of
that the [BFT] has had, or currently has, used any of [Ms
Brisset’s] personal assets as security for the loans. They have only
had my personal assets used as security.
Applicant contends that the admission could have been rectified in the Second
Respondent’s affidavit filed 14 November 2024,
however this did not occur.
Similarly, it is contended that the responses to the points of claim did not
address the allegations
and instead, consisted of bare denials. The Applicant
submits that it was not until the Second Respondent’s trial affidavit
filed 24 April 2025, that the Second and Third Respondents sought “to
recant or modify or seek to explain the blunt admissions
of breach of
The Applicant’s conduct
The Second and Third Respondent’s first basis for seeking
costs was that the Application lacked merit
considering the Applicant’s conduct, it is important to set out the
background to this proceeding.
Third Respondent is the trustee of a discretionary trust established by a trust
deed in 1985. The First Respondent was a specified
beneficiary of the Brisset
Family Trust (“the Trust”), the Second Respondent, who is the First
Respondent’s brother,
was also a specified beneficiary of the Trust and
one of the Third Respondent Trustee’s directors.
early 2021, after the sale of J Pty Ltd and after she had been paid net
$9,984,025, the First Respondent transferred her shares
in the Third Respondent
Trustee to the Second Respondent and resigned as director. The Second Respondent
then became the sole shareholder
and director of the Third Respondent
Applicant and First Respondent were in a de-facto relationship for approximately
21 years, with a disputed date of separation
being in or around August 2021 or
December 2021.
Applicant commenced proceedings on 14 September 2022 in the Federal Circuit and
Family Court of Australia (Division 2).
22 May 2023, the Applicant filed an Application in a Proceeding seeking to join
the Second and Third Respondents as parties to
the proceedings. This was sought
on the basis that there was a lack of disclosure from the First Respondent
regarding the Trust and
her involvement in its management.
16 June 2023, the Trustee executed the Deed which excluded the First Respondent
as a general beneficiary of the Trust.
29 August 2023, the Applicant filed an (Amended) Initiating Application seeking
a declaration pursuant to
of the Act that the Deed be set aside. These
orders were opposed by the Second and Third Respondents.
mentioned above, the Applicant relied upon the Second Respondent’s
affidavit filed 18 September 2023 as admissions with respect
to the alleged
mismanagement of the Trust. For example, the Applicant relied upon:
(a) Paragraph [3] of the affidavit that the Deed was “required only due to
[the Applicant] asserting in an affidavit that [the
First Respondent] had an
interest in the [Trust]”;
(b) Paragraph [4] that the Trust had “always been my entity”; and
(c) Paragraph [5] that “the assets of this entity were always intended to
be for the sole benefit of myself and no one else.”
Applicant submits that those admissions indicate that the Trust was not
administered in accordance with its terms and that the
Second Respondent acted
for the improper purpose of holding assets that he could regard as his own.
support of the claims against the Second and Third Respondents, the Applicant
relied upon the proposition that if a trustee of
a discretionary trust admits to
treating the trust as though it is for the benefit only of one individual, the
trust has neither
been administered according to its terms nor for a proper
purpose. In either event, the exercise of trust powers is void. This in
gave rise to a separate trust being created for each year of distributions in
favour of the First Respondent. The Applicant
also contends this voided the
First Respondent’s purported exclusion from the Trust.
is the Second and Third Respondents’ position that it is no defence to the
claim for costs that the Applicant, in bringing
the Application for joinder,
relied upon the representation at paragraph [4] of the affidavit filed 18
September 2023. It is further
submitted that it was not argued to be the reason
for the Application for joinder before his Honour Judge Turnbull nor was it
as a relevant factor until the filing of the points of claim, some 12
months later.
10 October 2023, Judge Turnbull delivered judgment and joined the Second and
Third Respondents to the proceeding.
17 September 2024, the matter was transferred to the Federal Circuit and Family
Court of Australia (Division 1) and listed for
mention before me on 26 September
2024. Orders were made that day for the Applicant to file and serve points of
claim in relation
to any orders sought against the Second and Third Respondents
and to further refine arguments made in relation to the Trust.
18 October 2024, the points of claim were filed and later amended.
interim defended hearing was listed on 2 and 3 December 2024 before Wilson J who
delivered judgment on 11 December 2024 (
Frederic & Brisset
FedCFamC1F 801).
His Honour struck out the amended points of claim and granted
leave to the Applicant to file and serve an amended statement of claim
out any claim he seeks to maintain against the Second and Third Respondents and
reserved costs.
his reasons, Wilson J was critical of the Applicant’s claims against the
Second and Third Respondents. His Honour determined
at [11] that:
As has already been recorded, I am of the view that the de facto husband’s
points of claim, must be dismissed. I also take
the view that the de facto
husband’s breach of trust claims in his points of claim in this case do
not disclose a reasonable
cause of action as that phrase has been construed by
the High Court in
Lindon v Commonwealth (No 2)
. I have reached that
conclusion for the following main reasons –
(a) the de facto husband, not being a beneficiary under the relevant trust, has
no standing to purport to invoke equitable doctrines
in respect of the trust;
(b) applying the test for the question of whether the points of claim may
disclose reasonable prospects of success which commands
me to take the evidence
at its highest, the trust claims made by the de facto husband are doomed to
(Citations Omitted)
is evident from the reasons of Wilson J that the Applicant was put on notice at
the deficiencies with the points of claim, his
standing to bring a claim against
the Second and Third Respondents and its prospects of success.
11 March 2025, the Applicant filed an Application in a Proceeding seeking to
join the First Respondent’s mother, sister and
half-brother. The Second
and Third Respondents submit that the forensic decision to seek to join
additional parties with respect
to the Trust claims, particularly once the
matter was fixed for trial, was an attempt to make further claims against the
Third Respondents. That Application was subsequently dismissed on 10
April 2025.
Applicant filed further amended points of claim on 17 March 2025.
Second and Third Respondents rely upon observations made on the morning of trial
where the Court observed that “the points
of claim didn’t improve
with the second iteration...the flaws weren’t cured.” These comments
were not a finding
but rather an initial observation which cannot be given any
substantial weight equivalent to that of findings made at trial. No findings
were made as the matter settled before the trial commenced.
Surprisingly,
the Applicant’s trial material failed to make any mention of the Trust,
the transaction said to justify a finding
of mismanagement giving rise to a
separate trust or cavil at all with the evidence that distributions had in fact
been made for many
years to the First Respondent. There was no effort to support
the allegations in the further amended points of claim.
Second and Third Respondents ultimately submit that the reasons for judgment of
Wilson J and the further amended points of claim
demonstrate that the
Applicant’s claims lacked merit.
the admissions made in the affidavit of the Second Respondent and up until 16
June 2023 when the First Respondent remained named
as a Specified Beneficiary,
it may not have been possible at that stage to say that the case lacked merit.
The same cannot be said
of the prospects of success following the detailed
reasons of Wilson J. This, together with the history of distributions discussed
below at [55]-[57], demonstrated that if there had been merit before, it had
been diminished almost entirely.
Distributions of the Trust
matter of contention between the parties were the distributions made by the
history of distributions to the First Respondent and to third parties were
disclosed as early as 22 May 2023 and were again reiterated
in the affidavit of
Mr T filed on 3 December 2024.
history of distributions of the Trust suggest that the Trust had been run in a
way contrary to the admissions in the Second Respondent’s
affidavit filed
18 September 2023 and that submitted by the Applicant. There was a lack of any
evidence in the trial material filed
by the Applicant regarding the specific
trust dealings of the Second and Third Respondents.
the matter resolved by consent, no finding was made in this regard. However, I
am satisfied that upon the history of distributions
being highlighted in the
affidavit of Mr T filed 3 December 2024, the Applicant should have been aware
that his claims against the
Second and Third Respondents were flawed.
Second and Third Respondents contend that the Applicant’s claims against
them ought to have been seen as having no merit
when the Applicant determined
not to value the “bundle of rights” he was asserting First
Respondent had as a beneficiary.
was particularly relevant as counsel ran the argument before Judge Turnbull that
the Trust was a “bundle of rights”
held by the First Respondent,
which were property and capable of being valued.
to the Second and Third Respondents’ submissions, the Applicant initially
sought to have the “bundle of rights”
valued but later decided that
this was not necessary. It would be extremely difficult for such a claim (if
subjected to proper scrutiny),
to succeed without a valuation. There was also no
attempt to value the First Respondent’s rights as a beneficiary of the
in the way contemplated in
Kennon v Spry
[2008] HCA 56
(2008) 238 CLR 366.
could have been done any time up until trial. The absence of a valuation prior
to trial, weighs in favour of a costs order pursuant
s 117(2A)(c).
Collectively,
for the reasons I have identified,
s 117(2A)(c)
carries significant weight in
favour of making a costs order.
Section 117(2A)(e)
Second and Third Respondents submit that they were wholly successful and that
the Applicant was wholly unsuccessful as per the
terms of the consent orders at
Order 10 which removed the Second and Third Respondents as parties to the
proceedings.
& Clayton (Costs)
[2016] FamCAFC 35
Bant & Clayton
’) (cited with approval in
Parke & The Estate of the
Late A Parke
[2016] FamCAFC 248)
discussed the application of
s 117(2A)(e)
of the Act when an amended application was discontinued:
father submits that by filing a Notice of Discontinuance the mother has been
wholly unsuccessful. The mother says that her application
was never heard or
determined, and thus it was not wholly unsuccessful.
is an element of truth in both submissions,
but it is apparent to us that
this paragraph does not apply to the facts of this case; it is designed for
cases where an application
is heard and determined and the applicant is wholly
unsuccessful.
this paragraph does not provide a circumstance justifying an order for
(Emphasis added)
above authorities, as relied upon by the Applicant, were born from circumstances
in which a Notice of Discontinuance had been
filed by one of the parties. Whilst
this is distinguishable from these proceedings, the reasoning of the Full Court
Bant & Clayton (Costs)
, considers that
s 117(2A)(e)
is “designed for” matters where the proceedings have been
“heard” and a party has been wholly unsuccessful
“determined” by the Court.
Applicant submits that that little to no weight should be given to
s 117(2A)(e)
of the Act as there has been no determination of the
application or the
proceedings.
the Second and Third Respondents were removed from the proceedings, such removal
did not come about from a determination of
the relevant issues or law.
Therefore, it cannot be said that either party has been wholly successful or
unsuccessful in this proceeding.
Accordingly, limited weight is placed on this
Section 117(2A)(f)
is the Second and Third Respondents’ case that the Applicant made no
reasonable attempts to resolve the proceedings.
support, the Second and Third Respondents refer to a
dated 18 December 2024 following the decision of Wilson J. The Second and Third
Respondents proposed to resolve the matter
on the basis that they be removed
from the proceedings on a final basis and that no costs be sought against the
offer was not accepted, instead the Applicant appealed the decision of Wilson J
on 7 January 2025.
28 February 2025, the Applicants made a counteroffer seeking the payment of
$1,250,000 from the First, Second and Third Respondents.
The Applicant says that
no response was received.
Second and Third Respondents refer to correspondence received from the
Applicant’s lawyer on 30 April 2025, which proposed
that the Second and
Third Respondents be removed from the proceedings and granted 21 days from the
date of final orders to file written
submissions in relation to their
application for costs.
offer was accepted by the Second and Third Respondents on 1 May 2025, and they
requested confirmation that the Second and Third
Respondents involvement in the
trial was not required by 2.00pm on Friday, 2 May 2025.
2 May 2025, the Second and Third Respondent’s granted an extension to
reply by 2.00pm on Saturday, 3 May 2025.
Second and Third Respondents did not receive a response until 8.30am on Monday,
5 May 2025 being the first day of trial. Accordingly,
airfare and accommodation
costs were incurred.
Second and Third Respondent submits that this conduct is contrary to
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Act 2021
agree. The Applicant’s acceptance of the Second and Third Respondents
proposal to resolve the proceedings should have been
made prior to the first day
of trial, particularly in circumstances where the Applicant was aware of the
Second and Third Respondents
lawyers’ requirement to travel.
factor carries significant weight in favour of making a costs order.
Section 117(2A)(g)
7 January 2025, the Applicant appealed the judgment of Wilson J, however, the
appeal was ultimately compromised on 28 February
2025. The final orders in the
appeal proceedings made no order as to costs as the parties had agreed that the
costs of the appeal
were to be considered alongside any costs application in the
first instance proceedings.
proceedings are to be distinct from first instance proceedings for the purpose
ss 117(2A)(a)
(2A)(f) of the Act. Therefore, any conduct or other
consideration related to costs resulting from the appeal proceeding is to be
pursuant to the Court’s broader discretion in
s 117(2A)(g)
Parke & the Estate of Parke
[2016] FamCAFC 248).
Applicant submits that the express basis of the compromise is significant as
there was a right to assert claims notwithstanding
the reasons of the primary
judge including claims relating to separate trusts under the Deed, alleged
breaches of the Deed and any
existing rights that the First Respondent may have
under the Deed.
Applicant submits that as the Second and Third Respondents agreed to settle the
appeal on this basis, there was merit in attempting
to pursue this line of
Second and Third Respondents submit that the appeal was a futile exercise to
undertake as Wilson J had made orders for the Applicant
to file and serve
amended points of claim. The Second and Third Respondents submit that the appeal
was a waste of time and money.
agree. I am satisfied that the Second and Third Respondents had the opportunity
to replead their claims against the Second and Third
Respondents by way of
amended statement of claim and the appeal was not necessary.
considered alongside the Applicant’s conduct, as discussed above under
, this factor carries significant weight.
Conclusion as to whether a costs order should be made
the reasons given above, I consider it appropriate that there be a costs order
made against the Applicant in the Second and Third
Respondents’ favour.
CALCULATION OF COSTS
Preliminary Issue – Provision of Costs Agreement
a party seeks a claim for indemnity costs,
rule 12.13(4)
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(‘the Rules’) provides:
A party applying for an order for costs on an indemnity basis must inform the
court if the party is bound by a costs agreement or
costs agreements in relation
to those costs and, if so, the terms of the costs agreement or costs agreements.
to on the Orders of 5 May 2025, any party seeking an order as to costs was
granted 14 days to file and serve written submissions
annexing any relevant
documents with the Court.
Second and Third Respondents filed their written submissions 14 days after the
making of the orders, however, no costs agreement
was provided.
3 June 2025, the Applicant filed written submissions in response, albeit a day
late. The Applicant contends that the Second and
Third Respondents have not
complied with the requirement in r 12.13(4) of the Rules to inform the Court of
the existence of any costs
agreement and disclose its terms if it does exist.
Further, that pursuant to r 1.33 of the Rules, the time for the Second and Third
Respondents to inform the Court of the costs agreement and its terms has lapsed.
4 June 2025, the Second and Third Respondents wrote to Chambers seeking leave to
file and serve submissions in reply. Leave was
not granted.
Second and Third Respondents subsequently brought to the Court’s attention
two Costs Agreements dated 5 June 2024 and 30
January 2025 in accordance with r
12.13(4) of the Rules.
the proceeding, there has been non-compliance with Court orders by the parties,
and I am, therefore, not satisfied that
the Second and Third Respondents should
be refused leave to rely upon the Costs Agreements.
Indemnity costs
I have identified earlier, the Second and Third Respondents seek that the
Applicant pay their costs of and incidental to the proceedings
on an indemnity
orders are generally made on a party/party basis in accordance with the Scale of
Costs contained in Schedule 3 of the Rules.
a general rule, the Court “should not depart lightly from the ordinary
rules relating to costs between party and party and
the circumstances justifying
the departure should be of an exceptional kind” (
Kohan & Kohan
[1992] FamCA 116
[1993] FLC 92-340
at 79,614).
Full Court in
Baker & Bond (No 2)
[2023] FedCFamC1A 26
observed at
It is well-established that an order for indemnity costs requires some
“special or unusual feature” to justify the Court
departing from the
ordinary practice of party/party costs (
Colgate Palmolive Co and Another v
Cusson Pty Ltd
(1993) 46 FCR 225).
circumstances that warrant an order for indemnity costs were set out by Holden
Munday v Bowman
(1997) FLC 92-784
drawing from
Sheppard J in
Colgate Palmolive Co and Another v Cusson Pty Ltd
Colgate Palmolive Co
include but are
not limited to the following:
(a) Where it appears that an action has been commenced or continued in
circumstances where a party properly advised should have known
that he had no
chance of success. In such cases the action must be presumed to have been
commenced or continued for some ulterior
motive or because of some wilful
disregard of the known facts (see
Fountain Selected Meats (Sales) Pty. Ltd.
v. International Produce Merchants Pty. Ltd
. [1988] 81 ALR 397).
(b) Making allegations of fraud, knowing them to be false, and the making of
irrelevant allegations of fraud (see
Fountain Selected Meats (Sales) Pty.
. (supra)).
(c) Evidence of particular misconduct causing loss of time to the court and to
other parties (see
Tetijo Holdings Pty. Ltd. v. Keeprite Australia Pty.
(unreported, Federal Court, 3 May 1991)).
(d) The making of allegations which ought never to have been made or the undue
prolongation of a case by groundless contentions (
see Ragatta Developments
Pty. Ltd. v. Westpac Banking Corporation
(unreported, Federal Court, 5 March
(e) An imprudent refusal of an offer to compromise.
Second and Third Respondents submit that:
...[the] Applicant commenced and proceeded with an application that lacked
merit. He persisted with that application when he ought
to have appreciated that
it had no prospect of success, further, and importantly, he was imprudent in
refusing to accept offers of
compromise.
not specified in their submissions the Second and Third Respondents address
considerations (a), (d) and (e) from
Colgate Palmolive Co
Applicants resist an indemnity costs order in circumstances where:
[t]here are no “
exceptional circumstances
” which would lead
to the exercise of the jurisdiction. In particular it cannot be said that the
allegations were made in “
wilful disregard of known facts or clearly
established law
Colgate-Palmolive Company v Cussons Pty
(1993) 46 FCR 225 at 233-4 (Sheppard J). To the contrary, the
allegations were made on the basis of sworn admissions and an application
clearly established legal principles
am satisfied that there are exceptional circumstances that exist to justify an
indemnity costs order being made against the Applicant
in the Second and Third
Respondent’s favour.
Relevantly,
having regard to:
(a) The serious inadequacies in the Applicant’s claims canvassed in the
points of claim as ventilated by Wilson J on 11 December
(b) The repeat of the same allegations in the further amended points of claim
filed 17 March 2025 showed a lack of evidence of the
claims in the trial
(c) The Applicant’s wilful disregard for the pattern of distributions
which had been set out in the affidavit of Mr T filed
3 December 2024;
(d) The Applicant’s persistence with the claims against the Second and
Third Respondents, who were not parties to the de facto
relationship,
particularly in circumstances where the Applicant was unsuccessful in interim
proceedings, including having the points
of claim struck out by Wilson J on 11
December 2025 and unsuccessfully attempting to join the parties to the
proceeding in the Application
in a Proceeding filed on 11 March 2025, which was
dismissed on 10 April 2025;
(e) The lack of a valuation of the “bundle of rights” allegedly held
by the First Respondent meaning the claim had little
to no chance of success;
(f) Making an offer to settle two business days before the commencement of trial
but not confirming acceptance until 8.30 am on the
day of trial once travel
costs had been incurred by the Second and Third Respondent’s legal
representatives; and
(g) The Applicant initially sought to appeal the decision of Wilson J and then
elected to re‑plead, rendering any appeal and
any costs of the Second and
Third Respondents unnecessary.
Second and Third Respondents seek indemnity costs from the date when they were
joined to the proceedings. For the reasons that
follow, indemnity costs will be
awarded from 3 December 2024 which is the filing date of the affidavit of
Mr T annexing the Trust’s
distributions for the period 2010 to 2020. It
should have been evident to the Applicant upon receipt of that information that
distributions of the Trust ran contrary to the allegations he had made
regarding the management of the Trust by the Second Respondent.
This was even
more evident in the reasons of Wilson J, which articulated the deficiencies in
the Applicant’s claims against
the Second and Third Respondents.
admissions made by the Second Respondent in his affidavit filed 18 September
2023 are not sufficient to avoid an indemnity costs
order. Particularly upon
becoming aware of the history of distributions, consideration should have been
given to the utility of the
Second and Third Respondents remaining in the
proceeding. The Second and Third Respondents allege that as early as 22 May
had disclosed the pattern of distributions to the Applicant, however,
as there is no evidence before the Court regarding same, I
am unable to make
such a finding.
the further amended points of claim filed on 17 March 2025 do not make reference
to the Trust’s distributions nor did
the Applicant’s trial material,
including his Outline of Case Document (Final Hearing) and affidavit. In fact,
the Applicant
did not advance any position in relation to the Second and Third
Respondents and only sought to rely upon the points of claim, which
evidence. Nor is there any ability for any such finding to be made.
am satisfied that the Applicant should have been advised that he had little
chance of success at trial in pursuing a claim against
the Second and Third
Respondents upon receipt of the history of distributions.
Second and Third Respondents sought that indemnity costs be ordered on a fixed
basis. However, as I have ordered costs from 3
December 2024, the indemnity
costs payable by the Applicant are to be as assessed.
Party/party costs
am not satisfied that party/party costs should be awarded for the period prior
to 3 December 2024.
the reasons set out above, the circumstances of this case justify the Applicant
paying the Second and Third Respondent’s
costs as and from 3 December 2024
on an indemnity basis as assessed.
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
six (106) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Chief Justice
Dated: 3 October 2025
RTF format (620 KB)
Signed PDF/A format