Sandow v State Minister for the State of Queensland [2025] FCAFC 140 (13 October 2025)
FEDERAL COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Sandow v State Minister for the State of
[2025] FCAFC 140
Appeal from:
Sandow on behalf of the Bigambul People #5 v State of Queensland
[2025] FCA 53
File number(s):
QUD 101 of 2025
Judgment of:
MURPHY, LONGBOTTOM and HILL JJ
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
NATIVE TITLE –
Application for leave
to appeal against interlocutory judgment striking out native title determination
– whether native title
determination application properly authorised
pursuant to
Native Title Act
whether authorisation notice afforded a reasonable opportunity to participate in
the decision-making process –
leave granted – appeal
Legislation:
Federal Court of Australia Act 1976
Native Title Act 1993
Federal Court Rules 2011
(Cth), r 26.01(1)
Cases cited:
Bodney v Bropho & Ors
[2004] FCAFC
(2004) 140 FCR 77
Bolton on behalf of the Southern Noongar Families v State of Western
[2004] FCA 760
Carr v Finance Corp of Australia Ltd (No 1)
[1981] HCA 20
147 CLR 246
Computer Edge Pty Ltd v Apple Computer Inc
[1984] HCA 47
Décor Corporation Pty Ltd v Dart Industries Inc
(1991) 33 FCR 397
Ex parte Bucknell
[1936] HCA 67
(1936) 56 CLR 221
Fraser v NRMA Holdings Limited
(1995) 55 FCR 452
Lawson on behalf of the ‘Pooncarie’ Barkandji (Paakantyi)
People v Minister for Land and Water Conservation for the State
of New South
[2002] FCA 1517
Nathanson v Minister for Home Affairs
[2022] HCA 26
Re Minister for Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Lam
[2003] HCA 6
(2003) 214 CLR 1
Sharp v DCT (NSW)
[1988] FCA 76
(1998) 19 ATR 908
Weribone on behalf of the Mandandanji People v State of Queensland
[2013] FCA 255
General Division
National Practice Area:
Native Title
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicants:
Mr D M Yarrow SC with Mr Hardie
Solicitor for the Applicants:
Just Us Lawyers
Counsel for the First Respondent:
Ms C Taggart
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Counsel for the Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Respondents:
Dr R Webb KC with Mr A Preston
Solicitor for the Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Respondents:
Queensland South Native Title Services Ltd
QUD 101 of 2025
ELVIE SANDOW
First Applicant
JAMES SCHIBROWSKI
Second Applicant
SHERIDON NOBLE (and another named in the
Third Applicant
STATE MINISTER FOR THE STATE OF
First Respondent
DARRYL HIPPI
Second Respondent
LEROY CONNORS (and others named in the
Third Respondent
, LONGBOTTOM AND HILL JJ
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
application for leave to appeal filed 20 February 2025 is granted.
appeal is dismissed.
order as to costs.
Note: Entry of
orders is dealt with in
Federal Court Rules 2011
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
application for leave to appeal concerns the requirement for valid authorisation
of an applicant under s 251B of the
Native Title
make an application as mentioned in s 13(1) of the Act for a determination of
native title in relation to an area for which
there is no determination.
6 February 2025, the primary judge ordered that the Bigambul People #5 native
title determination application (QUD344/2024) (
Bigambul #5 claim
struck out pursuant to s 84C of the Act or, alternatively, summarily
dismissed pursuant to r 26.01(1)(d) of the
Federal Court
(Cth) or s 31A of the
Federal Court
of Australia
(Cth) and removed from the Court file.
orders were made on the basis that the Bigambul #5 claim had not been properly
authorised, the native title determination application
was not filed on behalf
of the claim group and was an abuse of process.
applicant (
Bigambul #5 applicant
) sought leave to appeal the orders made
by the primary judge on four grounds. At the hearing the Court granted leave to
During the course of the appeal, the Bigambul #5 applicant abandoned one
of the grounds of appeal. The Bigambul #5 applicant further
conceded that they
must prevail on all of the remaining grounds in order to succeed on the appeal.
The Court indicated that it would
reject ground 1.
are our reasons for granting the Bigambul #5 applicant leave to appeal and
dismissing the appeal.
31 January 2024, a series of
to authorise two new native title
determination applications by the Bigambul People were notified in the Koori
Mail and Courier Mail.
provided as follows:
second claim
” referred to in the notice would partly overlap
with the native title determination application brought on behalf of the
People (QUD290/2017) (
Gamilaraay claim
commenced at the intersection of the New South Wales and Queensland
border and extended north and north-west to Woongallon, taking
in Talwood and
parts of the Weir River.
first meeting
on 26 February 2024 at Cherbourg, the second claim was
authorised. The chair called for, and received,
applicant and replacement applicant for the second claim. The first meeting then
voted unanimously in favour of a resolution
that the nominees be authorised as,
respectively, the applicant and the replacement applicant for the second
each of the
remaining meetings
the second claim, the applicant and
replacement applicant were authorised. Unlike the first meeting, the attendees
at the remaining
meetings were not given the opportunity to nominate alternative
members of the applicant. At the
second meeting
on 27 February 2024 at
The Chair explained that the names of the applicants were inserted in
yesterday’s meeting and cannot now be amended. The only
choice is to vote
for or against. No amendment can be made.
each of the remaining meetings, a majority voted in favour of
authorising the second claim, the applicant and replacement
applicant. On 27 June 2024, the Bigambul #5 claim was filed in this
Strike out application
4 July 2024, the members of the applicant for the Gamilaraay claim
Gamilaraay applicant
) were joined as respondents to the Bigambul #5
claim. The joinder was for the limited purpose of prosecuting an interlocutory
application
by which they sought orders that the Bigambul #5 claim be struck out
pursuant to s 84C of the Act and removed from the Court file.
84C empowers the Court to strike out a native title determination application
that does not comply with s 61 of the Act.
Section 61(1) relevantly provides
that a person or persons authorised by the native title claim group may make an
application as
mentioned in s 13(1) for a determination of native title in
relation to an area for which there is no approved determination of native
Decision below
making the orders the subject of the application for leave to appeal, the
primary judge found (at [50]):
... that the 31 January 2024 Notice was fatally misleading. In particular, the
31 January 2024 Notice purported to arrange a convocation
of people to come to
one of four meeting centres to attend “consultation and consent
meetings” for the purpose of authorisation
the Bigambul #5 Claim. In
reality only those at the Cherbourg meeting on 26 February 2024, notably
of the meetings, would have the opportunity to
determine the composition of the Bigambul #5 Applicant.
(Emphasis in the original)
Honour went on to conclude that (at [59]):
The denial of opportunity to Bigambul claim group members to nominate
alternative members of the Bigambul #5 Applicant was, in my
view, fatal to the
authorisation process. This is not an issue which is susceptible to subsequent
amendment in documentation filed
in support of the Bigambul #5 Claim. As such
the Bigambul #5 Claim should be struck out pursuant to
Native Title
on the basis that the Bigambul #5 Applicant was not properly authorised.
primary judge additionally found that the Bigambul #5 claim was, impermissibly,
brought on behalf of a subset of the Bigambul
People and that making and
prosecuting the native title determination application was an abuse of process.
In finding that the Bigambul
#5 claim was an abuse of process, her Honour noted,
amongst other matters, that the claimant application was filed three days after
the Gamilaraay claim was listed for a consent determination. This had the
consequence that for a second time the Gamilaraay claim
could not proceed to a
consent determination because of an overlapping native title determination
application by the Bigambul People.
GROUNDS OF APPEAL
outlined above, the Bigambul #5 applicant sought leave to appeal the judgment on
four grounds, only three of which were pressed
at the hearing of the appeal.
critical ground is ground 1, which concerns the primary judge’s findings
extracted at [13] and [14] above, and contends:
The learned primary judge erred by concluding (at Reasons [50] and [56]-[59])
that the 31 January 2024 notice of authorisation meetings
was misleading, and
that the participants at those meetings were denied a reasonable opportunity to
participate in the decision-making
process, when the learned primary judge
should have concluded that the authorisation meetings were effective to
authorise the Bigambul
#5 Claim because:
(a) the 31 January 2024 notice of authorisation meetings was not affected by any
(b) resolutions proposed to each authorisation meeting conduct were capable of
acceptance or rejection;
(c) participants at the 27 February 2024 meeting were able to move dissent in
the ruling of the chairperson that no nominations of
proposed members of the
applicant could be received; and
(d) the balance of voting between all four authorisation meetings was such that
Bigambul People, as a group, should be taken to have
authorised the Bigambul #5
second and fifth grounds of appeal concern the findings made by the primary
judge summarised at [15] above. By ground 2, the
Bigambul #5 applicant contends
that the primary judge erred in concluding that the Bigambul #5 claim was
brought by a subset of the
Bigambul People. By ground 5, the Bigambul #5
applicant challenges the adequacy of the reasons given by the primary judge on
abuse of process ground.
LEAVE TO APPEAL
judgment of the primary judge was interlocutory in that legally (if not
practically) it did not finally determine the rights of
the parties at issue in
the proceedings:
Bodney v Bropho & Ors
[2004] FCAFC 226
(Stone J, Spender and Branson JJ agreeing) citing
Finance Corp of Australia Ltd (No 1)
[1981] HCA 20
(1981) 147 CLR 246
Computer Edge Pty Ltd v Apple Computer Inc
[1984] HCA 47
(1984) 54 ALR
As such, the Bigambul #5 applicant requires leave to appeal: Federal
Court Act, s 24(1A) and (1D)(b).
principles governing the grant of leave are well established. First, whether
the judgment is attended with sufficient doubt to
warrant its reconsideration on
appeal. Second, whether substantial injustice would result if leave were
refused, assuming the decision
Décor Corporation Pty Ltd v
Dart Industries Inc
[1991] FCA 844
(1991) 33 FCR 397
at 398 to 399
(Sheppard, Burchett and Heerey JJ). The second consideration is particularly
likely to work in favour of an applicant
where, as here, the interlocutory
decision is, in effect, final:
v DCT (NSW)
[1988] FCA 76
at 909 (Burchett J), citing
Ex parte Bucknell
[1936] HCA 67
(1936) 56 CLR 221
at 225 to 226 (Latham CJ, Rich, Dixon, Evatt and McTiernan
sufficiency of the doubt in respect of the decision and the question of
substantial injustice bear on each other, so that the
degree of doubt which is
sufficient in one case may be different from that required in another:
at 910. A significant factor in this matter is the finality, in effect, of
striking out the Bigambul #5 claim. The practical consequence
of the orders is
to bring the proceeding in which the Bigambul People seek a determination of
native title over the overlap area
to an end. Given that circumstance, we
consider that this is an appropriate case for the grant of leave.
DISPOSITION OF THE APPEAL
Bigambul #5 applicant accepts that the notice failed to communicate that
nominations for the applicant would
occur at the first meeting and
that, as such, those attending the remaining meetings were denied the
opportunity to nominate members
of the applicant and replacement applicant.
say, however, that there was no practical injustice resulting from the denial of
the opportunity to nominate members of the applicant.
That is because (it is
said) those attending the remaining meetings could have voted against the
resolution and those attending
the second meeting could have moved dissent of
the ruling of the chair extracted at [9] above, but in either case the
to bring the Bigambul #5 claim was passed by a clear majority across
the meetings. As such, the Bigambul #5 applicant contends by
ground 1 that the
primary judge erred in finding that the defect in the notice was “fatal to
the authorisation process.”
ground of appeal is without substance.
French J observed in
on behalf of the Southern Noongar
Families v State of Western Australia
[2004] FCA 760
....it is of central importance to the conduct of native title determination
applications that those who purport to bring them and
to exercise, on behalf of
the native title claim groups, the rights and responsibilities associated with
such applications, have
the authority of their groups to do so. The
authorisation requirement acknowledges the communal character of traditional law
custom which grounds native title –
Western Australia v
[2000] FCA 652
(2000) 99 FCR 33
at 52; see also
Moran v Minister of Land and
Water Conservation (NSW)
[1999] FCA 1637.
process by which authorisation of the applicant is to occur is prescribed by s
251B of the Act. Where, as here, there is no process
of decision making under
traditional law and custom, s 251B(b) requires that:
....the persons in
the native title claim group
or compensation claim
the other person or persons to make the application and
to deal with the matters
in accordance with a process of decision - making
agreed to and adopted, by the persons in the native title claim group
compensation claim group, in relation to authorising the making of the
application and dealing with the matters, or in relation
to doing things of that
(Emphasis added)
251B(b) of the Act does not require that all members of the claim group be
involved in the decision or a unanimous vote.
A valid authorisation process
does, however, necessitate that “members of the claim group are given
every reasonable opportunity
to participate in the decision-making
on behalf of the
‘Pooncarie’ Barkandji (Paakantyi) People v Minister for Land and
Water Conservation for the State of
New South Wales
[2002] FCA 1517
in turn, requires that notice of an authorisation meeting is sufficient to
enable the persons to whom it is addressed to judge
for themselves whether to
on behalf of the Mandandanji People v State
of Queensland
[2013] FCA 255
(Rares J), citing
Fraser v NRMA
Holdings Limited
(1995) 55 FCR 452
at 466 (Black CJ, von Doussa and Cooper
JJ). Such a notice not only safeguards a “reasonable opportunity” to
participate,
it also ensures that the decision-making process can proceed on the
basis of an informed consent or vote:
at [39] to [40]; see
at [45] to [46] (French J).
the primary judge found, the notice failed to afford those authorising the
second claim a “reasonable opportunity”
to participate in the
decision-making process with respect to the authorisation of the Bigambul #5
applicant. That is because it
failed to inform those to whom it was addressed
that nomination of the applicant and the replacement applicant would
occur at the first meeting. That conclusion does not reflect a
“technical” or “overly pedantic” approach
procedural requirement of authorisation under s 251B of the Act: cf,
the contrary, consistent with the authorities cited above, the primary
judge’s finding properly reflected the central importance
of the applicant
to the conduct of a claimant application and the requirement that those entitled
to authorise the applicant be given
a “reasonable opportunity” to
participate in the decision-making process. That decision-making process was
not confined
to voting on the resolution, but materially included the
opportunity to be involved in the nomination of the persons to be authorised
applicant and replacement applicant for the second claim. The failure of the
notice to communicate that nomination of the applicant
and replacement applicant
occur at the first meeting was a fundamental part of that
opportunity.
Bigambul #5 applicant placed some emphasis on the concept of “practical
injustice”. That concept is found in the
authorities with respect to
procedural fairness at common law: see particularly,
Minister for
Immigration and Multicultural Affairs; Ex parte Lam
[2003] HCA 6
(Gleeson CJ). As Gleeson CJ there observed, “[w]hether one
talks in terms of procedural fairness or natural justice, the concern
is to avoid practical injustice”. Even in that context, however,
non-compliance with a requirement designed to
ensure a fair process will nearly
always be a material error: see, for example,
Nathanson v Minister for Home
[2022] HCA 26
(2022) 276 CLR 80
, [35] and [39]
(Kiefel CJ, Keane and Gleeson JJ), [41] and [55] (Gageler J),
[76] to [77] (Gordon J).
is not necessary to revert to the common law of procedural fairness to decide
this appeal. The requirements of a valid authorisation
process under s 251B of
the Act material to the disposition of the appeal are aptly detailed in the
authorities to which we have
referred. What did, or could have, occurred at the
remaining meetings is irrelevant to the validity of the authorisation of the
Bigambul #5 applicant because the process miscarried when the notice failed to
inform the claim group that they would only be given
an opportunity to be
involved in the nomination of the applicant if they attended the first
decision of the primary judge to strike out the Bigambul #5 claim under s 84C of
the Act on the ground that the Bigambul #5 applicant
was not properly authorised
is not attended by error.
Grounds 2 and 5
the conclusion we have reached with respect to ground 1, and the concession made
by the Bigambul #5 applicant that they need
to prevail on all grounds to succeed
on the appeal, it is unnecessary to consider grounds 2 and 5. We are confirmed
in that view
by the instructions obtained by counsel during the course of the
appeal that the Bigambul #5 applicant would not seek to re-authorise
title determination application over the overlap area, should the appeal be
application for leave to appeal is granted. The appeal is dismissed. There
will be no order as to costs.
I certify that the preceding thirty-five (35)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justices
Longbottom and Hill.
Dated: 13 October 2025
SCHEDULE OF PARTIES
Fourth Applicant:
EDWARD MITCHELL
Respondents
Fourth Respondent:
DEIDRE FLICK
Fifth Respondent:
REGINALD MCGRADY
Sixth Respondent:
GARRY SAUNDERS
RTF format (4.16 MB)
Signed PDF/A format