Frostbland Pty Ltd v Koori Skin Care Pty Ltd [2025] ATMO 217 (21 October 2025)
TRADE MARKS ACT 1995
DECISION OF A
DELEGATE OF THE REGISTRAR OF TRADE MARKS WITH REASONS
Re: Opposition by Frostbland
Pty Ltd to registration of trade mark application number
3 and 35) -
AYA-SKINCARE (word)
- in the name of Koori Skin Care Pty
Benjamin Goldsworthy
REPRESENTATION:
Sam Hallahan of Counsel, instructed by Omoi IP Pty
Andrew Sykes of Counsel, instructed by Mark My Words
Trademark Services Pty Ltd
2025 ATMO 217
Trade Marks Act 1995
(Cth) – opposition under
– grounds of opposition under
pressed – no
grounds established – trade mark to proceed to registration
matter concerns an opposition to an application for registration of a trade mark
Trade Marks Act 1995
in the name of Koori Skin
Care Pty Ltd (‘Applicant’). I extract details of the application
Filing date
: 26 October 2023 (‘Relevant
: AYA-SKINCARE (‘Trade Mark’)
Specification
Cosmetic preparations for skin care;
Cosmetic preparations for use on the face; Cosmetic preparations for use on the
skin; Non-medicated
cosmetic preparations; Preparations for the skin (cosmetic);
Serum (cosmetic preparations); Skin cleansing preparations (cosmetic);
preparations (cosmetic); Moisturising preparations (cosmetic); Facial
preparations (cosmetic); Cosmetic preparations (‘Applicant’s
Online retail services; Discount store services (retail,
wholesale, or sales promotion services); Retail services provided by pharmacies
(‘Applicant’s Services’)
Trade Mark was examined under
and acceptance was advertised on 27 March
2024. On 8 April 2024, Frostbland Pty Ltd (‘Opponent’) filed its
Intention to oppose. On 7 May 2024, the Opponent filed its Statement
of Grounds and Particulars (‘SGP’). On 16 May 2024,
the Applicant
filed its Notice of Intention to Defend.
20 August 2024, the Opponent filed its Evidence in Support (‘EIS’)
which consists of a declaration of Amanda Gani,
Managing Director of the
Opponent, dated 20 August 2024, and the accompanying Exhibits AG-1 to AG-25,
including Confidential Exhibits
AG-3, AG-4, AG-10, AG-11, AG-12, AG-13, AG-14,
AG-20, AG-23, and AG-24 (‘Gani’). Also annexed are Video Annexures 1
Video Annexure 5.
27 November 2024, the Applicant filed its Evidence in Answer (‘EIA’)
which consists of a declaration of Xhoana Gezhilli,
founder and director of the
Applicant, dated 26 November 2024, together with Annexures XG1 to XG7, Exhibits
XG8A to XG8D, Exhibits
XG9A to XG9J and Annexures XG10 to XG12 (Exhibits XG8A to
XG8D are MP3 files and Exhibits XG9A to XG9J are MP3 files)
(‘Gezhilli’).
The Applicant also filed a declaration of Jacqueline
Louise Pryor, trade mark attorney, dated 22 November 2024, together with
JLP1 and JLP2 (‘Pryor’).
31 January 2024, the Opponent filed its Evidence in Reply (‘EIR’)
consisting of a declaration of Karen Anne Hayne,
legal practitioner and
principal at Omoi IP, dated 31 January 2025, with Exhibits KH-1 to KH-6
period for evidence ended and the parties requested to be heard.
7 July 2025, the Opponent filed its written outline of the submissions. On 15
July 2022, the Applicant filed its written outline
of submissions. On 22 July
2025, I heard the matter by video conference. Sam Hallahan of Counsel instructed
by Omoi IP Pty Ltd appeared
on behalf of the Opponent. Andrew Sykes of Counsel
instructed by Jacqueline Pryor of Mark My Words Trademark Services Pty Ltd
on behalf of the Applicant.
am to decide this matter as a delegate of the Registrar of Trade Marks
(‘Registrar’).
Grounds and onus
Opponent has the onus of establishing one of the nominated grounds of
opposition.
The standard of proof
is the ordinary civil standard of the balance of
probabilities.
Opponent, by its SGP, listed grounds of opposition under
. The Opponent does not press the grounds of opposition under
and I consider them to be
time at which I must assess the rights of the parties is as at the priority date
of the Trade Mark, here being the Relevant Date.
declares that the Opponent was established in 1949. The Opponent markets and
distributes beauty products throughout Australia,
and other countries, including
‘ALYA’ and ‘ALYA
SKIN’. What Gani describes as the
‘Alya Skin Business’ was founded in 2018.
Opponent was made the authorised distributor of the Alya Skin Business in July
2018. On 20 October 2022, the Opponent appears
to have purchased the
intellectual property and other assets of Alya Skin IP Co Pty Ltd, including
registered trade marks.
Opponent is the registered owner of the following trade marks
(‘Opponent’s Trade Marks’):
: alya skin
Specification
: cosmetics; make-up; pink clay cosmetic
face masks; cosmetic clay face masks; beauty masks; beauty products; cosmetic
masks; cosmetic
kits; masks for the face (cosmetic); cleansing facial masks;
cleansing masks; cosmetic skin care products; cosmetic moisturisers;
for personal use; skin cleansing products; cosmetic creams; cosmetic bath
products; cosmetic body care products; cleaning
products for the skin
(‘Opponent’s Goods’)
Priority date
: 29 January 2018
Trade mark number
: alya skin
Specification
: distribution (not being transport
services) and wholesale of cosmetics, make-up, face masks and beauty products by
any means; distribution
of goods (not being transport services) by any means;
wholesale of goods (by any means); sale and distribution of cosmetics, make-up,
face masks and beauty products by any means, including online and through social
media; online retail services; online retail store
services; retail services;
online retail store services featuring cosmetics, make-up, face masks and beauty
products; sale of cosmetics,
make-up, face masks and beauty products by all
means including through ecommerce; retail of cosmetics, make-up, face masks and
products; retailing of goods (by any means); sale of goods (by any
means); demonstration of cosmetic goods, for retail purposes;
retail, wholesale,
services; sale and distribution of goods by any means, including online and
through social media (‘Opponent’s
Priority date
: 22 March 2019
of the Opponent’s Trade Marks is declared to have occurred from at least
2018 in Australia in relation to the Opponent’s
Goods and Services. Gani
declares that goods have also been promoted, advertised, offered for sale or
sold in various other countries.
Promotion occurs on websites controlled by the
Opponent, by third party retailers, Amazon and the Opponent’s social
Opponent owns the website www.alyaskin.com.au (‘Opponent’s
Website’) which was launched in October 2018. At
Exhibits AG-8 and AG-9
are screen captures from the Opponent’s Website. These include six screen
captures dated between September
2019 and October 2023. Shopify analytics are
attached at Confidential Exhibit AG-10 showing the number of both first-time
and return visitors.
declares that since 2018 there have been various distribution agreements with
third party retailers in Australia including over
1000 independent pharmacies as
well as chain pharmacies. Confidential Exhibit AG-11 is a schedule of
independent pharmacies with
which the Opponent has entered a third-party
retailer arrangement without details as to the time or the specific goods or
of goods offered in relation to the Opponent’s Trade Mark also appear in
provides the ‘approximate annual gross retail sales revenue of Alya Skin
Products (including the Opponent’s Goods
and Services)’ for the
financial years 2019 to 2024 at Confidential Exhibit
At Confidential Exhibit
AG-13 are examples of invoices issued between 2021 to 2024. The ‘estimated
marketing and advertising
spend in Australia’ in relation to ‘Alya
Skin Products (including the Opponent’s Goods and Services) under or by
reference to’ the Opponent’s Trade Marks for the years 2018 to 2024
appear at Confidential Exhibit
I note that the revenue
figures to not appear to demarcate sales for Australia as apart from sales in
other jurisdictions.
examples of promotional activities are provided. This includes by third party
retailers shown at Exhibit AG-15 which shows
posters declared to have appeared
at pharmacies. Also shown in the EIS are screen captures of social media
accounts on Instagram,
Tik Tok, Facebook and YouTube which display the
Opponent’s Trade Marks. The Opponent has also organised various events
goods have been promoted under the Opponent’s Trade Marks. Examples
are provided at Exhibit AG-19. At Exhibit AG-21 are examples
of promotions and
advertisements showing the Opponent’s Trade Marks arising from partnership
and other sponsorship arrangements.
Google Ads performance analytics are
provided at Confidential Exhibit AG-23 and Meta and Ad Creative analytics at
Confidential Exhibit
of customer surveys which occurred on Facebook is also provided at Confidential
Exhibit AG-20.
Exhibit AG-22 are copies of 30 articles in digital media publications and
websites dated in the years 2018 to 2024.
Annexures 1 to 5 show news and talk show segments in Australia and what appears
to be the United States of America which have
featured the skin products of the
Opponent, with announcers and presentors pronouncing the Opponent’s Trade
Exhibit AG-25 Gani provides articles which document awards and industry
recognition.
also refers to the following article which inadvertently misspells the word
‘alya’ with ‘aya’ when discussing
the Opponent’s
provides the history and background of the Applicant, the Trade Mark and goods
sold by the Applicant. The Trade Mark was
selected in March 2022 and Gezhilli
declares first use occurred in September 2023.
need not further summarise Gezhilli other than to add to that there are
Australian radio advertisements on Triple M Dubbo in August/September
Exhibits XG8A to XG8D and on Hit 105.9 Central West in August/September 2024 at
Exhibits XG9A to XG9J. These provide examples
of how the Trade Mark might be
pronounced.
provides Annexure JLP1 which consists of the results of searches of the
Australian Trade Marks Register. Annexure JLP2 to Pryor
consists of screen
captures taken from the websites of three Australian cosmetic retailers, showing
the use of trade marks which
consist of or include a first name, in connection
with the promotion and sale of class 3 products including cosmetics, perfumery,
and hair care goods.
mainly seeks to respond to much of, though not all, the statements made in
Gezhilli. Hayne in part responds to statements made
in Gezhilli about the
inspiration for the Trade Mark flowing from the same name given to the daughter
of Gezhilli. The results of
a search of the Australian Trade Marks Search
Applicant to the Opponent exploring the possibility of an arrangement
between the parties also appears at Exhibit KH-4. Examples
of the use of
‘AYA SKIN’ as opposed to ‘AYA SKINCARE’ are also shown
in exhibits to Gezhilli.
Consideration
provides that the ‘registration of a trade mark may be opposed on the
ground that the applicant is not the owner of the trade
order to establish a ground of opposition under
it is a requirement that
where the Opponent relies on the use of another sign, that sign shown in use
must be substantially identical
with the Trade Mark.
test for whether two trade marks are substantially identical is expounded in
Shell Co (Aust) Ltd v Esso Standard Oil (Aust) Ltd
considering whether marks are substantially identical they should, I think, be
compared side by side, their similarities and differences
noted and the
importance of these assessed having regard to the essential features of the
registered mark and the total impression
of resemblance or dissimilarity that
emerges from the comparison.
Opponent submits that the Applicant is not the owner of the Opposed Mark given
that the Opposed Mark is substantially identical
with the Opponent’s
‘alya’ and ‘alya skin’ marks. The use of those trade
marks as shown in the EIS
occurred before the Relevant Date.
the trade marks, I note the difference of the inclusion of the letter
‘l’ in the word ‘alya’ which
results in a visual
difference. I consider this to be a substantial and important difference and
there to be total impression of
dissimilarity on a side by side comparison of
the trade marks. I am not satisfied that the trade marks are substantially
Therefore, a major threshold requirement for the operation of
not satisfied.
Accordingly,
the ground of opposition under
has not been established.
Opponent relies on
which relevantly provides:
Identical etc. trade marks
(1) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), an application for the
registration of a trade mark (
applicant’s trade mark
respect of goods (
applicant’s goods
) must be rejected
(a) the applicant’s trade mark is substantially identical with, or
deceptively similar to:
(i) a trade mark registered by another person in respect of similar goods
or closely related services;
(ii) a trade mark whose registration in respect of similar goods or
closely related services is being
sought by another person; and
(b) the priority date for the registration of the applicant’s trade
mark in respect of the applicant’s
goods is not earlier than the priority
date for the registration of the other trade mark in respect of the similar
goods or closely
related services.
(2) Subject to subsections (3) and (4), an application for the
registration of a trade mark (
applicant’s trade mark
respect of services (
applicant’s services
) must be rejected
(a) it is substantially identical with, or deceptively similar to:
(i) a trade mark registered by another person in respect of similar
services or closely related goods;
(ii) a trade mark whose registration in respect of similar services or
closely related goods is being
sought by another person; and
(b) the priority date for the registration of the
applicant’s trade mark in respect of the applicant’s services is not
earlier than the priority date for the registration of the other trade mark in
respect of the similar services or closely related
Opponent relies on the Opponent’s Trade Marks for the ground of opposition
The Opponent’s Trade Marks both have a priority date which is
earlier than that of the Trade Mark and they are all in the name
of a person
other than the Applicant.
Opponent’s Trade Marks both cover either goods of the same description in
class 3 or services of the same description in
Substantially identical
note my findings regarding the substantial identity of the trade mark
‘alya’ and ‘alya skin’ in the
section of this
decision. For the same reasons, I am not satisfied that the Trade Mark is
substantially identical with the Opponent’s
Trade Marks. I now turn to the
question of deceptive similarity.
Deceptively similar
also must consider whether the Trade Mark is deceptively similar to any of the
Opponent’s Trade Marks.
provides that a trade mark is
deceptively similar to another trade mark if it ‘so nearly resembles that
other trade mark that
it is likely to deceive or cause confusion’. I must
compare the respective trade marks as
with regard to essential or
distinguishing features,
consider them visually and aurally, and in the context of the relevant
surrounding circumstances.
of importance is the effect and meaning of the trade
especially their effect
or impression produced on the mind of ordinary
I should account for
the imperfect recollection of those ordinary consumers and the addition of even
a single word or other element
can in the right circumstances relevantly
differentiate one remembered mark from another in the minds of those
Ultimately, what is
required is a real tangible danger of
That is, ‘a
real likelihood that some people will wonder or be left in doubt about whether
the two sets of products ... come
from the same
is often said that the first elements in a word trade mark is an important
factor to consider.
However, the
overall phonetic effect has at times meant that decision makers find two trade
marks to have a different effect on the
minds of the
I note that there are
various decisions which have involved a comparison of pronunciations. Firstly,
the decision in
Berlei Hestia Industries Ltd v The Bali Company Inc
where the High Court considered that the words bore a potential to be
pronounced ‘bar-ley’ and ‘bur-ley’ and
decided that the
relevant trade marks were deceptively similar. By contrast, in
Singtel Optus
Pty Ltd v Optum Inc
, Davies J noted the importance of phonetic dissimilarity
in finding that the words ‘OPTUM’ and ‘OPTUS’ were
deceptively similar.
Christian v Société Des Produits Nestlé SA (No 2)
the Full Court of the Federal Court found that ‘MUSASHI’ and
‘A-SASHI’ were deceptively
in respect of dietary
supplements. In
McDowell’s Application
the Court compared the trade
marks ‘Nuvol’ for illuminating, heating and lubricating oils and
‘Nujol’ for
medicinal preparations. The Court found that confusion
in an analysis which
started with the fact that the words were both invented words meaningless to
most persons.
The Court also
noted the similarity of the names as amounting to almost
Ultimately, what I
must consider are the trade marks before me and their own visual, aural and
other characteristics, including how
the words may be pronounced.
video at Video Annexure 2 shows a person promoting the Opponent’s offering
who pronounces the word ‘alya’ in
the Opponent’s Trade Mark
‘ah-lie-ah’. However, it is certainly also possible that a consumer
may pronounce the
word as ‘ah-lee-ah’, ah-leah, ‘al-yah’
or possibly ‘el-yah’. Gani at Video Annexure 2 is an Australian
television news segment for skincare goods where the announcer pronounces the
Opponent’s Trade Marks as ‘ah-lie-ah’,
starting the segment
with a play on the word stating, ‘...its called “ah-lie-ah”
but there are no falsehoods here’.
Segments from what appears to be the
Morning Show in the United States of America pronounces the word as
‘ah-lee-ah’.
contrast the Trade Mark is likely to be pronounced ‘eye-ah’. An
example of this is shown in the EIA, though that evidence
is dated after the
Relevant Date.
convergent and uninterrupted phonetic flow of the compared words present in
is not present here. The trade marks before me have different
syllabic structures when perceived by the ordinary consumer and they
to have quite different pronunciations. Visually there is some similarity in the
trade marks as they both start with the
letter ‘a’ and end with the
letters ‘ya’. Both trade marks also include reference to skin or
skincare. However,
I consider the addition to the ‘l’ to be
something persons consuming these goods are likely to take note of. The effect
on their minds is one which interrupts the similarity and sets an imperfectly
recollection and impression which is quite different
phonetically. To the
ordinary consumer of the goods and services, these compared words likely appear
to be invented words or as names.
However, I have also noted that the word
‘AYA’ has a short and palindromic construction whereas something
different is
conjured by the word ‘alya’. This is not a case of a
single letter being buried in both trade marks as in
Application
. The possibility that words tend to be slurred is also
interrupted at the outset by the inclusion of the letter ‘l’,
results in a different phonetic structure of the words forming the trade marks.
Overall, I consider the likely divergence in
pronunciation to result in
something which would be recollected in a manner which is sufficiently different
to Trade Mark.
am also mindful that consumers of goods which are put on the skin are likely to
have a level of care and attention as to the make
and contents of the
Applicant’s Goods which lessens any risk of confusion. At the hearing the
Opponent noted the lower scale
of the possible price for the Applicant’s
Goods, which I acknowledge as possible.
Colgate-Palmolive Co v Unilever Plc
, the delegate
While the goods involved in the specifications are generally
inexpensive, they are ones associated with personal grooming and hygiene,
in my personal observations of the world, people generally purchase with some
degree of care. That is to say, while some of
the goods included in the
specifications might occasionally be expensive, as far as the run-of-the-mill is
concerned the goods are
all such as might generally be found on the shelves of
pharmacies and/or supermarkets and purchasers often have preferences or personal
tastes such as scent, whether they are to select a soap or body gel, the brand
image presented to them on the product, and so forth.
The selection is not
entirely on the same basis as that of, say, spaghetti or white sugar where one
is more or less assured that
most spaghetti and all white sugar is the
concerned with goods with a cosmetic or otherwise aesthetic purpose remain
likely to be somewhat cautious even where those
goods are sold at lower price
points, and even if the Applicant’s Goods are faster moving consumer
is the onus of the Opponent to establish that there is a real and tangible
danger of confusion. I am not satisfied that this is
a real risk. As such, I am
not satisfied that the Trade Mark is deceptively similar to the Opponent’s
Trade Marks. Accordingly,
the ground of opposition under
has not been
established.
Opponent relies upon
similar to trade mark that has acquired a reputation in Australia
The registration of a trade mark in respect of particular goods or services
may be opposed on the ground that:
(a) another trade mark had, before the priority date for the
registration of the first‑mentioned trade mark in respect of those
or services, acquired a reputation in Australia; and
(b) because of the reputation of that other trade mark, the use of the
first‑mentioned trade mark would be likely to deceive
priority date
section 12.
, the Opponent must establish that as at the Relevant Date
another trade mark had acquired a reputation in Australia. The word
‘reputation’
here means, ‘the recognition of the [other trade
mark] by the public
generally’.
Something more
than a reputation among a small number of persons is required and the size and
extent of the class of persons may
vary depending on the
circumstances.
Reputation may be
inferred from a high sale volume, together with substantial advertising
expenditure and other promotions, without
direct evidence of consumer
appreciation of the Trade Mark.
The use as shown in the evidence must be use such that it indicates a connection
in the course of trade between the goods or services
and the person who applied
the trade mark in relation to the goods or
I proceed on the basis
that this will be an objective question to be assessed from the perspective of
the ordinary consumer.
SGP refers to the trade marks ‘ALYA’ and ‘ALYA SKIN’ in
respect of the ground of opposition under
The gross sales of ‘ALYA
SKIN’ products in a four-year period is said to consistently evidence at
least that the scale
of the Opponent’s business was moderate and in the
range of a fair sized small business. By the Relevant Date, the total gross
sales appear to be sizeable. However, these figures appear to be for sales
‘to Australian and overseas consumers’ and
it is completely unclear
what the scope of sales was in particular for Australia. I also note that the
figures provided are retail
sales figures. I consider the advertising figures to
be moderate to low in amounts. Further, there is no indication of which of the
goods or services which are represented by the sales figures. I also note that
the various analytics figures do not appear to be
demarcated for users and
consumers in Australia. Overall, the figures provided in the EIS are vague.
Whilst there are various online
articles in the EIS mentioning the Opponent and
the trade marks ‘ALYA’ and ‘ALYA SKIN’, these only go as
far as evidencing promotion. The articles appear to be in the nature of
advertising material and not necessarily evidence of recognition
as anticipated
a review of the evidence before me, I am not satisfied that there is a
reputation in the trade marks ‘ALYA’ and
‘ALYA SKIN’ in
Australia as at the Relevant Date. Therefore, the requirements of
Accordingly,
the ground of opposition under
has not been established.
[a]n application for the registration of a trade
mark must be rejected if... its
would be contrary to law [my emphasis
requirement for
is that I am satisfied that the use of the Trade Mark
rather than
be contrary to
The SGP for the
ground of opposition mentions the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010
(‘CCA’), the tort of passing off and the
requirements of
of the Australian Consumer Law (‘ACL’) in the
CCA are that there be a likelihood that the relevant consumer would be
deceived as to the origin of the Applicant’s Goods or Services due to the
conduct of the Applicant – that is,
the consumer would be likely to be led
into error.
of the ACL concerns representations that are false or
misleading. The expression ‘mislead or deceive’ in
is effectively equivalent to the expression ‘false or misleading’ in
of the ACL.
test for determining whether conduct contravenes the ACL is one that is stricter
than the that under
of the Act.
requires only that consumers
would be likely to be deceived or confused. Since I am not satisfied that the
ground of opposition under
is established, it follows that on the more
demanding test to be applied under the ACL, I am not satisfied that the
Applicant’s
use of the Trade Mark would be likely to mislead or deceive,
or amount to a false or misleading representation under the ACL.
determining whether there has been passing off, this involves similar
considerations to misleading and deceptive conduct in that
there must be
reputation in the relevant mark or indicia; misrepresentation leading to
deception; and damage to goodwill, or the
likelihood thereof. Where a trade mark
does not likely contravene the ACL, it is also not likely to amount to passing
off. In this
respect, Hill J noted in
Re Equity Access Pty Ltd v Westpac
Banking Corporation
The scope for the operation of
will thus be broader than that involved in the tort of passing off so that in a
case such as the present where the claim is for the
protection of the reputation
in a name against the use of that name by another, failure to succeed under
will invariably mean that proceedings for passing off would likewise
Trade Practices Act 1974
(Cth) are the predecessor
sections for
of the ACL. Given my findings in relation to
of the ACL, I am also satisfied that use of the Trade Mark would not
constitute passing off.
(Cth) is mentioned in the SGP there was no
submission about this basis for the
ground of opposition. I am not
satisfied that the ground is established in this
Accordingly,
the ground of opposition under
has not been established.
(1) Unless subsection (3) applies to the proceedings, the Registrar
must, at the end, decide:
(a) to refuse to register the trade mark; or
(b) to register the trade mark (with or without conditions or limitations)
in respect of the goods and/or services
then specified in the application;
having regard to the extent (if any) to which any ground on which the
application was opposed has been established.
limitations
Opponent has not established a ground of opposition. Accordingly, the Trade Mark
may proceed to registration after one month from
the date of this decision.
disposition of the application should be treated in accordance with any
direction or judgment of the Court if there is an appeal.
parties sought their costs. It is normal for costs to follow the event and I see
no reason to make an exception here.
award costs against the Opponent under
in the amounts according to
Schedule 8 of the Regulations
Benjamin Goldsworthy
Hearing Officer
Oppositions and Hearings
Trade Marks and Designs
Unless specified otherwise, a
reference in these reasons to a section is a reference to such in the
Marks Act 1995
(Cth) and a reference to a regulation is a reference to such
Trade Marks Regulations 1995
(‘Regulations’).
Food Channel Network Pty Ltd
v Television Food Network GP
[2010] FCAFC 58
, [32] (Keane CJ, Stone and
Telstra Corporation Ltd v
Phone Directories Co Pty Ltd
[2015] FCAFC 156
, [133] (Besanko, Jagot and
Edelman JJ).
Opponent’s written
submissions, 2, fn 1.
Gani, [25].
Gani, [26].
Gani, [72].
[1963] HCA 66
, [12] (Windeyer
Torpedoes Sportswear Pty
Limited v Thorpedo Enterprises Pty Limited
[2003] FCA 901
, [78] (Bennett
Crazy Ron’s
Communications v Mobileworld Communications
[2004] FCAFC 196
, [77]-[88]
(Moore, Sackville and Emmett JJ).
New South Wales Dairy
Corporation v Murray Goulburn Co-operative Co Ltd
[1989] FCA 124
(1989) 86 ALR 549
(Gummow J).
Self Care IP Holdings Pty
Ltd v Allergan Australia Pty Ltd
[51] (Kiefel
CJ, Gageler, Gordon, Edelman and Gleeson JJ).
Ibid [51] and [67], citing
Australian Woollen Mills Ltd v F S Walton & Co Ltd
[1937] HCA 51
(1937) 58 CLR 641
and McTiernan JJ) (‘
Australian Woollen Mills
Jockey International Inc
v Darren Wilkinson
[2010] ATMO 22 (Hearing
Officer Spence).
Southern Cross
Refrigerating Co v Toowoomba Foundry Pty Ltd
[1954] HCA 82
; 91 CLR 592, 595
(Kitto J) (‘
Southern Cross
Registrar of Trade Marks v
[1999] FCA 1020
, [50](i) (French J)
Campomar Sociedad Limitada v Nike
International Ltd
[2000] HCA 12
, [83] (Gleeson CJ, Gaudron, McHugh, Gummow,
Kirby, Hayne and Callinan JJ).
Southern Cross
(n 15) 594-595 (Kitto J). See also,
Australian Woollen Mills
(n 13) 658.
London Lubricants (1920)
Ltd’s Application
(1925) 42 RPC 264 (CA)
(Sargant LJ).
Societe des Produits
Nestle SA v Kabushiki Kaisha Yakult Honsha
[2009] ATMO 85 (Hearing
Thompson) comparing ‘PREBIO’ and ‘PRETIO’. These were
found to be not deceptively similar. See also,
Nikon Corporation v Nison
Engineering Co Pty Ltd
[2014] ATMO 95 (Hearing
Officer O’Brien) where
the trade marks ‘NIKON’ and ‘NISON’ were compared and
found to be not deceptively
[1973] HCA 43 (Mason
[2018] FCA 575
(Davies J).
[2015] FCAFC 153 (Bennett
Katzmann and Davies JJ).
(1927) 44 RPC 335 (HL)
(Viscount Cave LC).
Gani, Video Annexures 3 to
[2007] ATMO 5
, [36] (Hearing
Officer Thompson).
McCormick & Co Inc v
[2000] FCA 1335
, [81] (Kenny J)
ConAgra Inc v McCain
Foods (Australia) Pty Ltd
[1992] FCA 159
, [131]-[132] (Lockhart J).
Coca-Cola Co v All-Fect
Distributors Ltd
[1999] FCA 1721
, [19] (Black CJ, Sunberg and Finkelstein
JJ), which was cited with approval in
E & J Gallo Winery v Lion Nathan
Australia Pty Ltd
[2010] HCA 15
, [43] (French CJ, Gummow, Crennan and Bell
(n 8) [5]-[6]
Advantage-Rent-A-Car Inc
v Advantage Car Rental Pty Ltd
[2001] FCA 683
, [28] (Madgwick J).
Australian Competition
and Consumer Commission v Coles Supermarkets Australia Pty Ltd
, [40] (Allsop CJ).
Re Equity Access Pty Ltd
v Westpac Banking Corporation
[1989] FCA 771
Exxon Corp v Exxon
Insurance Consultants International Ltd
[1982] RPC 69 (CA).
RTF format (6.89 MB)
Signed PDF/A format