CCDM Holdings, LLC & Ors v The Republic of India [2025] HCATrans 72 (4 November 2025)
[2025] HCATrans 072
IN THE HIGH COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Office of the
Sydney No S90 of 2025
B e t w e e n
CCDM HOLDINGS, LLC
First Appellant
DEVAS EMPLOYEES FUND US, LLC
Second Appellant
TELCOM DEVAS, LLC
Third Appellant
THE REPUBLIC OF INDIA
BEECH‑JONES
TRANSCRIPT OF PROCEEDINGS
AT CANBERRA ON TUESDAY,
4 NOVEMBER 2025, AT 10.00 AM
____________________
MR B.W. WALKER, SC
May it please the
Court, I appear with my learned friends
MR J.A. HOGAN‑DORAN, SC
MS A.F. GARSIA
for the appellants. (instructed by
Norton Rose Fulbright)
MR J.T. GLEESON, SC
it please the Court, your Honours. As your Honours know from the
notice of appearance in the written submissions, India’s
appearance in
this proceeding, S90/2025, is consistent with its appearance in the
Federal Court only for the purposes of
section 10(7)(b)
Foreign States Immunities Act
(Cth) for the purpose of
asserting immunity. On that basis, I appear together with my learned friends
MS F.T. ROUGHLEY, SC
MS C.G. WINNETT
for the respondent. (instructed by
White & Case)
MR S.P. DONAGHUE, KC
Solicitor‑General of the Commonwealth of Australia
it please your Honours, I appear with
MS C.S.A. HARRIS
MR A.A.E. O’BEID
on behalf of the
Attorney‑General of the Commonwealth of Australia, intervening.
(instructed by Australian Government Solicitor)
Thank you, Mr Solicitor. Mr Walker.
As your Honours know, the proceedings below
concerned and concerned only the question of India’s immunity for the
of proceedings under the legislation implementing in Australia the
New York Convention, to which I will come.
In relation to that
question of immunity, the reservation of India from the New York Convention
and in accordance with its terms
played no role at first instance. To put it
another way, the reservation – notwithstanding it was conceded that
the reservation
had no impact on the questions of immunity argued before
Justice Jackman – that position was maintained, in effect, by
or doing nothing about it in the Full Court. The
Full Court’s decision against us was reached for reasons which were
without the assistance in the argument by the parties in writing or in
addresses on the issue ‑ ‑ ‑
But it is obvious ‑ ‑ ‑
I am sorry, your Honour?
obviously a matter relevant to the construction of the New York
Convention.
Your Honour, I am not taking a
reasoning in the
court below is not the outcome of adversarial argument before
that court. As your Honours know from our written submissions, we
criticise aspects of the resort to material which were not the subject of any
contest drawn between the parties before the Full Court.
As I say, the Full
Court did not get any assistance from any of us on those matters, because they
were simply not raised with us.
That, in our submission, is subsidiary
to what Justice Gleeson has pointed out. It is not as if India’s
position under the
New York Convention is not a significant matter. That is a
more general proposition. It does not involve any concession by us,
relevance – let alone centrality – of the question of
India’s reservation, to which we will come. Your
Honours appreciate that
in the Full Court below the question of the reservation did not merely loom
large, it seems to have been
In passages to which we will draw
attention, with which your Honours are already familiar in the reasons of
the Full Court, in effect
the arguments upheld at first instance broadly derived
from this Court’s decision in
concerning the effect
transferred to this case of India’s accession to the New York
Convention, for the purposes of considering
whether India had signified consent
or waiver in relation to its immunity within the meaning of
Foreign States Immunities Act
, were considered matters that had a
deal to be said for them.
In effect, the reasoning proceeded in the Full
Court as if we were correct in relation to those matters but for the
intervention
intellectually of the presence and content and operation of the
reservation. In that sense, the reservation being central to what
was of course
the central issue; the only issue in the application. Namely, the question of
consent within the meaning of the statute.
reasoning – that is, the reasoning by which the New York Convention
had the effect for which we successfully contended
at first instance, and which
by a kind of assumption in the Full Court was treated as correct – is
of course, as your Honours
appreciate, a simple reading of the critical
provisions of the New York Convention to which I am about to come concerning
this international
system for the enforcement of foreign awards.
point, if I could take your Honours to the terms of that treaty, the New
York Treaty, bearing in mind that they are to be
construed, of course, in
accordance with the familiar provisions of Articles 31 and 32 in
particular of the Vienna Convention. In
the book of authorities, it is
volume 7, tab 55; the copy of the New York Convention to which we will
GAGELER CJ:
Can we use the version that
the statute?
GAGELER CJ:
‑ ‑ ‑ in the statute?
Yes, of course, your Honour. I am sorry, your Honours. Could I then
go, in the book of authorities, behind tab 4 to page 106 of
the scheduled text of the New York Convention. In Article I,
your Honours will see the important opening words:
This Convention shall apply to the recognition and enforcement of arbitral
et cetera, et cetera. In Article I(3),
your Honours there see the question raised of reservations, both of which
were availed of
any State may –
there then comes a phrase which may or may not have particular
significance:
on the basis of reciprocity declare that it will apply the Convention to the
recognition and enforcement of awards made only in the
territory of another
Contracting State.
That is fairly obviously apt to produce something in the nature of
reciprocity. The second reservation, which is the one in question
case – though both were made by India – is:
It may also declare that it will apply the Convention only to differences
arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual
or not, which are
considered as commercial under the national law of the State making such
declaration.
In this case, meaning, of course, the law of India. That is the
reservation which is in question. In Article III, the principal
provision – obviously, overtly, the purpose and intended effect of
the treaty – is spelled out:
Each Contracting State shall recognize arbitral awards as binding and
enforce them in accordance with the rules of procedure of the
territory –
I draw to attention that phrase, to which we will come back:
where the reward is relied upon –
In this case, that means Australia:
under the conditions laid down in the following articles.
There is immediately, in the next sentence of Article III, a
reference to what is now expressed in English as:
more onerous conditions –
at an earlier stage in the travaux, that had been rendered as more
complicated provisions:
or higher fees or charges on the recognition or
enforcement . . . than are imposed –
domestically. Then may I finally, in the treaty, come to
Article XIV, which you will find in the book at page 111:
A Contracting State shall not be entitled to avail itself of the
present Convention against other Contracting States –
So, there are, in this case, a number of contracting States within the
orbit of the dispute. There is India; Mauritius; now, perhaps,
United States of America; the Netherlands, where the arbitration was heard
and the award handed down; and, finally, in the global
reach of the treaty,
Australia – which might be called the enforcing State. So, in our
case, two or more of those can be posed
in the kind of pair that
Article XIV requires with respect to India – India:
shall not be entitled to avail itself of the present Convention against other
Contracting States –
and your Honours see immediately that that is not what is happening
in these proceedings to any effect at all.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Walker, you are saying that Article XIV is just put to one
side, are you?
We say it is put to one side. I am
going to come back to it, of course, because it plays a part that needs to be
addressed in
the reasons of the Full Court, so I will certainly be coming back
to it. But by way of a statement at the outset of our argument
Article XIV, we say it concerns a state of affairs, that is, in this case,
India, availing itself of the Convention against
one of the other
countries – difficult to understand why that would be
Australia – just has no footing on the way in
which the dispute and
the present state of the dispute is framed, but I will be coming back to it, in
answer to the Chief Justice’s
There is a question
arising, methodologically, of the way in which the reservation is to be
understood. We have addressed that in
detail in writing, and I will spend a
deal of the address on that matter. But at the outset we point out that it is
principally
to be understood that in accordance with the rules of treaty
interpretation found in the Vienna Convention.
There is, we think,
probably a controversy between the parties, not spelled out in any particularly
sharply delineated way, concerning
whether there are rules of customary
international law, that is, not codified in a treaty, which are said to throw
light on the question
of how one reads the reservation and, much more
importantly, what effect that reservation has on the obligations and correlative
rights and powers of non‑reserving parties under the treaty. Relevantly,
as we shall point out, India is the only relevant
contracting party here who
made the relevant reservation.
The effect, then, within the principles
adumbrated by this Court in
of the accession by India to the
New York Convention is the acceptance of what Article I(1) of the
Convention defines as the scope
of its application. It is clear, we submit,
that there is no distinction whatever to be seen in the New York Convention
itself between
awards which are, say, solely awards to which the parties are
private entities – nationals, say, of contracting States on the
hand, and one end of the extreme, and at the other end of the extreme, an award
to which the only parties are contracting parties
– that is, in terms
of customary international law, sovereigns who may have, in other
sovereigns’ courts, a degree of
No such distinctions
appear. And neither would you expect it, bearing in mind the obvious intent of
the New York Convention, which
is the facilitation of international trade
by asserting that aspect of the rule of law which calls for peaceful
adjudication of disputes
and effective enforcement, and observation and
observance, I should say, of the outcomes of that dispute
resolution.
Against that background it is – of course,
bearing in mind the capacity of sovereign States to engage in commercial,
quasi‑commercial,
and other relations which affect business –
it is clear that the all-embracing terms of Article I(1) naturally include
to which India is a party as well as awards, for example, to which an
Indian private entity or an Indian public entity may be a
Is that really to say anything more than India
is a person within Article I(1)?
So, how does India cease, then, to become a
person if the recognition and enforcement is sought between India and another
It never does cease to be a person for
the purposes of this treaty, whilever it remains a contracting party. It may
be, in answer
to a further answer to Justice Edelman’s question and
looking ahead to parts of our argument and to the issue joined at least
written submissions, it may be that we will be able to persuade
your Honours that one of the defects in the reasoning below
argument advancing it here is that, effectively, India is seeking, as it were,
some Alsatia of non-affectation by terms
of a treaty to which it still remains a
party. I will come back to that.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Mr Walker, the fact that the scope of the parties that this New York
Convention could apply has a vast application, or scope of
application, to
persons who are not sovereign States.
BEECH‑JONES J:
Does that not make, or bear upon
whether the mere fact of accession to this Convention amounts to a waiver of
sovereign immunity?
It raises a
question ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
Compared with, say, an investor‑State relations treaty,
to which by definition a State will necessarily be a party.
It might be said that that is the paradigm example.
There are more ways than one of skinning that particular cat, but if you are
doing it under the New York Convention, then that is, as in this case, a
setting in which a sovereign State may well find itself,
by reason of an
obligation to arbitrate under an investor‑state treaty – in
this case a bilateral one – as a party
to an award to which then the
machinery, globally, of the New York Convention will
BEECH‑JONES J:
But in that case, the
submission or the waiver of sovereign immunity is the bilateral treaty, not
No, it is part of the setting in which one considers that question. It renders
it almost impossible to understand how in the sequence
of treaties, where many a
bilateral investment treaty will be made well after the New York Convention
was reached – therefore
a setting in which the later treaty can be
understood – it will normally defy credulity for a State volunteering
to be bound
by such an arbitration obligation than to deny its amenability to
That is not this case, of course. In
any such case, one needs to interpret, as well, what the arbitration obligation
in, say, the
bilateral investment treaty requires. Normally, they will require
that all parties accept the outcome as binding. That is not relevant
question here.
Justice Beech‑Jones’s question obviously
involves a notion that if sovereigns – all the contracting parties
be sovereigns – are not either the whole or nearly all of the
group of persons parties to awards which are the subject of the
Convention – if they are not most of the population, then we do not
have an argument that in order to give any efficacy
to the New York
Convention, of course accession to it must be understood as submitting to the
That is, the courts of the enforcing
States, using that expression concerning countries such as Australia is in this
case, but that
is not the way in which we have ever argued it, and it is not the
way one should argue it. What matters is that States are within
the scope of
the Convention as possible parties to awards to be recognised and enforced, not
that they are most of the persons who
would be in that class.
Are you saying that the combination of submission to the jurisdiction
of the arbitration and Article I(1) is sufficient as clear
unmistakable?
Yes, I do. Applying the principles
that this Court applied in the differently‑framed questions in
– that is, coming from different sources but exactly the
same principles – and it is not only did Justice Jackman so
hold, so it is seems would the Full Court have but for the reservation point.
have courts in other jurisdictions which have found a waiver done that applying
the clear and unmistakable test for waiver?
Honour is asking me
whether ‑ ‑ ‑
Other jurisdictions – I think you have invoked the idea that other
I(1) in submission
to an arbitration. Have they done that applying a test of clear and
unmistakable?
Your Honour, I do not think I can point
to exact verbal parallels, but there is – particularly the ones we
have cited do not
have a test that is materially different. It has to be with
sufficient clarity to import the amenability to jurisdiction, which
is of course
the reverse of the position that is peculiar to sovereigns of immunity, but it
is not the case that any of those jurisdictions
have what might be called a less
demanding test of the sufficiency of the indication of the consent so that there
is utility in citation
of those comparative decisions as decisions of
comparative law.
It is all a statutory question in this country, of
course, as to what the consent amounting to waiver means within the meaning of
section 10, but no, none of those authorities are made in a system which
calls for a less demanding test. They use different words.
None of the words
imports a less demanding test than the Australian test.
There are really two questions, are there not? The first is the scope of
second is, having determined the scope, whether or not the conduct of India
amounts to waiver, by their acts, in relation to
that Convention.
As I understand your position, that
if one takes Article I read with the other Articles, it is not limited to
any dispute to which
a contracting State is a party. It includes those
disputes. It does not include inter‑State disputes.
I am sorry?
It does not include
inter‑State disputes.
No, but that is not what
is in question in this case.
No, I know – I
am trying to work out the scope of Article I first. So, at the moment, it
is put against you that this dispute
is not within the scope of
Article I(1).
No, that is not the –
that is not what the court below found. The court below found that there was an
But there are, logically, two separate
Yes, there are.
So, before one even turns to immunity, one needs to determine, as
Justice Gordon said: does the scope of Article I(1) even extend
dispute that involves a State? If it does, then there is a separate question of
immunity: does it preserve immunity?
Yes, I agree
with that entirely. It was framed that way below, but not as a contest. It has
never been in contest that awards
within the meaning of Article I include
awards to which a party is a State.
contention 1 in paragraph 7 of the respondent’s
I understand but, in our submission, there
has been no argument advanced which at any point says that this is a convention
as a matter of its ordinary treaty interpretation excludes awards to which
a State is a party. Nothing in terms of the interpretation
of the treaty
produces that at all. It leaps out, from no basis whatever, as an
GAGELER CJ:
So, I suppose textually in terms of
Article I and the point that you are coming to address, which is
paragraph 2 of the notice
of contention turns on the content of this
concept of legal differences, is that right?
Yes, it obviously involves that fundamentally, yes.
GAGELER CJ:
I was intending to come back later to the
questions of contention, but may I say this. None of the courts below ruled
as a party to the award was a fact that rendered the New York
Convention of no possible application. Obviously, we can see the ambition
the notice of contention that there is no reasoning to that effect in the
reasons in the decisions below and, we submit, no argument
advanced which
employs what might be called orthodox matters of treaty interpretation to
achieve that outcome.
You do not approach the New York Convention
on the basis, perhaps, of some pervasive notion of immunity that sovereigns who
agreed – and I stress who have agreed – to binding
arbitration of differences, commercial or otherwise, are then thereafter
within the scope of the global recognition and enforcement regime which was the
whole purpose of the New York Convention.
Seetransport
in the United States, where they are addressing: is
the State relevantly a person for the
purposes ‑ ‑ ‑
that is quite different from the immunity argument.
Quite so. Exactly. In our submission, the expression in Article I(1),
“persons, whether physical or legal”, the better
view of the
materials that have been assembled about that for your Honours’
assistance is that it plainly includes polities,
which are sovereigns, who may
be contracting parties. And it is the coincidence, in this case, of a
contracting party who is a sovereign
being a party to an award which has
produced the critical nature of the immunity question.
taken in the arbitration which concluded in
the series of awards in
the Netherlands, but they have been determined and were not an issue in the
immunity argument in the Australian
Federal Court and they are not before this
Court. So, it is to be taken that India, by a process to which it agreed in the
investment treaty with Mauritius – it can be taken that
India accepts the binding nature of that award.
Now, it may or may not
have, within the meaning of Article V of the New York Convention, responses
to make to an attempt to enforce
once the question of immunity is determined
against it. It may or may not have them. We do not need to get into that. It
its own possible controversies which are of no moment to the question
of immunity. In our submission, one starts here with the proposition
is no mode of treaty interpretation which attaches to Article I of the New
York Convention with what might be called a
presumption that sovereigns are not
bound when they are parties to an award.
The contracting parties are
sovereigns, and they are all contracting the obligations, among themselves, of
the treaty. They include
the recognition of the mechanism provided by each
other’s municipal court systems for enforcement with the effect at that,
by extrapolation and application of the reasoning of this Court in
the accession to a treaty which requires other State parties – in
this case, Australia – to play their part in the global
enforcement by lending their municipal courts, with obligations imposed on their
municipal courts, to recognise and enforce
awards falling within the description
of awards in our country, foreign awards under the Act.
Once that is
true, the reasoning simply follows that contracting parties who, being
sovereigns, also find themselves to be parties
to awards, adversely to them,
have of course agreed that other contracting parties – in this case,
the enforcing State, Australia
– of course, they have agreed that
they may proceed to carry out their treaty obligation of enforcement by judicial
And that is the way in which the clear and unmistakable consent to the
exercise of the jurisdiction, which is an obligation of Australia
owed to all
contracting parties under the treaty, including India, that is how the basic
argument operates – an argument which,
as we have observed, it would
appear the Full Court had no intent to dispute.
Everything came down to
the question of the effect of the reservation, rather than this anterior
question: the Convention simply
does not apply to any case of a contracting
party – query, of a sovereign who is not a contracting
party – who is party
to an award. Now, it is plain enough that a
sovereign who is not a contracting party, if they find themselves sued in an
country’s court, will have a very different position concerning
immunity than a sovereign who is a contracting party.
We are, of course,
only interested in a sovereign who is a contracting party for the application of
the reasoning of this Court in
. But, I stress, the notion that the
New York Convention simply does not apply to an award to which a sovereign who
is a contracting
party is party, is not supported by any aspect of treaty
interpretation or any of the materials that we have assembled on that point.
accept it is logically anterior, but it is not logically anterior to the way in
which the case was determined in the Full Court
below at all, hence the
contention, obviously.
It is the first argument you
address, though.
No, the first argument I
addressed was whether the – I am sorry, it is the first proposition I
made, that Article I applies
to awards without distinction depending on
whether they are awards to which a contracting State is a party. And as we have
in proposition 7 in our outline, the paradigm of investor‑State
arbitration and awards stemming from them is one which, in
our submission,
provides a useful and concrete example of the evident purpose and utility of
realising that purpose for enforcement
under the New York
Convention.
GAGELER CJ:
It is hard to use investor‑State
arbitration as indicative of the purpose of the Convention, is it not, because
it was a phenomenon
that post‑dated the
Convention.
Quite so, you are right, and I do
not do that. That is not what I am saying. Investor‑State disputes, of
course, existed
well before there was an ordered system for dealing with them.
I mean that disputes between someone who might be called an
and a “State” are disputes which provide a
concrete example of the utility of a global system for enforcement, including,
obviously, awards to which States are parties.
States can be parties to
awards which are commercial in nature, and there have been such disputes, of
course, for centuries, whether
between moneylenders and kings or arms suppliers
and governments. So, that the nature or subject matter of the
Convention –
which is entirely general as to the nature of the awards
and the parties to the awards – are enough to indicate its useful
and, we would say, purposive application to all disputes, including, as it
happens, investor‑State disputes.
that – even if one assumes that all of that is correct –
that still does not answer the immunity question, though,
No. It means we then have to deal with it.
We intend it as a platform from which there is an immediate engagement of the
kind of reasoning as applied in the different contexts in
That is how we reach it. It does not conclude the issue, I
It does not conclude it but, as I understand,
your submission provides a foundation from which you may more readily draw the
Yes, that is right.
because of the nature and scope of Article I(1), the purpose and object of
the Convention itself, its
interpretation
Exactly. That is how we put it, yes.
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Walker, just on what I understand has then joined the issue about the
immunity, there is a broader and a narrower contention.
The broader one is even
if the Convention is capable of applying to arbitral disputes involving States,
accession to it is not a
waiver of any form of immunity – is that
right? And then the narrower contention is, if that is wrong, it is not a
in respect of those disputes that were the subject of India’s
express reservation. Is that how you understand it is being
put against you, a
narrower ‑ ‑ ‑
Not quite, not quite. It may be there is an element, in particular, of the
latter part, yes. The first would say that all the
judges below seemed to have
mistaken how this Court reasoned in
. We submit, with respect, they
did not. The – I am using the expression “the enforcing
State” for Australia in
this case – the notion that the
Convention does not import, expressly, a relation between all States and an
enforcing State
who are contracting parties is, in our submission, quite
unmaintainable.
That is the whole point of the treaty. It is obviously
on the pointed question of what happens when a contracting party is a party
an award adverse to it and finds itself in an enforcing party’s courts
under the Convention, or under any other treaty for
recognition and enforcement.
It is when that expressly involves questions of immunity, which it could only
ever apply, relevantly
– the exceptions, we do not need to worry
That is precisely the area where
accession to the Convention does carry with it, by way of
obligation – you might call them
cooperative obligations or
correlative obligations – by which, if you find yourself as a party,
as a would‑be party,
in an enforcing the State’s court systems, you,
as a contracting party, are bound to accept that Australia has obligations
everybody else under the treaty – particularly Mauritius,
particularly the Netherlands, for example – and India then
exactly the same cooperative obligation as a contracting party, not as a party
to an award – that is the coincidence but
makes these cases of
In paragraph 8, we talk about obvious cases where
sovereign‑sovereign disputes cannot be contemplated as being within
I(1). The obvious example, which I do not need to linger on, is,
if you are talking arbitrated boundary disputes, that really is
not a matter for
municipal courts of other countries altogether to be involved in. That can be
put to one side as bearing in no
way at all upon the question of what we have
started with as the generality without differentiation of the awards, so long as
have the requisite foreignness, which are within the ambit of the global
system set up by the Convention.
GAGELER CJ:
takes the sovereign‑sovereign dispute outside Article I is a matter
Exactly so. There are some
sovereign-sovereign disputes that could easily be understood as being within,
but we do not have to
be concerned about them. One country’s supply as a
nation to another nation of something – whether it is called
commercial,
it does not matter – if it involves money, that is
obviously something which, upon there being an arbitral award between them,
might be enforced in the event of recalcitrance. So, that could be imagined.
That is not this case, and if it ever arises, it can
considered.
BEECH‑JONES J:
I am sorry,
Mr Walker, what is it about the text of Article I that excludes that?
Or is it something else in
The whole of the Convention refers to enforcement and execution. And, without
getting back into distinctions between an executor
and execution, what matters,
obviously, is that those are just impossible to apply to many a
sovereign‑sovereign dispute of
a kind that has been arbitrated over the
BEECH‑JONES J:
So, what takes them
out is that the domestic State is unlikely to have anything in its court system
that it would allow you to
recognise an enforcement between them.
Between ‑ ‑ ‑
A border dispute between two countries on the other side
of the globe. So, sovereigns have disputes which are peculiar to sovereigns
between each other. But, in our submission, none of that has the slightest
effect upon the evident intent of those who made the
Convention – I do not mean those who assisted in its drafting, I mean
those who acceded to it – because it has
to do with arbitral awards
at the most general level, with obvious exceptions, that is, the text does not
reach matters which are
not within the obvious intention of the
The obvious intention of the text is, globally, to bring to bear
the municipal court enforcement processes of contracting parties
with respect to
awards falling within the ambit of the Convention. That is enough to point out
that there are many sovereign‑sovereign
disputes settled otherwise than by
way of war, by arbitration in particular, which will not lend themselves to any
other sovereign’s
municipal court’s enforcement
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Walker, if we take the example of a
bilateral investment treaty, which is a treaty between sovereigns requiring
particular treatment
by one sovereign of a national of another sovereign, a
breach of that treaty can give rise to a dispute between those
sovereigns.
And off to the ICJ, yes, or the permanent
GAGELER CJ:
Well, depending on the terms of the
GAGELER CJ:
dispute between – or is such a dispute between the two sovereigns who
are parties to the bilateral investment treaty
a dispute that can give rise to
an award within the meaning of Article I(1)?
would appear unlikely, but you would first have to posit – in order
for there to be award, you would have to posit an
arbitration. An arbitration
can either be agreed ad hoc or it can have been agreed previously and put
into train after the prerequisites
for enforcing the agreement to arbitrate have
come into existence. But if it is simply a sovereign‑sovereign dispute
you not observing, for example, the promise to allow my nationals to
invest in your grains industry or whatever, that will not fall
within most of
the arbitration clauses I have seen in investor‑State treaties, which are
mostly obviously tailored for investor
grievances.
– that American case – they identify that
one cannot have, as I read the reasons, a sole answer to the question posed
the Chief Justice because of the ability under the bilateral investment
treaty to not extend rights to third parties, not to preclude
arbitration to do a whole range of things that would preclude in its terms I
think, as I understand the reasoning, the
application of the
Convention.
Yes. You start with the question: is
there provision for ‑ ‑ ‑
Is that right?
Yes. Is there a provision for an
arbitration at all? As to some sovereign‑sovereign disputes in relation
to bilateral trade
of treaties, you will not expect to see an arbitration. That
is, there are other methods in public international law for sovereigns
their differences about one or other of them in their observance of a treaty
obligation. In other words, treaty obligations
are not necessarily always going
to end up in an award within the meaning of the New York Convention. It would
be rather surprising
if many of them did.
understanding from the travaux to the New York Convention was that the
possibility a State‑State arbitration was raised,
and it was fairly
commonly understood that the consequences of that would not fall within the
New York Convention.
That is right, for the
reasons I have put, but the New York Convention was about enlisting the
mechanism of contracting parties and
municipal courts to enforce an award. Many
a sovereign‑sovereign dispute – indeed, in most of them it is
treaty observance – will simply not be within the
cognisance of municipal courts in terms of enforcement of an
So that drives us
was just going to say, I think the bilateral investment treaty here does provide
for State‑State arbitration as an
That will be case by case, which is why it cannot be answered in the
abstract up front.
But the case in which you are
submitting, the Article 9 arbitration would not be subject to the New York
Convention.
No. Take, for example, an award in such
an arbitration that one of the States should enact legislation to change their
legislation,
there is no municipal court that could do anything by way of
enforcing that. So, there are some things that are just, of their subject
matter, not within the scope of what the New York Convention is about, which is
Was it argued below that the very entry into of this bilateral
investment treaty was in and of itself a submission, given the proposed
arbitrations between investors and the State?
No, it is the beginning of the story. That is the means by which there was an
award coming. That is not in itself a consent,
or to put it another way, we
certainly did not say: we say we win just with that, regardless that the Court
is against us under
the New York Convention. We say they all act
Well, you do not really – I
mean, your submission, as I understand it, is stronger than that. It is that
the waiver occurs
by Article I(1), irrespective of what might be said in
the agreement.
It cannot be irrespective. The
agreement has to be an agreement to arbitrate in binding fashion,
So, it is not irrespective, so it picks it
have to have a factum by which you bring yourself within Article
Yes, that is right.
But the waiver comes from Article I(1) by itself.
Yes, it is because it is the New York Convention that imposes obligations
on, in this case, Australia for its court system to act
in a particular way to
which we then have India, as a party to an award but also a contracting party,
obliged as a contracting party
to cooperate or to perform correlative acts in
relation to Australia’s obligation, which is owed generally because it is
global system, the global nature of which is the purpose of the Convention,
but particularly in this instance owed, if you like,
Netherlands – the place of the award, to Mauritius – the
place whose nationals invested under the trade treaty
which had produced a
dispute which resulted in the award in the first place.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, if India expressly reserved, in the bilaterial investment treaty,
sovereign immunity for any claim against India under the treaty,
you would still
say that there is still, effectively, a waiver of a dispute arising out of
that – an arbitral award arising
out of that – because of
the Convention.
Yes. Can I in particular say,
to which their reservation has nothing to do. Can I come back to that
BEECH-JONES J:
In the bilateral treaty, yes, I understand
Could I emphasise – as you have
seen in our writing – Article I, yes, is the beginning of things
but you have to read
it – as we have said repeatedly –
with Article III because Article III contains, severally, for every
contracting State,
the obligation to recognise arbitral awards as binding
and to enforce them in accordance with – that phrase I referred to
– the rules of procedure.
It is the nature of the
Convention which announces itself in Article III, which is the completion
of the text and the effect of neutral
obligation between contracting parties to
the treaty, which amounts to the waiver or consent of each of them to the
municipally, of any other contracting State who happens to be
involved in relation to the enforcement of awards.
In our submission,
the whole point of Articles I(1) and III is to ensure that there is an as
close to global system as possible –
many contracting parties as
possible – whose courts are available regardless of what would
otherwise be jurisdictional nexus
for that court and the dispute which resulted
in the award in question.
The award can be peripatetic; go from
municipal system to municipal system, obviously, in search, ultimately, of
execution and, in
the meantime, of enforcement. It is for those reasons, in our
submission, that the bilateral trade treaty is, obviously, the beginning
story here but does not, of itself, do anything to achieve the
Mr Walker, would it be fair to
describe the overall purpose of the bilateral investment treaty is the
elimination of sovereign
risk for investors?
think that is what most press releases, when they are made, say. I cannot think
of a single case where that has been true.
what is its purpose here?
It never eliminates
it – it never eliminates it; it is an attempt to manage
Yes. So, it provides – your Honours know that, what I will call
the exceptions – they are really not exceptions, they
are just the
things outside the scope of what the treaty covers – covers the
matter that is not only intensely political and
socially controversial but they
are actually difficult to adjudicate. Disputes are really hard, as I think
Australia’s experiences
would corroborate.
They are happy experiences,
ultimately, but they are very onerous matters. So, that cannot be an
elimination of sovereign risks,
but they are obviously an attempt to attract
more investment than would otherwise be attracted. So, it is meant to be an
enhancement
of an investment opportunity by burdening what I will call the host
State – the State that wants the incoming investment –
with certain obligations, mostly restrictive in nature, concerning what is often
called, emotionally or otherwise, expropriatory
particular.
So, whether you call them nationalisations or whatever,
those are the deadset examples from history which these treaties are meant
control. Obviously enough, as soon as one posits something like that, you then
raise questions of national security, et cetera,
et cetera, and they are treaties that might be said to bristle in potential
with dispute. Most of them, or all the ones
I have seen, contained from the
investor’s point of view the possibility – hedged around by
limits of recoverability
and limits of liability – of financial
compensation for matters which the host State would appear to have carried out,
to the purpose of attracting investment, or certainly contrary to the
effect of attracting investment.
Yes, it has a setting in a history of
sovereign risk. They have an evident intent to do something about sovereign
risk. From an
investor’s point of view, they end up with money if there
has been a breach of obligation, and that is the award that is before
Could I ask one question. In response to a
question put to you, I had thought that you said that Article I(1) was the
of the waiver.
In your submissions you rely upon not Article I(1), but
Article III.
They go together.
I want to understand that the submission is that it is
Article I(1) together with Article III, not Article III on its
No, it is – and even then, of course,
it is wrong for mere method simply to say Article I(1) and III. It is
the whole of
the treaty with the evident project it has in mind which gives body
to the notion of the cooperative imperative imposed upon all
contracting parties
with respect to questions of sovereign immunity from when it arises for them at
the instance of a party that
brings a New York Convention enforcement action in
another contracting State.
So, it is Articles I(1) and III
which have the particular explicit text concerning an obligation, but it is of
course the nature
of the whole project, which is the enlistment of municipal
court systems for recognition and enforcement in the discrete territory
contracting States, that gives Article I(1) and Article III their
effect for the purposes of our section 10 consent or waiver.
proposition 9, we then point to the state of affairs which produces the
possibility of reservation. As I say, we know that India
has made that
reservation. The travaux to which we refer – I do not want to go to
them – certainly support the proposition
that there was a
perception – it does not matter whether it was entirety historically
accurate or not – that within what
I will call different legal
cultures, speaking very generally, there were anterior views about the
appropriateness of arbitration
for disputes that were not commercial, using that
word in an Australian sense.
It does not matter what the genesis of the
approach was, the reach beyond commercial disputes is clear given the generality
language – there are no such qualifications in I(1),
obviously – it is dealt with by the possibility of contracting
each of them making one of the second of the two specified reservations
that are available. Those are the only two reservations.
referred to
. I perhaps do not need to take your Honours
to it, we have written what we say is to be taken from it, but in our
submission, it
really, with respect, cannot be doubted that the availability of
the enforcement facility under the New York Convention is intended
deployed in cases which, subject to the question of reservation, do not have to
be within the scope of commerciality, however
that may be defined by any
particular contracting State.
In paragraph 10, we move to another
discrete stage in our reasoning concerning the effect of Article I(1),
which defines the scope
of the Convention. Article III is, if you like,
the submission of the parties to what follows from that scope. In our
proposition
10, we point that here we are talking about the effect of a
treaty and that the rule of international law referred to in 31(3)(c)
Vienna Convention – in this case I am talking about what was
originally customary law as State immunity – obviously,
elementary matter, does not prevail over the plain terms of the New York
Convention in what it imports and requires by
way of cooperation or correlative
obligation on contracting parties with respect to one of their number who
happens to be, in the
case of a particular award, an enforcing
Could I then turn to completing what I wanted to say about the
correctness of Justice Jackman’s and the appropriateness of
assumption in favour of that in the Full Court as to the application of the
approach taken by this Court in
. There has already been a
reference to
Seetransport
, the passage that we have cited both in our
written submission and given the particular page reference to in
proposition 11 –
it is in the report 1341
I do not need to take you to it. It is, with respect,
extremely plain as to what is imported by the process of what we call the
necessary implication following from the obligations between themselves of the
treaty parties concerning what one of their number,
an enforcing party, is
seeking or is requiring, namely, the holding of process to which, as it happens,
all award parties are bound,
subject to questions of immunity. Immunity is
dealt with by the promise of contracting parties that they will cooperate and
correlatively with the enforcing State as to questions of
I said earlier that we would refer to the phrase you find,
“in accordance with rules of procedure”. There may or may
controversy, though we respectfully submit it is not a significant one, not
material to the decision, as to the limits or
distinction between matters of
procedure and whatever contrasting genus one might have according to particular
jurisprudence.
It is easy enough in our system to suggest that questions
of State immunity are substantive, not procedural, but rather than concern
ourselves with those matters of taxonomy, in our submission, from the
text – including the preceding travaux to which we have
referred in
our proposition 12 – it can be seen that this is a bit like the
national treatment idea. The promise between the
contracting parties in the
treaty was that they would not provide in their municipal courts, when they were
an enforcing party, something
more onerous – an earlier stage, it was
talked about something more complicated, something more expensive, see the
to fees – for foreign parties as opposed to local
That, in our submission, says absolutely nothing either in the
words or between the lines concerning matters of immunity. It has
restraint on the part of the contracting party whose courts are being sought to
be enlisted. It does not, in our submission,
lend itself to anything concerning
the question of an immunity claim by a State who happens to be party adversely
to an award which
is the subject of those proposed enforcement
proceedings.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Walker, can I just go back to
the statement of principle in
Kingdom of Spain
GAGELER CJ:
The requirement is for a clear and
unmistakable intention to appear.
GAGELER CJ:
We have, of course, a domestic equivalent in
the principle in
Coco v The Queen
, which would say that such an
intention would not ordinarily appear from general words. Do you say that the
domestic principle is
different from the international
Not really. At bottom, there is the
sufficiency of the clarity with which something is stated. Now, they are
different in one radical
respect. Domestically, what one is talking about is a
system where there is a state of affairs into which legislation comes. You
Potter v Minahan
, but you probably need an understanding
that, at the federal level, the
Constitution
itself has an assumption as
to the common law, and the common law had a position, clear and special, for the
And so, whether that was affected by a statute, the competence of
Parliament to do so being undoubted, is a matter, ultimately, of
interpreting,
within our system, whether or not words – it does not matter whether
they are general or not. General may mean
they are very comprehensive and
clear. In particular, there has never been a requirement, even in our domestic
approach, there has
never been a requirement that there be explicit words
referring, say, to Crown immunity or to a maxim that the King can do no wrong,
or whatever one might regard as being the antecedent law.
There has to
be a clarity which depends upon an understanding of the enacted text. It is
rather different when one is talking about
a treaty, because there are general
propositions, customary law and otherwise, about the immunity of sovereigns, but
it is clear
to demonstration that that can be overcome by an appropriate treaty
In our submission, that is borne out by the experience of the
. It was treaty wording which did not in terms refer to
immunity, which was nonetheless part of the setting in which the consent
spelled out. This case is no different in that regard. It does not have more
diffuse language or a less clear scheme for the
enlistment of municipal courts
involving litigation for awards, which can include awards against States, such
as have been involved
in investor‑State dispute resolution.
submission, we are not proposing, by our calling in aid
, we are not
proposing anything which is affected, to the detriment of our argument, by the
need for the Court to be persuaded to
the requisite standard of clarity, which
resembles, but only in general terms, what happens – if you are
talking about
and related jurisprudence – in the
subjection of our sovereign to laws. It is simply always a matter of
interpreting what
the words are.
We would particularly resist the notion
that mere general expressions are a sign of incapacity to have achieved the
meaning. Sometimes
that will be true, and it will be the reason why the meaning
is not conveyed. In other contexts such as this, where there is a need
overall and comprehensive scheme, there is, in our submission, every reason,
rather, to treat words of general import as being
words of comprehensive effect,
including ‑ ‑ ‑
one of the submissions that the Court was addressing in
submission that had been made broadly to the effect that statements –
that there needed to be an express waiver, or a
waiver needed to be in express
words. It should be understood to mean you need to specifically use the words
like, I waive, or something
to that effect. That proposition, I think, was
clearly rejected, but that does not detract from the fact that there is some
to an international presumption that unless the words and the
circumstances in which they appear are sufficiently clear, then there
gravitational pull of immunity of the States.
do not think we differ, at a relatively high level, with any of
But it is much stronger than the
so‑called gravitational pull of any remaining immunity of the Crown at a
domestic level.
I think I am bound to accept
that – of its nature, one would hope so. But that is why we go to
the nature of the treaty.
There is no doubt – and this is the whole
point of a treaty, the essence of a treaty – the sovereigns are
binding themselves,
each to the other. So, it is a question of: what have they
bound themselves to do?
They have given up the sovereign freedom to act
in a way that the treaty would constrain. So, if we are talking about
sovereignty,
a treaty is both an expression of sovereignty and, usually, a
qualification of the freedom that sovereignty bestows in the absence
treaty. So much is elementary but, in our submission, instructive.
then asks, in the case of multilateral treaties, for the enlistment of
contracting parties’ municipal court systems: how
are court systems
operative? They are operative by the exercise of jurisdiction. Does
can be heard and against whom
process can be levelled?
Of course, the answer to that is, I think,
universally, yes – in one way or another, depending upon procedures,
but in principle,
yes. It is for those reasons that the remaining question is
whether or not awards to which contracting parties are award parties
the scope of the multilateral, inter se promises by the sovereigns
concerning the operation of this scheme: will it apply
to one of them as an
award party?
Once that is decided as it ought to be – yes,
clearly, you can, by your conduct, become a party to an arbitral award which
based, of course, and stems from your own consent – that award will
then fit the description of Articles I(1) and III in
particular, in
this country will fit the definition of “foreign award”, and the
only question remaining is: have you,
by your accession to the New York
Convention – where you are still a contracting party, reservation
notwithstanding as to your
own courts’ participation – have you
signified your consent to the operation of the system which all the contracting
parties have agreed on will involve implementation through municipal courts
being enlisted to carry out enforcement proceedings?
And, in our submission,
for exactly the same reason as appeared in
, that does appear with
absolute clarity.
What one cannot do – in, I think, a
deferred, delayed answer to the Chief Justice – what you cannot
do is say that the
immunity of sovereigns is a very deep‑seated and
different matter from what might be called, domestically, the King can do
wrong. It is a different matter because, on any view of it, there is no world
parliament to which all sovereigns can be made
subject, as is true of our kind
of polity. All that is accepted.
But that is why the whole thing is
rooted in a treaty, a treaty which has, as its essence, the qualification by its
exercise of each
of their sovereignties. So, you do not start by saying these
words in the treaty are to be interpreted on the basis that sovereignty
with it an immunity which will detract from the obligation plainly accepted in
the treaty. Now, I have to persuade your
Honours that there is an
obligation plainly accepted in the treaty. That is what I keep calling the
cooperative or correlative obligation.
Mr Walker, can I just ask you just to consider one point, perhaps over
the break. It just relates to pages 1341 to 1342 of the book
pages 578 to 579, to which I think you referred, in the
Seetransport Case
My understanding, which may be wrong, of the reasoning in that case is that
the waiver of immunity arose not from entry into the New
York Convention but
from the combination of entry into the New York Convention and later
entering into a contract with Seetransport,
and it was the later contract that
was entered into that was the foundation of the waiver. So, the analogy here
would be that the
waiver did not arise just from the entry into the
New York Convention, it would have arisen, if one wanted to develop the
from the 1998 bilateral investment treaty.
That is why I say that is the beginning of things. Obviously, but
for it, there would not be an award. So, that treaty is consensual.
arbitration is consensual pursuant to it. That then produces the putative
application of the New York Convention for recognition
and enforcement. I
do not think that our argument
BEECH-JONES J:
your submission that waiver is to be found exclusively within the Convention,
because the ‑ ‑ ‑
No, my argument is that but for the Convention there is no waiver. So, I am
not just – I do not and never relied just upon
the bilateral
investment treaty.
BEECH-JONES J:
No, I am not saying that.
See, that example ‑ ‑ ‑
You would have to have
BEECH-JONES J:
You have to have the bilateral investment treaty to have an
arbitration.
To have an – and to have an
award, and then along comes the New York Convention.
BEECH-JONES J:
But – in that example I gave you earlier – if the
bilateral investment treaty expressly reserves sovereign immunity to
would still say accession to the New York Convention would mean there was a
I probably would,
GAGELER CJ:
find the waiver in the terms of Article I and Article III as acceded
to by India, that is it?
Yes, that is right, that is
right. And it is a waiver with respect to proceedings in relation to the award
emanating from the bilateral
investment treaty.
it not that, under that bilateral investment treaty, as put in
that you cannot, between parties, say I am not going to be governed by the New
York Convention for disputes between us?
respect, is not a reservation to the New York Convention, and
not a reservation to the New York Convention. It is just saying, for the
purposes of the agreement between us in relation to
this bilateral investment
treaty, we are not going to have – we agree, between ourselves, not
to be subject to it.
Your Honour, that is to
raise a question about what I am going to call a private contract in relation to
the public international
law obligations under a treaty which, in our
submission, has no footing in this case at all. In terms of the
Seetransport
, it is the passage at 1341 of the book, 578 of the
report, left hand column, about the middle of the page, that in particular we
draw attention to. It is the passage that is repeated in
when a country becomes a signatory to the Convention, by the very provisions
of the Convention, the signatory State –
and then come the words that really matter for waiver:
must have contemplated enforcement actions in other signatory
leaving, we submit, only the question: is that something which
applies with respect to the case of an award to which a State which
otherwise have immunity is party.
I just ask you, then, to look at 1633 to 1634 of the
decision, which takes it out, I think, as I read those reasons,
because the bilateral investment treaty does not give you the ability
Could I take that on
Certainly. I may be misreading it, Mr
I just want to consider
GAGELER CJ:
We will take the morning adjournment,
May it please,
your Honour.
AT 11.23 AM SHORT
ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT 11.37
Could I take
your Honours, please, to the reasoning of the majority in the United States
Court of Appeals, District of Columbia
Fucheng v Nigeria
, which is tab 50 starting at 1622 in the book.
There are two aspects of immunity that inform the reasoning and decision, both
which we submit are in favour of our argument. There is one that is not
material, in the sense that it concerns the anterior argument
to arbitrate and
the award that comes from that.
As the court points out – as
the majority points out, it is not every investor‑State agreement that
either has an agreement
to arbitrate or ensures that any award will be
enforceable, et cetera, et cetera; in that case there was, in our case
So, there is the first aspect of immunity with which the court was
concerned. It does not matter in this case because it is not
said by India that
it had not agreed to arbitrate, and that it is not also agreed to treat as
binding an award subject to such arguments
as are permissible as
Though there might be – we doubt it, but there might
be Article V New York Convention arguments after immunity is being
determined,
but the second aspect of immunity which is important for our case
turns upon what it means to have acceded to the New York Convention
potential application to an award. Could I pick up the reasoning at
page 1633, section B, right‑hand column, where
they turn to the
question of whether, in terms of the New York Convention, Nigeria is a
person. They express their conclusion that
I do not need to dwell on:
“persons” includes a foreign state that has entered into a
bilateral investment treaty –
BEECH‑JONES J:
I am sorry, Mr Walker, what page are
you reading from?
Page 1633. Of the report, it
is 1065, right‑hand column. Then they deal with an argument starting
in the paragraph:
Extensive precedent –
against which they point to that array of precedent concerning
enforcement:
under the New York Convention –
arbitral awards involving foreign states charged with breaching investment
and commercial treaty obligations.
Which is exactly what we are attempting in our case. After referring to
an array of such instances, on the left‑hand column
on page 1634,
first full paragraph, there is a return to the need for the State to be a
person, which in our submission, is really
of no possible controversy at a
serious level in our case:
Nigeria . . . signed a treaty and assumed obligations to
private, third‑party beneficiaries that are connected to commerce.
That was India’s position with respect to its treaty with
Mauritius. Then there is a recording and disposal of an argument
concerning the
nature of a limit on the personhood of a sovereign under the Convention, which I
do not need to dwell on. We do not
understand – though I may be
wrong – that to be nestled in any of the contention points against
us. In paragraph 15,
left‑hand column of 1634, in particular,
there is called out the notion that a foreign State is a person:
only when acting in a purportedly “private”
So, in the middle of the right‑hand column on that same page, it is
disposed of:
So, Nigeria’s position must be that, although the word
“persons” encompasses foreign states, it does so only when
states act in a private capacity. Yet nothing in the Convention’s text
provides for such a bespoke limitation on signatory
states’ coverage.
Then, there is a reference to the United States legislation that I can
pass over for the time being. On page 1635, the left‑hand
issue is taken with the dissenting reasons, which we understand are sought to be
relied upon against us in this case. One
aspect of that dissenting opinion
reason which is picked up by the majority is this, we submit, exaggerated
floodgates notion that
an argument such as we put would destroy
The majority then turns to what we have emphasised. Namely,
after all, all of this stems from a consensual act by entering into
arbitration which produces an award agreed to be binding, and your equally
consensual – indeed, if it has to be pointed
out, a sovereign act of
acceding to the treaty. The majority pulls all this together as following.
There is a reference to:
foreign states’ ability voluntarily to consent –
against the background of the:
founding‑era principles . . . under which states could
be sued only with their consent) –
It is then pointed out, as we point out, that the whole point of the
New York Convention was to add to global enforcement stemming
consensually‑based arbitral dispute resolution
BEECH-JONES J:
But in this case, the consent to
arbitrate was in the bilaterial treaty with
BEECH-JONES J:
Yes. Is that right?
Yes, and the whole
point of the New York Convention is
BEECH-JONES J:
the New York Convention.
No, no. The
first part of their answer to dissent is: but you did consent to arbitrate and
to be bound by an award.
Can we just clarify that,
Mr Walker, because I thought that the Federal Court proceedings were
operating on the basis that there was
an ex facie agreement to arbitrate,
rather than an undisputed consent to arbitrate.
our case, there was lively dispute as to whether India was bound to arbitrate
the dispute we had with them. That was determined
put, adversely to India by the arbitrators, so that there is an award which the
arbitrators made because
they ruled that they had jurisdiction to do
I am not quite
sure what your Honour is raising with me by the reference to
“ex facie”. Yes, there was a dispute which
was determined
adversely to India concerning the jurisdiction of the arbitrators, but that is
not before this Court and it was not
before the Federal Court, because it was
determined against them and there was ultimately an award in money terms, which
flowed from
the fact that the arbitrators ruled that they had jurisdiction to do
The order probably may be put to one side for
the moment, but the point that I had thought had come out of this reasoning was
one has ‑ ‑ ‑
I am sorry, your Honour.
That is all right. When
you are ready.
absolutely ‑ ‑ ‑
has accession to the Convention, which this decision says in part determines
whether a State has consented to an award enforcement,
but one then goes to the
bilateral investment treaty between the States and determines whether or not
they have agreed to arbitrate;
to pick up, in effect, the New York
Convention mechanism established for the disposal of these kinds of disputes.
As I read it,
it says here that Nigeria did not have to agree to arbitrate, but
it had, and once having agreed to arbitrate in the bilateral investment
including extending it to third parties, then was entitled to invoke the
Convention, and order may not matter.
With respect, I
think so. Can I pick that up in a bit more detail from the
reasons, but before I do so, could I return to Justice Gleeson. I
apologise, your Honour, if your Honour were referring to what
recorded at first instance in this case but is not an issue today –
namely, whether it sufficed to prove the award in the
way it was done at first
instance, what is called in some places the prima facie proof – then
yes, there is a history of controversy
informing any of the issued before your Honours.
What was said
below and was not, as we understand it, challenged in the Full Court, was
that after immunity has been determined against
India, it can then move to other
matters, such as Article V contemplates, with respect to resistance to
recognition and enforcement,
and one of them might be there was no arbitration
For our present purposes, this is a case right for decision
but for the reservation, there was an award sufficiently to the prima facie
level to proceed – to entertain the proceedings,
I mean, and that
carried with it the immunity matter. Then, as I say, there may later be an
Article V argument or not. Can I turn
, page 1635
of the book ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
Could you also give the page reference to the report,
Of course – it is
Zhongshan v Federal Republic of Nigeria
112 F.4th 1054, at
GAGELER CJ:
the bottom of the left‑hand column there, there is first the reference to
what is called the:
long‑established principle of foreign states’ ability to consent
So, you can agree to be sued, and then –
that again is, I stress, with respect to the arbitral proceedings and what might
as an award. It is pointed out that conceptually it is the United States
statute’s reference to the consequences which are
obvious, of venturing
into an agreement to arbitrate so as to produce a binding award. That, to quote
their Honours:
strips states of their immunity.
Then, we turn to the particular
position between Nigeria and
Zhongshan ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Walker, that is referring to the arbitration exception.
That is why there are two aspects, and that is
not of moment in this case, as we understand it.
GAGELER CJ:
But it is not waiver they are talking about.
am not talking about waiver
there ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
am trying to work my way through the reasoning in
passage which, in our submission, is relevant to waiver enforcing the final
award. So, they work their way through the
fact that obviously these people did
agree to arbitrate, there was an award. That is what they then bring home to
case in the right‑hand column on 1067, and then it
But Nigeria signed a treaty that expressly obligated it to arbitrate
They arbitrated this dispute, and then the next
important passage:
Nigeria also committed itself via the New York Convention to the
enforcement of arbitral awards.
So, that is discreet and logically
subsequent to the earlier one‑off arbitration to arbitrate, which produced
an award that
they also committed. So, the majority is pointing to that for the
obvious consequence that they are not – Nigeria is not immune
suits under the New York Convention for the enforcement of the award,
because they go on:
While the Convention covers an arbitral award regardless of whether the
parties have acceded to the Convention . . . accession to
the Convention in part determines whether a state has
consented –
So, they have already established that a State can
be a party to an arbitral award under New York Convention. We all
know that you
do not have to have a State as a party to an award for the
New York Convention to apply, but where there is a State:
accession to the Convention in part determines whether a state has consented
to an award’s enforcement in foreign courts.
That has to do,
obviously, with immunity. Then on the next page, 1068, they return to that
framing of the matter, in the middle paragraph:
Nigeria signed an investment treaty with China that expressly provided for
other state’s nationals to directly arbitrate . .
stood by that promise by arbitrating with Zhongshan.
So, there you are.
The treaty party is also an arbitration party, as contemplated by the terms of
the treaty. Then the next sentence:
Enforcing the Final Award is therefore entirely consistent with espousal
requirements.
Which are, in general terms, described on the previous page
at the foot of the right-hand column, prohibiting:
private parties from asserting claims arising under international law
directly against foreign states . . . that prohibition does
apply where an international agreement expressly provides a mechanism for the
resolution of disputes between a government and
nationals –
which is true with the BIT, obviously:
or where a government
to resolve a dispute
which is an ad hoc arbitration agreement. So, you have this sovereign
engaging in the dispute resolution producing an award, and
then the question is:
what is the status of that State as a party to enforcement proceedings under the
New York Convention? The
answer provided by the District of Columbia
Circuit is that enforcing the final award – that is, under the New
York Convention
– is entirely inconsistent with the special aspects
of being a sovereign with respect to commercial cases.
Could I then go
over please in the report; 1072. That last paragraph in the left-hand column,
there is a reference to the question
that I have said does not affect matters in
this case. Namely, the idea of:
a dispute between two sovereigns states governed purely by public
international law –
as their Honours put it. They go on, having put that to one
it is sufficient that nothing in the Convention’s drafting history
establishes that the Convention is categorically inapplicable
to an arbitration
that implicates a single state’s sovereign activity directed at a
non‑state entity and that is governed,
in part or in whole, by domestic
So, there we have a pretty classic description of what will happen
under a bilateral investment treaty. The two sovereigns do not
head‑to‑head. The investor has a grievance against one of
them – the host sovereign, the host State for investment
and that, in our submission, then makes it clear – you then see over
at page 1073, right‑hand column, last paragraph:
contrary to Nigeria’s claim, the Convention’s drafters did not
“plainly” state an “intent[ ]”
sovereign‑act breaches against a private entity out of the New York
Convention’s scope and to categorically
constrict the Convention’s
coverage to private acts.
In our submission, the conclusion, which you
will find on page 1075, at the top half of the left‑hand column,
The district court therefore has jurisdiction –
involves, for the reasons that the passages I have quoted point out, that
involves the notion that Nigeria has waived or
consented to the exercise of the
enforcement jurisdiction under the New York Convention arising from that
arbitrated dispute.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Walker, I just do not
think that is right. If you look over at the next page, 1076, that is the
most convenient framing, I think,
of the issue that is raised in the case. In
the dissenting judgment, in the top column, you see a reference to the
Foreign Sovereigns Immunity Act
general provision. It is that:
“a foreign state shall be immune from the jurisdiction of the courts of
the United States,” subject to –
a number of exceptions.
The only exception being addressed – and I think this is true of the
majority as well – is what
is called the arbitral exception, and the
question is whether this award falls within the scope of the arbitral exception.
is a completely separate exception for waiver of sovereign immunity, and
that was not in issue, I think.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, maybe to put
it in other words, this is the equivalent of section 17 of our Act, not
section 10.
I think that parallel is probably
appropriate, but what we get from this reasoning is the clarity – you
saw the expression
“entirely consistent” – the clarity of
what is imported by the accession to the Convention. Nigeria’s defences
were mounted at earlier stages, logically, and failed. The difference between
the majority and the minority is not material, in
our submission, to the
proposition made good by the majority that it is acceding to the Convention
which renders enforcement of the
award which they had courted, by agreeing to
arbitration with a binding award, that produces the effect which, in our
submission,
matches the approach taken in
That is, it is
the existence of the Convention, once you accept that States, parties to an
arbitrated dispute, are within the notion
of persons in I(1) –
and that was at odds in
– once you accept that then,
in our submission, it leads, in order to reach the conclusion that the
proceedings were appropriate,
there had to be no immunity. Now, it is not to
our point ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
Well, the exception from the general rule produced before the DC Circuit
that there was no immunity, but it was the exception that
relied on the
arbitration agreement that produced that result, not waiver.
When your Honour says “not waiver”, it is the
combination of agreeing to an arbitration and being a contracting party
New York Convention which, in our case – because that was not the
issue there – in our case produces, for exactly
the same kind of
reasoning, namely that the promise of arbitrating in
, enforcing
the final award, is therefore entirely consistent with what are otherwise the
special positions of States, which obviously
involves, in the court proceedings,
questions of immunity. That is the only one that comes to mind. It is for
those reasons, in
our submission, that this is a case which was not framed, if
you like, in our terms of section 10.
This was a case which makes
it clear that the Convention plays a role – in our case,
Articles I and III – plays a role
in understanding whether
there has been a consent by a person who, as a contracting party, is also
voluntarily a party to an arbitration
which has produced a binding award. That
is the case that brings the question: well, what does your membership, your
to the New York Convention bring to the enforcement of that award?
And what it brings is, in our submission, what the Circuit Court
determined in
this case, not by reason of an Australian section 10 consent question, but
rather by the consistency, the entire consistency,
of enforcement in a court of
an award which had come from an arbitration to which you had agreed, which is
exactly this case.
This case has brought a focus on whether there is, in
section 10 terms, any status to be given to your position as a contracting
party when you are sought to be brought before the courts of another contracting
party as the enforcing party by reason of the promises
inter se in
Articles I and III. In our submission, that is exactly the same kind
of reasoning as informed this Court’s determination
and decision in
So, there is, with respect, nothing in
against us. There is a deal in terms of the schematic necessity of amenability
to the municipal jurisdiction of an enforcing party
on the part of a contracting
party who is adversely affected by an award. And they are on all fours in that
regard. I think it
suffices for me to entirely accept what the
Chief Justice has said.
is not – and I did not take
you to any arguments – is not a decision on waiver.
decision on something I called in aid for waiver. Namely, the entire
consistency of enforcement in a court with what the
New York Convention imposes
with respect to all contracting parties with respect to the court system of an
enforcing party.
It has three propositions,
I think, you take from it. One is that, generally, private parties cannot make
claims under international
law directly against foreign States. The second, one
can get out of it by consent. And accession to the Convention in part
whether a State has consented to an award’s
enforcement.
in part – the essential feature, for us, once you have a State who
has agreed to arbitrate, there has been an award produced,
the essential feature
is what do Articles I and III say about the scheme to which everyone has
consented, including India.
Then one comes
to the bilateral investment treaty, giving rise to the dispute that you have
identified leading to the award. The
order may not matter, but they are the
Thank you – yes, that is
right. So, the bilateral investment treaty is the reason why questions arise as
to enforcement.
But it is consensual, as the Federal Circuit Court points out,
that has its own significance. The whole point about something being
is that you do not have to agree to it – so, author of your own
position. That does have to do with the arbitration
exception, which is not in
question here. It is what it goes on to say about the subsequent step
concerning judicial enforcement
stemming from being a party to the Convention,
which is what we rely upon in
Could I then move
to – I do not want to add anything further to what we have written
with respect to propositions 13 and 14.
Can I make it clear that in
our argument, it is by reason of the engagement in Article III for the
Convention as a whole which produces,
eventually, the section 10 consent or
That, in our submission, means that there can be no reliance by
way of a bar or barrier to our access by pointing either specifically
generally to any rule of procedure even if that were thought to encompass the
laws from time to time in this country concerning
the immunity of foreign States
or sovereigns. It is obviously a matter of how section 10 operates, rather
than saying that section
10 does not have any effect upon questions of
immunity. It plainly does. That is its whole purpose.
Can I then come
to the matter which is perhaps at the core of the Full Court’s
reasoning, and that concerns a so‑called
reciprocal operation of the
commercial reservation made by India. Now, it poses in this case what, in our
submission, is an oddity
– we think, a novelty – in
relation to the New York Convention.
So, a reservation, in the terms I
am about to come to, is relied upon to have an effect in relation to proceedings
brought in a non‑reserving
contracting State – that is,
Australia – in favour of nationals of a non‑reserving
contracting State – that
is Mauritius and/or the United
States – and it is sought to be enforced in a non‑reserving
contracting State, which is
Australia – the award, sorry, is the
Netherlands.
So, there could be no doubt that all of those contracting
States, who are non‑reserving, are not to be understood as having
to remove or modify any obligations affected within the meaning of Vienna
Convention 2(1) by that reservation. As you know,
it was conceded below
that that had no effect on the position of Australia. It is that which, in the
reasoning of the Full Court,
were the reasons why the appeal should be
allowed. Could I take your Honours in the reasons, please,
Coulton v Holcombe
I have but, as Justice Gleeson pointed
out, this matter has to be confronted, and it is basal. The sense in which I do
is to be seen in the position that we take in our last ground of appeal.
In truth, if there is anything in this, it should then be
the subject of a
remitter. There are aspects of the matter which, in our friends’
argument, proceed upon a presumption of
the similarity of foreign law to
Australian law. That seems to be – that is a matter that could not
have been addressed while
there was not a live issue. That, in our
submission ‑ ‑ ‑
Could you explain that to me again, because I got confused when looking at
the concessions you had made about the commerciality of
these arrangements, both
before the primary judge and then the Full Court, and now here. I do not want
to go through the –
there seemed to be a changing – you
are not addressing any of those?
I am not going
to revisit that. All I am
saying ‑ ‑ ‑
So, is the position clear that the lack of commerciality or the
commerciality was not accepted? You accepted it was not commercial
in relation
to both the BIT, the agreement and the annulment.
Ultimately, yes, and I am not going to move away from that position that we
I can understand that. And that means you
are left with the quantum award.
Is that how – have I understood the
position that is ultimately reached?
someone is left with it, that is what we want to enforce. I may be mistaking
your Honour ‑ ‑ ‑
I understand – of course, you would want to enforce, but that is
the only issue that is left between you as to the reservation
Well, there was no reservation
question between us in the courts below.
Well, there
was an issue about the laws below, in the sense that there is – the
question is about, there being no evidence
of the commercial laws of India, the
presumption applies.
What I am trying to work out is what is being remitted, if you are
right about
Coulton v Holcombe
Coulton v Holcombe
applies to justify a remitter, if your Honours were against us, in this
sense. It was a section 11 statutory question of commerciality
conceded below. It was not a commercial according to the laws of India, for the
purposes of the reservation that was the
subject of any concession or any
evidence. And it is the reservation – now live between the parties,
because the Full Court
decided the case against us on it – which
means that if your Honours were against us, the matter should be remitted
out whether it does, in fact, fit within the
reservation.
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Walker, this may a way of
saying the same thing, if you look at the core appeal book, page 139,
paragraph 82, do I take
BEECH-JONES J:
‑ ‑ ‑ paragraph 82, on page 139.
I am sorry – I misheard
your Honour. Yes.
BEECH-JONES J:
That finding, you
challenge, in the sense – do you – saying, we were not
heard on it?
Yes, that is reservation
BEECH‑JONES J:
It is not section 11 language, and we conceded section 11.
So, just so I am absolutely clear, when you say you
conceded section 11, does that mean that that finding is limited and the
you challenge is limited only to the award? You do not challenge
anything about the bits that led up to – wrong word –
BIT, the agreement, the annulment.
not. No. And 82,
section 11, or generally?
section 11, no. We took a position on section 11, we are not going to
resile from it, but we did not take a position about
what the language in the
reservation meant – which means what the language in
Article I(2) means – because it was not
an issue between the
parties. It is not the subject of any evidence about the law of India.
And 82 is a conclusion on that issue,
which was not raised between the
parties. We have not had an opportunity to consider that and to deal with it in
evidentiary terms.
It is an evidentiary matter. And, in our
submission ‑ ‑ ‑
had the onus to address it, if it was an issue? I ask that for this question:
India is contending that it had not waived
its immunity. It was the applicant
before the primary judge seeking to maintain that
contention.
There is a swapping of onuses
assertion – this is highly artificial, because there was no position
taken by India, indeed, there was an express opposite
position by India, to the
effect that its reservation prevented any reasoning by which it was obliged to
cooperate and, therefore,
had consented to Australia’s discharge of its
obligation as an enforcing party.
I just raise – I am sorry, finish what you were going to
I am sorry. Our point is this. There was
no raising of any contention by anyone. We certainly did not have to raise a
contention,
and, by the way, your Honours or your Honours do not have
to worry about the reservation contemplated by the second part of
I(2), because India does not rely upon that as affecting
Australia’s position at all.
So, there was no onus on us about
that then. There is certainly no onus on us in the Full Court because the
matter was not raised.
You will not find in particular the Article 21 of
the Vienna Convention to which I will be coming. You will not find that in the
argument advanced as a reason for us to lose the appeal, but you do here find
that relied upon.
Can I just raise paragraph 76
of the Full Court’s reasons.
The respondents did not contend or adduce evidence to the effect that the
award is an award within the scope of India’s reservation.
say, they did not contend or seek to prove that the award determines differences
arising out of a legal relationship
that is considered as commercial under the
law of India.
Is that wrong?
No, that is a recording
absence of something?
Because that paragraph is not directed at the section 11 concession
which you do not resile from.
No, but that is a
different question altogether.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, do you say:
yes, that is right, and we did not do that because no‑one ever asked us to
or had raised an issue about it?
No, they were not
making anything of their reservations.
BEECH-JONES J:
is why you did not lead anything about it. Yes.
is right. It is also why they did not lead anything about it.
So, what is the last sentence of 76 directed at?
In particular, the second half?
That is where I am confused. On more than one issue normally, but on that issue
I am more confused as always,
your Honour, but my recollection is that India has always referred to its
reservation but not as part
of any argument against us. That is, it has always
been well known that India had a reservation. India has never argued below.
They do now, but they had not argued below that that made the slightest
difference to the question of what Australia was obliged
correlatively, what a cooperative India was required to do by way of its
So, I am unable to tell you what forensic purpose, if any, was
being served by the assertion recorded in the second half of the last
of paragraph 76, but it had no role in the argument of issues between the
parties. Accordingly, there was no onus, but
if there is an
assertion – if there had been an assertion that the reservation
operated so as to make this dispute outside
the scope delimited by India’s
reservation, then it obviously would have been the asserting party, India, who
would have to
prove in particular enough about the dispute and enough about the
laws of India to enable that comparison to be seen.
That was never in
issue at first instance or in the Full Court. It is quite impossible to
maintain that we in the Full Court, what
as by way of evidence on
appeal – that we were to, I do not know, prove more about
India’s reservation and the dispute
than was necessary for the prima facie
position in relation to which the immunity case had been argued. We do not
understand that
to be the position. That is an absurd
proposition.
On core appeal book 31, at
paragraphs 43 and 44 – and I do not know whether this is
relevant to this issue, but there is
a discussion by Justice Jackman about
what needed to be proved. At the bottom, his Honour says –
sorry it is at the top of
I do not accept India’s submission that it is necessary for the
Applicants to establish at this stage that there was in fact
“investment” under the relevant laws . . . so as
to prove that –
it will give rise, et cetera.
This is the so‑called prima facie point.
That is the prima facie point.
I noted it in response to Justice Gleeson
And that is it, that is the extent
of the debate at that point.
I think a fair
answer is yes, but of course it was absolutely not directed to – I
should not say “absolutely”
– it is not in terms directed
to the question of the carve‑out by the reservation. Yes, it does refer
to the relevant
laws of India, but that is for the purpose of understanding a
word in the bilateral investment treaty.
Does all of that mean,
Mr Walker, that if for whatever reason we get to having to ask the
question: is the reservation engaged
here to limit India’s commitment to
the Convention – we would have to remit?
Yes. You can limit the remitter, of
But leaving aside who has got the
onus, the issue was not live before the court at first
instance ‑ ‑ ‑
That is right. To put it mildly, through no fault of
‑ ‑ ‑ and requires
evidence as to the content of foreign law.
Yes. It bespeaks evidence, which is why, in this Court for the first time
that – if I may say so – unsatisfying presumption
called in aid. That is odd because there could not have been evidence tended
against the presumption in this Court.
in this Court, but in the lower courts.
idea of being able to rely upon a presumption but then say section 73 means
the other party cannot adduce any evidence against
the presumption is, in our
submission, a bizarre way to deal with the fact that there has been a
transformation of the issues between
the parties, through no fault of ours. It
is for those reasons that yes there is a point taken about the positions of
parties and
how it has affected the course of justice, particularly bearing in
mind I cannot tender any evidence in this Court, but the Full
consider what to do with that if that becomes, for the reasons the
Full Court themselves identified without hearing from
us, a critical
So, we did not concede that this was in the reservation, we
conceded section 11. There may be massive overlap there, but that is
something upon which we are entitled to be heard. I confess I know nothing
Court, and neither did
the Full Court.
GAGELER CJ:
And that would be the
scope of the remittal, to examine the relevant laws of India?
I have to say – yes, it is not an opportunity
to reshape at large. That would be quite unfair, we accept
GAGELER CJ:
Have you formulated the terms of the remittal
that you would be seeking?
No. Certainly not as
to a limit on the remitter. May I take the opportunity at the adjournment to do
GAGELER CJ:
In the context
of the overlap, that is the way the Full Court dealt with it, as you took
us to, in relation to paragraph 76 through
to 82 ‑ ‑ ‑
acknowledging them, as they do at 79, of the
that the subject of any argument at all? This idea of the overlap between
section 11 and the reservation.
I do not accept this notion of the position we took, in terms of the issues
joined, carries with it anything beyond
issues not joined.
So, that is what I asked. Was this idea of the overlap between
section 11 considerations and India’s commercial reservations
subject of argument before the Full Court.
I understand that you say it was not an issue
but was this sort of analysis
no. I mean, I accept that it is. If you look at the words and there is not
overlap, I will be very surprised, and if it is
not significant, I will be even
more surprised. Yes, of course there is, but I do not know the extent to which
anything in the law
of India – which has never been
canvassed – and when the Full Court talks about those in
relation to India’s commercial
reservation, first of all they accept that
they are different, they return to significant overlap; they do not say which
over the edge.
In particular, they say so without, so far as
the parties are aware, having any knowledge of the laws of India as it affects
11, which we earlier argued and then conceded. It is for those
reasons that there is simply no evidentiary footing for a finding
with respect to the reservation, and their Honours obviously should have
proceeded differently in respect of the matter.
Your Honours,
could I pick up the reasoning concerning reservation in the Full Court,
starting in the core appeal book at 133. In
paragraph 70, it is said
the issue – which is all under the heading:
Is India’s submission limited by its
reservation?
their Honours identify this argument:
to the extent that India waived its foreign state immunity by ratifying the
New York Convention –
That is the last sentence of paragraph 60. So, it is an argument
which accepted what I am going to call, in shorthand,
Kingdom of Spain
it has only waived immunity with regard to awards meeting the description of
those it undertook to enforce and not with regard to
awards outside of that
description.
Now, their Honours then turn to refer to an argument
attributed to us about reciprocity as it is evoked in Article III, all
of course to Article V, which is after the immunity has been
determined, and then noting that:
the “commercial reservation” is a unilateral reservation that
does not oblige other States to limit recognition and enforcement
in the same
And we still do not know why or how that is said to be wrong
concerning the law of reservations, to which I am about to come.
Honours then turn to what they call in general terms:
Reliance by India on its commercial reservation –
your Honours see there that that is presumably to this notion that there
Kingdom of Spain
waiver, but the reservation has some effect. The
engagement of Article 21, which was not the subject of any argument between
parties concerning the effect of the reservation attributed to India, and
then their Honours are now dealing in the next few pages
with materials
that were not the subject of adumbration or argument in the Full
In paragraph 64 there is a reference to the guidelines, and
you see there is a reference to guideline 4.2.4 in the materials. You
find that in volume 10, tab 107, page 3254, left‑hand
column. Their Honours set it out. You see that they are obviously
part of a whole; 1, 2 and 3. Just dealing with the guideline at the
moment, before we come to what the Vienna Convention says
there are notions that might be thought to involve something in the nature of
reciprocity. In 2:
To the extent that an established reservation excludes the legal effect of
certain provisions of a treaty –
Here it would be
India’s obligation for its courts to enforce awards that are outside
India’s concept of commercial:
the author of that reservation has neither rights nor obligations under those
provisions –
That is, the provisions which have –
the legal effect of which have been excluded:
in its relations with the other parties with regard to which the reservation
is established.
Now, that is all at a very abstract level and one of our
complaints, as you know, is that, had one read on, the puzzle would have
resolved and in our favour. Then there is the reference to:
Those other parties shall likewise have neither rights nor obligations under
those provisions –
and those are the provisions the legal effect of which has been excluded
by the reservation. Then in 3, the changes are run in relation
modification as opposed to exclusion. Like their Honours in the Full Court, I
would submit that probably the difference is not
going to be very important,
though in some cases it may turn out to be critical.
One sees that the
modification is said to work in the relations between the parties to the treaty,
the effect limited by the terms
of the reservation. Can I take you, however,
first of all to the Vienna Convention. Sorry, your Honours, too many
volumes. In
the Vienna Convention, at 1834 in volume 7 of tab 59
of the book, you see the language of modification:
Modifies for the reserving State in its relations with that other
that is an important phrase:
the provisions . . . to which the reservation relates to the
extent of the reservation –
Modifies those provisions to the same extent –
are the provisions modified by the reservation:
for that other party in its relations with the reserving
does not modify the provisions of the treaty for the other parties to the
So, holding those very general propositions in mind, one turns back to
the reasoning in the Full Court in their
paragraph ‑
Just before you do so, do you accept that Article 21 reflects customary
international law?
Yes, although –
yes, it is probably more academic than significant, because it is the treaty.
If I may say so, as you would
expect, customary law in relation to these matters
was not such as to suggest that making a treaty to spell it all out was an act
of supererogation. I mean, it has produced what I might call clarity in several
languages, as opposed to the body of learning otherwise.
If I could take
you back, please, to the guidelines that their Honours had gone to in
paragraph 64, and in particular, back to page
3254 of the book, where
you will find after, 4.2.4, you will find 4.2.5, which is very much
what we would wish to be heard on before
their Honours reach these
conclusions. It reads:
Insofar as the obligations under the provisions to which the reservation
relates are not subject to reciprocal application in view
of the nature of the
obligations or the object and purpose of the treaty –
that is the New York Convention here:
the content of the obligations of the parties other than the author of the
reservation remains unaffected. The content of the obligations
of those parties
likewise remains unaffected when reciprocal application is not possible because
of the content of the reservation.
Now, if one goes back to the comments on the guideline in the preceding
document at tab 106 in the book, you will find at 3113 a comment
on 4.2.4 relied upon by our friends, number (8) at the top of that
page, there is a reference to:
and on a reciprocal basis.
Which is why the word has entered into the currency of this case, with a
footnote on that matter:
see below guideline 4.2.5 and commentary.
Which, of course, is a very
considerable qualification to the notion of whatever reciprocity involves. When
one goes to that guideline
and some of its commentary, we would take you in
particular to page 3122 of the book, comment (7).
Do you say that the relevant reservation is a reservation with regard to
another party, using the language in the chapeau to
Yes, in one – with great
respect, your Honour has asked a question which may inform the way in
which 4.2.5 is expressed.
In one sense, of course – which
cannot be a complete answer to your Honour – in one sense, any
party’s reservation
in a multilateral treaty affects its relations with
everyone else who is a party to the treaty. But 4.2.5 uses that
expression:
not subject to reciprocal application in view of the nature of the
obligations or the object and purpose of the treaty –
means that in Article 21, which of course is expressed so as to include
bilateral as well as multilateral treaties and has the
perhaps difficult
expressions in English of “that other party”, “that other
party” and “the other parties”,
it raises the question: what
are the relations and what is being affected? Plainly enough, reservation by
party A of an obligation
which it would otherwise owe to parties B
and C has an effect on the relations of A with B and C,
because B and C can no longer call
for performance of that obligation
which does not exist. That is true but, in a sense, trivial. But it is very
So, the unilateral act, so the parties have agreed, will remove
what would otherwise be an obligation. That does not always apply
in contracts,
but it does here for reservations. But it does not say that by A
autonomously choosing to make that reservation, it
has determined that same
matter for B and C. So, A reserves, so it no longer owes an
obligation to B and C, but that does not prevent
having obligations in those same terms inter se and, subject to knowing
more about the particular reservation and obligation,
BEECH‑JONES J:
And are you using that
to illustrate that it might affect between India and Australia, but it does not
affect between Holland or
Mauritius and Australia?
That is right, but it is also not just India and
because ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH‑JONES
Or India and Holland, and India and Mauritius, but not
between Holland and Australia or Mauritius and Australia.
Yes. That will always require analysis under
Article 21, but always in terms of the treaty obligations which are being
excluded or modified by the reservation and the terms of the
reservation. And that is when the guidance comes in. We have drawn
attention what you will find at the top of 3122, to which one is directed
with respect to this so‑called matter of reciprocity.
This is a comment
on 4.2.5, which I have already read, that you will find at 3254. That
is what the reference is:
In all these situations –
those are the situations referred to in 4.2.5:
a reservation cannot produce a reciprocal effect in the bilateral relations
between its author and a State or international organization
with regard to
which the reservation is established.
In this case, that is multilateral – everyone else in the
New York Convention:
A party owes it to all the other parties to the treaty to respect the
obligation. Thus the reverse effect of the reservation has
“nothing on
which it can ‘bite’ or operate”.
Now, the reverse
effect ‑ ‑ ‑
But that situation is dealing where the nature of the
obligation itself cannot be the subject of reciprocity, I think. Is that
dealing with the first sentence of 4.2.5?
Yes, it is. That is what that comment is about, yes. So, here, the reservation
is about the class of awards, by reason what they
have sprung from. You will
find the reservation behind tab 13, at page 906 of the book, and it
echoes Article I(2):
India . . . will apply the Convention . . .
they will apply the Convention only to differences arising out of legal
relationships,
whether contractual or not, which are considered as commercial
under the Law of India.
What cannot be imagined is any reversed effect or reciprocity whereby
that is true of any other party to the New York Convention.
No other party
is, as it were, caught in the coat‑tails of India’s reservation.
That is absolutely absurd, and no‑one
would argue that. So, India will
apply it only to that subset of awards. Those who do not reserve will continue
to apply it to
the whole class caught within the Convention.
You say that this reservation is, in a sense,
inward‑looking?
It applies to how India enforces
arbitral awards in the Republic of India.
another way of putting exactly that point is this. Of course it is proper for
India, if permitted to make reservations
– and it is, and we all know
that making reservations available when you are trying to get people to sign
onto a multilateral
treaty has been seen, correctly or otherwise, as an
appropriate means of inducing accession to a treaty which might otherwise not
have occurred. In any event, it is there. It is a familiar device. You can
make a reservation.
BEECH-JONES J:
So, why can this not be
applied in Australia, so that Australia will
has no effect on Australia at all, is my point. So, India will apply. One
asks, then, in this Convention, what role
does India possibly have? And I have
already described some of them. The most obvious one is it is a contracting
party whose court
systems are turned to account for the global enforcement of
awards within the Convention.
So, India and only India controls its
court system, as Australia, and only India controls its court system, and the
applicant of
the Convention by India obviously – not only, but
obviously – involves what it will require its court system to do.
This reservation limits the complaint by other parties to the Convention that
India has directed its courts not to have anything
to do with the enforcement of
what I will call non‑Indian commercial awards.
So, on this argument, the reservation is
do with anything.
Has nothing to do with
Nothing to do with it.
It is about: have you applied your obligations of the Convention in
How India will apply. So, we are not
talking about India will observe or India will be bound by. India is bound by
Convention. The reservation is how it will apply
GAGELER CJ:
It affects the scope of the obligation in
Article III that India ‑ ‑ ‑
I am sorry, your Honour?
GAGELER CJ:
affects the scope of the obligation in Article III that India has
Absolutely. Your Honour anticipates
me. So, there is an ongoing obligation, but in India’s case, as
contemplated when it
was open for signature – as contemplated, it has
cut back to a subset of the differences which can produce awards which may
enforced under Article III.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Walker – I see the time – it is really the
interaction of Article III as modified by the reservation with
21(b) of the Vienna Convention, that I think I need some assistance
GAGELER CJ:
Court will take the luncheon adjournment.
AT 12.45 PM
LUNCHEON ADJOURNMENT
UPON RESUMING AT
Your Honours,
for the purposes of completing the argument at the heart of the matter
concerning the effect of India’s reservation
on the consent we spell out
from the circumstances I have addressed on this morning, can I take you back,
please, to Article I of
the Convention, and Article I(3) in
particular, concerning those reservations.
The first of them, which is
the one that uses reciprocity in an easy way to understand, touches upon an
important and essential territorial
aspect of this Convention, which is to
provide global enforcement for awards made in the territory of a particular
State. But that
State need not be a contracting State, hence the significance
of the first of the possible reservations:
may on the basis of reciprocity declare that it will apply the Convention to
the recognition and enforcement of awards made only in
the territory of another
Contracting State.
So, the reciprocity is obvious and straightforward: I
will reciprocate you enforcing awards made in my territory by accepting an
obligation to enforce awards made in your territory. It is in both cases,
awards made and application, a territorial question –
apply the Convention” means in my territory, my courts will enforce the
award. Against that background, one
then goes to the reservation in question,
which echoes the language of Article I(3) and picks up, therefore, this
concept of applying
the Convention. They:
will apply the Convention only to differences arising out of –
et cetera, et cetera. That means, just as it does in the first
of the possible reservations, in my territory, and in particular,
it will apply
it not just with respect to awards but also to arbitration agreements. So, it
is Article II, as well as Article III.
Then one asks how,
understood against the general background of Article 21 of the
Vienna Convention, how does that affect, if at
all, the obligations of
non‑reserving parties such as Australia or, for that matter, the
rights – that is, the expectation
of observed
obligations – on the part of other non‑reserving parties such
as the Netherlands, in whose territory the
award was made, or Mauritius,
whose nationals were parties to the arbitration and award
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Walker, can I just
ask – and if I am cutting you off – if you look at
paragraph 68 of the Full Court, it sought to
do this reciprocal
Their Honours used the
word – the phrase I am going to criticise is the four words in the
middle of that paragraph:
and, critically, vice versa.
BEECH-JONES J:
Yes, that is what I am asking. That second
sentence – is it part, or at least part of your
potential – the problem with
that is Australia still has an
obligation to Holland to enforce the awards, even awards that would not be
considered as commercial
under the law of India.
And in a more extended protection sense, Mauritius as well, with nationals,
BEECH-JONES J:
Everywhere else. So, just
because there you might have it – on that reasoning, it would only
work if, say, you had a dispute
between someone in America and France which did
not answer – which was not commercial under the law of India. If you
this literally, India’s reservation would seep out all across the
whole, to affect everyone.
It affects everyone, and I
am going to come very briefly, in a moment, to why that just cannot be
BEECH-JONES J:
But is that your point? That is why you
said it is not capable of being reciprocated?
that is right. Just not, of its nature, as the guidelines and the commentary on
the guidelines well appreciated. There is
reciprocity when it comes to: I will
behave in my territory with respect to awards from your territory, so long as
you will do the
same by reason of being a contracting party. If you are not a
contracting party, you have no such obligation.
There is the reciprocity
for the first kind of reservation. Not – the word does not appear in
the second of the contemplated
reservations but, leaving that textual indication
aside, the guidelines and obvious commentary points out, well, you have to posit
what it means by reciprocity. What it does not mean is that the autonomous act
of one party unilaterally making a reservation with
respect to the kind of
dispute, this kind of difference – what it does not mean is that that
affects the obligation of a non‑reserving
party who chooses to be subject
to the full obligation with respect to all awards within
It is absurd to suppose that it is a form of reciprocity
whereby parties that do not reserve have their position as to their own
obligation, and therefore powers, affected by a reserving party. But, to that
end, could I, on the way to Article 21, remind you
that Article XIV is
found in the Convention but does not, in its own terms, seem to have much point
of attachment in our case:
A Contracting State shall not be entitled to avail itself of the present
Convention against other Contracting States except to the
extent that it is
itself bound to apply the Convention.
It is odd language, because it is a
“Contracting State”, so it is obviously bound to apply the
Convention in some way.
It might be an indication, obviously, of what the
effect of a reservation differentially concerning the content of obligation,
there is no – and there, that is out and out
reciprocity – but that does not find any attachment to the facts of
case. There is no availing itself of the present Convention against any
contracting States either by India, the Netherlands or
Can I ask you, Mr Walker, in that
respect, were you going to say anything about the passage in the travaux set out
at paragraph 36
of the Solicitor-General’s submissions?
This is the exchange between
Norway and Sweden.
No. Not in chief,
Very well, then.
have a time limit that I want to try and observe. So, when we come, then, to
Article 21, and stepping through the consequences
of a reservation, in our
submission, there is no diminution of Australia’s obligation by reason of
India’s reservation
and there is no diminution of the expectation of every
party to the Convention, reserving and non-reserving, of, on the part of each
them, that the obligations of non-reserving parties will be as they exist
without a reservation.
The obligations of reserving parties will be, as
they are, cut back by the reservation, and each is entitled to performance by
other of the obligations which are thus spelled out. So, in 21(1)(a),
the reservation:
Modifies for the reserving State –
that is India:
in its relations with that other party –
Language which
indicates that this applies not only to multilateral treaties, of
in its relations with that other party –
Now, that could be the Netherlands, Mauritius or Australia:
to the extent of the reservation –
And, (b), it:
Modifies those provisions to the same extent for that other
Now, when India says it will not apply – it must mean in its
territory, because it does not get to apply the Convention in anyone
else’s territory – when it says it will not apply in its
territory, that does not have any effect on the obligation,
the willing
obligation of non‑reserving parties to apply the Convention in their
territories to the full extent of the awards
in Article I(1), without any
effect of what I will call the commercial reservation.
That, in our
submission, puts paid to any idea that under Article 21, as the
Full Court apparently considered, something spills into
the relation of
India with the non‑reserving parties under the Convention concerning their
obligations and powers with respect
to this global network of enforcement of
eligible awards. In particular, that calls, of course, for each to do that
which is necessary
and not to do that which is antithetical to the observance of
those obligations.
Or, to put it another way, India’s reservation
cannot be allowed to shadow or diminish or to affect the full extent of a
non‑reserving
State’s obligation. We do not understand –
at least until today – that India would argue to the contrary of
That must follow, by Article 21(2), to which I have earlier drawn
attention. It cannot be the case that there is a difference in
the impact of
Article III on all parties, reserving and non‑reserving, depending on
whether an award State is a reserving party.
Can I explain?
Article I or in any other part of the Convention contemplates any special
treatment for a sovereign state even if it is
a contracting party –
especially if it is a contracting party – who is an award debtor.
The Convention is not concerned
with that kind of differential effect. The same
is true, with respect, when one considers the reasoning – borrowed
– with respect to, in this case, the New York
Convention and the obligation inter se for this global enforcement where it
obviously contemplated that some parties will reserve, some parties will not,
some parties will reserve and make the commercial reservation,
other parties
will not, and it will, in each case, turn upon what they undertake to do in
their territory through their courts in
observance of Articles II and
With respect, it is for those reasons that one cannot see any
difference in the language of the obligations accepted. One cannot
difference in the situation, depending upon whether a State is an award debtor
or not an award debtor, which would possibly
indicate any difference in the
message sent, the implication of agreeing to these obligations being observed.
I am sorry, your Honour.
So, the premise of this
submission is that there has been a waiver of State
That is the conclusion to which I
Well, the conclusion in respect of this part
of the reservation but without the reservation, looking at the ratification of
York Convention as a whole, the first point would be: if a
State‑investor arbitration is within the scope of the Convention,
a waiver of state immunity?
If there has been a waiver of state immunity,
and you are correct about that, would it not be odd that that waiver of state
extended to circumstances beyond those circumstances which are
encompassed within the terms of the reservation?
The answer is no. Can I explain why? Within India, of course. India does
not have any obligation to apply the Convention outside
the scope described by
the reservation. That is true, and no‑one is saying it
BEECH‑JONES J:
Mr Walker, can I ask you this.
If you had an award made in India which was non‑commercial under the law
of India, that –
I will start again. So, if you had an award in
Holland which was not a commercial dispute under the law of India, that would
be enforceable in India under the Convention.
That is right.
BEECH‑JONES J:
If you had an award, that
award made in India, which was non‑commercial under its law, would that be
enforceable in Holland?
It is not this case, of course, because your point is:
this is Holland, they are Australia –
answer is yes.
BEECH‑JONES J:
It would be?
Because the Netherlands has that
obligation.
BEECH‑JONES J:
And there is
is no reservation in favour of a contracting party as an award debtor, and there
is no reservation that affects that
obligation of any other contracting
BEECH‑JONES J:
So, the reservation would not apply
in that narrow reciprocal sense either.
It would not
apply in any sense.
BEECH‑JONES J:
So, it describes – limits the extent of the obligation
India has to apply the Convention. It does not limit the application
Convention. Article I describes the application of the Convention;
Article III describes what parties have to do. Article
there to be a reservation with respect to the nature of the awards which is
otherwise general; it does not care whether
a State is a party to the award, let
alone being the award debtor.
It obviously does not care about whether
countries are sovereign or not, because it contemplates that there may be
enforcement.
That is the
point, which is what carries –
conveys, unmistakably – the consent to jurisdiction. Now, in our
submission, ideas that
there might be a problem in the Netherlands trying to
enforce an award made in India against India is to say of India’s
reservation
that it has an effect on the obligation of the Netherlands which is
at odds with what Article I says concerning the effect of a
reservation
BEECH‑JONES
Sorry, my question was not directed against India, but if it was
against India, it would be in their domestic court system. I
Exactly so. As your Honour was putting the
example, I was about to interrupt to say: if it was domestic, it would be
none of this arises. But if there is an award made in India sought to
be enforced in the Netherlands against India, then my answer
is as I gave you.
And in our submission, there is nothing in Article 21 which possibly means
that a party that has not reserved
has its obligations, where it has not made a
reservation, affected by somebody else reserving as to that other
that other State party’s –
reservation.
Or, to put it another way, there continues to remain in
force, as the commentary to which we have drawn attention makes it clear,
the obligations inter se of all the parties to the Convention. The treaty
obligations and powers remain the same, simply taking
account of the effect of
the reservation, which in this case clearly affects only what happens in India.
Because nothing is happening
in India, the reservation falls away as having no
In the Full Court, however – and one sees this
culminating in their paragraph 72 – the reasoning appears to be
I will call a disdain for those excluded awards for enforcement in
India affects India’s approach to the exercise of jurisdiction
non‑reserving country – Australia – which does not
disdain enforcement of that kind of award. That, in our
submission, has nothing
to do with the effect of the reservation. It is an indeterminate, completely
diffuse and, we think, unprecedented
notion that a reservation may have an
effect outside its tenor, outside its function, as diminishing the obligation of
the reserving
party while leaving the rights and obligations of others
unaffected.
The only right of others that is affected is that which is
correlative to – if you must, reciprocal with – the
that has been removed by the reservation. And none of those have to
do with an obligation and, thus, a power in Australia to carry
obligations of global enforcement within the territory of Australia, of an award
which is eligible for enforcement.
It is for those reasons, in our
submission, that the “and, critically, vice versa” phrase in
paragraph 68 of the Full
Court, the references to Article XIV I
have already dealt with, it is not to modify, as we have written in relation to
Article XIV,
it does not have the effect of turning a non‑reserving
State into a State whose jurisdiction is infirm by no longer being able
receive that cooperation from State parties who happen to be sued for
enforcement by way of the consent for the purposes of
The modification of the relationship which is referred
to in the middle of their Honours’ paragraph 69 cannot possibly
is not supported by any of the cited material as being a modification which
reduces the full force and effect of Australia’s
obligation and every
other contracting party’s correlative obligations. We stress what India
says will not happen in India
does not amount to saying: and we will do
everything we can to stop it happening against India in any other place. That
the permissible subject of any reservation, and it is not the effect of
the permitted reservation which was made.
come back to Justice Edelman’s question, the reservation indicates,
you would say, a distain for enforcement, but another
way of looking at it would
be a respect for sovereign immunity.
reservation, your Honour, says nothing about sovereign immunity.
Does it not say that India will not enforce awards
against foreign States?
Not in terms, no. It may
carry with it that meaning.
Why does that meaning
not indicate at least some lack of clarity about India’s approach to
sovereign immunity under the New
York Convention?
That question does in fact engage, with respect, with what I have been trying to
put, concerning defects in the reasoning of the
Full Court. Can I unpack it
In effect, your submission is that, reading
the New York Convention and the reservation as a whole, India is by
implication saying
we waive our State immunity to enforcement of this Convention
against us, even in circumstances in which we would not enforce the
against others.
That is right, because we respect the
difference between reserving and non‑reserving parties. A reserving
if they do not want to be bound by the treaty, they do not
have to join the treaty, but a reserving party cannot possibly be heard
and I wish non‑reserving parties had done the same.
No, but it can reduce the scope to which it is waiving its immunity. It can
waive its immunity in a limited capacity. In other words,
it can waive its
immunity other than in relation to relationships which are considered as
commercial under the law of India.
Well, I think one
has to again unpack that because, as Justice Gleeson pointed out, the
question is to what extent this says anything
for our purpose about
section 10 and the consent question. The first thing is the reservation
does not say anything about sovereign
or immunity. It proceeds, as the rest of
the treaty proceeds, on the basis that States may be parties to the awards and
may therefore
be award debtors, which call for enforcement, and I do not want to
repeat what we have both written and said about that. That is
The second point is that what the reservation talks about are
legal relationships to which a sovereign may or may not be party.
So, it is not
only legal relationships where one of the parties is a sovereign, which are
considered commercial, which are within
the reservation by India. It is
just – it does not matter who they are. So, in its terms, the
reservation does not speak
to questions of immunity.
What it does speak
to is an exactly‑same general subjection to the
enforceability – the enforcement by national court
systems – of an award within the Convention so long as it is within
the reservation by reason of the character of the relationship.
It does not say
anything reserving a further position but not in the case of sovereigns, or even
worse, not in the case of India.
That is, only the reserving party. That is
not permitted by way of reservation.
It is for those reasons that there
is no defect or diminution in the clarity with which accession and being bound
by the Convention
conveys the acceptance that there will be, in a country like
Australia, judicial enforcement which will include, in our
– for Australian purposes – the waiver or
consent in accordance with the reasoning in
simply because everyone
is a party to promises by which each of them will in turn, as circumstances
arise, be bound by an obligation
to enforce. All others are bound equally to
permit that, and if the award happens to be one in which you were the award
it makes no difference. That was the meaning of this Court’s
finding holding in
In particular, in answer to Justice
Edelman’s question, which is also picking up on what Justice Gleeson has
raised, it cannot
at all matter that India has indicated, as Article I(3)
invited, that it will not in its territory enforce certain kinds of awards.
Again, regardless whether a sovereign is party of not; it has got nothing to do
All it has done is cut back the nature of the awards. The
reservation can only apply in its application of the Convention if is
applying the Convention when it is an award debtor sought to be sued in
Australia. That is absolutely not applying the Convention.
That is Australia
trying to apply the Convention, or perhaps the private party trying to take
advantage of the Convention, as it
is entitled to within the terms of the treaty
exceeded to by their nation.
It is for those reasons, in our submission,
that one does not get out of the reservation any effect on India’s treaty
concerning Australia’s obligation to enforce, and India’s
treaty position is that it will accept Australia’s enforcement
obligation,
which will include in the case of India as a State, because “awards are
binding” – Article III –
it will accept that
they are to be enforced, that unmistakably conveys that India’s sovereign
immunity will not prevent that
from happening. That is the reasoning by which
we say the reservation could never have had the effect which, in principle, the
Court held against us. Obviously enough:
legal relationships, whether contractual or not, which are considered as
commercial under the Law of India.”
is rather different from the phrase in our section 11, that
hence – if there is overlap, significant or otherwise, hence the
matter that was not able to be determined. If that were determined against us,
it follows nonetheless – that
is, if that had been determined
against us, namely that this award fell outside the zone created by
India’s reservation in India,
it nonetheless would have had no effect on
the position in the non‑reserving State, which is Australia, because India
had accepted
that some parties will reserve, some parties will not; maybe no
parties will reserve.
It certainly accepted the possibility that
Australia would not reserve. India therefore accepted the obligation of
Australia and
accepted as well the inter se obligations with the Netherlands and
with Mauritius, all of which obviously have an interest in the
observance of the
obligation of Australia, which involves the deployment of its judicial
institutions.
It is in that setting, which is indistinguishable from
what obtained in the
Kingdom of Spain
, notwithstanding the different
treaty – it is in that setting that one sees the unmistakable
conveyance of consent or waiver,
because this is only by the State party who
happens to be a contracting party, taking that step – or being
regarded as having
that position, more accurately – that there can be
an observance of the obligations which everyone has agreed should be observed.
A non‑reserving party is not a party in relation to whom reserving parties
have no expectation of observers. That is simply
not the way the reservation
works. You can see that in particular in 21(2).
Your Honours,
given the time, having covered I think all the matters for which there are
citations in our paragraphs 16 to 26, I
will then rest on our written
submissions in those regards. I have not yet got a form of orders were we to
fail but the question
of the extent of the reservation in relation to this
dispute remain open.
GAGELER CJ:
You could do that overnight,
If I may, thank you,
your Honour. The work is advanced but has not been checked, if I may say.
If it please the Court.
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Gleeson.
MR GLEESON:
Your Honours, our first
proposition involves clarifying precisely the issue that is before you and
correcting some statements made
this morning about the issue and about the
position India has taken.
As we submit in paragraph 2 of the
outline, the ultimate issue for you is whether within
section 10(2)
Foreign States Immunities Act
, the 1960 conduct of India in ratifying the
New York Convention – subject to reservations –
constitutes, without more
– which I will come back to – a
relevant agreement to submit to the Federal Court’s jurisdiction in a
to recognise and enforce an arbitral award to which India is a
The force of the “without more” is this: contrary to
what was said this morning, this is not a case where the appellant
has sought to
obtain, or obtained, a finding that India agreed to arbitrate in respect to a
dispute producing this award. The fundamental
issue which was seen in all of
the United States cases you were referred to – and I will come
to them – was a case where,
whether it was under the waiver exception
or the arbitration exception, there was a finding at the immunity stage of a
valid agreement
to arbitrate producing the award sought to be
That critical finding was not sought or obtained by India
here, as you will see from this short history that I will go to. First,
primary judge’s judgment, at paragraphs 102 to 103, his Honour
recognised that India raised a contention that there
was no agreement to
arbitrate for the reason that the BIT promise was never activated because the
investment was procured by
Which page of the appeal book?
Page 59 of the core appeal book,
paragraph 101. His Honour accurately summarised that this argument
had been raised bona fide,
supported by “expert evidence”. Its
consequence, at the foot of paragraph 101, was a submission that there was
no agreement
to arbitrate, and therefore there could be no agreement to waive
Paragraph 102, his Honour did not reach a final
view on that argument because he took the view that it was sufficient for the
to tender a document which looks like an agreement and looks like an
award without need to prove the State ever in fact agreed to
the arbitration
which produced the award, thereby relegating the State to raise any such
argument under Article V defences after
it has lost its
What his Honour there said accurately records precisely
the landscape that was joined in this case, which distinguishes it from all
the United States cases that you have seen. Can I just show you where that
argument was sourced in the BIT. If you have the
appellant’s book of
further materials, volume 1, the BIT is at tab 1 and the promise to
arbitrate is page 12, Article 8. The
promise requires a dispute in
relation to an investment of the investor of the other State under this
agreement. That refers you
to Article 1, definition (1), an
“investment” is:
every kind of asset established or acquired under the relevant laws and
regulations of the Contracting –
State. So, if this investment, as India alleged, was procured by fraud
upon the State of India, it would not be an investment within
The promise in Article 8 would not bite, and therefore there was no
agreement to arbitrate.
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Gleeson, does
this then put the case in the same position as the first instance judge in
MR GLEESON:
Exactly, your Honour. So,
your Honours have the first instance decision in the parallel
BEECH-JONES J:
MR GLEESON:
Thank you, tab 21 of volume 4. The issue joined before
Sir William Blair is the identical issue, and that can be seen from the
decision at paragraph 87. It is a pure question of law:
I consider that by reason only of its ratification of the New York Convention
1958 (NYC), the Republic of India has not submitted
to the jurisdiction,
or . . . ratification of the NYC by India does not in and of
itself amount to consent by way of a “prior
agreement” –
under the equivalent United Kingdom
by the state waiving its immunity.
Then Sir William Blair gives
three reasons for that conclusion. If one is focusing solely on ratification,
we embrace those three
reasons. So, of the ample material with which the Court
has been provided, the most directly relevant and persuasive authority is
Sir William Blair. All of the United States authorities require there
to be proof of the agreement to arbitrate at the stage of
deciding the
exceptions to the NYC, whether under waiver or arbitration
GAGELER CJ:
Has any case anywhere, or the mere
ratification of the Convention, constituted a waiver?
MR GLEESON:
It is difficult to assert an absolute negative, but the commentators whom the
appellants disparage have expressed that view, that
no case has said it on the
precise issue. I will take your Honour to those commentators shortly on
Article III.
Is your submission that, taken at
its highest, the extracts we were taken to in
Seetransport
and the like addressing the question of consent to the
New York Convention are to be read in the context of what I will call the
other acts?
MR GLEESON:
Yes, and the waiver is, in fact,
found in the other acts. It is found
So, this is
what I put to Mr Walker, and he properly put he no longer or has never
relied on the other acts, we are limited to
Articles I(1), I(3) and
MR GLEESON:
That is what we are limited to.
However, he did make these submissions, which, according to my note, India has
accepted the binding
nature of the award subject to the defences under
Article V, if immunity is found against it – wrong; India has
not said there
is no agreement to arbitrate – wrong; India has raised
no issue about the sufficiency of the prima facie proof that the primary
relied upon before the Full Court, or here – wrong; their case
at all stages involved a package, he said, which included
it did not, their case was the case the primary judge accurately identified,
never in ‑ ‑ ‑
that because forensic decisions were made about proof of those
MR GLEESON:
Yes, because we – there was
expert evidence before his Honour on this aspect of Indian law, which was
whether the decisions
reached by the Indian courts on this very investment, that
it was procured by fraud, and it was void ab initio, whether those decisions
supported the argument that there was no agreement to arbitrate under the BIT.
His Honour decided he would not resolve any of the
issues of agreement to
arbitrate, because he thought he got there under primary judgment 43,
the critical reasoning. On appeal,
there was no attempt by the appellants to
seek a finding that there was an agreement to arbitrate.
So, in short,
your Honours could dispose of the entirety of this appeal on the basis that
the argument boil down to: does signing
the NYC equal a clear and unmistakable
waiver in circumstances of no proof of an agreement to arbitrate and, at best,
something that
looks like a duck is one that does not meet the standard you laid
So, if that is right, where
does that then leave arguments that the agreement to arbitrate, if there is such
a valid agreement,
could amount to a waiver or could fall within
section 17? Would they be issues that would remain to be
MR GLEESON:
No, they are issues that are gone
because of forensic choices made at trial, but that will be for – if
there is any attempt
to resurrect them, that will be our answer to them. But
this entire caravan ran on a particular basis, that the appellants here
took on that obligation, which was a necessary obligation, as we would put it,
to establish the waiver exception.
Mr Walker that there were two questions. The first was whether or not the
Convention could apply to an agreement, to
a dispute of this kind; and then
second, whether or not there had been this question of waiver, because if it did
not, you would
never get through the first hurdle. You have reversed those.
Does that matter?
MR GLEESON:
No, we have only reversed that for
simplicity, that if we are correct on what I have put so far and what I will
expand on, that is
the narrowest and simplest way to resolve this case. We do
not abandon the scope question, which we accept is logically anterior,
Dr Roughley will be dealing with it.
It is in fact a question of
far broader application, as your Honours will appreciate, because if awards
involving States are not
within Article I in the sense that we contend for,
which is where they are awards impugning acts done in the capacity as a
that will not just affect Article III, that it will affect
Article II applications to stay court proceedings in favour of collateral
arbitrations. It is a very big question, there is a lot to be said on both
sides of that. If your Honours can resolve the case
on the narrow basis I
am putting, which is the narrow basis on which we lost, we urge you to take that
course, as under Occam’s
American decisions would be wrong, then, on that submission?
No, because the American decisions all were cases involving proof
of an agreement to arbitrate plus NYC.
appreciate that – on the scope point, the American decisions would
have to be wrong, on that submission.
MR GLEESON:
On the scope
point, we are commending Judge Katsas’ reasoning.
You rely upon the minority judgment in
Yes, but on the present point – that I call the narrow
point about Article III – all judgments in
submit, speak in one voice, which is that if you are under the arbitration
exception, you must prove an agreement to arbitrate
plus use the NYC as the
treaty in order to defeat immunity.
To the extent any United States
cases are still run on the waiver exception, which is now very much the
exception, because they are
all being run by the arbitration, the waiver cases
Seetransport
and its successors all require proof of an agreement
to arbitrate plus the NYC. So, there is nothing left in the United States
jurisprudence
that impedes our narrow argument and the scope question we urge
you not to reach, but if you reach it, we will put our arguments
question, including why the tenor of the United States cases may be wrong.
But just finally, to complete the overall prism, your Honours
might ask: where does that leave the notice of appeal? If we are
our primary point, you do not reach the notice of appeal because the notice of
appeal proceeded on the basis of a rather
unsatisfactory starting point of the
Full Court, that they would assume the primary judge was probably correct in his
approach to
the requirement concept coming out of Article III, and then
said, well, that requirement concept, along the lines your Honour
Edelman put this afternoon, cannot continue to exist in the fact of
a reservation that has cut back the nature of the State’s
So, the Full Court entered the question a large way down the
argument on assumptions contrary to those which apply on the basic case
they proceeded to find a way to depart from the primary judge’s
So, could I
MR GLEESON:
So, we do defend that, but it is very much an alternative.
The arguments which were put and were the subject of expert evidence before
the primary judge, which were not ruled on by the primary
judge, does what is
set out at core appeal book 131, paragraphs 49 to 51, accurately
reflect the notice of contention – I should
have asked Mr Walker
this – which were filed seeking to uphold the decision? That is,
they did not seek to re‑agitate
the matters which were not ruled on by
his Honour.
MR GLEESON:
Your Honour is correct. They
did not seek to re‑agitate the matters which were not ruled upon. The
matter that is in page
131, paragraph – that is the short answer
to your Honour’s question.
extent that the United States authorities – whether it is
or the others – the arguments that are run there are
unable to be run here, because they were not re‑agitated.
That is correct.
That is your
submission?
MR GLEESON:
GAGELER CJ:
understanding your primary point or your primary argument, as you put it a
moment ago, is it ground 3 of your notice of contention?
GAGELER CJ:
Essentially, it is that one
paragraph in the judgment of Sir William Blair that summarises it, I
MR GLEESON:
That is a summary of the core of it. There
are a few little improvements.
GAGELER CJ:
MR GLEESON:
But, at the core of it, it is saying, when
you open Article III, the only words you expressly see are, I promise to do
things within
my territory, which is enforce a category of awards. In fact, the
very sort of language Mr Walker emphasised, you see in Article
language of this is an obligation, I assume, as to what I will do in my
territory. That language, textually, is silent as
to what is to happen to this
fundamental obligation of international law that every State owes to accord each
other State immunity
respecting the sovereign equality of the States.
the face of that textual silence, there are two possibilities. One possibility,
which we commend, is that the obligations to
accord your sovereign equals
immunity are simply unaffected – un‑cut down by the promise of
recognition and enforcement.
So, as a matter of international law, my promise
is to recognise and enforce the awards that fall within Article I, subject
rights of immunity as any sovereign might have if it is called before my
courts. So, the scope of the promise, properly understood,
carries with it that
qualification.
That is a different point, though.
That is a point that is saying that the scope of the promise includes the
immunity. I thought
that was the argument you said was the only argument that
you want the Court to deal with. But that has built into it, the way you
express it, an assumption that the scope without the immunity would extend to
State‑investor disputes.
MR GLEESON:
your Honour, yes, I have said that is the logically anterior question, and
if it is necessary to answer that first, you
must answer it. But for the
purpose of the narrow argument, I was assuming either you are prepared to make
that assumption against
us and/or you have looked at it and found it against us,
and so we now know awards involving States, at least in some cases, can
within scope, we now look at the promise in Article III and we say: is the
better view of the textual silence, when we have regard
to object, purpose,
context, travaux, that this fundamental international law obligation to accord
immunity to my equal sovereigns
remains intact, or is the better view that
obligation has been eliminated in the sense that contracting States are agreeing
will not observe what would otherwise be one of their most fundamental
international law obligations?
Then we say, at the stage of the NYC, you
are going to be a long way short of unmistakable language to that effect, and
you are a long way short of unmistakable waiver. So, when India signs
up to Article III, expressly, it is promising about what it
is doing in its
territory. Australia is promising what it is doing in its
The suite of promises are subject to non‑diminution of
this fundamental principle of international law. Therefore, when India
hauled before the Australian courts, it is exactly the same as Tuvalu or Nauru
being called before the Australian courts: Australia’s
promise requires
Australia to respect the immunity of that sovereign.
So, with whoever be
the sovereign, whether they be a contracting State or a non‑contracting
State, you ask, have you done anything
to waive that immunity? And the mere
fact that you have signed this treaty in the first place, which is what has
generated the promises,
is not of itself an act constituting waiver. So, that
is the core argument.
Then we say, in terms of object and purpose, we do
not in fact differ very far from what Mr Walker put this morning. It is
facilitating international trade. It was primarily, if not exclusively,
directed to improvement in private law dispute resolution
procedures. There was
nothing in the object or purpose which was to cut down obligations which
sovereigns owe to other sovereigns.
Then, when your Honours come to
the travaux, which I will do a little bit later, as a supplementary means of
interpretation, it is
perfectly clear, unlike ICSID, that the burning question
of what do we do with foreign State immunity was never one addressed in
Convention. The closest the parties got was they were grappling in the dark
with the related scope question as to when would
it be, if ever, that a State
might be within the Convention at all.
But the direct problem grappled
with in ICSID of what to do with immunity, including immunity as to recognition
and enforcement,
as opposed to immunity as to execution, the very problem that
ICSID solved – and your Honours then dealt with it in
, just entirely missing in NYC – all of that, for the
reason your Honour the Chief Justice raised, that the modern system of
ISDS was unknown in the 1950s when this was being negotiated. We have given you
the materials that the first BITs were not signed
until the very end of the
1950s, really, the 1960s and so on.
So, all there was –
and there was something – there was the slightest smattering of
occasional disputes between an investor
and a State with an ad hoc
arbitration mechanism. So, they were not completely unheard of but there were
in no sense the core object
of this project.
Mr Gleeson, do you go so far as to say that ICSID
explained why your primary contention that there was no waiver of immunity the
States when they signed the New York Convention?
It goes a long way to explaining it, because
when – because the New York Convention was not a project dealing
with this problem
at all, that is why ICSID was necessary, and then ICSID,
because it did involve investor‑State and it did require attention
paid to the hard question – by setting up this new structure, are we
in fact also solving immunity at the same time?
It all had to be addressed in
ICSID – it did not have to be
addressed ‑ ‑ ‑
Is that another way of saying that if Mr Walker is
right, we did not need ICSID? Particularly, if the mere signing of the
York Convention is enough.
MR GLEESON:
not have needed ICSID but more than that, ICSID may almost have been
counter‑productive, because the big compromise in
ICSID to not accord
immunity for execution and leave that to the individual States, which
your Honours dealt with in
– you see nothing in NYC
to deal with the distinction between recognition and enforcement and execution.
So, is not the logic
of Mr Walker’s case that, in fact, NYC has
surrendered immunity for execution as well as for enforcement?
not go that far expressly. But where do you see in NYC the same way you saw in
ICSID an acceptable basis for saying that
immunity has been waived at
recognition and enforcement stage but not at the execution stage? In ICSID you
had that because Article
55, I think, expressly dealt with execution,
and 54 had that promise, States promise to treat awards as binding, and
that is what
created the textual hook for loss of immunity at the recognition
and enforcement stage.
And do you say that the lack
of that distinction in the New York Convention explains that it is
really focused on investor v investor
arbitrations?
MR GLEESON:
Yes, trade.
MR GLEESON:
It is facilitating trade,
and – sorry, Article 53 is the binding, Article 54, I
think, it is the not deal with the loss of
immunity at the execution stage. So,
one certainly sees very clear textual differences – they are the ones
we have summarised
in paragraph 4 of the outline – that ICSID
expressly deals with immunity at the execution stage; NYC does not expressly
with immunity at all. Secondly,
immunity ‑ ‑ ‑
not just textual – it is textual in the whole of the context, and the
context was debate about State immunity.
MR GLEESON:
of course. I was starting unaccustomedly narrow, your Honour, because
Mr Walker did make a firm and perhaps correct submission
against us, that
our written submissions seem to start too quickly in that context.
think the context is absolutely critical in the present case, but if you start
narrowly with the text, you do have, in ICSID,
a provision dealing with immunity
and saying how immunity is to be dealt with. You do not have that in NYC.
Then, as to debate,
you have immunity hotly debated in ICSID, for the reasons
you developed in
, leading to a compromise, whereas here, you have
immunity not addressed directly.
The third difference is ICSID has the
express promise to be bound by the award, that is Article 53. There
is no equivalent in NYC.
And taking up your Honour the
Chief Justice’s question, we do say that there is a parallel between
the international law approach
where one is looking at whether a fundamental
right and duty has been given up. If it is mere general words, you are likely
far short of the clear and unmistakable language needed, and in that
sense, there is some parallel with the domestic approach in
Your Honours, the fourth critical difference, which is
a difference of fact that I would like to come to immediately, is that in
, when the case came to you, the basis of it was that the award had
become binding between the parties and that factual position was
then, in turn,
the immediate premise for attracting Article 53, by which Spain had
promised to recognise the binding nature of the
award. If your Honours
volume 3 ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
So, this is a factual distinction rather than a legal distinction you are
MR GLEESON:
Yes. It comes back to where I started,
which was that in
, there was no issue raised before you that there
was some defect in the agreement to arbitrate such that the Article 53
promise was
not triggered. You see that from – it is volume 3,
tab 11, but it is
[2023] HCA 11
275 CLR 292.
The binding nature of the
award, it is built into the conclusion in paragraph 8, the statement of the
issue under paragraph 15,
and then the ultimate conclusions at
paragraph 69 and following rely heavily – not
exhaustively – on the concept of the
award being binding, which has
picked up that factual ‑ ‑ ‑
But that really just goes to whether or not, there having been a
waiver, the waived effect of the Convention then bites on the
MR GLEESON:
Yes. So I mention it – the
primary way we put proposition 3 is to identify the fundamental differences
in text and context,
object and purpose. Your Honours, before I come to
the ALRC report, which is proposition 5, can I just complete what we want
say about the United Kingdom and the United States cases which I have so far
put in summary form. In Sir William Blair’s decision
volume 4, tab 21 ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
Mr Gleeson, what is the status of that
decision? It is on appeal at the moment?
MR GLEESON:
appeal, yes. If we find out anything more about the hearing arrangements, we
will let your Honours know.
infrastructure cases as well that are picked up in that, were they appealed to
the Supreme Court, or not?
MR GLEESON:
Can I just come back
with an accurate and complete answer on that. For present purposes, on the
point of the United States authorities,
at paragraph 55 on page 811,
the court refers to the:
waiver exception –
in the United States, which is:
§ 1605(a)(1), Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act –
and the judge accepted India’s submission that the case in:
Preble-Rish Haiti
. . . and other cases, show that in
US practice a State does not waive immunity (or submit to the jurisdiction)
merely by becoming
party to the NYC. There has to be an agreement on the part
of the State to arbitrate the dispute in question.
I will take
your Honours to
Preble-Rish
shortly. The short point is
that – it is at first instance, but it is referring to the second
court jurisprudence, and what
it shows is that the authorities relied upon by
the appellant and by the learned Solicitor-General from the United States have
been taken further in these critical decisions which are not addressed in
their submissions. So, that is the first one. And then,
This was explicitly rejected in the recent decision of US District Court for
the District of Columbia in
Glob. Voice
. . . The court
This comes back to one of the answers I will seek your Honour the
Chief Justice:
that the D.C. Circuit “... has never held in a published decision that
a foreign state waives its sovereign immunity from suits
seeking to enforce
awards under the New York Convention (or similar conventions) solely by
ratifying that convention”.
And then at 59:
The Court said, “To put it even more simply: no arbitration agreement,
no waiver.”
There is then reference to Canada and to Australia, the
first instance decision. Then, for convenience, if I could ask
your Honours
to go over to paragraph 70, your Honours might note
that the commentators that are there referred to.
There are five main
ones. They are in the materials before you in these places:
Professor Crawford’s article is in volume
10, tab 110;
Professor Bermann is in volume 9, tab 101;
Professor Bjorklund is in volume 8, tab 86;
Mr Börner’s article
is in volume 8, tab 88; and
Mr Olmedo’s article is in volume 10, tab 112. I will come
Then in the reasoning at 76 and
following, there is an argument as to how the travaux of NYC contained a concept
of maintaining:
generally recognized principles of justice and respect
the . . . States.
That is paragraph 76. We rely upon that as a positive indication
that foreign state immunity would not lightly have been diminished
or eliminated
by this Convention. Paragraph 77 is Professor Bjorklund’s
comment on that silence:
It is clear, however, based on the negotiating history of the Convention,
that the delegates did not intend to preclude an immunity-based
Then, at 78, the contrast is drawn with the
text, context and object of ICSID, and then the conclusions follow from
paragraphs 80
through to 88. In Sir William Blair’s
approach – this is seen in 87, his second reason:
the reference to “rules of procedure” in
Article III –
is a textual hook for the preservation of
immunity. We put that argument, but we also put it at a more fundamental level,
reference to rules of procedure is merely a recognition of the more
basic point that the promise in Article III was never intended
or diminish the obligations of foreign State immunity.
What that means
technically, your Honours – just to deal with it on two
different levels, if one was looking at a suit in international
law between
the Netherlands and Australia, say, in the ICJ, on our case, the promise of
Australia to recognise and enforce always
carries with it Australia’s
duties to respect foreign State immunity if States are hauled before it, and
Australia would not
be in breach of its promise to the Netherlands by enforcing
this award. Indeed, Australia would be honouring its international obligations.
So that is one level at which – so, in not enforcing the award, that
is one level at which it operates.
What the rules of procedure do is to
say that the Article III obligation is also qualified by the domestic rules
of procedure of
the enforcing State. I will show your Honours in a little
while that the discussion about what are rules of procedure conveys a
notion and is amply capable of picking up foreign State immunity. What that
means is that on a domestic level, each State
in its own law can bring its
international law foreign State immunity obligation into the terms it considers
appropriate within its
domestic statute, as Australia has done in
sections 10 and following.
So, at both the level of the purely
international obligations between Australia and other States and at the more
specific level of
the ability to bring FSI into local law through rules of
procedure, the Convention is then fully understood, and that is how we would
it. I want to, then, just show your Honour, on this point, what these
three most recent United States cases say in support of
the way I have
introduced the argument this afternoon. So, the first of these will be the
decision in
Preble-Rish
, which is in volume 6,
This is the decision of Judge Castel, sitting in the
Southern District of New York but analysing the Second Circuit jurisdiction
jurisprudence. You will see on page 1306 of the book, at the top, that the
Republic of Haiti at least had foreshadowed an argument
that it was:
not a party or signatory to the underlying arbitration
agreements –
and for that reason:
the Court lacks subject-matter jurisdiction to decide the case because no
exception to the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act –
Then if you go to the foot of page 1310, Haiti was relying upon two
exceptions, first the “waiver exception”, and then,
secondly, the
“arbitration exception”. The waiver exception is dealt with in the
first two full paragraphs on 1311.
The second paragraph says:
As a general matter, courts do not find that a foreign state waives immunity
before a court in the United States “simply because
a sovereign entered
into a contract that named a third country for arbitration or designated the
laws of a third nation to govern
the interpretation of the contract.”
There, quoting
Seetransport
. And then goes on:
But “when a country becomes a signatory to the [New York] Convention,
by the very provisions of the Convention, the signatory
State must have
contemplated enforcement actions in other
signatory States.”
Again, quoting
Seetransport
at page 578. That is the little
passage Mr Walker emphasised this morning. It then goes on to put that
passage in its correct context:
The Second Circuit in
Seetransport
concluded that where (1) a foreign
state was a signatory to the New York Convention, (2) the state – or
an instrumentality or
agency thereof – “entered into a
contract . . . that had a provision that any disputes would
be submitted to arbitration,”
and then (3) “participated in an
arbitration in which an award was issued against it,” the contracting
entity had waived
any sovereign immunity defense and the district court would
have subject-matter jurisdiction.
Citing pages 578 to 579 of
Seetransport
. So, it is
clear ‑ ‑ ‑
GAGELER CJ:
Seetransport
the strongest case in favour of waiver? That is, you
need (1), (2) and (3)?
MR GLEESON:
GAGELER CJ:
I have not seen a case where there has just been (1)
MR GLEESON:
GAGELER CJ:
Let alone just (1) alone.
MR GLEESON:
The very reason that
the arbitration exception was introduced into the United States Act in 1988
was because the US Courts had struggled
gravely with the implied waiver
exception, and many courts had said even signing the arbitration agreement
should not be interpreted
as a loss of rights in respect to enforcement in a
different country. It is just possible to argue that by signing the arbitration
agreement, you have waived the right to recognition and enforcement in the
courts at the seat of the arbitration – some cases
But, on a clear and unmistakable standard, it is obviously open to
a view that you have not given up your rights in respect to enforcement
courts of other countries, which could be anywhere in the world, and for that
reason, the arbitration exception was introduced
and since then, most of the
cases feed through the arbitration exception. But
Seetransport
the case relied upon by the appellants and by the learned
Solicitor‑General, cannot avail the appellants on the present
facts where
they do not have element (2) and they do not have element (3). The
Court then turns to the arbitration
exception ‑
Do they not have (2)?
MR GLEESON:
because ‑ ‑ ‑
Because of the fraud.
MR GLEESON:
‑ ‑ ‑ because of the
Yes. I see.
MR GLEESON:
They may not have (2), because of the fraud.
may not – it has not been decided.
MR GLEESON:
Why do they not have (3)?
Because they have not – in the way they ran the case
before Justice Jackman – sought to prove acts of conduct by
in consenting to the arbitration which would form part of the waiver. So,
in the arbitration, there is a reason they did not take
India was asserting that it had not agreed to this arbitration, it was asserting
that the sorts of matters that engaged
the fraud. And
going back – so, they are the matters which were put in issue before
Justice Jackman but not decided and not re‑agitated.
Yes, that is the forensic choice in this case.
Are they the subject of appeal in front of
Justice Blair?
MR GLEESON:
My understanding is it is
operating slightly differently in the United Kingdom. What happened there
was that a separate question
was set, which is the exact question before you.
It is a separate question within a proceeding, so there may be a potential for
there to be other questions – I will not say too much about that,
because that is a different case – but the critical
difference here
is that to the extent the entire topic of foreign state immunity was the issue
before the primary
is really the lack of a notice of contention that you rely upon as the forensic
MR GLEESON:
That is probably the last step. There were
choices at trial, there was a lack of a notice of contention in the
Full Court and there
is no notice of contention now. So, you have no
argument before you that our fraud case is bad.
some stage it would assist me, if you have them readily to hand, even with a
short of the cases that you have referred that
say that it is the seat of the
arbitration that is the only extent of the waiver when a party enters into an
arbitration agreement.
MR GLEESON:
I will give you the cases,
your Honour. I think I put it more precisely, which was the United States
cases were grappling in the
dark with this question. There may be some cases
where – and there is certainly academic discussion that you might
agreement to arbitrate as that form of implied waiver, because by
agreeing to arbitrate in Singapore, where Singapore is the seat,
you are taken
to know that there is a supervisory jurisdiction of the Singapore
So, it may not be a huge bridge to an unmistakable consent to
that jurisdiction. And – as I will show you in about five
– this is the very point that Professor Crawford was
grappling with both in the ALRC report and in his article, this problem
implied waiver exception is not a suitable vehicle to grapple with arbitrations,
which is the whole reason section 17 became
the bespoke answer in
Australia, and it is not invoked in this case.
Just to complete it, you
will see, then, at the foot of page 1311, the court turns to the
arbitration exception, and in the second‑last
paragraph refers to a
“The [New York] Convention, as implemented by chapter two of the FAA,
is exactly the kind of treaty which the arbitration exception
contemplates.”
And then goes on:
But for the “immunity exception to apply here, the relevant arbitration
agreement must have been ‘made by’”
the foreign state.
Then the conclusion in the next paragraph is that:
the Court has subject‑matter jurisdiction –
having regard to both the waiver and the arbitration exception, but in
circumstances where you have signing the NYC plus the contracts
containing the
necessary arbitration agreement:
No party disputes –
there was an appearance:
in the arbitration. Direct application of
Seetransport
there is no immunity. So, the three necessary elements from
Seetransport
were found on the facts of the case, therefore, no immunity.
Now, the other decision is
Global Voice
, which is in volume 5,
tab 27. At page 932, using the court book numbering, near the
To fall under the FSIA’s arbitration exception, a plaintiff must put
forward evidence of –
what are in fact described as:
“jurisdictional facts”: “(1) an arbitration
agreement, (2) an arbitration award, and (3) a treaty potentially
award enforcement.”
Then there is discussion over the
page about the logic of the NYC, and then on page 934, the first paragraph
says, near the end:
that is, the award creditor:
cites no case in which a court deferred, over a foreign state’s
challenge, to an arbitrator’s determination that the
foreign state
respondent . . . was a party to the arbitration agreement and
thus subject to FSIA jurisdiction. Instead, the D.C. Circuit calls
the question
of whether the “foreign state has agreed to arbitrate” a
“jurisdictional fact” that “the
District Court must resolve in
order to maintain jurisdiction.”
Now, there was just the slightest
hint this morning that whatever decision might have been made by the arbitrators
on jurisdictional
challenges before them, it somehow forecloses this question
for the purpose of foreign State immunity in Australia. It does not,
does not under the parallel United States approach.
BEECH‑JONES
Is that because whether there is agreement under section 10(2) is
a matter for an Australian court?
MR GLEESON:
For two reasons.
That is the first reason; that is the primary one. It is a matter for the
Australian court, applying what we
understand to be clear, unmistakable waiver.
That is probably a sufficient answer to it, and certainly that is the United
flavour, which is the combine the inquiry into jurisdiction with
the inquiry into the
Foreign States Immunities Act
But there is
also a deeper answer, that if you are only looking at Article III through
the international law plane and you are asking
whether there is a clear and
unmistakable waiver within international law, the language is not clear enough,
because what it would
need to say is: I agree to accept and waive my foreign
State immunity rights, accept jurisdiction and waive my rights whenever the
panel has made a decision adverse to me.
You will not see that language
in most cases. So, it is a lack of sufficiently‑clear language to be
bound by the decision
of the panel. There is discussion here of this point, but
you will see at the end of the middle paragraph, which is close to what
your Honour puts to me as being the United States context, where:
When a private party seeks to force a foreign state into U.S. court to
confirm an arbitration award, the strictures of foreign sovereign
immunity and
principles of contractual consent both require the Court to satisfy itself that
the foreign state agreed to arbitrate
the dispute.
So, the conclusion over on 935, point 3:
this Court must either find
that Guinea was a party to the
Arbitration Agreement or –
and then this is the alternative way I have put it, the court
at least, find clear and unmistakable evidence that Guinea agreed to delegate
that arbitrability question to the Arbitration Tribunal.
This comes back to something we were discussing with Mr Walker before
lunch, I think, and that is that if you take the logic of the
argument that is
put against you to its conclusion, it would render the terms of the bilateral
investment treaties and the like really
of no – leaving them very
little work to do, as you could not reserve to yourself in those agreements in
the way in which the
United States cases have identified.
It would tend in that direction, because the foreign State is
precluded from saying: but I did not agree. So, the court is never
with looking at whether there was agreement in fact, and if you are not looking
at whether there is agreement in fact, you
are not looking at its terms, and its
terms may well vary. It is theoretically possible you could have an agreement
which says:
I agree to arbitrate, I also agree that I will be bound the
decision of the panel on any question of jurisdiction, and I also agree
resulting award will be enforced against me anywhere in the world. That is at
one extreme.
You could then have various versions along the spectrums,
and you could have versions at the other end where, in the BIT, you expressly
say: here are the promises but the only mechanisms we have for enforcement do
not include the NYC. Mr Walker calls that a private
contract, but you
could have a private contract to that effect between the parties and, perhaps,
on his argument, nevertheless the
NYC has resulted in waiver. That cannot be
right, and so the better view is that at the stage of determining whether you
have immunity,
the award creditor must overcome any arguments of immunity and
therefore must overcome any arguments that the agreement was not made
relevantly extend to the case.
So, where this court has reached at the
middle of 935 is to say that the arbitration exception could only apply if
the court was
to find one of those two things: that they were a party or that
they had delegated the question. They then do that factual exercise,
conclusion at 937, point 4, is that the award creditor failed to prove
an agreement, and therefore failed under the arbitration
exception. Then they
turn to the implied waiver exception, and this is where we have the purple
passage, second paragraph:
the D.C. Circuit has never held in a published decision that a foreign state
waives its sovereign immunity from suits seeking to enforce
awards under the New
York Convention (or similar conventions) solely by ratifying that convention.
Indeed, the D.C. Circuit has
recently and repeatedly declined to “formally
adopt” that rule, despite the unpublished Tatneft decision and despite
previous favorable citations (in dicta) to decisions from other –
courts. So,
, that is again an authority you see reference
to in the appellants’ and the Commonwealth’s submissions. This is
true status in the United States. Next paragraph:
Moreover, even if this Court were to adopt the Tatneft
rule . . . it would not result in a waiver –
It goes through, there, the requirements:
the quote GVG pulls from Tatneft appears to find implied waiver by a foreign
state as long as (a) the arbitration award was made under
the New York
Convention, (b) the defendant –
(c) the forum country . . . is also a signatory to the New
York Convention –
So, they are the three elements the
appellant says are enough here. But the Court says at page 938:
the cases upon which Tatneft relies . . . impose a fourth
requirement, and appropriately so: that (d) the foreign state agreed to
arbitrate that
dispute in the underlying arbitration conducted
under the New York Convention. That issue did not come up in Tatneft
there, it was:
a bilateral investment treaty . . . and there was no
question that the respondent foreign state had agreed to the investment
blanket arbitration agreement . . . The same
goes for the parties in Seetransport –
and then it is
GAGELER CJ:
amongst the
MR GLEESON:
Yes, it is volume 6,
GAGELER CJ:
And am I right in understanding that an
unpublished decision, according to the rules of DC Circuit, is to carry no
precedential value?
Is that the significance of it being
unpublished?
MR GLEESON:
Yes. This is where the law moved on.
Five to 10 years ago, people were citing cases like
saying, rather blithely, in the United States, signing the NYC is the end
of your FSI. What has happened is that the courts
have looked at this more
Seetransport
is very precise, these cases are quite
precise – you must have proof of at least the relevant agreement to
arbitrate, and it
is for that reason the DC Circuit is exercising reserve in not
publishing ‑ ‑ ‑
BEECH-JONES J:
Or consent under a bilateral treaty.
MR GLEESON:
under a bilateral treaty where there is no issue that the consent is
BEECH‑JONES J:
I understand.
So, the ultimate logic of the appellant’s case, and it was
the case of
, which is exposed on 938 in the middle, is:
For GVG to prevail on its theory, this Court would have to hold that Guinea
implicitly waived its sovereign immunity to enforcement
of all arbitration
made subject to the New York Convention, even if (as explained
above) it never agreed to arbitrate the dispute . . . simply
it is a signatory to the New York Convention.
It is interesting that – I assume that it is the
same Judge Katsas who is in dissent in
that is the judge
MR GLEESON:
Your Honour’s researches are deeper than ours.
Well, by looking at it.
MR GLEESON:
Yes. I think it is an accurate statement, what is here in the first paragraph
of 938, that
did not have to actually deal with the issue of
what happens if there is a question of whether the underlying arbitration
is sound or not. That is the question that is then exposed in these
further cases, and the position has become pretty clear –
you have to
be able to prove the agreement if you wish to assert immunity as lost. So, the
passage continues:
Despite loose language in some of the cases GVG cites, GVG provides no case
holding such a thing. Particularly when the D.C. Circuit
has interpreted the
implied waiver exception “narrowly,” –
, one of the cases relied upon by the
appellants:
this Court will not adopt an even more permissive rule than the unpublished
decision in Tatneft –
So, not even
would have been enough to get the present
appellants’ argument up, and the cases are certainly not prepared to go
. That leaves
, which is volume 6,
tab 50. In the majority decision at, using the book number, 1626,
paragraph [3], it is clear that the decision
was solely about the
“arbitration exception”, which is there set out. And one sees in
the language of the arbitration
exception that it must be:
an award made pursuant to . . . an agreement to
arbitrate –
That is the textual hook for the award creditor needing to prove an
agreement. Then, immediately beneath that, the majority says:
To establish jurisdiction under the arbitration exception, a party must offer
“more than a claim invoking an arbitration award.”
citing a 2021 decision of the D.C. Circuit involving Moldova:
The party must show (1) “the existence of an arbitration
agreement”; (2) “an arbitration award”; and (3) “a
treaty governing the award[.]”
So, they are effectively the three elements we have seen in
Seetransport
. The whole case proceeded on the basis that if you are in
the arbitration exception, you must prove an agreement to arbitrate, and
approach the appellants here took at trial is very much the one that was
rejected in
, which is to offer a claim invoking an arbitration
award as opposed to a claim based upon an arbitration agreement, which falls
of what is required.
In this case, factually –
page 1628, under letter C, in the second paragraph – there
was consent via the willing participation
in the arbitration. That is the third
step your Honour Justice Gleeson asked me about. At page 1629,
paragraph [8], the majority
affirmed that there are:
three jurisdictional facts: (1) “an arbitration
agreement” –
the award and the treaty, and then
The first two requirements are not disputed in this case and are plainly
established in the record.
There are two elements to the “plainly
established in the record”. The first is “an arbitration
which was treated as beyond doubt providing consent to the
arbitration, and then, secondly, there was the conduct in participating
arbitration. So, that was the context in which one then asked the question of
scope, and that distinguishes the case entirely
from the primary argument we are
running. On page 1633, the court puts it very clearly, in
paragraph [13]:
not every treaty contains an agreement to arbitrate. Without a valid
arbitration agreement, the FSIA’s arbitration exception
And you will see, on page 1635 of the book in the second
column, just above paragraphs [16, 17], this is said:
Because Nigeria has twice consented to the enforcement of this award, our
reading of the New York Convention is consistent with
long‑established
principles of sovereign immunity.
And the double
consent appears, repeated, again on page 1636, first column, middle
paragraph. It:
signed an investment treaty . . . that expressly provided
the right of arbitration plus participation in the
arbitration, thereby consenting to everything that followed. Your Honours,
balance of the correctness of the dispute between the majority and the
minority we propose to return to at the end of our submissions
Your Honours, the final matter in this set that I
wanted to come to was then the ALRC report and
Professor Crawford’s article
– this is paragraph 5 of
the outline. It is volume 8, tab 90. The ALRC report can be had
regard to in interpreting the
Foreign States Immunities Act
section 15AB(2)(b) of the
Acts Interpretation Act
. The report
was tabled in Parliament, and it was referred to in the second reading
on 21 August 1985.
Attorney‑General Bowen said
the legislation will implement the recommendations of the Law Reform Commission
Report number 24
tabled in Parliament on 10 April 1984. This is
what I wish to go to from the report. At paragraph 28, the report under
Crawford’s chairmanship made the point I had mentioned
consent to arbitration constitutes a waiver of immunity from
What page are you
MR GLEESON:
Page 2382. The next sentence comes back to
what I was putting and your Honour Justice Edelman asked me about as in
there being a
view that the – well, this is perhaps narrower,
even – consent to arbitrate is a consent:
to the ‘supervisory’ jurisdiction of the courts –
Then if I can go to page 2386, which is paragraphs 78 and 79.
The report discusses the concept of submission and is focusing here
describes about 10 lines down as:
actual consent, whether express or implied –
At 79 it refers to:
The Draft Articles provisionally adopted by the International
Law Commission provide that a state may expressly submit to
agreement . . . contract, or by a
declaration –
Those Articles in their subsequent but materially‑relevant version
of 1991 are found at volume 10, tab 105. What is said over
page, it is about five lines down:
To avoid disputes waiver by prior agreement should be required to be in
writing. The Commission is not aware of any existing bilateral
treaties which
contain a waiver of immunity from jurisdiction of Australian courts. There are
a number of multilateral treaties
in which parties either explicitly or
(arguably) impliedly waive foreign state immunity. The most important of these
are referred
to in Chapter 2.
At that point, footnote 7 takes the reader back to page 2375,
footnote 72. So, these are the treaties in footnote 72 that the
thought, either expressly or at least arguably, might involve a
waiver of immunity from jurisdiction of the Australian courts. Significantly,
the NYC is not in that list, even though, as I will show, the Commission was
acutely aware of the NYC. If you remain on that page
2375 and go to the
text, there is a reference to:
the 1958 Convention on the Territorial Sea and Contiguous
Zone . . . Similar provisions appear in the 1982 Law of the Sea
Convention.
The International Convention on Civil Liability for Oil Pollution
requires a state party to ‘waive all defences based on its
status as a
sovereign State’ –
That is the text that takes you to footnote 72, which does not
include NYC. The next sentence goes on:
On the other hand there are treaties where the negotiators were unable to
agree on the scope of immunity with respect to ships or
more generally.
And footnote 74 takes you down to ICSID. So, the Commission was
acutely aware of NYC and of ICSID. It understood, correctly as this
recently found, that ICSID was a convention which had expressly addressed itself
to immunity and decided exactly how it
would be followed.
submission therefore is that the Commission, carefully analysing the existing
treaties, and carefully analysing the concepts
of waiver, did not regard mere
signing the NYC as a waiver of foreign State immunity, which we say is correct.
That is the first
proposition we get from the report.
proposition comes when the Commission expressly looked at arbitration involving
foreign States. This is page 2403. It
is paragraphs 104 to 107.
In 104 the Commission is dealing with the topic of arbitrations and the
supervisory jurisdiction of the
court of the seat. It says:
This interest is recognised in various multilateral treaties on arbitration
which either apply specifically to or include ‘private
arbitrations to which states are parties.
Footnote 69 refers to NYC
and ICSID, so the Commission is acutely conscious of NYC. It says:
There is therefore clear justification for asserting jurisdiction over
matters such as arbitral procedure, the constitution of the
arbitral tribunal,
etc in respect of such local arbitrations. It is recommended that the proposed
legislation follow the European
Convention on State Immunity,
So, the whole of paragraph 104 is then about what
became part of section 17, which is: if you consent to arbitration, you
are consenting
to the supervisory jurisdiction of the Australian court.
Then 105, which is closer to our problem, dealt with the recognition and
enforcement of arbitral awards. It regards this as a distinct question. It
the award for example may be foreign, with recognition and enforcement sought
under established machinery –
Footnote 72:
Especially the New York Convention –
So, the Commission
here is expressly grappling with the genus of the present problem: what if you
have foreign award? What if it
is sought to be enforced under NYC? In
footnote 72, the Commission expressed considerable reserve:
It is possible that the Convention applies to at least some arbitral awards
between states and private parties, and it is certain
that it applies to
arbitral awards to which separate entities are parties.
It refers to some decisions and some discussion:
On the general problem cf J Crawford –
his article on:
‘Foreign State Immunities Act’ –
which I will come to. It is volume 10, tab 110. So, here we
have the Commission acutely aware of awards sought to be enforced against
foreign States using the NYC as their mechanism. There is a discussion of how
this was dealt with in the United States provision
and then how it was dealt
with in the United Kingdom provision. The Commission saw a problem in the
United Kingdom provision because
it simply conferred a jurisdiction using the
language – see over the page:
‘which relate to the arbitration’ –
The Commission thought that left ambiguity. So, the question had to be
dealt with directly as to:
whether a foreign state should be regarded as not immune from proceedings for
the registration or recognition . . . in all cases whatever,
only those cases in which it would not have been immune had the dispute itself
been brought before the courts –
The Commission then looked at
a view which it ultimately rejected at 106, which it calls:
The Wider View
. . . On one view, a foreign state in
agreeing to arbitrate should be taken to have waived its immunity from
enforcement of any resulting
award against it, at least in the courts of the
forum of the arbitration, but arguably anywhere in the world –
This comes back to what I was putting to
your Honour Justice Edelman. And footnote 76 says
Mr Feldman of the American Bar Association
put the strongest version of
The argument from implied waiver has been adopted in some United States
And then there are some examples in
footnote 77:
supported by the International Law Commission’s Special Rapporteur:
Once a State agrees in a written instrument to submit disputes which have
arisen or may arise between it and other private parties
to a transaction, there
is an irresistible implication, if not an almost irrebuttable presumption, that
it has waived its jurisdictional
immunity in relation to all pertinent questions
arising out of the arbitral process, from its initiation, judicial confirmation
enforcement –
So, this is the strongest view that is put on implied waiver as of the
early 1980s in international law. Immediately observe, even
strongest view, an essential element of the implied waiver is a written
agreement, not someone who claims there might be an
agreement. Then the view of
the Commission is that this view of waiver can be accepted:
As far as the supervisory jurisdiction . . . is
concerned . . . The argument also has force so far as enforcement
in the forum of
the arbitration is concerned –
That is the argument identified earlier, the narrower approach,
the inference is much less strong so far as enforcement of foreign awards is
concerned: agreement to arbitrate under the law of one
state can hardly be
taken as a waiver of foreign state immunity in any other state where enforcement
of the award may be sought,
whatever differences in the law of foreign state
immunity there may be in that state . . . it is better to treat
this as a question
of principle rather than as one of submission.
Commission, with the deepest of thought on this problem, first of all is not
even contemplating a possibility where anything less
than an actual agreement to
arbitrate will be a necessary step for the waiver. That is enough to defeat the
appellant’s case,
but secondly, he is saying that even an agreement to
arbitrate does not clearly and unmistakably convey consent to give up your
when you are sued in any State of the world other than the State which
has supervisory jurisdiction over the arbitration. There
is a lack of
sufficient clarity. For all those reasons, the Commission in 107
it is too much to say that a foreign state which agrees to arbitrate a
dispute waives its immunity from jurisdiction to enforce the
resulting award
throughout the world. A foreign state is competent to waive its
immunity . . . In the absence of express submission
defensible view is that the local courts should only be able to enforce an award
against a foreign state if, had the underlying
dispute been brought before the
courts for resolution, the foreign state would not have been immune.
if your Honours compare that then to the statute in volume 1 at
Foreign States Immunities Act
section 17(1)
implements the recommendation at paragraph 104, and
section 17(2)
implements the recommendation at paragraph 107, and to
make out the arbitration exception, you need to have the two
Taking them in reverse order, you need to prove that the
foreign State was a party to an agreement to submit to arbitration of a
arbitrate – consistent with everything I have
shown you from the
United States jurisprudence – but in addition, you must prove
that the foreign State would not have been
immune in a preceding in the court
concerning the underlying transaction or event.
are not submitting that
is effectively a carve‑out from
MR GLEESON:
It is not a
carve‑out, but when your Honours read them together what should be
clear is that the kind of clear and unmistakable
agreement that
was requiring is the sort we are advancing. Namely, there will have to be an
agreement to arbitrate. There is no agreement to arbitrate,
there is no waiver.
Possibly, although there could have been a provision
in the New York Convention that expressly said: by entry into this
Convention,
a State will waive its immunity to enforcement anywhere in the
MR GLEESON:
Yes, and if it had those final words
your Honour has said, “anywhere in the world”, then that would
answer the description
under this provision. So, it is not a carve‑out,
but it is just treating it as a deliberately constructed scheme. If you
accurately described how the Australian scheme works as
This will allow the enforcement of awards arising out of commercial
transactions, or of other transactions of the foreign state over
courts would have had jurisdiction. Private parties seeking the enforceability
of foreign awards in a wider category of
cases are of course free to stipulate
to that effect in the agreement to arbitrate.
your Honour’s point, with respect:
Foreign states cannot convincingly object, in view of the widespread
acceptance of international commercial arbitration and of the
Convention of 1958, if a foreign arbitral award is enforced in this way.
So, the NYC is treated by the Commission as a background treaty which
is capable of having impacts upon your FSI if two elements are
Firstly, you have an actual agreement to arbitrate. Secondly, you have
sufficiently explicit language in that agreement of
your Honour Justice Edelman put to me. The very thing that is not
contemplated is that the argument put by the appellant
and supported by the
Commonwealth is either correct in international law or embodied in the statute
that followed the ALRC.
Your Honours, the article of Professor Crawford
that is referred to by the Commission is found in volume 10 at
tab 110. It is an
important article for this part of the case I am on, and
it is also relevant to the scope question that we will come to last. Professor
Crawford expresses it in footnote 1 as his views are:
not necessarily those of the Commission.
Although, they perhaps
merged. What he does at page 81 and following is recognise the distinction
between public and private law
acts, which is picked up in the jurisprudence of
many States – particularly civilian States – and he is
recognising that
in some such States, arbitration is only permitted in respect
to disputes described as commercial or private law. It is regarded
as a public
policy that arbitration cannot get into matrimonial disputes or a range of other
So, he is dealing with that topic. What he then comes to at
page 3330 is whether in Australia the distinction between
acta iure gestionis
is sufficiently clear and workable
within a common law jurisdiction to become the basis for identifying where the
exceptions to foreign
State immunity come in. No doubt, as we know from the
final Act, that was not the distinction built into the Act as such.
then deals with the position of separate State instrumentalities on
page 3332, and then he comes to our problem of waiver at 3334
way through to 3340. At the bottom of 3334 he starts by explaining
why the question of waiver had become more rather than
less controversial in the
United States and goes through the difficulties which the waiver exception
had generated in the United
States at that point in time. At 3337,
explains how the waiver exception or the equivalent was creating significant
problems in
Europe and the United Kingdom in determining these
At the top of 3338, he says at that stage, in general,
arbitral awards were being enforced in the United States under the waiver
provision. That has now been overtaken by the subsequent arbitration exception.
He refers to some of the United States then‑authority,
which has been
overtaken by what you have seen. It says at the foot of 3338:
It is not clear whether the New York Convention was taken as an additional
form of waiver(as Judge Weinfeld seems to have assumed
or merely as consent to the exercise of subject matter jurisdiction, with the
waiver of sovereign immunity established by the consent
Your Honour Justice Gordon asked about whether the order
matters. You have to have the treaty, you have to have, we would say, the
agreement as a minimum. One of Professor Crawford’s insights was that,
conceptually, the treaty is probably being used as
the element in establishing
subject matter jurisdiction and the waiver is coming more from the agreement to
arbitrate. He says the
better view is the latter one – namely, that
the waiver is established by the consent to arbitrate – and the
a background matter which goes to subject matter jurisdiction. Then
But whether –
it is regarded:
as waiving sovereign immunity or objections to subject-matter jurisdiction,
the Convention is by no means clear or unproblematic in
its application to
States parties to arbitral awards.
He then refers to the language of Article I(1) that is before you
On its face it is not clear that States or state instrumentalities (as
distinct from separate state trading corporations) are covered
by the term
“persons, whether physical or legal”.
So, at this point he is
dealing with what we would call notice of contention 2, or the scope issue.
A common lawyer might well deny this, but in fact the
Convention give a degree of support to its application to States and State
instrumentalities.
So, there is very great doubt about what was the true
consensus that the parties were coming to in the travaux. He then refers to
some delegates thought that the term “persons”:
included “corporate bodies under public law, and particularly States,
in their capacity as entities having rights and duties
under private law”,
and the Drafting Committee only rejected a specific amendment to this
effect because it “was of the
“superfluous”:
This was an unfortunate omission –
Well, that is the
prescient statement by Professor Crawford. So, the whole of notice of
contention 2 arises because, although the
delegates were gravely troubled
providing additional
clarity to the word “person”.
Professor Crawford then says:
if the term “persons” in Article 1(1) includes States, then
it would seem to include them in whatever capacity (at least
beyond private law matters).
So, if you took the word
“person” without qualification, you would end with a conclusion
beyond even where the appellant
is and beyond where we are but perhaps where the
Commonwealth is, that “persons” include States. States are always
Their awards are always within the scope of
Article I(1).
Not necessarily, if the clear
presupposition was that it was persons only insofar as it is not a
State‑State dispute.
MR GLEESON:
And that is the issue
between on notice of contention 2: what is the implicit carve‑out
that must be recognised? If I might
just complete this, your Honours, he
It also follows that the Convention applies to arbitral awards between States
(where international law is not the proper law), despite
the fact that this was
not intended by the draftsmen of the Convention.
Now, that is what
his Honour relied upon against us on the scope question. Once you read
footnote 39, Professor Crawford says –
and this is a binary
If States are regarded as “persons” within Art 1(1) there is
no textual basis in the Convention for denying its application
to private law
arbitrations between States.
And so on, so I refer to that, but just to
questions of sovereign immunity from enforcement awards were deliberately not
dealt with –
by ICSID, and then over the page:
A further difficulty with reliance on the Convention is that on this
interpretation it requires enforcement of foreign awards involving
third States,
irrespective of whether the third State is itself a party to the Convention. It
follows that the Convention cannot
be interpreted as waiving sovereign immunity
with respect to enforcement, since it would then violate the
pacta tertiis
Footnote 42. So, Professor Crawford’s ultimate
conclusion is where I started this afternoon. The Article III promise on
preferable construction does not involve any waiver of sovereign immunity.
That is true as against third party States, as against
contracting States, and
if your Honours could read footnote 42, this is Professor
Crawford’s binary result. Either we win
on notice of contention 3,
or we win on notice of contention 2, but what we do not do is lose on both
BEECH-JONES J:
Mr Gleeson, my Latin is pretty
poor, what is the pacta tertiis rule?
MR GLEESON:
that parties to a treaty cannot, merely by their contract, affect the rights of
persons who are not parties to the treaty.
He is there alluding to the
point – to our Tuvalu and Nauru example; they are not parties to the
New York Convention.
No proposition is acceptable that you read
Article III as eliminating foreign State immunity rights, because Australia
has obligations
to Tuvalu and Nauru. Australia cannot, by agreement
with 167 States, violate those rights. Is that a convenient time
your Honours?
GAGELER CJ:
It is. The Court will adjourn
until 10.00 am tomorrow.
AT 4.17 PM THE MATTER WAS
UNTIL WEDNESDAY, 5 NOVEMBER 2025
RTF format (1.69 MB)
Signed PDF/A format