Twardowski & Twardowski (No 2) [2025] FedCFamC1F 557 (20 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
& Twardowski (No 2)
[2025] FedCFamC1F 557
File number(s):
CAC 1969 of 2016
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– Where the parties require the court to settle a joint letter of
instruction to be provided
to the single expert – Where the parties each
provide proposed letters of instruction for the court to consider – Where
the joint instructions to be provided to the single expert are settled by the
court and made an exhibit to the reasons for judgment
– Where the settled
instructions address the key issues only.
Legislation:
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia
(Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) r 7.10
Cases cited:
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR 705
Twardowski & Twardowski
[2018] FamCAFC 153
Twardowski & Twardowski
[2025] FedCFamC1F 542
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Ms Neilan of Neilan Stramandinoli Family Law
Solicitor for the First Respondent:
Ms Tresise of Baxter Warne Legal
For the Second Respondent:
The Second Respondent appeared in person
CAC 1969 of 2016
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
MS TWARDOWSKI
MR A TWARDOWSKI
MR B TWARDOWSKI
Second Respondent
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
48 hours of these orders and reasons for judgment being made available, the
applicant’s solicitor is to provide Ms L
with the settled instructions as
at Exhibit 1 of the reasons for judgment delivered 20 August 2025, copying the
first respondent’s
solicitor and the second respondent into that
communication.
be reserved.
Application in a Proceeding filed 30 May 2025 be otherwise dismissed.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under the pseudonym
Twardowski & Twardowski
has been approved pursuant to
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
reasons relate to a dispute between the parties as to the letter of instruction
to be provided to the single expert, Ms L (“the
expert”). The
selection of the expert was previously in dispute between the parties and that
was resolved by way of orders
made by me on 15 August 2025 (
Twardowski &
[2025] FedCFamC1F 542).
The relevant background to the dispute is
addressed in paragraphs 1 to 13 of those reasons for judgment.
expert is to be engaged to provide expert evidence as to aspects of Country K
Law, particularly with respect to the resolution
of disputes between married
parties. Prior to the wife commencing proceedings in Australia, the husband had
commenced proceedings
in Country K in 2016 – each seeking relief following
upon the breakdown of their marriage. The orders made (in the resolution
appeal) on 19 July 2018, stayed the Australian proceedings until further
& Twardowski
[2018] FamCAFC 153
explains that:
wife’s appeal against his Honour’s orders was heard on 19 July 2018
and following submissions from both counsel for
the wife and counsel for the
husband, the husband conceded that given the errors of law that attended the
primary judge’s orders,
the appeal must succeed and the primary
judge’s orders be set aside.
parties were able to agree on orders which stayed the wife’s Australian
proceedings pending the resolution of the [Country
K] proceedings
further agreed on various injunctions to preserve and protect the Australian
aspect of the case. The second respondent appeared
for himself but made no
submissions on the appeal. He was, however, party to the discussions about the
orders and consented to their
making. He sought no order for a costs
certificate.
(Emphasis added)
circumstances where a judgment was delivered and final orders were made in the
Country K proceedings on 4 January 2024, the wife
now seeks to discharge
the stay. There is dispute about whether the Country K proceedings have
“resolved” such that
the basis of the stay has been removed. That
dispute (about the status of the Country K proceedings) founds the basis for the
for expert evidence about certain aspects of Country K Law.
is set out in paragraphs 2 and 32 of
Twardowski & Twardowski
FedCFamC1F 542
, orders had been made on 9 December 2024 (“the December
orders”) which provide that in the event the parties could not
draft joint letter of instruction, “then each party is to send a separate
letter of facts to the Single Expert within
two (2) days of having been
selected”. It would appear that the parties agree that such an option is
not sufficient to ensure
that the expert is properly instructed.
her Application in a Proceeding filed on 30 May 2025 (“the
application”), the wife seeks orders to the effect that
the court settle
the disputed joint letter of instruction (which draft letter she makes an
exhibit to the application) and that within
48 hours of receipt of the finalised
letter from the court, the wife will send the letter to the expert (copying in
the husband’s
husband, in his Response to an Application in a Proceeding filed 13 June 2025
(“the response”), seeks orders that
the parties engage in “an
informal mediation to agree on the questions to be put to the expert, with the
scope defined by Registrar
Buttriss”. That approach was not embraced by
I reason at paragraph 34 of
Twardowski & Twardowski
[2025] FedCFamC1F
, I am reluctant to impose upon the parties any additional processes that may
cause further delay. The prospects of such a mediation,
informal or otherwise,
resulting in agreement between the parties, must be assessed as remote, given
the history in this matter.
Thereafter,
the husband’s proposed orders in the response, set out the steps which he
says ought to be ordered, which include
the court settling any part of the joint
letter of instruction remaining in dispute and the lawyers then taking a series
of stipulated
steps to have the letter and specific documents sent to the
expert. The disputed joint letter produced by the husband (and attached
affidavit) is different to that produced by the wife, but the areas of
difference were not immediately identified or made
did not have one document within which there was identified parts the subject of
dispute and which made clear those additions which
were supported or opposed by
each party. The prospect of undertaking an assessment of the two proposed
letters without additional
guidance from the parties created risk that the
product would be deficient for the intended purpose, potentially for each party.
range of matters about which they each sought the input of the expert, as
expressed in their respective draft letters, were broad
and differed from the
summary of matters to be addressed as noted in the December orders.
THE FURTHER LISTING
matter was listed again at my request, to enable the parties a further
opportunity to make submissions to explain the matters
which were agreed, and
which were not agreed, in each draft letter, and the bases for the inclusion or
deletion in each instance.
key issues, about which the provision of expert evidence was sought, relates to
uncertainty regarding:
(a) The outcome of certain proceedings in a court in City D, Country K, between
the parties (being the orders made, and judgment
delivered on 4 January 2024)
and the meaning of certain aspects of the judgment;
(b) The nature and import of subsequent steps taken by each of the parties in
those proceedings including separate appeals as to
parts of the orders made; and
(c) The nature and import of subsequent steps taken by the husband in commencing
another proceeding in a different court in Country
note that this summary of key issues is consistent with the approach proposed by
Senior Judicial Registrar Buttriss in the December
orders and Notations F, G and
H to those orders.
process of settling the instructions has also been complicated by the differing
approaches taken by the parties to seeking information
entered by the parties in 2005 (“the Deed”) in Country K. That Deed
appears to regulate the
ownership of property by the parties. The operation of
the Deed and its possible significance in the proceedings in Country K were
matters about which the parties obtained expert evidence previously and which
were considered by the primary judge (and to the extent
the subject of ground of
appeal, by the Full Court).
remained some dispute between the parties, prior to the relisting on 15 August
2025, about the extent to which the expert should
be directed to comment upon
the meaning and effect of the Deed. The husband sought that this occur, and
this was opposed by the
were other broader questions which the wife proposed to be put to the expert,
including about the operation of Country K Law
with respect to property owned by
the parties, or in which they had an interest, located in Australia. That
approach was not agreed
by the husband.
CONSIDERATION
the eve of the further listing, each party provided to Chambers their revised
draft letter (or letters) which they proposed be
sent to the expert. The
revised and proposed draft letter of the wife, dated 8 July 2025, was made
Exhibit 16.
husband provided two revised proposed draft letters. The first, being his
preferred draft letter, was made Exhibit 17, and his
second, described as his
alternative letter, was made Exhibit 18.
reviewed the draft letters prepared and provided by the wife and by the husband,
I have settled instructions for the expert
and that document is Exhibit 1 to
these reasons for judgment. I have addressed only the key issues relating to
the Country K proceedings.
If the parties wish to explore other matters with
the expert, those matters would need to the subject of agreement between the
or one or the other party may elect to seek permission to rely upon an
adversarial expert report, in accordance with r 7.10 of the
Federal Circuit
and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) (“the
Judicial Registrar Buttriss ordered that the parties could each provide the
expert with their own statement of facts. Neither
party has sought to discharge
that order and each of the draft letters of instruction suggests that such
documents will be provided
to the expert.
instructions, as settled by me, have directed the inquiry to assist in properly
understanding what is occurring, or has occurred,
in the various Country K
proceedings. I have included reference to the Deed, to the extent of ensuring
that the expert is aware
of the existence of that document and the obligations
of the parties consequently. The parties previously obtained expert evidence
seek to ask this expert different questions about the
Deed, will be a matter for
them to progress. The evidence before me at this time does not persuade me that
this expert should be
asked to comment upon those matters at this time
(especially where such is not an agreed inquiry).
settled instructions at Exhibit 1 otherwise represents a combination of the
letters preferred by each of the parties with some
uniformity of language
applied and some matters omitted (in light of the matters addressed previously).
The parties remain at liberty
to expand the information requested of the expert,
as agreed between them.
draft letter prepared on behalf of the wife sought the expert’s opinion
in Country K, including those
brought in the District Court of Town M, Country K. The husband’s draft
letters did not refer
to these proceedings. I have included reference to those
proceedings as sought by the wife, as doing so will ensure that the court
the parties have an understanding of the nature and status of all of the
proceedings between them.
I have determined that the expert should have the pleadings filed by each party
in each set of the proceedings and the
various determinations/rulings in each
set of proceedings. Where the parties are securing expert evidence about the
nature of the
proceedings in Country K, it is essential that the expert is
given the material that the parties have each relied upon, to ensure
has all necessary information. I otherwise do not have sufficient information
to determine the relevance or otherwise
of documents filed in, or pronouncements
issued by, the applicable courts and thus adopt an inclusionary approach.
have included among documents to be provided to the expert, the Deed, along with
the other deeds entered into between the parties
with respect (it appears) to
the acquisition of property in Country K. Again, it is important that the
expert is aware of these
deeds and can assess the extent to which any of the
determinations in the proceedings have been influenced by, or take into account,
the existence of, and obligations created by, the various deeds.
wife proposed that the expert should also have the earlier legal opinions
obtained by the parties. That does not appear to be
agreed by the husband. I
decline to do so in circumstances where the documents or things to which the
expert has regard in the preparation
of her opinion, need to be capable of
admission in these proceedings, or else the foundations of the opinion may be
undermined (see
Makita (Australia) Pty Ltd v Sprowles
[2001] NSWCA 305
(2001) 52 NSWLR
this time, I do not know the extent to which either of the parties may seek to
rely upon those earlier reports (Mr N is a deponent
of two affidavits which were
relied upon in the Australian proceedings previously, but I do not know at this
time if either party
will seek to rely upon that evidence again, or if the
authors of the other two opinions will be witnesses in the proceedings). In
event that either party, after the expert has completed her report, wishes to
ask questions of the expert (which questions may
be informed by these other
opinions), there are processes available under the Rules which permit that to
December orders provide that the parties may each provide the expert with their
own statement of facts. The most recent draft
letters provided on behalf of the
parties suggest that those documents will be provided separately. I have
included that phrasing
as sought by both parties.
party sought different orders about the process of having the settled
instructions provided to the expert. The wife proposed
that within 48 hours of
receipt of the settled letter (“signed by an officer of the court”),
the letter and documents
would be sent by her lawyers to the expert. The
husband sought orders that would allow three business days, from receipt of the
settled letter, for each of the lawyers to sign the settled letter of
instruction. He then proposes that within a further three
business days, from
receipt of the letter signed by his lawyers, that the wife’s lawyers will
then send the letter and stipulated
documents to the expert. That regime may
see up to six additional business days passing before the expert receives the
instructions
and letter.
settled instructions at Exhibit 1 should be provided to the expert promptly.
The orders proposed by the wife appear to provide
the most direct pathway about
that process. I will make orders that largely adopt those procedures, save that
the document now settled
by me, will not be signed by a court officer. That
additional step is not necessary given that the instructions as settled by me
now an exhibit to these reasons for judgment. In addition, it is not clear why
the parties need to sign the letter to the expert,
given the orders provide for
her appointment and for the matters to be addressed by her. The document which
is now Exhibit 1 can
be provided to the expert, by the solicitors for the wife,
on the basis that they also copy the solicitors for the husband (and copy
second respondent) into those communications.
expert may be provided a copy of the order made relating to her appointment and
the orders being made this day.
party sought orders as to costs. I have reserved that issue to the further
I certify that the preceding thirty-three (33)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
TWARDOWSKI & TWARDOWSKI – AUSTRALIAN FAMILY LAW
We refer to family law proceedings (for property settlement)
currently before the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division
(“the FCFCOA”). The Applicant Wife is Ms Twardowski (“the
wife”), represented by Ms Anna Neilan of Neilan
Stramandinoli Family Law.
The First Respondent Husband is Mr A Twardowski (“the husband”),
represented by Ms Deborah
Tresise of Baxter Warne Legal. The Second
Respondent, Mr B Twardowski, is self-represented.
This is a joint
communication to you, the contents of which have been settled by orders made by
the FCFCOA.
Expert Opinion
You have been appointed
a single expert to assist the husband and the wife (and the Court) pursuant to
orders made in the Federal
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Division 1) by
the Honourable Justice Simpson on 15 August 2025. A copy of those orders is
. The terms of our instructions to you have also been settled by
way of determination of the FCFCOA. We
a copy of orders made on
20 August 2025.
You have been appointed as the single expert witness in
the parties’ proceedings pursuant to Division 7.1.2 of the
Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(“the Rules”). Please find
a copy of Divisions
7.1.4, 7.1.5 and 7.1.6 of the Rules for your review and information.
confirm that your Report is intended for use in the proceedings between the
parties in the FCFCOA. It is possible that in due
course, one or both of the
parties may require you for cross examination in those proceedings. In that
event, there will be further
communication with you about those
Would you kindly disclose any conflict of interest, including
any personal or familiar relationships with any of the parties or their
(as applicable).
Please ensure that your Report includes:
qualifications.
underlying reasons for each of your opinions.
citations of any Country K legislation and/or any reference material used, if
any, in providing the basis for your opinion.
relevant facts, matters and assumptions on which your opinions as expressed in
your Report are based.
facts in the Report that are within your expert field of knowledge; and
necessary, your disclosure that:
(a) A particular question or issue falls outside your expertise; or
(b) The Report may be incomplete or inaccurate without some qualification and
the details of any qualification; or
(c) Your opinion is not a concluded opinion because further research or data is
required or because of any other reason.
The Parties seek an Expert opinion concerning
the following proceedings and the operation of Country K law:
(a) Proceedings in the Regional Court of City D, Country K
file...2016
(b) Proceedings in the District Court of Town M, Country K
file...2016.
(c) Appeal proceedings filed in the Regional Court City D, Country K
file...2024
(d) Proceedings in the District Court in Town M, Country K,
File...2024
You are requested to provide written answers to
the following questions. For each of your responses, would you please advise
reasons, including reference to any relevant statutory provisions and case
law authorities:
respect to each of the separate proceedings listed above, please
(a) What was the relevant/applicable statute regulating each of the
applications?
(b) What was the nature of the relief being sought by each of the applicant and
respondent (and for other parties, if applicable)?
(c) What is the present status of each of the proceedings?
(d) For proceedings which have not concluded, what is the current stage of the
matter and what is the applicable case management
pathway for each of the
ongoing matters?
(e) Is there a time limit which applies to the lodgement of any appeal from
determinations made relating to financial relief following
the breakdown of a
(f) For proceedings in which the division of property has been sought, what
property has been particularised as being available for/subject
determination of the court?
refer to the proceedings before the Regional Court City D, Civil and Family
(Case file...2016)
(a) These proceedings concern an application for divorce, alimony, care of minor
child (who is no longer a minor child) and division
of marital property filed by
the husband in 2016.
(b) The wife filed a response and sought different orders to the husband.
(c) The Court made a determination in 2024 and delivered reasons for judgment
(“judgment”).
(d) The Court’s determination is subject to appeals lodged by both the
husband and the Wife.
(i) Is the abovementioned time to judgment within usual expectations for
hearings of this nature, in that particular court?
(ii) Were there any factors in the pre-trial case management of the matter which
may have influenced or added to delay before final
(iii) Was the Deed (as referenced further below) in evidence in those
proceedings?
(iv) To what extent, if any, has the Deed been considered by the court?
(v) To what extent, if any, did either the husband or the wife seek relief with
respect to property owned by a party/the parties
in Australia?
(vi) We refer to the judgment and reference to the husband’s application
for the division of matrimonial property. You will
note the statement
In view of the fact that carrying out the division of matrimonial
property could cause an
undue delay in the proceedings
, the court, on the
wording of Article 58 δ 3 of the Family and Guardianship Code a contrario,
left the application without consideration
” (emphasis added). What is
the meaning of that statement and in particular, the reference to the Family and
Guardianship Code?
(vii) What is the meaning of
a contrario
in that context?
(viii) In practical terms, what does this mean for a party seeking to finalise
the division of marital property?
refer to the proceedings currently before the District Court of Town M, Country
Case file...2016
(and to the extent not otherwise addressed by you in
response to Question 1 above):
(a) What is the nature of these proceedings?
(b) What is the relief sought by each party?
(c) What is the status of the proceedings?
refer to the proceedings currently before the Court of Appeal, City D
file...2024)
(a) The husband and the wife have filed separate appeals to the decision of the
Regional Court of City D Case file...2016, delivered
in on 4 January 2024.
Proceedings are continuing.
(i) What is the nature of the appeal brought by each
party (that is, which orders are being appealed by each party and what relief
they each seek)?
(ii) What are the case management steps required to advance the appeal?
(iii) What are the grounds for appeal (and what is asserted by each party)?
(iv) To what extent, if any, has either party sought to raise issues or
otherwise assert error as to how the Court at first instance
dealt (or did not
deal) with property in Australia?
(v) What is the process for determination of the appeal – is it a hearing
de novo or consideration of error or are there other
matters which may be
considered?
(vi) What is the case management pathway for the hearing of the appeal/s?
(vii) What is the likely timeframe for the hearing of the appeal/s?
(viii) Does the appellate court have the power to replace the original judgment
with their own decision (re-exercise of the decision-making
process) or must the
matter (if the appeal is successful) be remitted to the lower court for
(ix) If the matter is remitted to the lower court, will the matter be given any
priority on the re-hearing?
(x) What is the likely timeframe for the re-hearing of the matter (noting the
matter took around 7 years from commencement to delivery
of reasons)?
(xi) In practical terms, what do these Appeal proceedings mean for the
enforcement of the Orders of the Regional Court (Case file...2016)
of 4 January
(xii) Will the appeals be consolidated and heard at the same time?
(xiii) In this regard, do you consider that the Regional Court (Case
file...2016) proceedings have ‘finalised’ or ‘concluded’
(and please provide your explanation re use of the terms)?
(xiv) If something more is required for the
proceedings to be finalised or concluded, please advise the nature of the
additional steps/further
action required?
refer to the Husband’s application filed in 2024 in Town M District Court
Case file...2024
(a) Following the judgment of the Regional Court of City D (Case file...2016)
the husband commenced the new cause of action (Case
file...2024).
(b) Was the Husband eligible to apply for the division of the parties’
marital property in that court (noting in particular
the appeal he had by that
time, brought with respect to proceedings Case file...2016)?
(c) What is the nature of the court in which these more recent proceedings have
been commenced by the husband (as is, is it the same
which the earlier proceedings had occurred and exercising the same
(d) Has the husband in the new proceedings disclosed the existence of the
earlier proceedings in City D and that there are appeals
on foot? If that has
not occurred, is the disclosure of those earlier proceedings and the extant
appeal proceedings necessary?
(e) Is there an issue estoppel/cause of action estoppel/other estoppel that may
apply to these proceedings?
(f) Is the husband’s application for marital property division filed in
the District Court of Town M more akin to an appeal
from the judgment of the
Regional Court of City D (in Case file...2016)? Why?
Statement of Facts
We note that under orders made in the
FCFCOA, each of the parties are at liberty to provide to you a statement of
facts. The parties
will provide their document to you in separate
correspondence.
Documents Provided
Court City D Case file...2016:
1.1. Application
filed by the Husband on 1 September 2016.
1.2. Minute of
Court Trial dated 28 May 2018.
1.3. Response to
a Petitioner’s letter in a divorce case filed on behalf of the Wife on 3
October 2016.
1.4. Petitioner’s
Letter filed by the Husband on 4 October 2016.
1.5. Written
statement of claim of defence filed on behalf of the Wife on 24 October
1.6. Letter to
Court filed on behalf of the Husband dated 27 February 2017 requesting that
Application for the division of gained
property be excluded from
proceedings.
1.7. Objection
to the Husband’s Application of 27 February 2017 filed by the Wife on 13
March 2017.
1.8. Letter
filed on behalf of the Wife on 17 March 2017.
1.9. Response to
a Petitioner’s letter in a divorce lawsuit filed on behalf of the Wife on
27 March 2017.
1.10. Minute of
Court transcript of 26 April 2023; and
1.11. Court
Orders and Reasons/Judgment dated 4 January 2024.
Court in Town M Case file...2016
2.1. Application
filed by the Husband on 28 November 2016.
2.2. Answer to
the Defence – Amendment of Statement of Claim filed by the Husband’s
solicitor on 28 November 2016.
2.3. Response
filed by the Wife on 3 January 2017.
2.4. Pleading of
the Husband filed 24 January 2017.
Decision dated 13 February 2017, dismissing the Husband’s Application.
2.6. Husband’s
further Application filed 7 March 2017 requesting a reconsideration of the
Court’s decision; and
2.7. Reasons/Judgment.
of Appeal, City D Case file...2024
3.1. Appeal to
the Reasons/Judgment filed by Husband on
27 March 2024; and
3.2. Appeal to
the Reasons/Judgment filed by the Wife on 27 March
Court of Town M Case file...2024
4.1. Application
for distribution of marital property filed by the Husband on 29 March 2024.
4.2. Response
by Wife filed 11 December 2024; and
4.3. Wife’s
petition to the Town M Court on 4 July 2025.
proceedings (background)
5.1. Orders of
the Full Court of the Family Court of Australia (as it then was) dated 19 July
5.2. Judgment of
the Full Court of the Family Court of Australia (as it then was) dated 10 August
documents (background)
6.1. Notarial
Deed entered into by the Parties in 2005 (“the Deed”).
6.2. Notarial
Deed of Village O, Country K land purchase (in Country K only).
6.3. Notarial
Deed of P Street, Town Q, Country K real estate purchase (in Country K only);
6.4. Notarial
Deed of R Street, District S, Country K real estate purchase (in Country K
Statutory Provisions
Please consider the
Family and Guardianship Code
Civil Procedure
and relevant Court Authorities that may be applicable for
this matter. To the extent that other statute applies to these matters
the questions asked of you, please advise.
Costs for Production of
Your Report
The husband and wife have agreed to share equally all
costs of your opinion/Report, including all associated certified translations.
Please issue your tax invoice addressed to each of the husband and wife, care of
their respective solicitor (that is, direct 50%
of the fee to each of the
solicitors for the parties).
Further information and/or
If you require any further documents or information we ask
that such requests are made to both parties jointly in writing.
Timing of your Report
Please provide your estimated time
for completion of your Report.
RTF format (480 KB)
Signed PDF/A format