Quill & Quill (No. 2) [2021] FamCA 627 (31 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Quill & Quill (No. 2)
[2021] FamCA
File number(s):
MLC 6573 of 2010
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– Review of a Senior Registrar’s decision – Hearing de novo
– Interim Application
by husband to adduce single expert evidence from a
forensic accountant – Application dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Consult Solicitors
Counsel for the Respondent:
Mr Dixon Q.C.
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Coote Family Lawyers
MLC 6573 of 2010
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The husband's Application in the Case dated 23 August to 2021 seeking a
review of the orders of Senior Registrar Hoult of 18 August
2. Pursuant to
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) it was
reasonable to engage counsel to attend.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Quill & Quill
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
Application
1 Before me is an
application in the case filed by the husband, Mr Quill, seeking to review the
decision of Senior Registrar Hoult
of 18 August 2021. Pursuant to the
such application proceeds by
way of hearing de novo.
2 After discussions with counsel, the only issue remaining from my
determination is the husband's application for liberty to adduce
evidence from a
forensic accountant, Mr KK, by way of expert report in respect of the
husband’s substantive application, currently
listed for trial on 27
September 2021, and seeking orders under
s 79A(1)(a)
Family Law Act
5 (Cth) (‘the Act’) to set aside the final property orders
made by consent between the parties on 21 July 2010. Both
the substantive and
interlocutory applications are opposed by the wife, Ms Quill.
RELEVANT BACKGROUND
3 The husband is 77 years of age and the wife is 62
4 They married in 1979 and separated in 2000. A divorce was granted in
5 The parties entered into final consent orders as to property settlement on
21 July 2010. Both parties were represented at that
time. The limited evidence
before the Court suggests that the parties were then of some considerable
wealth. They owned a number
of the parcels of real property. They operated a
farming partnership, ‘DD Company'. The consent orders provided, as is
for the parties to continue to operate to the partnership despite the
of the Act. It also seems agreed that the husband remained in
occupation of a property which fell to the wife under the consent
that he paid rent at least until 2020.
6 On 29 January 2021 the wife filed an application in this Court effectively
seeking enforcement of a number of the orders from 2010.
7 On 1 February 2021 the husband filed an application seeking orders under
of the Act. The applications became came before McMillan J on 16 February
2021 whereupon the matter was bifurcated to allow preliminary
hearing of the
application which was then listed for trial for three days
duration commencing 1 June 2021.
8 Broadly speaking, in respect of his substantive application, the husband
s 79A(1)(a)
that there has been a miscarriage of justice and
that the parties conduct gave rise to an explicit or implied consent that the
parties vary the orders and specifically that the wife
was to hold certain
assets coming to her under the consent orders on trust for the husband and
apparently so as to avoid scrutiny
by a potentially litigious creditor of the
9 Trial material appears to have been filed in anticipation of the trial to
commence 1 June 2021. The husband filed his trial affidavit
10 Nevertheless, on 22 April 2021 the husband filed an application in a case
seeking to rely on the single expert valuations of:
(i) Mr B – real estate
(ii) Mr GG – building experts; and
(iii) Mr KK – forensic
accountant.
11 Queens Counsel for the wife now before me submits, and I accept, that at
that stage the husband had obtained substantive reports
from Mr B, but not from
either Mr GG or Mr KK.
12 The husband's interlocutory application came before Hartnett J for hearing
on 10 May 2021. Her Honour gave judgement on 14 July
2021 ordering inter alia
that the husband have liberty to rely on expert evidence of the Mr B, but
dismissing the application in
respect of the each of Mr GG and Mr KK.
13 No appeal was lodged in respect of the determination of the Hartnett J.
Quite obviously, the trial date of 1 June 2021 was vacated
and the matter was
allocated for trial before me on 27 September 2021.
14 On 12 August 2021, some six weeks prior to the second allocated trial date
and some month following Her Honours determination,
the husband filed a second
application in a case seeking orders inter alia that the husband have liberty
'to rely on expert evidence of Mr KK
(i) as to whether the methodology adopted by Ms Q in
preparing 3 versions of the summary of the parties’ financial
circumstances
in about June 2010 was sound;
(ii) in respect of the retrospective valuation (as at 21 July 2010) of the
assets the subject of the applicant husband's application
under is 79A.
15 The Application also sought an extension of time to file Mr B's evidence
permitted by Her Honour’s orders of 14 July 2021.
Senior Registrar Hoult
extended time for Mr B's evidence to 1 September 2021 and otherwise dismissed
the application.
16 To his credit, Counsel for the husband concedes that the application
coming before me is 'unusual and, not without its difficulties’
circumstances where arguably Hartnett J has determined this issue and where no
appeal has been lodged. Counsel, however, does
argue that there is 'new'
evidence not agitated before Her Honour on 10 May 2021 and which (arguably) was
not available to the husband
at that time. In any event, no preliminary
argument is mounted before me as to whether or not I should do proceed to hear
this application
for review.
17 Relevantly, it is inherent in this application that should it succeed then
the trial of the matter currently listed for 27 September
2021 be further
adjourned with counsel for the husband anticipating that the matter would then
be ready for trial 'around December'.
This submission and application, of
course, presumes available judicial resources and court time in December which,
again with the
appropriate concession by counsel for the husband, may be
unreasonably presumptuous.
Application – Mr KK
18 The essence of the argument in respect of Mr KK
is that it is both
to the husband’s
substantive case that Mr KK be permitted to provide evidence of the 'real value'
of the parties' property
pool as of the time of making the consent orders in in
19 Indeed, counsel argues that Hartnett J effectively created a precedent
permitting such evidence of
'real value’
in giving liberty for the
husband to adduce evidence from the real estate valuer, Mr B. Counsel refers me
to and relies upon a decision
of the Full Court in
where their Honours,
similarly dealing with an application under
s 79A(i)(a)
of the Act, considered
retrospective valuations appropriate or necessary to determine the
of the assets as at the time of the original orders. Accordingly,
counsel for the husband argues that the proposed evidence of Mr
KK 'is necessary
and relevant' to the miscarriage of justice ground in
s 79A(i)(a)
as likely to
be of strong probative value.
20 The argument before me was therefore in these general terms of Mr KK being
able to provide:
(i) retrospective valuations of
the assets;
(ii) to show 'real value as at the year date of the 2010 consent orders; and
(iii) that such evidence is both
21 Specifically, the focus of the submissions before me is the evidence of
three iterations of financial summaries of balance sheets
prepared for the
parties by their then joint accountant, Ms Q, in June 2010, which the husband
says formed the basis of the alteration
of their property by reason of the
consent orders. The husband argues some form of financial manipulation
evidenced by these summaries.
22 Significantly, at [16] of the husband's counsel’s written
submissions there is an admission that such material was available
and disclosed
prior to the hearing before Hartnett J. Counsel for the husband says, however,
that this evidence is now 'new' because
such was as an exhibit to the wife's 42
page affidavit of 4 May 2021 filed in the substantive proceedings being only a
days prior to the hearing before Her Honour on 10 May 2021. Counsel
claims that neither the husband nor his legal representatives
had read the
wife's trial affidavit prior to the interlocutory hearing before Hartnett J and
hence it is 'new' material.
23 Specifically, on the submissions of his counsel, the husband proposes to
adduce evidence from Mr KK in respect of the following:
(i) the methodology of Ms Q with
reference to her three iterations of a balance sheet;
(ii) the inclusion of the actual or potential capital gains tax liability;
(iii) the inclusion and transfer to the husband pursuant to the consent orders
of the right to pursue and recover a debt to a Mr
(iv) the value attributed to the assets of the ‘N Trust’.
24 The husband relies on his affidavit of 12 August 2021 where he deposes
that his own education and background do not allow him to
provide such expert
Mr KK himself sworn 12 August
2021 setting out the following at [8]-[9]:
[8] I agree with the statement made by [the wife] in
paragraphs 31 – 32 of the Affidavit that the Family Court Application
appears to have been based on the values adopted by Ms Q in the third version of
the Financial Summary.
[9] The Financial Summaries purport to:
(a) value each of the family assets and
entities belonging to [the husband] and [the wife’s] as at July 2010.
(b) set out Ms Q's proposal for the division of assets between [the husband]
and [the wife] for the purposes of the Family Court
Application.
25 Whilst counsel for the husband, properly in my view, concedes that the
evidence in the 'Ms Q
Summaries' is not necessarily under
the cover of ‘new evidence' but simply evidence available but not read by
the husband's
legal practitioners prior to the hearing before Hartnett J, he
argues that the interests of justice and the Court having the best
evidence are
overriding and that the application should be permitted and despite the
inevitable loss of the trial date of 27 September
26 The fundamental and general submission of Queens Counsel for the wife,
opposing the application, is that the evidence of the Mr
KK is neither necessary
nor relevant to the
27 Firstly, and in respect of the Application now before me, the wife argues
that the material is not 'new' to that considered by
Justice Hartnett.
Significantly, there was no application to re – open before Her Honour and
despite Her Honour's judgment
being reserved between 10 May and 14 July 2021.
As mentioned above, there has been no appeal in respect of Her Honours judgment
and these matters are relevant, in my view, in respect of the potential delay in
the judicial process weighed against the 'necessary'
and 'relevant' argument of
the husband.
28 Specifically, however, the generalised argument before me obfuscates the
issues of direct 'relevance' and ‘necessity'. Firstly,
and importantly,
the assets of the parties in 2010 comprised almost entirely of real property
including the assets of the N Trust.
Her Honour has already acceded to the
application to adduce evidence from the real estate valuer for retrospective
valuations.
This is not a field of Mr KK expertise.
29 Secondly, I accept the submission of Queens Counsel for that the wife that
there is no 'necessity' for expert evidence in respect
of Ms Q's 'methodology'
and her apparent preparing of three summaries. It is conceded by Mr KK himself
that Ms Q relies on the third
summary. Ultimately this issue is one for the
Court and Mr KK would not give evidence but simply critique as to the soundness
the process. Again, the orders made in the 2010 were by consent and where
each of the parties was the represented. Mr KK own affidavit
at [8] states that
the Financial Summary prepared by Ms Q is ‘based on values’. The
values relates primarily to real
estate. These have been attended to by Mr B
and Mr KK can offer no further evidence.
30 Similarly, the inclusion by Ms Q of an actual or potential capital gains
tax liability is a matter for consideration for the Court
and not comment by Mr
31 Further, counsel for the husband submits, and it is conceded that there
are no ‘enterprises’ of the parties other than
the partnership. The
husband retained an ‘asset’ or chose-in-action by reason of the
consent orders being the right
to recover a debt from a Mr NN. The husband
himself can give evidence as to the nature of the debt and its recoverability.
such as the prospects of the recovery and the like are not properly the
subject of such expert opinion and as anticipated from Mr
32 In conclusion, therefore, I am not persuaded that
there is either necessity or relevance within the context of this
application for expert forensic accounting evidence from Mr KK. The assets
essentially comprise of real property now the subject
of expert historical
valuations by Mr B and issues as to the inclusion of a capital gains tax
liability and/or the recoverability
of the Mr NN debt are matters of fact for
the Court assisted by relevant to authorities.
33 Given this determination, I need comment no further on the delays in this
matter and the submissions by Queens Counsel for the
wife as to any motivation
of this application. Again, it was not argued that I should not hear the
application and I have not done
so. The application will be dismissed. The
matter will remain listed for trial to commence 27 September 2021.
I certify that the preceding thirty-three (33) numbered paragraphs are a
true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the Honourable Justice
Dated: 31 August 2021
Family Law Rules 2004
[2007] FamCA
Rosati v Rosati
(1998) FLC 92–804.
RTF format (377 KB)
Signed PDF/A format