Allied Pumps Pty Ltd v UON Pty Ltd [2025] APO 33 (7 October 2025)
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Allied Pumps
Pty Ltd v UON Pty Ltd
[2025] APO 33
Patent Application: 2022271455
Title: Control of submersible pumps powered via renewable energy
Patent Applicant: UON Pty Ltd
Opponent: Allied Pumps Pty Ltd
Delegate: Neil Miller
Decision Date: 7 October 2025
Hearing Date: 12 February 2025, via Videoconference
Catchwords:
– Section 59 – opposition to grant of
a patent – grounds of Novelty, Inventive Step – submersible pumps
hybrid power system – renewable energy – selective
engagement – variable speed device – setpoint control
predetermined levels available power – claims are novel and inventive
– opposition unsuccessful – costs
Representation: Counsel for the applicant: Mr
Andrew Fox SC
Patent attorney for the applicant: Mr Barry Newman, Armour IP
Patent attorney for the opponent: Mr Alistair Mann, Mann IP
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Patent Application: 2022271455
Title: Control of submersible pumps powered via renewable energy
Patent Applicant: UON Pty Ltd
Date of Decision: 7 October 2025
The opposition is unsuccessful. I consider the invention
so far as claimed to be novel and to involve an inventive step.
to appeal, I direct that the application proceeds to grant.
I award costs according to Schedule 8 against Allied Pumps Pty Ltd.
REASONS FOR DECISION
patent application 2022271455 (“
the application
”) in the name
of UON Pty Ltd (“
the applicant
”) was filed on 17 November
2022. The application claims priority from Australian provisional application
no 2021903705 with
a priority date of 17 November 2021. The application was
advertised as accepted on 16 March 2023.
Pumps Pty Ltd (“
the opponent
”) filed a notice of opposition
on 15 June 2023. A Statement of Grounds and Particulars (“the
”) was subsequently filed on 15 September 2023. Evidence in
”) was filed by the opponent on 15 December
2023. The EIS consisted of a statutory declaration by Emlyn Williams dated 14
2023 with supporting exhibits EW-A to EW-K (“
applicant filed their Evidence in Answer (“
”) on 18 March
2024. The EIA consisted of:
A declaration by
Pavalan Jeeva dated 18 March 2024 accompanied by exhibits PJ-1 to PJ-13
A declaration by
James (Jim) Waterreus dated 15 March 2024 accompanied by exhibit JW-1
in Reply (“
”) was filed by the opponent on 17 May 2024.
This evidence consisted of a further declaration by Emlyn Williams dated 17 May
2024 with supporting exhibit EW-A. The filing of the EIR drew the formal
evidentiary stages of the proceedings to a close.
opponent filed a written summary of submissions (“
written submissions
”) on 29 January 2025. The applicant filed their
written summary of submissions (“
applicant’s written
submissions
”) on 5 February 2025.
The invention as described
paragraph [0001] of the specification, it is stated that the invention relates
to submersible pumps used in dewatering applications
within the mining industry.
More specifically the invention relates to the powering of such pumps where some
of the power provided
to the pump is drawn from renewable energy sources. It is
also acknowledged at paragraph [0001] that the invention may find application
other industries such as the use of ground water in
agriculture.
information relating to the invention is then provided at paragraphs
[0002]-[0011]. At paragraph [0002] the general process
of dewatering in mining
operations is outlined, notably a bore is drilled, a submersible pump inserted
and water removed from the
bore to lower the surrounding water table to allow
mining operations to be conducted. Details of a type of submersible pump
in such applications is then provided at paragraph [0003], these being
centrifugal pumps driven by an AC induction motor or a synchronous
motors used in such application may vary in power between 7.5kW and 500kW and
may be operated at frequencies between
30Hz and 60Hz.
specification then discusses common arrangements for powering such pumps where
mains power is unavailable. Such arrangements
typically include the use of
petrol or diesel-powered generators (i.e. generators that utilise a combustion
engine to drive an alternator)
to produce the necessary AC supply. At
paragraphs [0005]-[0009] the specification discusses use of power systems which
incorporate
photovoltaic (PV) cells into their operations and the problems
associated with such system as follows:
Such systems are
capable of operating under either full generator power or full PV power, but not
both simultaneously;
frequently incapable of providing an uninterruptable power supply;
between full generator power or full PV power is often associated with a
temporary suspension in pumping operations;
insufficient, power generation by PV due to unfavourable atmospheric conditions.
specification then states at paragraph [0009] that it is common during
dewatering operations for such submersible pumps to maintain
a desired setpoint.
This has traditionally been achieved by the use of a Variable Speed Drive
). The VSD receives a constant voltage, constant frequency
alternating current (either from a fixed-speed generator or from an inverter
connected to a PV system), and outputs an alternating current at a voltage and
frequency required for the submersible pump to maintain
its setpoint.
Australian patent number 2021106106 is then referenced as an example of such
pumping arrangements. The specification
at paragraph [0010] references
Australian patent number 2021107164, which describes the use of a controllable
variable speed generator
to power a submersible pump that negates the need for a
summary of the invention is then provided at paragraphs [0012]-[0025]; the
summary is primarily composed of a number of consistory
statements which
generally correspond with the language utilised in the claims. There then
follows a brief description of the drawings.
The specification then proceeds to
discuss the preferred embodiments of the invention.
1 (reproduced below) is a schematic diagram of a system for providing power to a
submersible pump according to an embodiment
of the present invention. As shown
pump 12 is located in a water bore and is controlled to maintain a setpoint.
The setpoint being
taken from the set of bore level, water flow rate, or output
water pressure. Power is supplied to the pump either by a variable
generator 14 of the type described in Australian Patent application no.
2021107164, or via a VSD 16. The power to the pump
can be selectively switched
between the variable speed generator and the VSD by a pair of interlocked
switches 18 and 20. The interlocking
arrangement is such that when one switch
is open the other is closed, effectively toggling the power supplied from one
power source
to the other. As can be seen in Figure 1 switch 18 is open and
switch 20 is closed, thus the pump is being powered by the VSD 16.
system also includes a renewable energy system which includes a collector 22.
The collector per the embodiment of Figure 1 is
a photovoltaic (PV) array 22;
energy collected from the array is passed to a DC/DC converter 24. The
converter is coupled via a
DC bus 30 to a battery management system (BMS) 26,
batteries 28 and the VSD 16. Finally, the system includes a programable logic
controller (PLC) 32 that receives information regarding the output of the PV
array and the storage level of the BMS 26. The PLC
32 also receives information
from a number of sensors regarding bore level, water flow rate, and output water
pressure; i.e. information
relating to the setpoint to be maintained by the
system. Based on the information received, the PLC is configured to provide
signals to either the VSD or variable speed generator depending on the
operating mode of the system.
discussed in the application the system operates in one of three modes; these
are summarised as follows:
operating state
In this mode of operation the energy provided by the PV
array equals or exceeds that demanded by the VSD 16 to drive the pump(s).
PLC in this mode sends a signal to the VSD indicating the frequency and voltage
that is required to maintain the desired setpoint
for pump; the VSD then draws
power from the DC bus and converts it to the required AC level to maintain the
desired setpoint. Any
surplus electrical power produced by the array is
utilised to charge the batteries via the battery management system
Battery drawdown
operating state
This mode of operation occurs when the
power produced by the PV array is not sufficient to drive the pump at the
setpoint. In this
mode of operation, the PLC enables power produced by the PV
array to be supplemented by power from the battery to enable the VSD
to maintain
the required AC output. As the amount of power provided by the PV array
diminishes, an increasingly greater amount of
power is drawn down from the
battery up until the point where the power required by the VSD to drive the
pump(s) is fully supplied
by the batteries.
Generator-only
operating state
In this third operating state the variable speed
generator is operational, with output frequency and voltage produced by the
being controlled by the PLC to meet the requirements to maintain the
operation of the pump at the desired setpoint.
paragraphs [0048]-[0052] the specification discusses how the PLC switches
between the various operating states by operating switches
18 and 20 based on
various measured operating parameters. In short, the PLC maintains the system
in the PV mode or draw down mode
when the PV array produces sufficient power,
and the batteries are above a preset charge threshold e.g. 15% charge. When the
from the PV array is insufficient, and the batteries are below a preset
charge threshold, e.g. 10% charge, then the PLC switches
to generator mode by
opening switch 20 and closing switch 18.
the system depicted in Figure 1 it is appreciated that, in the PV-only state and
the battery drawn down state, switch 20 is closed
and switch 18 open such that
the variable speed generator is disconnected from the pump and other components
within the system.
That is, in the embodiment depicted in Figure 1, the DC side
of the system (composed of the PV array, DC/DC converter, batteries
and the BMS)
is isolated from the AC side (composed of the selected AC source e.g. mains
supply or variable speed generator) of the
system as the switching between the
AC supplies i.e. AC from the VSD or AC from the variable speed generator occurs
downstream of
the output of both the VSD and variable speed generator.
specification at paragraphs [0053]-[0054] then discuses a second embodiment of
the system with reference to Figure 2 (reproduced
below). The system discussed
in relation to Figure 2 is essentially the same as that discussed above with
respect to Figure 1 with
several differences. Firstly, the variable speed
generator of the second embodiment is coupled to the AC input of the VSD via
18. The DC supply system (PV array and battery system) is coupled to the
DC input of the VSD via switch 20. Thus, in the case of
figure 2 the point of
isolation between the DC and AC power sources is the VSD itself and selection of
the relevant power source
used to generate the supply to the pump occurs
upstream of the VSD.
detailed description then concludes with a discussion of Figures 3 and 4.
Figure 3 (reproduced below) is said to depict a traditional
arrangement for
coupling the DC power system to the submersible pump. The arrangement of Figure
3 includes a first stage of inverters
50 and 56 to convert DC from the PV array
or battery to an AC supply which is then fed to the VSD 16. The VSD 16 then
produces the
output AC signal via a series of inverters with the resultant AC
then supplied to the motor 12.
contrast Figure 4 (reproduced below) depicts the arrangement according to the
present invention. As can be seen the present invention
avoids the need for the
first stage of inverters and supplies a regulated DC voltage via a DC/DC
converter 24 directly to the VSD
The opposed claims
specification as accepted includes a total of 20 claims with claim 1 being the
only independent claim as follows:
1. A power and control
system arranged for powering a submersible pump or pumps, the system
a first source of electricity;
a renewable energy collector;
a variable speed drive (VSD) arranged to receive direct current from the
renewable energy collector and/or the battery, the VSD arranged
alternating current;
at least one sensor arranged to provide information regarding pump
operation and/or surrounding conditions including information about
at least one
measured parameter of pump operation and/or surrounding conditions; and
a system controller, the system controller being arranged to receive
information from the sensor, the system controller being arranged
information regarding a desired setpoint for the parameter measured by the
the system controller being arranged to direct electrical power to the
submersible pump(s),
the system controller arranged to determine available electrical power
from the renewable energy collector and from the battery,
the system controller arranged to selectively engage or disengage the
first source of electricity in response to predetermined levels
of available
wherein the system controller controls the voltage and frequency output by
the VSD based on a comparison between the received information
from the sensor
and the desired setpoint so as to maintain the parameter at the desired
2-10 define additional features relating to the form of the first electricity
source, the form of the renewable energy collector,
the various other components
in the system and the interconnection, system operating states, etc.
my initial review of claim 1, I did not perceive any idiosyncrasies or
inconsistency that would give rise to any significant issue
in understanding the
general ambit of the claim. However, the opponent noted several terms and
expressions in the claims that require
some scrutiny given the differing
opinions of the experts. I will address these issues later in this decision.
Onus and standard of proof
present application was filed after 15 April 2013. As such, the present
application is governed by the
Patents Act 1990
) as amended by the
Intellectual Property Laws
Amendment (Raising the Bar) Act
Raising the Bar
”). Amendments to Sections 7, 40 and 60 of the Act apply to
the present case as a consequence of Schedule 1, items 55(1)(d)
and 55(4)(a),
and Schedule 6, item 133(7)(d) of the
Raising the Bar Act
standard of proof that applies in the present case is the balance of
probabilities. Under subsection 60(3A), if I am satisfied,
on the balance of
probabilities, that a ground of opposition to the grant of a patent exists, I
may refuse the present application.
Nevertheless, it remains the case that, in
proceedings such as these before the Commissioner, the onus rests with the
opponent to
establish its case in reaching a conclusion on any
The nature of the opposition
the SGP the opponent listed the following grounds of
opposition:
s18(1)(b)(i)
– the invention as claimed lacks novelty; and
s18(1)(b)(ii)
– the invention as claimed does not comprise an inventive
written and oral submissions, the opponent sought to narrow their case in
respect of the ground of inventive step. Notably the
opponent did not seek to
press the issue that the claims lack an inventive step in light of the Common
General Knowledge (CGK) taken
alone or in combination with “Investment
analysis of solar energy in a hybrid diesel irrigation pumping system in New
Wales, Australia”, Powell et al, Journal of Cleaner Production (D4)
or “Economic analysis of PV/diesel hybrid system
with flywheel energy
storage”, Ramli et al, Renewable Energy (D5) (opponent’s submissions
at [6]). The opponent did,
however, point out that the Commissioner was still
entitled to take these grounds into account in determining the present
opposition.
Person skilled in the art
specification is to be construed through the eyes of the person skilled in the
art, being a notionally non-inventive skilled worker
aware of the CGK in the
relevant field. In
KD Kanopy Australasia Pty Ltd v Insta Image Pty Ltd
[2007] FCA 481
Kiefel J identified (at [16]) the person skilled in
a person acquainted with the surrounding circumstances of the
state of the art and manufacture at the relevant time...They are likely
a ‘practical interest in the subject matter of the invention’...and
may often work in the art with which the
invention is connected
Root Quality Pty Ltd v Root Control Technologies Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 980
9 IPR 225, Finkelstein J stated at [70]:
He is the person to whom the patent is addressed and who must
construe it. He is the person whose knowledge will determine whether
a patent is
novel. He is the person who will judge whether a patent is
AstraZeneca AB v Apotex Pty Ltd
[2015] HCA 30
(at [23]), the High Court
additionally noted that:
The notional person is not an avatar for expert witnesses whose
testimony is accepted by the court. It is a pale shadow of a real
a tool of analysis which guides the court in determining, by reference to expert
and other evidence, whether an invention
as claimed does not involve an
inventive step.
the face of the specification, there is little doubt that the notional PSA
includes a person with experience in the control of
submersible pumps such as
those used in dewatering applications. It also seems clear that the PSA would
require knowledge relating
to the powering of such pumps utilising a combination
of a renewable source (e.g. a solar and batteries system) and a non-renewable
source (e.g. generators).
both written and oral submissions, the opponent advanced that the relevant
skilled person is one who has an interest in making
or using systems for
powering and controlling electrically powered submersible pumps using multiple
power sources, including at least
one renewable source. The applicant accepted
this characterisation of the skilled person for the purposes of the opposition.
the skilled person as postulated by the opponent and applicant
substantially aligns with my understanding of the notional PSA as
parties did not seem to dispute the fact that the experts in this particular
case were reasonable facsimiles for the notional
PSA. However, in both written
and oral submissions the opponent did note that Mr Waterreus is an employee of
the applicant and is
a named inventor on the application and, as such, he could
not be said to be an independent expert. During oral submissions the
also called the impartiality of Mr Jeeva into question, noting that his CV
indicated that he had carried out dewatering
studies for the applicant.
applicant’s response to this was that Mr Waterreus was not being put
forward as an independent expert but as someone who
is skilled in the relevant
technical field. In relation to the suggestion that Mr Jeeva lacks impartiality
due a previous dealing
with the applicant, the applicant submitted that this was
incorrect and appeared to have been said for no other reason than to suggest
that there might be a problem with Mr Jeeva’s evidence. The applicant
also countered the attack on impartiality by pointing
to a number of concerns
they had regarding the manner in which Mr Williams was instructed. It was
seemingly intimated by the applicant
that the opponent’s expert may have
been led to several of his conclusions given the manner of his
instruction.
any event it is clear that there was general agreement between the parties that
all the expert witnesses are suitably qualified
to provide evidence concerning
the state of the art as at the relevant date. In my view any issues arising
from a question of impartiality
or the manner in which a particular witness was
instructed can be readily addressed by appropriate weighing of the evidence.
Construction
the rules of construction for an Australian patent specification are well
summarized in
Decor Corp v Dart Industries
[1988] FCA 399
the correct application of these rules to the construction of claims was
discussed by Bennett J in
H Lundbeck A/S v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
the words in a claim should be read through the eyes of the skilled
addressee in the context in which they appear...While the claims
monopoly claimed in the words of the patentee's choosing, the specification
should be read as a whole ... It is not permissible
to read into a claim an
additional integer or limitation to vary or qualify the claim by reference to
the body of the specification...terms
in the claim which are unclear may be
defined or clarified by reference to the body of the
specification
would also note what was said in
Eli Lilly and Company Limited v Apotex Pty
[2013] FCA 214
It is well settled that the Court should, from the outset, approach
the task of patent construction with a generous measure of common
Court must place itself in the position of a person skilled in the relevant art,
being the subject matter of the patent.
From this perspective, the patent is to
be read as a whole, in the context of the specification and in light of the
prevailing common
general knowledge and state of the relevant art at the
priority date
a plain reading of the claim, it is apparent that it is directed to a power and
control system for a submersible pump or pumps
whereby the electrical power
supplied to the pump is actively switched between a first energy source i.e.
mains power or backup generator
and a renewable energy collector and battery
renewable energy system
”) connected to the pump via a VSD.
The VSD receives the DC supply from the renewable energy system and outputs an
to the pump. The VSD in this instance is regulated by the controller
such that the AC outputted is sufficient to maintain the operation
of the pump
at a desired setpoint. The system is configured to switch between the energy
sources when the available power from the
renewable energy system meets certain
predetermined levels. As such I do not see any inherent difficultly in
interpreting claim
1, however, and as I have previous noted, there were several
phrases within the claim that the opponent sought to scrutinise. More
specifically, the opponent drew attention to the following phrases within claim
1 which in their view required further clarification:
electrical power”
available electrical power”
“predetermined
levels of available power”
direct electrical
written submissions, the opponent advanced that claim 1 does not provide any
antecedent for the term “electrical power”.
The opponent also
argued that the claim was satisfied when electrical power originates from the
VSD or the first source of electricity;
however, the claim was not limited to
these specific sources. This point was further reenforced during oral
submissions where the
opponent noted that the claim wording is very general, and
it does not specify where the power comes from. Following on from this
the opponent then noted that, ultimately, nothing in these proceeding turns on
the phrase “direct electrical power”.
Given the change in the
opponent’s position it does not seem necessary for me to analyse the
phrase in any significant detail.
It is worth noting, however, that I did not
take issue with the phrase. The issue perceived by the opponent seems only to
when the phrase is read in isolation. Reading the phrase in context it
is clear that the controller is configured to direct power
from one of the
available power sources to the pump to ensure its continued operation at the
desired setpoint. This operation being
elucidated by the remaining features
recited in the claim.
determine available electrical
oral submissions, the opponent sought to focus on an apparent disagreement in
the expert evidence concerning the interpretation
of this phrase. More
specifically, the opponent noted that the applicant’s position is that the
phrase calls for the controller
to measure levels of power, whereas in the
opponent’s view the phrase simply calls for a controller to determine if
any available power. However, after pressing this point the opponent
noted that, ultimately, it did not really matter whether the
quantifies power levels or not given the features recited in the remaining claim
integers. This sentiment is seemingly
echoed in the opponent’s written
submissions at [60] where they state that nothing turns on this point of
construction.
will admit I find this line of argument on the phrase “determining
available electrical power” perplexing, particularly
opponent’s view that it is of little consequence within the context of
these proceedings. On the whole this line
of argument seems to have been
offered up to highlight apparent conflicts in the expert evidence rather than
addressing any significant
issues of construction. In any event, the relevant
authorities have made it clear the task of construction is not one that falls
the experts; it is a matter for the courts or, in this instance, the relevant
decision maker.
a plain reading of the claim, I did not take issue with the phrase
“determine available electrical power”. The meaning
of the phrase
is readily apparent from the plain meaning of each of the terms. For example,
the term “determining” as
defined by the Macquarie Dictionary
Online, 2025, Macquarie Dictionary Publishers, an imprint of Pan Macmillan
Australia Pty Ltd,
https://www.macquariedictionary.com.au/
Macquarie Dictionary online”
) simply means “to
conclude or ascertain, as after reasoning or observation”, while the term
“available” per
the Macquarie Dictionary online means
“suitable or ready for use”. Thus, reading phrase as a whole, it
simply refers
to ascertaining the electrical power ready for use. As to what
does the ascertaining and the source of the power this made apparent
claim: nemely the controller determines the electrical power available from the
renewable energy collector and the battery
– that is, the electrical power
that can be drawn from the renewable energy system to power the pump.
predetermined levels of available power
arguments presented by the opponent simply sought to highlight the problems they
had perceived on their initial reading of the
phrase and how these were
subsequently resolved to arrive at a workable construction. From what I
understand, the argument that
was put to me at the hearing was that, on its
face, the phrase appears to lack clarity. More specifically, the opponent noted
the claim did not adequately define the predetermined levels.
Additionally, the identified phrase does not specify where the available
is coming from. These initial issues were, however, seemingly resolved by the
opponent utilising the general principles of
construction.
agree with the opponent that there is no strict antecedent basis for the phrase
“available power”. However, on consideration
the phrase simply
appears to be a reference to the available electrical power from the renewable
energy system recited in the previous
claim integers. Moreover, when the phrase
is read in context, the features recited directly before the phrase qualify that
the controller
is to engage or disengage the first source responsive to the
available power. When the first source is disengaged it provides no
the system. It therefore logically follows that the “available
power” used to instigate switching must be the
electrical power available
from the renewable energy system.
the term “predetermined levels”, I appreciate the opponent’s
point that no level or levels is specified
within the claim. However, as was
noted in the opponent’s written submission at paragraph [62.2], the word
“predetermined”
is an adjective that means “established or
decided in advance”. During oral submissions the applicant also advocated
for the adoption this meaning as it accords with the plain and ordinary meaning
of the term and there is nothing in the claim or
the specification as a whole to
indicate that some other meaning should be applied. I agree. The phrase should
be read plainly
in accordance with the general principles of construction. As
such, the term “predetermined” should be read as meaning
“established or decided in advance”. It is also important to note
here the use of the plural “levels” and
not the singular
“level” implies that more than one level is used in the
determination of when to engage or disengage
the first source. Consequently,
when I consider the phrase as a whole it denotes the setting in advance of two
or more levels (i.e.
thresholds values) that the available power is compared
against to enable the controller to determine when to disengage or engage
first power source.
above interpretation that two or more predetermined levels are utilised is in
line with the discussion in the specification at
paragraphs [0043]-[0052]. Here
it is noted that the system engages the AC source when the solar and battery
available power is below
a primary threshold. The AC source is then disengaged
when the available power from the solar array and battery is at or above a
secondary threshold.
moving on from construction, it is worth noting that the opponent in both
written and oral submissions advanced that the term
” used in claim 2, which defines that the submersible pump or
pumps of claim 1 are “used for dewatering purposes”,
interpreted more broadly to encompass removing groundwater or surface water
using a pump for any purpose, not just lowering
the water table. This was
because the invention was not limited to dewatering applications
with the specification contemplating usage of the invention in other industries
such as ground water irrigation for agriculture.
applicant’s rebuttal to this was that the term “dewatering”
involves the concept of draining water or otherwise
lowering the water table,
this being in line with the plain ordinary meaning. This interpretation was
also consistent with the interpretation
of the term by Downes J in
Pumps Pty Ltd v LAA Industries Pty Ltd
[2023] FCA 1457.
Consequently, the
term should be read plainly and not extended to include irrigation in general.
consideration of claim 2, I am of the view that the opponent’s position
that the term should be read broadly is untenable.
Claim 1 as it stands, is not
limited to the use of the control system to a particular application. Claim 1
as accepted encompasses
the types of applications identified by opponent. By
contrast, claim 2 seeks to narrow the application of the power and control
system to dewatering. Thus, a broad reading of “dewatering” in
claim 2 is at odds with the intent of the claim, which
is to clearly narrow the
field of use of the system of claim 1. Given this I am inclined to agree with
the applicant’s position
that the term should not be read broadly and
should be read plainly as meaning the use of the system to lower the water
is well established that the general test for lack of novelty is the reverse
infringement test. The classic formulation of this
test is that given by Aickin
Meyers Taylor Pty Ltd v Vicarr Industries Ltd
[1977] HCA 19
137 CLR 228
at page 235:
The basic test for anticipation or want of novelty is the same as
that for infringement and generally one can ask oneself whether
the alleged
anticipation would, if the patent were valid, constitute an
infringement
follows that if a citation discloses all the integers of the claim, the claim
will lack novelty. If the citation does not disclose
all the integers of the
claim, the claim will still lack novelty provided the citation discloses all the
essential integers of the
Nicaro Holdings v Martin Engineering
[1990] FCA 40
Catnic Components Ltd v Hill and Smith
(1982) RPC 183.
is noted that
General Tire & Rubber Company v The Firestone Tyre and
Rubber Company Limited
[1972] RPC 457
at 486 stated that:
If ... the prior publication contains a direction which is capable
of being carried out in a manner which would infringe the patentee’s
claim, but would be at least as likely to be carried out in a way which would
not do so, the patentee’s claim will not have
been anticipated, although
it may fail on the ground of obviousness
and that, in order to meet the test for anticipation, the prior art:
must contain clear and unmistakeable directions to do what the
patentee claims to have invented...A signpost, however clear, upon
the road to
the patentee’s invention will not suffice. The prior inventor must be
clearly shown to have planted his flag at
the precise destination before the
opponent advances that the invention as defined in claims 1-3, 6-8, 13 and 15
lacks novelty in view of the disclosure of WO 2021/094814
”). In oral submissions, the opponent’s case for
lack of novelty centred on the disclosure associated with Figure 4 of
the opponent’s view the embodiment shown in figure 4 of D1 discloses all
the relevant hardware components of claim
1. The remainder of the
opponent’s argument focused on the discussion of the speed mode and
solar/generator modes of operation
of D1. These modes, in the opponent’s
view, anticipate the functions of monitoring available power and the switching
available power sources when threshold criteria are met.
proceeding further with my consideration of D1 it is worth nothing that there
was some conjecture in both the written and oral
submissions concerning the size
of the pump utilised in D1. The applicant submitted that present application
concerns larger-power
or larger-scale pumping operations; i.e. dewatering
operations. They submitted that D1 does not disclose a pump which acts as a
submersible pump in the claimed sense or a pump of a similar size (per the
applicant’s submission at [56] and [58] and Waterreus
at [20]). I also
note that Mr Waterreus in his evidence discusses that the VSD of D1 is incapable
of operating at the power required,
so D1 cannot be said to anticipate the
a review of the specification of the application, the only mention of the sizing
of the pump occurs in the discussion of the background
art at paragraph [0003]
where it is stated that motor sizes between 7.5kW and 500kW are typically
utilised in dewatering applications.
Aside for this brief mention the
specification does not contain any further discussion relating to the sizing of
the pump motor.
Nor does the specification discuss the sizing of the VSD. When
I consider the claims as a whole they do not explicitly impose any
limitation on
the size of the pump utilised or the VSD utilised. Moreover, I have previously
noted claim 1 itself is not limited
to dewatering operations
Thus, the applicant’s point concerning the sizing of the pump and the VSD
are not material to the consideration of D1 as
it relates to claim 1.
Consideration of novelty
Consideration of D1
will firstly consider the arrangement disclosed in Figure 4 of D1 given it is
central to the opponent’s case before giving
further consideration of the
operating modes identified by the opponent. Figure 4 of D1 (reproduced below)
depicts a preferred embodiment
of the control system of D1. As shown, the
system includes an electronic control unit (ECU) 24 that controls a variable
device (VFD) 25 which supplies AC power to drive a submersible pump
system also includes number of energy sources namely a solar array 30, a battery
pack 39 and a generator set 33. The solar array
is arranged to feed DC power
directly to the VFD via cables 31, 32. The generator set is arranged to provide
AC power directly to
the VFD through cables 34, 35. The generator set is also
connected by cables 37, 38 to a charger 36 which is utilised to deliver
through cables 40,41 to the battery pack 36; i.e. the generator set is utilised
to charge the battery pack. As per the
arrangement of Figure 4, the battery
pack can supply DC power to the VFD. Alternatively, the battery pack can be
utilised to provide
AC to the VFD via the charger 36 and an inverter 42.
noted, the ECU adjusts the operation of the VFD to ensure that the output AC is
of sufficient level to drive the pump. In operation
the ECU continuously
monitors the voltage and current from the solar source and other system inputs
such as temperature, pressure,
and water level, etc via one or more sensors.
This information is then utilised by the ECU to perform the necessary
adjustments
of the output of the VFD. The adjustments made by the ECU primarily
depend on the operating mode of the system, which may be solar-only,
speed, eco,
or solar/generator.
speed mode is first discussed on page 3 of D1, where it is stated that this mode
ensures that 100% of the available solar DC power
is utilised at all times. The
operation of the speed mode is clarified on pages 9-10 of D1. More
specifically, D1 discloses that
in this mode of operation, the required pump
speed is defined by an external pressure measurement, with the pump speed being
adapted to maintain a constant pressure. In this mode the ECU
algorithm is primarily utilised to give priority to solar DC power,
only taking
additional power from the battery or AC source when there is a shortfall in
solar, i.e. solar power alone is insufficient
to drive the pump at the required
speed to maintain the desired pressure. D1 also states that in this arrangement
it is possible
to lower the pump speed provided constant pressure is maintained.
solar generator mode is discussed on pages 11-12 of D1. Under this mode the
generator set supplements the solar DC power when
it is not sufficient to run
the pump at the requested speed. To ensure the efficient use of the generator,
the ECU manages its load
by selectively engaging an additional load so that the
generator set operates within its specified operating tolerances around its
nominal power level. When the power required by the pump is below the specified
tolerance of the generator set, the ECU engages
the additional load, with the
generator set’s surplus power being passed to the additional load while
still suppling power
to the pump.
the example discussed in D1 the additional load is the battery pack, which is
charged with the surplus power from the generator
set. Once the batteries are
fully charged, the ECU stops the generator set and the power from the battery
pack provides the missing
power to the pump. The power provided by the battery
may be either DC or AC. DC power is provided by coupling the battery to the
supply from the solar array, and AC power is achieved by coupling the battery to
the AC side of the VSD via an inverter.
a reading of D1 the first question that springs to mind is whether the VFD of D1
anticipates to the VSD as claimed. Here I note
that the experts for both
parties seem content that the VFD of D1 equates to the VSD as claimed. More
specifically Mr Williams,
at paragraph [23] of Williams 1, states that a VSD
that outputs AC power on a variable voltage, variable frequency basis to control
an AC motor’s speed is often referred to as a VFD. This position is not
repudiated by the applicant’s experts. In fact,
Mr Waterreus, at
paragraph [20] of his declaration, opines that D1 utilises a small VSD which is
incapable of operating in the ranges
required by the instant application. What
seems to manifest from the evidence is that the terms “VSD” and
are utilised somewhat interchangeably in the art owing to the
fact that a VFD is a specific type of VSD as noted by Mr Williams.
this I am satisfied that the VFD of D1 reads onto the VSD as claimed.
the written and oral submissions from both parties there was some consternation
as to whether the ECU of D1 controls both the voltage
and frequency output by
the VSD. The opponent advances that when the output frequency of a VFD such as
that disclosed in D1 is varied
the voltage it applies to the motor is also
varied. In support of this the opponent drew attention to Williams 1 at
paragraph [22],
where Mr Williams states that the speed of an AC motor is
controlled by varying the frequency and voltage of the AC power supplying
motor. In general terms, decreasing or increasing the frequency applied to the
motor increases or decreases the speed of the
motor. Such an increase or
decrease in frequency invariably necessitates a change in the voltage to
maintain the voltage to frequency
ratio of the motor at the constant value.
Thus, the speed of any AC motor, including those used in electrically-powered
submersible
), is controlled by varying the
frequency and voltage of the AC power applied to motor.
the opponent’s position is that, in operation, the VFD of D1 inherently
varies both the output voltage and frequency
to maintain the required ratio for
the motor, as evidenced by the statements of Mr Williams (at [22] of Williams
1). The opponent
maintains that Mr Williams’ position is further
supported by the article entitled “
The ABCs (and 1-2-3s) of variable
frequency drives,
”) annexed to Williams 1 as exhibit EW-C, more
specifically the disclosure of the mode of operation at definition [36] of
both written and oral argument, the applicant advanced that the VFD of D1
operates at a constant voltage. In support of this position
the applicant drew
my attention to page 6 lines 10-18 of D1 where D1 discloses that the VFD
converts the DC from the solar array
to AC voltage i.e. a constant voltage.
Thus, on the applicant’s reading of D1 a constant voltage is supplied by
the VSD, and
there is no instruction to vary the voltage. During oral
submissions the applicant noted that it may well be said that a VSD in
can vary the output voltage, however, there is no disclosure in D1 that the
output voltage of the VSD is in fact varied.
Consequently, D1 fails to provide
clear and unmistakable directions to vary both the voltage and frequency applied
to the motor
from the VSD. Despite the applicant’s position, I note that
neither of the applicant’s experts seem to repudiate the
statements of Mr
Williams regarding the operation of the VSD of D1 as discussed above.
consideration of D1, I agree with the applicant that there is no literal
disclosure in D1 that the output voltage from the VFD
is varied. However, I am
cognisant that less than a literal disclosure can act as an anticipation
provided there is sufficient directions
in the prior art for a skilled addressee
to identify the claimed invention and to put it into practice (per
Holdings v Martin Engineering
[1990] FCA 40
at page 563). When I consider the
disclosure of D1 at page 6 line 10-18, I do not agree that passage cited by the
applicant stands
for the general proposition that the output voltage of the VFD
is held constant.
is nothing in the passage to suggest that the applied voltage is held constant.
Equally, there nothing in the identified passage
that suggests that the applied
voltage is fact varied. All that D1 states at page 6 line 10-18 is that the VFD
is able to adapt
the input DC to provide an AC output according to the motor
expected voltage. Examples of expected AC voltages are then provided,
being two 3 phase voltages typically utilised in Europe: 3x 230V or 3 x 400V .
The referenced passage of D1 then states that
the VFD can address different
voltages according to the requirements of different electric motors. Thus, all
I take from the cited
passage is that the VFD is capable of supplying the motor
with the specified nominal operating voltage.
noted above, the opponent submits that the system of D1, when operating in one
of the speed and solar/generator modes, performs
the same operations as recited
in claim 1. As discussed above the solar/generator mode is concerned with the
management of the load
applied to the generator set to ensure that it operated
efficiently. Thus, this particular mode of operation is not directly concerned
with the regulation of the AC signal output from the VFD. Rather, the
solar/generator mode is more concerned with ensuring that
the input voltage to
the VFD is of a sufficient level to enable the VFD to produce the necessary AC
output to drive the pump.
speed mode the voltage supplied to the VFD is managed by the APC algorithm which
prioritises the solar power, and takes any short
fall in required power from the
AC provided by the generator set to maintain the input voltage supplied to the
VFD. Additionally,
the speed of the pump is defined by an external factor. In
the example discussed in D1 the external factor is a pressure measurement.
noted in D1 it is possible in the speed mode to operate the pump at a lower
speed provided the required pressure is maintained.
While not presented by
either party, it is a well-established fact that, for any AC induction motor
is a function of the frequency
number of motor poles
given by following motor equation:
in order to reduce the motor speed it is necessary to lower the frequency of the
AC applied to the motor. Both parties agree
that a reducing in the frequency
applied to the pump results in a change in the . What is disputed is whether
such a lowering of
frequency also necessitates a change in the voltage of AC
supplied to the motor. As already noted, in speed mode the system of D1
to maintain a set pressure. In hydraulic systems the pressure is directly
proportional to the torque (i.e. output torque of
the pump). It is also a
well-established fact that for an AC motor the output torque T is given by
where k is a constant, I is the rotor current, φ
angle between rotor emf and rotor current and φ the motor flux.
can be seen from the above equation the output torque of an AC motor is
proportional to the motor flux
. The motor flux is defined by the
following function where
is the input voltage and F the applied
and K is a constant:
It is the above equation that underpins the operation of the mode discussed
in the Amick reference.
the motor speed is reduced by lowering the frequency of the supplied AC and the
voltage is held constant, for example, as the applicant
submits, at
(i.e. nominal operating voltage of the motor), then the motor flux
increases resulting in a change in output torque. As noted above
the pressure
is directly proportional to the output torque. Consequently, a change in torque
leads to a change in the pressure.
Accordingly, if, as advanced by the
applicant, voltage is held constant then the system of D1 would not maintain the
set pressure
at the reduced frequency and speed.
order for the system of D1 to maintain a constant pressure the output torque
must be held constant. To achieve a constant torque
the motor flux must remain
constant and, as can be seen from the basic AC motor equations, the only way in
which the motor flux can
be maintained as a constant is for the value of to
remain constant. Therefore, if frequency is reduced the voltage must also
reduced. Thus, given the basic characteristic of AC motors, it would be
apparent to the skilled addressee that, if the VFD of
D1 reduces the frequency
to reduce the speed of the pump, that must also reduce the applied voltage to
ensure constant flux, torque
and thus pressure.
Additionally,
it would also be apparent to the skilled addressee that holding voltage constant
while varying the frequency of the
AC applied to the motor is detrimental to its
operation. As the frequency is decreased, the flux increases, which leads to
saturation of the motor and potential burn out. Conversely, holding
frequency constant and lowering the voltage applied would also
render the motor
not fit for purpose, as this would minimise flux and reduce the torque to a
point where it was insufficient to drive
the load. It is therefore necessary to
maintain a balance between the voltage and frequency applied to the motor to
ensure that
the flux is at a level that ensures that motor operates within it
specified tolerances.
Considering
the above and weighing the evidence before me, I am inclined to agree with the
opponent that operating in speed mode the
VFD would vary the applied voltage to
the pump motor proportionally to the frequency. This would be readily
understood by the skilled
addressee given the inherent characteristics of AC
motors and the requirement of D1 to maintain a constant pressure while operating
the pump at reduced speed.
the above, in my view D1 discloses the following elements of claim 1: a first
source of electricity (AC source being a generator
set 33 or other AC source
e.g. mains supply), a renewable energy collector (solar array 30), and a battery
(battery pack 39). D1
further discloses the use of at least one sensor arranged
to provide information about a measured parameter of pump operation and/or
surrounding conditions and a controller that controls a variable frequency
device to adapt the speed of the pump to meet an externally
measured parameter
e.g. pressure. D1 also discloses a VSD in the form of a VFD, the VFD is
configured to receive DC directly from
the solar supply and output an AC supply
to drive the pump. In D1 the voltage and frequency output by the VSD is
controlled by the
ECU to maintain a constant pressure (i.e. maintain a setpoint)
based on the received information from the sensor.
both written and oral submissions there was some disagreement between the
parties as to whether D1 disclosures the features of
determining the available
electrical power from the renewable energy collector and battery and selectively
engaging or disengaging
the first source of electricity in response to
predetermined levels of available power.
opponent submits that such functionality is provided in D1. In this regard the
opponent noted the findings of Mr Williams regarding
D1 as articulated at
Williams 1 paragraphs [138]-[140] and Williams 2 at [39] which support this
view. The opponent also noted that
the applicant’s experts opine
(Waterreus at paras [23]-[24] and Jeeva at [28]) that the system of D1 does not
measure available
power, but did not refer to any specific information in D1 to
support their conclusion. The opponent notes that Mr Jeeva simply
states that
he thoroughly reviewed D1 and confirms that it does not measure available power.
The opponent notes that the refence
made by Mr Waterreus to page 15 line 18 of
D1 relates to startup sequence in the Eco mode and does not support the view
that D1 fails
to monitor available power from the renewable energy collector and
the evidence of Mr Waterreus and Mr Jeeva, the applicant’s position is
clear. They submit that D1 fails to disclose determining
available electrical
power from the renewable energy collector and battery. The applicant also
submits that D1 fails to disclose
the engagement and disengagement of the first
power source in response to the predetermined level of available power. In both
and oral submissions, the applicant noted that the opponent proceeds on
the assumption that the predetermined level is taken to be
the level necessary
to power the ESP at the required speed. The applicant maintains that this does
not meet the definition of “predetermined
level”, as the required
speed may change even if the setpoint does not change. The applicant concludes
that it is impossible
for this level to be “predetermined”.
I look to Williams 1 at [138]-[140] the point that is made by Mr Williams is
simply that D1 determines if there is sufficient
solar power and, if not, it
engages the generator set to provide the missing power, or supplements the solar
power with power from
the battery pack. This operation, in Mr Williams’
view, necessitates that the system of D1 determines available electric power
from the renewable energy source and the battery. The manner in which the
determination is made is further elucidated by Mr Williams
at paragraph [39] of
Willimas 2 where he notes, with reference to D1 at page 8 lines 16-26, that the
ECU compares two DC voltages:
the voltage from the solar array, and a rectified
DC level produced by converting the AC from the generator set to a DC
opponent’s position is that Mr Williams’ evidence supports the view
that the ECU of D1 compares the available power
from the solar and battery to a
predetermined power level to determine when to engage or disengage the generator
set. It is this
functionality that the opponent seeks to equate to the step of
determining the available power electrical power from the renewable
collector and battery and selectively engaging or disengaging the first source
of electricity in response to predetermined
levels of available
I understand it, the opponent’s position is that the monitoring of the
input DC voltage by D1 equates to determining the
total available power from the
solar and the batteries. On consideration of D1 page 8 lines 16-26, it does
discloses comparing the
DC voltage, being voltage from the solar array, to the
AC rectified voltage. As such D1 discloses measuring/determining the available
electrical power provided by the solar array. This understanding is further
supported by discussion of the solar mode and discussion
concerning the I-V
curve of the solar array depicted in Figure 2 of D1. The identified passage
however does not directly discuss
measuring the available power from the
battery. In this regard D1 states at page 18 lines 17-19, that battery pack 39
can provide
DC directly to the VFD 25 through cables 41 and 47. As such, D1 can
be said to disclose that the batteries can be interconnected
in series with the
solar array. In this configuration the power applied to the VFD is from both
the solar array and the batteries.
Therefore, it could be argued that the DC
input measured by D1 in this configuration is the total available electrical
the renewable energy collector and battery and this measurement is
then used by the ECU to engage or disengage the generator set.
counter argument to the above is that the DC voltage applied to the VFD in the
“solar plus battery” configuration
is not a measure of the available
power from the solar array and the battery. This is the position advanced by
the applicant. More
specifically, as put by the applicant’s counsel
during oral submissions, the system of D1 looks to maximise the use of available
solar power, and the power that is utilised is the total solar power plus a
component of the power available (missing power) from
the battery.
Consequently, D1 does not measure the available power from both the solar array
and the battery.
note that D1 does clearly state that only missing power is provided by the
batteries. So, there appears to be some validity to
the view that the DC
voltage measured at the input of the VFD in D1 is not a measure of the available
power ready for use from the
solar and the batteries. Rather it is a measure of
the total solar power and a fraction or portion of the power available from the
battery. Additionally, the apparent lack of disclosure in D1 relating to
determining available battery power lends further support
to the view that D1
does not determine available power ready for use from the solar array and the
further review of D1 it is noted that the use of the battery to either
supplement the solar power, or as a standalone power source
to run the pump,
occurs when the battery is fully charged, with the generator set then being
engaged when the battery level is too
low. Thus, it is intimated in D1 that the
power level of the battery is monitored or determined in some way. However,
outside the
mention of the battery being fully charged or too low, D1 does not
discuss in any detail as to how it determines the charge level
on the battery or
for that matter what constitutes too low a level. When I look to circuits
depicted in figure 4 of D1 a reasonable
assumption to make is that the system of
D1 indirectly determines if the battery is too low based on the voltage at the
DC terminal
of the VFD. If it falls below the predetermined level when the
batteries are supplementing the DC from the solar array, then the
batteries are
at an insufficient level to provide the shortfall in power (i.e. battery to
low). It is noted that D1 does not contain
any explicit disclosure as to how
such a determination is made, however it is clear that D1 that it determines the
power of the solar
array and the battery to make sure these are sufficient to
allow the VSD to power the pump if not the AC generator is engaged to
supply. Thus, it is considered that the monitoring of the DC input from the
solar and the battery per D1 is per inherent
in the disclosure of D1 that a
determination of available electrical power is made.
remains the question of whether D1 engages and disengages the first source of
power (i.e. the generator set) based on predetermined
levels of available power.
In the case of D1 the ECU compares the DC voltage applied at the input of the
VFD against a DC value that
represents the nominal AC voltage supplied by the
first source (D1 page 8 lines 16-26). Thus, in D1 the ECU checks to see if the
input DC from the solar and battery is at or above the AC supply voltage if not
then it engages the AC supply. As I have noted above
“predetermined
levels of available power” denotes the setting in advance of two or more
levels (i.e. thresholds values)
that the available power is compared against to
enable the controller to determine when to disengage or engage the first power
This being exemplified in the specification at paragraphs [0043]-[0052]
where the AC source is engaged when the power available form
the solar and
battery is below a primary threshold and disengaged when the level of power from
the solar and batteries is at or above
a secondary threshold. D1 by contrast
operates on the basis of a predetermined condition namely the input DC is at or
above a set
level, it does not seemingly require the assessment are
predetermined levels as per the present application.
light of the above, D1 in my view does not provide the necessary level of detail
to anticipate the claim feature of the system
controller arranged to selectively
engage or disengage the first source of electricity in response to predetermined
levels of available
power. I am satisfied that claim 1 to be novel over the
disclosure of D1. It also follows that all other claims, by virtue of their
dependency on claim 1, are novel over D1.
Inventive Step
statutory basis for inventive step for this opposition is set out at s7(2) and
s7(3) of the
as it stood after commencement of the
Raising the Bar
, and is reproduced below:
(2) For the purposes of this Act, an invention is to be taken to involve
an inventive step when compared with the prior art base unless
the invention
would have been obvious to a person skilled in the relevant art in the light of
the common general knowledge as it
existed (whether in or out of the patent
area) before the priority date of the relevant claim, whether that knowledge is
separately or together with the information mentioned in subsection
(3) The information for the purposes of subsection (2) is:
(a) any single piece of prior art information; or
(b) a combination of any 2 or more pieces of prior art information that
the skilled person mentioned in subsection (2) could, before
the priority date
of the relevant claim, be reasonably expected to have combined.
question of obviousness has been extensively considered by the courts. Aickin J
Wellcome Foundation Ltd. v VR Laboratories (Aust) Pty. Ltd.
[1981] HCA 12
[1981] HCA 12
(1981) 148 CLR 262
Wellcome Foundation
The test is whether the hypothetical addressee faced with the same
problem would have taken as a matter of routine whatever steps
might have led
from the prior art to the invention, whether they be the steps of the inventor
Aktiebolaget Hassle v Alphapharm Pty Ltd
[2002] HCA 59
212 CLR 411
Aktiebolaget Hassle
, the High Court
accepted the approach taken in
Olin Mathieson Chemical Corporation v Biorex
Laboratories Ltd
[1970] RPC 157
at [187] where Graham J posed the
reformulated Cripps question:
Would the notional research group at the relevant date, in all the
circumstances, ... directly be led as a matter of course to try
[the claimed
combination] in the expectation that it might well produce a [useful or better
?” (emphasis in the original)
the relevant authorities have also made it clear that the question of
obviousness is a question of fact that is to be determined
by evidence.
the present case, the opponent argues that the invention as defined in claims
1-20 lacks an inventive step in light of any one
of the following documents
considered together with the CGK in the art as at the priority date:
AU 2021201656
AU 2021106106
Optimization and
Energy Management of Hybrid Photovoltaic-Diesel-Battery System to Pump and
Desalinate Water at Isolated Regions”,
Rezk et al (D6) and
Powered Pumping Irrigation solutions”, NSW Farmers (D7)
opponent also advances that the invention per claims 1-20 also lacks an
inventive step in light of the CGK in the art considered
together with the
information in any combination of two or more of documents D1, D2, D3, D6 and
Assessment of inventive step
common approach to determining inventive step is the problem-solution approach
Wellcome Foundation
. Once the problem has been formulated and the
CGK and the prior art base has been determined, the question of whether the
solution is obvious must be addressed.
am however mindful that the use of the problem solution approach needs to be
somewhat tempered. It is well established in patent
law that an invention need
not solve or address a particular problem. In such cases one must be cautious
in the use of the problem
solution approach. Moreover, the Full Bench of the
Federal Court in
AstraZeneca AB v Apotex Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 99
AstraZeneca
”) at [202]-[203], effectively stated
that when formulating the problem, it is not permissible to incorporate
information that
is not available to the person skilled in the art as either CGK
or information available under section 7(3).
The problem
being addressed
written submissions, the opponent does not expressly identify a problem or
problems addressed by the application. However, during
oral submissions, the
opponent noted that the application seemingly addresses four problems these
being as follows:
Typical systems
operate under either full generator power or full PV power, but not both
simultaneously;
Typical systems
are frequently incapable of providing an uninterruptable power supply;
situations where
constant pump operation is required the use of renewable energy sources has been
considered problematic; and
traditional PV
powered systems can only operate when there is sufficient solar radiation to
power the pump.
opponent then drew attention to the paragraph [0011] where it is stated that the
present invention seeks provide a system which
can incorporate a variable speed
generator alongside a renewable energy source.
fact that the opponent in their written submissions had not sought to articulate
a problem or problems addressed was a fact that
was not lost on the applicant.
As was observed by counsel for the applicant during oral submissions, the
opponent seemingly utilises
the problem solution approach but there has been no
proper articulation of the problem that is said to be addressed by the opposed
application prior to oral submissions. However, counsel for applicant argued
that the referenced problems are simply a mention of
common problems that arise
in such hybrid systems. Counsel for the applicant then submitted that there is
no statement within the
specification of particular a problem that was there to
be solved by the application and that there was no known problem to be solved
this particular invention.
is also worth noting here that during oral submissions the opponent acknowledged
that the problem solution approach was but one
approach to the assessment of
inventive step that had been articulated by the courts. In the present case the
opponent was not advocating
use of the problem solution approach as the
probative test for inventive step. The opponent noted that the reference to
in this case is made in relation to the combination of references.
tend to agree with the applicant that the problems as identified by the opponent
are simply issues that arise through the use of
pumping system which incorporate
renewable energy sources i.e. hybrid power systems for pumping. Each of the
identified issues speak
to one particular problem, namely that of reliability
i.e. how to ensure the hybrid system provides sufficient power to drive the
to maintain desired operation (e.g. maintain setpoint operation). In any event,
further consideration of the nature of the
problems being addressed is of little
benefit in these proceedings, given the opponent does not advocate for use of
the problem solution
approach in this instance and the applicant’s
position that no specific problem is addressed by the instant application.
The Common General Knowledge (CGK)
opponent at [69] of their submissions sets out what they considered to be the
agreed CGK as follows:
The internal
electromechanical configuration of ESPs (i.e., mechanical pump driven by AC
motor) and the use of ESPs for artificially
lifting water from wells;
Controlling an
ESP’s operating speed by varying the frequency and voltage of AC power
supplied to the ESP’s motor;
VSDs and their
use for controlling the speed of electric motors and associated driven loads,
including ESPs. This includes VSDs outputting
variable voltage, variable
frequency (VVVF) power to control an AC motor’s speed, also known in the
field as variable frequency
drives (VFDs), inverters, adjustable speed drives,
adjustable frequency drives or VVVF controllers;
The arrangement
and functioning of the rectifier, DC bus and inverter stages of a VSD and more
specifically that:
rectifier receives AC that is supplied to the VSD and converts the AC into
bus (also known as the “DC link”) carries the DC output by the
rectifier to the VSD’s inverter;
inverter transforms the DC received from the DC bus back into an AC signal at
the desired output voltage and frequency;
Configuring a
VSD to perform setpoint control in response to sensor inputs, including using
internal VSD controllers and external
controllers connected to a VSD;
Controlling an
ESP using a VSD to maintain a setpoint relating to the ESP, or to the
ESP’s operating environment, such as a
flow rate of fluid pumped by the
Powering a VSD
using mains power or AC output by an engine-generator (genset), and powering and
controlling an ESP using a VSD connected
to such power sources; and
Powering an ESP
by a VSD that receives power from multiple sources – including renewable
sources (e.g., solar power) and battery
power sources – and engaging and
disengaging the power sources such that continuous, uninterruptible power is
supplied by the
VSD to the ESP
opponent also submits that supplying DC directly to a VSD was CGK before the
priority date, and that the information relating
to the VSDs or VFDs per the
document also formed part of the CGK (opponent’s submissions
at [73]-[78]). In addition to this, the opponent also advanced
that electrical
components such as voltage regulators (DC/DC converters) for converting a
variable input DC voltage into a desired
output DC voltage, DC busses for
carrying DC between electrical components and uninterruptible power supplies
(UPS) formed part of
the CGK (opponent’s submissions at [79] and [81]).
Similarly, the opponent submitted that components such as engines, alternators,
generators, photovoltaic arrays/cells, wind turbines, sensors, system
controllers, electric buses, battery storage etc were also
well known in the
art. Finally, the opponent submits that the use of closed-loop control methods,
the use of the MPPT algorithm,
and methods for charging and monitoring batteries
were also well known in the art (opponent’s submissions at
[80]-[83]).
applicant agrees with the assessment of the CGK per paragraph [69] of the
opponent’s submissions but does not accept that
the method of powering and
controlling an ESP using a variable speed generator (VSG) was part of the CGK
existing before the priority
date (applicant’s submissions at [82]). In
this regard I note that the feature of the VSG is introduced in claim 4, whereas
claim 1 as it currently stands is not limited to the use of a
applicant also accepts (for the purposes of this opposition) that the use of VSD
devices with DC inputs having relatively low
voltage ratings, as used in small
scale pumping machinery, was CGK. However, the applicant submits that the use
of VSD devices with
DC inputs having voltage ratings sufficiently high for
dewatering purposes was not CGK, and that the evidence does not establish
to be the case (per Waterreus 1 at [15]). The applicant also noted that Mr
Williams opines that, at the priority date, coupling
high voltage DC to VSDs had
been utilised in high-powered uninterruptible power supply systems for large
data centres, industrial
facilities and critical loads, but submitted that this
assertion was unsupported, as no proper basis and no example of such a system
was given in his evidence. The applicant also noted that the evidence of Mr
Williams concerns a completely different field to that
of the claimed invention.
They submitted that this lent further weight to their position that the
connection of high voltage DC directly
to the DC input of a VSD was not CGK in
relevant authorities concerning CGK are clear; namely a piece of knowledge only
becomes CGK when it is generally known and assimilated
by the bulk of those who
are engaged in the particular art (
British Acoustic Films Ld v Nettlefold
Productions
(1936) 53 RPC 221
at page 250,
Ranbaxy Laboratories Limited v
AstraZeneca AB
(2013) FCA 368
Alphapharm Pty Ltd v H Lundbeck
(2008) FCA 559
Aktiebolaget Hassle
at [31], [55] and
[57]. It is appreciated that Mr Williams’s evidence does not establish
that that the connection of high
voltage DC to the input of a VSD was known in
the art. Mr Williams’s opinion also seemingly lends support to the views
Mr Waterreus that directly coupling high voltage DC to the input of the VSD
was not well known in the art. In any case, the evidence
presented in this
instance does not establish to the necessary level whether or not the provision
of high voltage DC to the DC input
of a VSD was CGK in the art. However, this
is somewhat tempered by the fact the claims are not expressly limited to the
of high voltage DC to the VSD
Consideration of inventive step
opponent contends that as claims 1-3, 6-8, 13 and 15 lack novelty in view of D1,
they also lack an inventive step. The remaining
claims, namely claims 4,5,
9-12, 14 and 16-20, are said to lack an inventive step in view of D1 when
considered together with the
CGK. The opponent also advances that claims 1-20
also lack an inventive step in light of each of D2, D3, D6 and D7 when
together with the CGK in the art.
applicant in response asserts that the PSA would not consider D1, D2, D3, D6 and
D7 as being relevant and, as a consequence, a
skilled worker at the priority
date would not be (reasonably) expected to consider any of the documents in
question to be of assistance
in developing a system of the kind claimed in the
opposed application. The applicant also took issue with the manner in which the
opponent sought to assess the question of inventive step. More specifically,
the applicant noted that the opponent appeared to adopt
a differentiation
analysis whereby they seek to identify points of difference between the claimed
invention and the citation and
then ask whether such points of differentiation
would be obvious to the PSA. In the applicant’s opinion, this approach is
more akin to an innovative step assessment made under s7(4). Consequently, the
opponent’s approach was said to be an incorrect
starting point for the
obviousness analysis, is liable to mislead and encourages a flawed analysis of
the requisite statutory question.
respect to the question of relevance brought up by the applicant, as I have
previously noted the specification and claims are
not strictly limited to
dewatering as advanced by the applicant. The specification contemplates other
uses for the system outside
of dewatering, e.g. use of ground water in
agriculture. Likewise, claim 1 as currently presented is not restricted to
; it is directed to a power control system suitable for
controlling a submersible pump that utilises a hybrid power system. D1-D3,
and D7 generally relate to control systems and methods for the control of AC
motors and/or pumps across various applications including
irrigation,
desalination, etc. Thus, the references relied upon by the opponent are in the
same general technical field as the
application and, as such, clearly fall
within the prior art base for the purposes of s7(3) of the Act.
relation to the applicant’s points as to the opponent’s approach to
the assessment inventive step, is not uncommon
to see an analysis of where or
how a citation differs from the claimed invention. Such an approach is not
necessarily at odds with
the general premise that the appropriate starting point
in the assessment of obviousness is the prior art per
AstraZeneca
[192]-[230]. Often, where a differentiation analysis is employed, the
assessment of inventive step proceeds solely on the point
difference rather than
the actual disclosure or teaching of the reference in question. That is, the
question posited in such instances
is whether the identified difference is
obvious. When framed in this narrow sense, this approach is erroneous and sails
dangerously
close to ex post facto analysis. The proper question to be
determined is, given the disclosure of prior art and the CGK, is what
Consideration of D1 and the CGK
noted above the opponent’s position is that D1 anticipates claims 1-3,
6-8, 13 and 15 and, so, it follows that they also
lack an inventive step. The
remaining claims in the opponent’s view lack an inventive step in view of
D1 and the CGK.
I have found that D1 does not anticipate claim 1 it cannot be said that claims
1-3, 6-8, 13 and 15 as a matter of course lack
an inventive step. It is,
therefore, necessary for me to consider whether the invention as defined in
claim 1 lacks an inventive
step in light of the disclosure of D1 when combined
with the CGK.
note that Mr Williams is of the view (see [137] of Williams 1) that the speed
mode of D1 provides the functionality of the features
of claims that “the
system controller arranged to determine available electrical power from the
renewable energy collector
and from the battery, the system controller arranged
to selectively engage or disengage the first source of electricity in response
to predetermined levels of available power”. At [37]-[43] of Williams 2,
Mr Williams summarises the various modes of operation
of D1 and at [44] he
concludes that D1 constantly monitors and quantifies the levels of available
power from the solar array and
battery DC power sources and, based on these
levels, then determines how the power is used to drive the submersible pump on a
basis. Mr Williams does not offer anything further to substantiate
this conclusion. As I have noted in my assessment of novelty,
I do not draw the
same conclusion as Mr Williams concerning D1.
I consider the evidence of Mr Williams, Mr Waterreus or Mr Jeeva there is
nothing to suggest that the use of a system controller
arranged to determine
available electrical power from the renewable energy collector and from the
battery, or the system controller
arranged to selectively engage or disengage
the first source of electricity in response to predetermined levels of available
was well known in the art as at the priority date. I acknowledge that Mr
Williams makes statements at [96(e)] of Williams 1 about
the potential use of a
PLC to enable an ESP to be driven using power obtained from any one of an AC or
DC power source based on power
available from these sources. In Mr
Williams’ views, such operation equates to the aforementioned features.
However, the
statements made at [96(e)] are made in relation to hypothetical
modifications Mr Williams would likely make to the system which the
presented him with as outlined at para [32] of Williams 1. As such the opinion
expressed at [96(e)] of Williams 1 are concerned
with the hypothetical design
task postulated by the opponent and are not indicative of what constituted the
CGK in the art as the
priority date.
comes out of the evidence submitted in this case is that it was generally known
to measure the power produced by renewable energy
collectors, i.e. solar arrays.
It was also known to supplement renewables with secondary sources of power such
as batteries or AC
sources. However, when I consider the CGK as outlined above,
there is nothing to suggest that the features of determining available
electrical power from the renewable energy collector and from the battery, and
then subsequently having a system controller selectively
engage or disengage the
first source of electricity in response to predetermined levels of available
power, was well known in the
relevant art as at the priority
the above discussion, and based on the evidence before me, I am satisfied that
the invention so far as claimed involves an inventive
step over the disclosure
Consideration of D2 and D3 in view of the CGK
discloses a system for powering and controlling electric submersible pumps. The
operation of the system of D2 is best understood
with reference to Figure 2
(reproduced below). As shown in Figure 2 the system includes a submersible pump
connected to a first
source of power being a generator 14 and an auxiliary power
system 24. The auxiliary power system includes a direct current (DC)
30 such as a solar generator or wind turbine and battery system 34. As shown
both the battery and the DC generator are
connected to the inverter 32 which
converts the DC electricity produced by the renewable DC generator/battery to
AC. The AC produced
from the inverter is then supplied to a VSD 28 which
supplies AC to the submersible pump. To control the speed of the submersible
pump the VSD varies the frequency and voltage of the AC supplied to the
submersible pump based on instruction from the system controller.
controller can also vary the sped of the submissible pump when powered by the
generator 14 by exercising throttle control.
the system of D2 the controller implements an optimization algorithm that
controls the extent or ratio at which the AC from
the auxiliary power system and
the generator is supplied to the pump. The algorithm may balance the first and
second alternating
currents such that the necessary power is supplied to the
pump in the most efficient way possible that minimises fuel consumption
engine. Thus, under D2 the AC supplied to the pump is a combination of AC from
the auxiliary power system and generator,
with the split between these two power
sources being such that the most efficient operation of the generator is
is directed to a system for providing a continuous electrical supply to a
submersible pump or pumps including a combination of
generator and photovoltaic
power sources. As shown in Figure 1 (reproduced below) the system of D3
includes PV arrays 16 arranged
to provide solar energy to inverters 18 that
produce three phase AC power. The system also includes a generator 20 which also
three phase AC power. The system further includes a battery energy
storage system (BESS) 22 incorporating a battery 24, an inverter
and a system
controller. The BESS 22 is sized to be able to supply three phase AC. The power
from the solar array, BESS and generator
are all coupled to a variable speed
drive (VSD) 14 via a common AC bus. The VSD is arranged to supply AC power to
the pump 12 at
the required voltage and frequency.
The system of D3 also includes a system controller (not shown) which receives
information on the output of the PV arrays, the storage
level of the batteries,
the power from the generator and the power demand by the VSD. The system
controller is arranged to control
operation of the generator based on the
information regarding the PV arrays and the BESS. More specifically the
controller engages
or disengages the generator based on the levels of power
provided by the PV arrays and the BESS.
the opponent’s view each of D2 and D3 take all the features of claim 1
except that DC is not directly input into the VSD.
The opponent also notes that
in both D2 and D3 the VSD is powered by AC with the DC from the renewable
collector and batteries being
passed to an inverter which then provides AC to
the VSD (opponent’s written submissions at [160] and [172] respectively).
I agree that each of D2 and D3 do not disclose a VSD arranged to receive direct
current from the renewable energy collector and/or
battery as claimed. The
opponent’s case for lack of inventive step is that the provision of DC
directly to the VSD would be
obvious to one of skill in the art given D2 and D3
and the CGK in the art.
specifically the opponent advances that it was known at the priority date that
VSDs were able to receive both DC and AC. Equipped
with this knowledge, the PSA
would have been directly led as a matter of course to directly connect the DC
power sources of the system
D2 or D3 to the VSD. The opponent argued that this
step, per the comments of Mr Williams at [109] of Williams 1, would have
no more than a simple wiring change. The opponent then noted that the
evidence of Mr Williams in this regard is uncontested and,
as such, his finding
that the invention of claim 1 is obvious in light of the disclosures of each of
D2 and D3 should be preferred.
response, counsel for the applicant again raised the issue regarding the manner
in which Mr Williams was instructed by the opponent
in respect to the assessment
of inventive step. In this respect, counsel for the applicant argued that Mr
Williams was given very
broad instruction and the manner in which the
hypothetical design task was put to Mr Williams effectively led him to the
invention. The applicant then questioned the probative value of the
evidence of Mr Williams provided in respect of the hypothetical
design task he
was set given the comments of Yates J in
Novartis AG v Pharmacor Pty
[2024] FCA 1307.
At paragraph
, Yates J warned that
placing an expert in a position to address such hypothetical design tasks
invites the import of hindsight.
addition to the above, the applicant also advanced that it was not a simple case
of modifying the references of D2 and D3 to remove
the inverter as suggested by
the opponent. The applicant argued that in order to produce the claimed
invention from either D2 or
D3 you would need to modify the VSD to make it
suitable for receiving high voltage direct current. The PSA in the
applicant’s
view would also have to introduce means of determining
available power from the battery and a means for selectively engaging or
disengaging
the generator assembly modifications into D2. Additional
modification would also be required to be made to D3 such as removal of
AC bus, initiation of setpoint control through the inclusion of sensors, etc.
Given the level of modification required,
the applicant argued it cannot be said
that the claimed invention is obvious in light of D2 and D3.
the applicant’s commentary on the probative value of Mr William’s
evidence with respect to the hypothetical
design task which he was set, when I
consider statements of Mr Williams it is clear he was presented with a specific
design task.
Here I am drawn to the statements of Mr Williams at
[34](a)-[34](d) of Williams 1. It is clear from these statements that the
in presenting the hypothetical design task, focused in on the issues
with the use of inverters. Given the manner in which the task
was sign-posted,
it is not surprising that Mr Williams was led to the conclusion that it would be
obvious to simply connect the DC
from the renewables to the VSD. As a
consequence of the way in which Mr Williams was instructed, the spectre of
hindsight looms
over the opinion expressed by Mr Williams as it pertains to
obviousness.
the relevant authorities have made clear, the starting point in the assessment
of obviousness is the prior art reference. Thus,
the question to be considered,
given the disclosure of the identified reference and the state of the CGK, is
the invention so far
as claimed obvious? Framed in this light, the question I
am faced with in this instance is, given the disclosure of either D2 or
the CGK, would it be obvious to the PSA to directly couple the DC from the
renewable energy system into the VSD in the manner
as claimed? When I consider
each of the systems of D2 and D3 it is clear that each teach the use of an
inverter to convert the DC
from the renewable energy system to AC which is then
provided to the VSD. There is nothing in either reference to suggest directly
coupling the DC provided from the renewable energy system into the VSD. There
is nothing in either reference that would lead the
PSA to directly couple the DC
produced from the renewable into the VSD. By requiring the DC from the
renewable energy system to
be converted into AC before being supplied to the VSD
each of D2 and D3 teach away from actively coupling DC directly into the VSD.
I have noted the opponent advances that, when armed with the CGK, the provision
of DC directly to the VSD would be obvious, requiring
only a simply wiring
change. In the evidence submitted there is nothing to suggest that the direct
connection of DC to the VSD was
CGK in the art. Mr Williams at [109] of
Williams 1 opines that the connection of DC directly to the VSD would be a
simple and routine
modification as DC input terminals were commonly provided on
commercially available VSDs for this purpose for many years before the
date. I note that in making this statement Mr Williams references the
discussion at paragraph [37] of Williams 1. When
I look to paragraph [37] of
Williams 1, I note that Mr Williams states the following:
Whilst the majority of AC VSDs known before the Priority Date had a
DC bus, the DC bus used in commercially available VSDs was not
always connected
to DC input terminals on the VSD for use by customers. Some VSDs had AC input
and output terminals only. DC input
terminals tended to be featured on smaller
VSDs with relatively low voltage ratings
These statements seemingly run contra to the opinion express at [109] of
Williams 1. They highlight that the commercially available
VSDs at the time
either did not permit the direct connection of DC, or, where DC terminals were
provided, there was no guarantee
that they were connected to the DC bus to
enable the VSD to be run directly off DC. The limited commercial availability
having direct DC inputs points to the fact that prevailing practice was
to supply VSDs with AC.
Mr Williams considers that such a reconfiguration would require no more than a
simple wiring change, this does not seem to take
into consideration that the
VSDs at the time as per Mr Williams’ evidence did not readily provide for
the direct connection
of DC to the VSD. Moreover, the approach taken in D2 and
D3 in supplying the VSD with AC is in line with prevailing practice. Again,
there is nothing in either D2 or D3 that would suggest to the PSA to deviate
from the conventional and accepted approach. Additionally,
given that the
majority of commercially available VSDs did not readily support such
functionality, there is nothing in the CGK that
would point the PSA toward
reconfiguring the systems of D2 and D3 to provide DC directly to the VSD. For
these reasons, I am satisfied
that it would not be obvious to the PSA to simply
reconfigure either of the systems of D2 and D3 in the manner suggested by the
Consideration of D6 and D7
is a paper entitled optimisation and energy management of hybrid
PV-diesel-battery system (PV/DG/B system) to pump and desalinate
isolated regions. The paper evaluates the feasibility of such a system from a
techno-economic and energy management standpoint.
The paper evaluates a
proposed stand-alone PV/DG/B system that supplies a real load in Al-Minya city,
Egypt. A simulation tool
(HOMER software) is utilised to determine the optimal
size and best energy management strategy for a PV/DG/B system. The majority
the paper is given over to the discussion of the various techno economic
parameters utilised in the modelling and the determination
of the best energy
management strategy. In this regard the paper discusses two main types of
energy management strategies: load
following and cycle charging.
provides little in the way of detail as to the implementation of the control
system. A broad schematic overview of the end-to-end
system is shown in Figure
7 (shown below). As can be seen the system includes a renewable energy system
including PV arrays and
batteries that are coupled to a converter and controller
unit via DC bus. The generator is also coupled to a converter and controller
unit by an AC bus, with the AC bus also being utilised to supply bower to the
load being AC pumps desalinators etc.
discusses the use of solar power in irrigation. D7 notes that components of
such systems include a solar array, an inverter to
convert generated DC
electricity into AC electricity (and enable integration with other electricity
supply), power controllers, and
electric pumps to lift the water from source and
move it to delivery points. A number of topologies for such systems are then
however these provide little detail on the construction of such systems,
as shown below. The system shown in figure (a) is a standalone
DC system where
the solar array is connected to DC motors and pumps. In the hybrid arrangement
shown in figure (b) the DC from the
renewable system solar array and batteries
is passed to an inverter to produce an AC signal, which is then utilised to
pump. The hybrid system also includes a generator for supplementing
the supply of renewables.
can be seen D7 does depict an arrangement where a control system is utilised. As
shown the control system is coupled between the
AC supply and the pump. Outside
the position of the control system D7 fails to provide any details as to the
makeup or operation
of the control system.
opponent submits that D6 and D7 do not expressly disclose the use of sensors or
the setpoint control method performed by the system
controller as claimed.
However, in the opponent’s view, these features would again be obvious to
one of skill in the art given
the state of the CGK.
opponent’s argument on obviousness with respect to D6 is that the
implementation of setpoint control would require no more
than a simple
modification that the PSA could perform through routine steps that were well
understood from the CGK. This position
is based on the view that, in the system
of D6, the controller is a VSD which governs the ESP’s speed based on the
load demand (PL) placed on it to perform the pumping process
(opponent’s submissions at [177]). Similar arguments are advanced
respect of D7.
response to the opponent’s submissions, the applicant noted that neither
D6 or D7 provides sufficient detail concerning the
configuration of the power
and control system; without such detail it cannot be said that the claimed
invention would have been obvious
to one of skill in the art. Moreover, the
applicant argued that neither D6 nor D7 disclose or suggest the selective
engagement and
disengagement of the generator based on predetermined levels of
available power as claimed. The applicant submits that this deficiency
cured by the CGK in the art.
first issue I have with the opponent’s line of reasoning is that they do
not adequately address why the inclusion of setpoint
control into either the
system of D6 or D7 would be obvious. Mr Williams’s evidence does not
directly address this question.
While it is appreciated that the use of
setpoint control formed part of the CGK as at the priority, this fact alone does
the claimed invention obvious in view of the disclosures of D6 or D7.
The question to be assessed is, starting with the disclosure
of the relevant
refence and given the CGK, is the claimed invention obvious? The question is
not whether the PSA could re-design,
or otherwise modify, the systems of the
prior art to produce the claimed invention. Rather, the question is would the
directly to the claimed invention given the disclosure of the prior
art refence and the state of the CGK as at the priority date?
and D7 are silent as to the regime utilised to control the pump. D6 is
concerned with determining the optimal size and best energy
management strategy
of a hybrid power system including PVs, a diesel generator and batteries. The
two energy management strategies
that are modelled in D6 are load following and
cycle charging. As per section VI of D6, these two strategies are used to
the generator operation. In the load following strategy the generator
output is matched to the real-time demand, using the generator
only to serve the
load directly and not to charge batteries. In cycle charging the generator is
run at maximum capacity to meet
current demand and use any excess power to
charge batteries. Neither strategy is concerned with setpoint control
. D7 makes no mention of any control regime. It only broadly discusses a
number of possible topologies for the powering of an irrigation
system utilising
solar arrays as standalone systems, or in a hybrid system where the solar is
supplemented by a suitable AC source.
Consequently, there is nothing in either
reference that teaches towards, or would otherwise suggest to the PSA, the
implementation
of setpoint control in either of the systems of D6 or D7.
Additionally, there is nothing in the evidence in this case that suggests
that the PSA, starting from either D6 or D7, would, as a matter of course, be
led to the implementation of setpoint control
as advanced by the opponent.
second issue I have with the opponent’s reasoning is that it proceeds on
the basis that both D6 and D7 disclose the use
of a VSD that varies the voltage
and frequency of the output AC. When I consider D6 and D7 there is no depiction
or mention of such
a VSD. Regarding D6, I note Mr Williams’ evidence is
that he considers that the controller/converter depicted in Figure 7
variable speed drive (VSD) arranged to receive direct current from the renewable
energy collector and/or the battery, and
to output alternating current (Williams
1 at [323]). However, when I review Figure 7 of D6 and the corresponding
discussion, no
mention is made of the configuration of the controller/converter.
All that D6 says about the construction of the system depicted
in Figure 7 is
that the proposed renewable energy system consists of solar PV cells, a diesel
generator, a converter, and batteries.
D6 makes no mention of a VSD, nor does
it make any mention of varying the voltage or frequency output of the converter.
can be taken from the disclosure of figure 7 is that the converter
takes in a DC input and outputs the necessary AC to meet the power
requirements
of the downstream equipment, such as a desalinator, pump etc.
respect to D7, Mr Williams states at [378] of Williams 1 that he considers that
the inverter shown in Figure b of D7 is a VSD.
In support of this contention Mr
Williams refers back to his earlier statements at [23] of Williams 1 where he
opines that VSDs
are often referred to as inverters. This statement, in my
view, seems to run contrary to the standard meaning applied to
which is simply a device that converts DC to AC. The
statement also seems at odds with the general construction of VSDs as outlined
by Mr Williams at [24] of Williams 1, where he states that VSDs include 3
stages: a rectifier, a DC bus and then an inverter, i.e.
a VSD is significantly
more than a singular inverter. When I consider the disclosure of D7 there is
nothing to indicate that the
inverter is anything more than a standard DC to AC
inverter. The reference made to the inverter in Figure b clearly states that
the inverter is a DC to AC converter.
in my view, despite the opponent’s submissions, D6 and D7 lack a
disclosure of a VSD as currently claimed. Consequently,
even if I were to find
that integration of setpoint control in the systems of D6 and D7 would have been
obvious and I do not think
that this has been established by the evidence, the
systems of D6 and D7 would still be lacking a number of salient claim features
namely the use of the VSD along with determining predetermined levels of
available power to selective engage or disengage the first
source of power (i.e.
generator set). Given the limited technical detail in D6 and D7 and the fact
they do not disclose a number
of pertinent claim features it is apparent that
they fail provide sufficient teaching that would render the claimed invention as
being obvious.
light of the above I am satisfied that the invention as defined in claim 1
involves an inventive step over each D6 and D7.
Consideration of inventive step in light of the combination
any one of D1-D7
opponent contends that the invention as claimed lacks an inventive step in light
of the combination of any one of D1, D2, D3,
D6 and D7. More specifically, the
opponent advances that it would be obvious to the PSA to make the necessary
substitution or additions
to the references in question from the remaining
documents in the cohort e.g. D1 combined with any one of D2, D3, D6 and/or D7
to produce the claimed invention.
applicant’s position regarding the opponent’s case under s7(3) is
that they have done little more than to cherry pick
the missing features
identified in their differentiation analysis from one or more of the references
in order to try and arrive at
the various claims that are attacked. In the
applicant’s view, the general assertion made by the opponent as to the
combination
of the documents and CGK concerned does not reflect the requirements
of the test of obviousness. The applicant stated that the opponent’s
submissions are, in essence, an invitation to the Commissioner to engage in an
approach that was admonished by Yates J in
Rakman International Pty Ltd v
Boss Fire & Safety Pty Ltd
[2022] FCA 464
. The applicant
argued that the unquestioned acceptance of such broad general submission without
regard to a proper evidentiary footing
renders the notion of the onus of proof
being borne by the opponent meaningless.
opponent’s rationale for their proposed combination of references is
principally set out at paragraph [139] of their written
submissions. The
essence of the opponent’s submissions are as follows:
The documents in
question are all from the same technical field and address the same problem
Each of the
identified references uses exactly the same control devices as used by the
system claimed by the application. Given this,
the PSA would not have been
required to use any inventive capacity to combine the documents.
The technical
field of the claimed invention was mature at the priority date, so the PSA would
have been prompted to research the
field and to combine documents discovered as
a result of such research.
I consider the points put forward in paragraph [139] of the opponent’s
written submissions, they appear to be little more
than a recitation of the
general considerations coming out of the authorities concerning the combination
of documents for the purposes
of s7(3). Nothing put forward in paragraph [139]
engages with the question of whether the PSA would have been reasonably expected
to combine the references in the manner proposed. Moreover, there was nothing
put forward in oral submissions that addressed this
question; it was simply
advanced that the PSA would look to the remaining documents in the cohort to
rectify the deficiencies in
each of D1, D2, D3, D6 and D7 to arrive at the
claimed invention.
Mr Williams’s evidence concerning the combination of references does not
engage with the question of reasonable expectation
or reasonable basis to
combine. For instance, at paragraph [442] of Williams 1, Mr Williams simply
states that he considers the
VSD configuration required by claim 1 to be
disclosed in each of D1, D6 and D7. Consequently, he would have been “led
matter of course by the information disclosed in any one of the foregoing
publications to configure the system in D2 as required
by claim 1”.
Similar statements are made with respect to D3 at paragraph [459] of Williams 1.
The statement again seems to
be phrased in terms of the hypothetical design
problem with which Mr Williams was presented.
Consequently,
I am inclined to agree with the applicant that the opponent has failed to
discharge their onus to prove their case for
lack of inventive step under
s7(3)(b). This view is only reinforced when I consider the disclosures of D1,
D2, D3, D6 and D7 which
fail to present any motivation or reasonable basis to
combine their teachings.
explain further, as I have noted above, D2 and D3 require the DC from the
renewable energy system to be converted into AC before
being supplied to the
VSD. Consequently, both D2 and D3 teach away from connecting DC directly to the
VSD, consistent with standard
industry practice at the priority date, since
commercially available VSDs as at the priority date were not typically
configured to
accept DC directly. D1, by contrast, teaches directly connecting
DC to the VSD. Given the teaching of D1 is in direct conflict
of that D2 and
D3, there is no reasonable or rational basis for the PSA to proceed to combine
the references as suggested. In fact,
modifying the systems of D2 or D3 to
accept DC as taught in D1 would seem to be counter intuitive, given the
limitations of commercially
available VSDs of the time.
respect to D6 and D7, as previously discussed neither of these references
discloses the use of a VSD as claimed. Furthermore,
each of these references
contains little in the way of technical discourse concerning the implementation
of the depicted hybrid system.
All that is provided in D6 is that the AC and DC
sources are coupled into the controller/converter in a non-descript manner and
that the controller/converter then supplies the downstream components such as
pumps, desalinators, etc with the required AC. As
previously noted, D6 is more
concerned with determining the best energy management strategy, this being
either load following or
cycle charging. D7 simply has depictions of a
standalone DC system and two hybrid systems. There is nothing in D7 that speaks
the control of such systems or to the actual physical components used other
than the use of generic labels such as “inverter”,
motor”, “DC motor”, “generator”, etc. The fact
that neither reference specifically discusses
the use of VSDs and the lack of
any specific technical detail as to the implementation of the systems makes it a
difficult prospect
for the PSA to meaningfully combine the disclosures of D6 and
D7 with any one of D1, D2 or D3.
light of the forgoing, the opponent’s case that the invention lacks an
inventive step in light of the combination of any
one of D1, D2, D3, D6 and D7
opponent has not established that the documents relied upon contain sufficient
disclosure to render claim 1 as lacking novelty.
Nor has the opponent
established, based on the evidence submitted in these proceeding, that the
invention as defined in claim 1
lacks an inventive step. Since claim 1 is the
only independent claim, it follows that the dependent claims are also novel and
Consequently, the opposition fails on all
parties sought their costs. In this case, I see no sufficient reason to depart
from the normal approach that costs should follow
the event. The opposition is
unsuccessful. Accordingly, I award costs in accordance with Schedule 8 against
the opponent, Allied
Pumps Pty Ltd.
Neil Miller
Delegate of the Commissioner of Patents
RTF format (111 MB)
Signed PDF/A format