Metropolitan Fire and Emergency Services Board v United Firefighters' Union of Australia-Victorian Branch [2012] FWAFB 9555 (13 November 2012)
FAIR WORK AUSTRALIA
REASONS FOR DECISION
Fair Work Act 2009
- Appeal of decisions
Metropolitan Fire and Emergency Services Board
United Firefighters' Union of Australia-Victorian Branch
(C2012/4779)
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT KAUFMAN
DEPUTY PRESIDENT HAMILTON
COMMISSIONER GREGORY
MELBOURNE, 13 NOVEMBER 2012
Appeal - enterprise agreement - dispute resolution - matters pertaining.
On 23 July 2012 Commissioner Roe made an order
the effect of which is to require the Metropolitan Fire and Emergency Services Board (
) to contribute to a disability insurance policy in respect of each of its firefighters who elect to be covered it and whose employment
is covered by the
Metropolitan, Fire and Emergency Services Board, United Firefighters’ Union of Australia Operational Staff Agreement 2010
the Agreement
The MFB seeks to appeal the order and the decision pursuant to which it was made.
On 23 September 2011, the United Firefighters’ Union of Australia (
), applied under
Fair Work Act 2009
) for Fair Work Australia to deal with a dispute in accordance with a dispute settlement procedure in the Agreement.
The dispute was said to be “about the MFB’s Accident and Illness Policy, and specifically the provision of income protection
insurance to operational staff”. The MFB characterizes this as a “dispute over the UFU’s claim that the Metropolitan,
Fire and Emergency Services Board (MFB) fund an income protection insurance policy for all of its operational firefighters.”
Commissioner Roe described the dispute thus: “The dispute relates to the MFB’s Accident and Illness Policy and the UFU
seeks income protection insurance for operational staff employed under the Agreement as a resolution to the dispute.”
On 6 February 2012, after unsuccessful conciliation and a two day hearing, Commissioner Roe published a decision (
first decision
At paragraph 119, the Commissioner concluded that there should be an income protection insurance scheme available to all firefighters
in respect of non-work related injuries and illnesses, provided that it was achievable within certain cost parameters that the Commissioner
established. He prescribed several parameters and conditions in respect of matters such as the cost and the respective contributions
to be made by the MFB and the employees who took up the insurance and indicated that the scheme could be established by one of two
methods; a leave bank or an insurance policy. The Commissioner left it to the parties to negotiate implementation details and indicated
that he would arbitrate the outcome if there were no agreement.
The parties failed to reach an agreement and Commissioner Roe listed the matter for further hearing. Of the two options, the MFB
contended that the leave bank option should be adopted and it put a proposal in that regard. The UFU contended that the income protection
insurance option should be adopted. Ultimately, the UFU tendered a proposed insurance policy. It also produced a draft order that
required that all operational firefighters be offered the option to elect to take out the insurance policy proposed by the UFU, except
those who chose to stay on the AXA Scheme, which was an income protection scheme that firefighters at MFB had been able take up at
their own expense, with the payments automatically deducted from payroll. Several years ago AXA decided not to make the policy available
to new firefighters. Some 900 firefighters are covered by the AXA policy.
On 20 July 2012, Commissioner Roe published another decision
second decision
) determining that the MFB would be required to contribute to the income protection insurance proposed by the UFU (
), with two modifications; the Commissioner provided the MFB the option of being a co-insured or joint holder of the policy albeit
the UFU had sought that it be the “insured” or the holder of the policy. Secondly, he considered that it was desirable
that there be certainty as to the arrangements for the scheme during the life of the Agreement and that the parties should not be
able to vary the arrangements in an unfettered manner.
The Commissioner rejected the arguments of the MFB that Fair Work Australia did not have jurisdiction or power to make the order.
He determined:
“Further to my decision in
United Firefighters’ Union of Australia - Victorian Branch v Metropolitan Fire and Emergency Services Board
[2012] FWA 1085
and pursuant to Clause 19 Disputes Resolution of the Agreement I therefore determine that the following shall apply as the appropriate
resolution to the dispute:
1. Commencing, within 30 days of the making of this determination and continuing thereafter every operational employee whose employment
is subject to the Agreement shall be offered an option to elect to take out insurance cover in accordance with the terms of the policy
and schedule set out in Exhibit UFU 18 in C2011/781. (
). This shall also apply if the Insurer elects to renew the Policy after its first anniversary. The terms of the Policy may be varied
pursuant to Clause 5.
2. Notwithstanding clause 1, insurance cover shall not be offered to those employees who retain cover under the United Firefighters’
Union Sick & Accident Plan, Group Number: VJ3737 AXA Scheme (
3. An employee who makes an election under clause 1 will have deducted from his or her wages a sum equivalent to 0.5625% of wages
for ordinary time work including all purpose allowances but excluding overtime and any other allowances (
Insurable Income
) if the premium is 0.75% and 0.5875% of Insurable Income if the premium is 0.80%; or such sum as is necessary to pay the premium
, PROVIDED THAT the relevant employee has agreed in advance to such deduction.
4. The MFB shall pay in accordance with the
, on behalf of the Insured under the Policy in respect of each employee who elects to take out insurance cover under clause 1, the
premium specified in the Policy comprised in the following proportions:
a. The amount deducted under clause 3 from the employee’s Insurable Income; and
b. A sum equivalent to 0.1875% of Insurable Income as defined in clause 3 if the premium is 0.75% and 0.2125% of Insurable Income
as defined in clause 3 if the premium is 0.80%.
5. The “Insured” as defined in the Policy shall be varied to be the UFU and the MFB should the MFB advise the UFU and
FWA in writing of its support for this variation by 26 July 2012. The “Premium” as defined in the Policy may be 0.75%
in lieu of 0.80% and the “Premium” as defined in the Policy upon renewal shall be no more than 0.80%.
6. The Metropolitan Fire and Emergency Services Board (
) and/or the United Firefighters’ Union (
) are at liberty to apply for variation to resolve any implementation issues.”
It is against this decision, and the order giving effect to it, that the MFB seeks to appeal.
On 23 July 2012, the Commissioner made an order giving effect to his decisions
“Further to my decision in
and pursuant to Clause 19 Disputes Resolution of the Agreement I Order that the following shall apply as the appropriate resolution
to the dispute:
1. Commencing, within 30 days of the making of this determination and continuing thereafter every operational employee whose employment
is subject to the Agreement shall be offered an option to elect to take out insurance cover in accordance with the terms of the policy
and schedule set out in Exhibit UFU 18 in C2011/781. (
). This shall also apply if the Insurer elects to renew the Policy after its first anniversary. The terms of the Policy may be varied
pursuant to Clause 5.
2. Notwithstanding clause 1, insurance cover shall not be offered to those employees who retain cover under the United Firefighters’
Union Sick & Accident Plan, Group Number: VJ3737 AXA Scheme (
3. An employee who makes an election under clause 1 will have deducted from his or her wages a sum equivalent to 0.5625% of wages
for ordinary time work including all purpose allowances but excluding overtime and any other allowances
(Insurable Income
) if the premium is 0.75% and 0.5875% of Insurable Income if the premium is 0.80%; or such sum as is necessary to pay the premium
, PROVIDED THAT the relevant employee has agreed in advance to such deduction.
4. The MFB shall pay in accordance with the
, on behalf of the Insured under the Policy in respect of each employee who elects to take out insurance cover under clause 1, the
premium specified in the Policy comprised in the following proportions:
a. The amount deducted under clause 3 from the employee’s Insurable Income; and
b. A sum equivalent to 0.1875% of Insurable Income as defined in clause 3 if the premium is 0.75% and 0.2125% of Insurable Income
as defined in clause 3 if the premium is 0.80%.
5. The “Insured” as defined in the Policy shall be varied to be the UFU and the MFB should the MFB advise the UFU and
FWA in writing of its support for this variation by 26 July 2012. The “Premium” as defined in the Policy may be 0.75%
in lieu of 0.80% and the “Premium” as defined in the Policy upon renewal shall be no more than 0.80%.
6. The Metropolitan Fire and Emergency Services Board (
) and/or the United Firefighters’ Union (
) are at liberty to apply for variation to resolve any implementation issues.”
The Order imposes two obligations on the MFB; the first is that it is to deduct from the wages of those of its employees who take
out disability insurance cover the amount of each employee’s contribution and pay it to the insurer, and secondly to pay to
the insurer an amount in respect of each employee who has so elected. The amount payable by each employee who takes out the insurance
is either 0.5625% or 0.5875% of the employee’s “Insurable income” and the amount payable by the MFB in respect
of each such employee is either 0.1875% or 0.2125% of each insured employee’s Insurable income. In each case the lower amount
is payable if the insurance premium is 0.75% and the higher amount if the premium is 0.80% of gross monthly income for each covered
The first issue that must be decided is whether Fair Work Australia has jurisdiction to make the Order.
Three clauses in the Agreement are of particular relevance:
“19. DISPUTE RESOLUTION
19.1. This dispute resolution process applies to all matters arising under this agreement, which the parties have agreed includes:
19.1.1. all matters for which express provision is made in this agreement; and
19.1.2. all matters pertaining to the employment relationship, whether or not express provision for any such matter is made in this
agreement; and
19.1.3. all matters pertaining to the relationship between the MFESB and UFU, whether or not express provision for any such matter
is made in this agreement.
The parties agree that disputes about any such matters shall be dealt with by using the provisions in this clause.
19.2. To ensure effective consultation between the employer, its employee(s) and the union on all matters, the following procedure
shall be followed in an effort to achieve a satisfactory resolution of any dispute or grievance:
19.2.1. Step 1 The dispute shall be submitted by the union and/or employee(s) to the employee's immediate supervisor.
19.2.2. Step 2 If not settled at Step 1, the matter shall be submitted to the appropriate senior officer.
19.2.3. Step 3 If not settled at Step 2, the matter shall be recorded. The matter shall be submitted to the appropriate delegated
Industrial Representative of the employer for consultation.
19.2.4. Steps 1 - 3 Must be concluded within a period of ten (10) consecutive days. Disputes are to be resolved at a local level wherever
19.2.5. Step 4 If the matter is not settled at Step 3, the dispute shall be formally submitted in writing to the Manager Employee
Relations, setting out details of the dispute and, where appropriate, with supporting documentation.
The Manager Employee Relations shall convene a meeting of the employer, employee(s) and the union within a period of one week (7 days)
of receipt of such submissions and endeavour to reach a satisfactory settlement.
19.2.6. Step 5 If the matter is not settled following progression through the disputes procedure it may be referred by the union or
the employer to FWA.
FWA may utilise all its powers in conciliation and arbitration to settle the dispute.
19.3. Notwithstanding the words contained in the above sub-clause, the steps or the procedure apply equally to a dispute raised by
an employee, the union or Officer in Charge
19.4. While the above procedures are being followed, including the resolution of any dispute by FWA pursuant to clause 19.2.6, work
must continue and the status quo must apply in accordance with the existing situation or practice that existed immediately prior
to the subject matter of the grievance or dispute occurring. No party shall be prejudiced as to the final settlement by the continuance
of work in accordance with this sub-clause.
19.5. This clause shall not apply to a dispute on a Health and Safety issue.
19.6. A dispute may be submitted, notified or referred under this clause by the UFU.
19.7. A decision of FWA under this clause may be appealed. A dispute is not resolved until any such appeal is determined.
42. ALLOWANCES
42.1. The monetary amounts of all allowances provided for in this agreement are set out in Schedule 4.
42.2. All other work related allowances will increase by 13.5% as identified in Schedule 4 of this agreement as from the date of lodgement
of the Agreement with Fair Work Australia.
42.3. Any additional, new or increase of allowance above that already provided in the agreement will be referred to FWA for determination.
Both parties reserve their rights to put their respective positions.
23. NO EXTRA CLAIMS
23.1. There shall be no extra claims by either party.”
During the negotiations for the Agreement the parties were unable to reach agreement on several issues and agreed that those issues
would be able to be dealt with under the dispute resolution clause and that they would not be treated as extra claims, as they would
otherwise have fallen foul of clause 23 which prevents extra claims being made during the nominal life of the Agreement. “Accident
and illness policy” was one such matter that was reserved for private arbitration.
The matter of disability insurance not being a matter for which express provision is made in the Agreement, and thus not falling within
clause 19.1.2, it was necessary for the Commissioner to decide whether either or both of sub-clauses 1.2 or 1.3 applied. He decided
that the matter fell within both. He found that pursuant to clause 19.2 he was able to exercise all the powers of Fair Work Australia,
including that of arbitration, to settle the dispute. The Commissioner also found that the claim for the payment of a fixed amount
each week in respect of each worker to provide him or her with income protection benefits could be characterized as a claim for a
new income protection insurance allowance and clause 42.3 could therefore also found the jurisdiction of Fair Work Australia to arbitrate
an outcome to the dispute.
The MFB submitted that, notwithstanding that it is a party to the Agreement that confers the power of arbitration on Fair Work Australia
and notwithstanding that it had agreed that the issue of disability insurance would be one of the matters reserved to be dealt with
under the dispute resolution clause, Fair Work Australia does not have the requisite jurisdiction to do so.
On the question of jurisdiction the MFB submitted:
“a) reserving a discrete matter for arbitration during the life of the Agreement purports to expand the tribunal’s role
beyond that prescribed under the Act, with the consequence that the matter is not a “permitted matter” under s 172(1).
Consequently, neither clause 19.1 nor clause 42.3 is a source of arbitral power in respect of the UFU’s income protection insurance
b) the tribunal had no power to make a decision or order the substance and effect of which was to vary the Agreement in a manner that
was inconsistent with the Act;”
The relevant provisions of the Act are:
“Part 2-4 Approval of enterprise agreements
186 When FWA must approve an enterprise agreement—general requirements
(1) If an application for the approval of an enterprise agreement is made under section 185, FWA must approve the agreement under
this section if the requirements set out in this section and section 187 are met.
Requirement for a term about settling disputes
(6) FWA must be satisfied that the agreement includes a term:
(a) that provides a procedure that requires or allows FWA, or another person who is independent of the employers, employees or employee
organisations covered by the agreement, to settle disputes:
(i) about any matters arising under the agreement; and
(ii) in relation to the National Employment Standards; and
(b) that allows for the representation of employees covered by the agreement for the purposes of that procedure.
Division 2 - Employers and employees may make enterprise agreements
172 MAKING AN ENTERPRISE AGREEMENT
172(1) An agreement (an
enterprise agreement
) that is about one or more of the following matters (the
permitted matters
) may be made in accordance with this Part;
(a) matters pertaining to the relationship between an employer that will be covered by the agreement and that employer’s employees
who will be covered by the agreement;
(b) matters pertaining to the relationship between the employer or employers, and the employee organisation or employee organisations,
that will be covered by the agreement;
Chapter 5 - Administration
Part 5 - 1 - Fair Work Australia
Division 3 - Conduct of matter before FWA
595 FWA’s power to deal with disputes
(1) FWA may deal with a dispute only if FWA is expressly
authorised to do so under or in accordance with another provision of this Act.
(2) FWA may deal with a dispute (other than by arbitration) as it considers appropriate, including in the following ways:
(a) by mediation or conciliation;
(b) by making a recommendation or expressing an opinion.
(3) FWA may deal with a dispute by arbitration (including by making any orders it considers appropriate) only if FWA is expressly
authorised to do so under or in accordance with another provision of this Act.
Example: Parties may consent to FWA arbitrating a bargaining dispute (see subsection 240(4)).
(4) In dealing with a dispute, FWA may exercise any powers it has under this Subdivision.
Example: FWA could direct a person to attend a conference under section 592.
(5) To avoid doubt, FWA must not exercise any of the powers referred to in subsection (2) or (3) in relation to a matter before FWA
except as authorised by this section
Subdivision B—Dealing with disputes
738 Application of this Division
This Division applies if:
(a) a modern award includes a term that provides a procedure for dealing with disputes, including a term in accordance with section
(b) an enterprise agreement includes a term that provides a procedure for dealing with disputes, including a term referred to in subsection
(c) a contract of employment or other written agreement includes a term that provides a procedure for dealing with disputes between
the employer and the employee, to the extent that the dispute is about any matters in relation to the National Employment Standards
or a safety net contractual entitlement; or
(d) a determination under the
Public Service Act 1999
includes a term that provides a procedure for dealing with disputes arising under the determination or in relation to the National
Employment Standards.
739 Disputes dealt with by FWA
(1) This section applies if a term referred to in section 738 requires or allows FWA to deal with a dispute.
(2) FWA must not deal with a dispute to the extent that the dispute is about whether an employer had reasonable business grounds under
subsection 65(5)
(4), unless:
(a) the parties have agreed in a contract of employment, enterprise agreement or other written agreement to FWA dealing with the matter;
(b) a determination under the
Public Service Act 1999
authorises FWA to deal with the matter.
Note: This does not prevent FWA from dealing with a dispute relating to a term of an enterprise agreement that has the same (or substantially
the same) effect
subsection 65(5)
(4) (see also
subsection 55(5)).
(3) In dealing with a dispute, FWA must not exercise any powers limited by the term.
(4) If, in accordance with the term, the parties have agreed that FWA may arbitrate (however described) the dispute, FWA may do so.
Note: FWA may also deal with a dispute by mediation or conciliation, or by making a recommendation or expressing an opinion (see subsection
(5) Despite subsection (4), FWA must not make a decision that is inconsistent with this Act, or a fair work instrument that applies
to the parties.
(6) FWA may deal with a dispute only on application by a party to the dispute.”
The MFB submitted that the reservation of a discrete matter for arbitration does not pertain to the employer/employee or employer/union
relationship. It submitted, further, that the Agreement, by this mechanism, permitted Fair Work Australia to award new entitlements
during the nominal life of the Agreement, contrary to the provisions of section 739(3) and (5) of the Act. It contends that, whilst
a clause that provides some form of income protection might have been a permitted matter within section 172(1), a clause that merely
allows Fair Work Australia to arbitrate in respect of whether there should be such an entitlement, and if so, what form it should
take, is not a permitted matter pertaining to the relationship between an employer and its employees.
The MFB’s argument is that because under section 793(5) Fair Work Australia may not make a decision that is inconsistent with
the Act and, as the power to arbitrate generally does not pertain to the relationship between employers and employees, the decision
is inconsistent with section 172(1).
In our view, this argument is not tenable. If there were no prohibition on the making of extra claims and the UFU had made a claim
for disability insurance which the MFB had rejected, the parties would be in dispute about whether such a scheme should be introduced.
That dispute clearly pertains to the employer/employee relationship and if the Agreement permits, such a dispute could be settled
by Fair Work Australia exercising arbitral powers.
Section 172(1) provides that an enterprise agreement may only be made about matters that pertain. Clause 19, the dispute resolution
clause only allows disputes about matters that pertain to be dealt with under its terms. Ergo, the dispute settlement clause is
a clause that pertains to the relationship between employer and employee.
Albeit this might have the effect that the settlement of pertaining disputes results in the creation of new rights and obligations,
as is the case here, that is a result of the parties specifically agreeing that disputes that extend beyond matters dealt with by
the Agreement are amenable to resolution under the dispute settlement procedure in the Agreement. Whilst section 186(6) requires
that an enterprise agreement provide procedures for the settlement of disputes arising under the agreement, section 172(1) makes
it clear that the clause need not be so limited, as long as it pertains to the relationship. Despite MFB’s submissions that
we should find that it was wrongly decided, we agree with the conclusion of the Full Bench that so found in
Boral Resources (NSW) Pty Ltd v Transport Workers’ Union of Australia.
It follows that we do not accept the MFB’s submissions, at pages 6 to 8 of its written submissions, that the construction and
context of the Act leads to the conclusion that a dispute settlement clause that allows for the imposition of new obligations under
an enterprise agreement travels beyond what is permitted by the Act.
It is thus not necessary for us to determine whether the claim for a disability insurance scheme could properly be characterized as
a new allowance and thus able to be the subject of arbitration pursuant to clause 42, as the Commissioner found. We observe however,
that, in our view, a contribution by an employer to an income protection insurance scheme for its employees sits somewhat uneasily
with the notion of the payment of an allowance.
It is also not necessary to decide whether jurisdiction was attracted because the claim pertained to the relationship between the
MFB and the UFU and was therefore supported by section 172(1)(b) of the Act and clause 19.1.3 of the Agreement.
Having concluded that the Commissioner was empowered to deal with the dispute by the exercise of arbitral powers it is now necessary
to determine whether he erred in coming to the conclusion that he did.
The MFB employs some 1,900 firefighters. Of these approximately 50% are covered by a disability insurance policy known as the “United
Firefighters Union Sickness and Accident Scheme” or the “AXA Scheme”. Access to this policy has not been available
to firefighters engaged since 1999. The firefighters who are covered by that scheme voluntarily pay a small amount to maintain their
cover. The MFB, although it, as does the UFU, supports the AXA Scheme, makes no payments towards it. There is also limited access
for firefighters to temporary disability payments through the ESS superannuation fund. It appears that the ESS benefits, as well
as the prerequisites to obtaining them, are less than adequate when compared with a scheme such as the AXA Scheme or that provided
by Commissioner Roe’s order.
It appears that between 2001 and 2009 there had only been ten firefighters with non-work related injuries who had exhausted their
leave entitlements and who had accessed a voluntary leave bank arrangement whereby other firefighters forewent some of the leave
to which they were entitled or worked the shifts of those who had exhausted their leave. Additionally, some 78 firefighters had
made claims under the AXA Scheme since March 2001. Given that there are approximately 1,900 firefighters employed by the MFB it
seems that the average claim rate per annum would be less than 0.5% of the eligible workforce. To this there should be added some
firefighters who might lose income whilst on light duties.
The Commissioner’s order gives all firefighters the option of taking out cover under the Scheme. There are some 856 covered
by the AXA Scheme and 945 who are not covered by it. Thus the potential number of firefighters eligible to take out coverage under
the Scheme was 1,801 at the time of the hearing at first instance.
The basis upon which the Scheme is established and in particular how the premium is set is outlined in the witness evidence and in
the terms of the scheme adopted by the Commissioner’s determination. Both Mr Okely, an insurance broker called by the MFB
and Mr McDonald for the UFU confirmed that the premiums and other calculations were made on the basis of a potential coverage for
the new scheme of between 1 - 945 employees. According to Mr Okely the insurance premiums will be affected by the level of take
up of the policy after the first 12 month period.
The Commissioner found, contrary to Mr McDonald’s evidence, that there is a direct link between the number of employees participating
in an income protection insurance scheme and the premium rate paid in respect of the insurance payments paid by those employees.
If there were to be a low take up rate this would inevitably have the consequence that the premium payable would be higher than
would be the case if a significant proportion of employees took up the insurance. The claims history could also affect future premiums.
The Commissioner accepted that, although the premium was fixed for the first year of the policy, the premium would increase thereafter
if there were to be a low take up rate. However, he was of the view was that the take up rate was likely to be high rather than
The Commissioner’s order provided in paragraph 1 that insurance coverage be offered under the terms of the policy and schedule
set out in the ‘Group Accident & Sickness Product Disclosure Statement & Policy Wording’ issued by ATC Insurance
Solutions Pty Ltd. This was the document provided by the UFU. The schedule provides that the number of covered persons is “1
- 945 approximately”. It also stipulates that the premium is “0.80% (inclusive of charges) of gross monthly income ...
for each Covered Person”. During the course of the hearing at first instance the Commissioner was informed that a binding
quote of 0.75% had been given by the insurer based on a take up rate of between 1 and 495 firefighters taking out the insurance.
Although the level of premiums is fixed for the first 12 months, this is an issue of some significance. It is apparent that, despite
the Order providing for different contribution rates depending on whether the premium is 0.75% or 0.8%, the contribution rates for
the first 12 months will be at the lower level. However, should there be a low uptake, it is almost inevitable that in future the
premium will increase. The Order only contemplates a premium of 0.75% or 0.8%; neither more nor less. Mr Friend conceded that if
the premium goes above 0.8% the order ceases to have effect and there will no longer be an income protection scheme available to
the MFB’s firefighters, other than those who might remain covered by the AXA Scheme. It occurs to us that the same will result
if the premium becomes lower than 0.75% or between 0.75% and 0.8%.
The Commissioner did not appear to have had regard to the possibility of former AXA covered employees losing their insurance cover
in coming to his decision. In our view his failure to do so amounted to a failure to have regard to a relevant consideration and
constitutes an error in the
Further, although the Commissioner adopted the Scheme with premiums calculated on the basis of a potential membership of approximately
1 to 945 employees, because the Order provides that anyone who is presently a member of the AXA Scheme can join the new scheme, the
potential coverage of the scheme is 1,801. Albeit the premium is fixed for the first 12 months of the policy, both Mr Okely and
Mr McDonald said that the potential membership was an important factor in the calculation of the premium levels. We are not satisfied
that the evidence before the Commissioner provided a sufficient basis for the Order. There was no evidence before him regarding
premium levels for a scheme with the potential membership provided for in his determination. The Commissioner failed to adequately
consider the likelihood that premiums would alter after the first 12 months of operation of the Scheme with the possible consequence
that his Order would cease to have effect. Although it is more probable than not that with a larger membership base premiums will
not exceed 0.8%, there is nevertheless the possibility that the future claims history or other factors could lead to an increase
above 0.8%, with the consequence that the Order would no longer operate. The failure to have regard to these matters is also an
error in the
We also consider that the Commissioner erred in failing to have sufficient regard to the currently small number of claims as well
as the efficacy of the current voluntary leave bank arrangement in concluding that there should be a requirement to make a disability
scheme available to all firefighters towards the premiums for which the MFB is obliged to contribute.
We will grant permission to appeal because the decision at first instance is attended by error and, further, because we think that
the appeal raises important matters of law and principle that lead us to conclude that it is in the public interest to do so.
Having found error in the decision below, the appeal proceeds by way of rehearing.
In his second decision the Commissioner summarized the criticisms the UFU had of the MFB’s proposal for a leave bank and the
MFB’s criticisms of the UFU’s proposal for the Scheme. He concluded:
“[41] I am satisfied that the design features of the income protection insurance proposal as outlined in the UFU proposed policy
and schedule are sufficiently consistent with the requirements of my earlier decision. I am satisfied that with the exception of
the absence of clear arrangements in respect to appeals the MFB leave bank proposal is sufficiently consistent with the requirements
of my earlier decision.
[42] After evaluating the various submissions and the evidence I consider the main strengths of the leave bank proposal to be:
• Virtually all of the contributions by the MFB and firefighters go directly to the provision of benefits. None of the contributions
go to support the costs of external administration or the profits of the insurer. There may be some costs associated with the proposed
Trust but these are likely to be small when compared to an insurer’s costs.
• The scheme is able to be closely linked to other employee support mechanisms operated by the MFB and the UFU and to promote
employee health and return to work.
• The scheme builds on the existing culture of mutual help amongst firefighters. The UFU and the MFB both contribute to the
maintenance of this culture.
[43] I consider the main weaknesses of the leave bank proposal to be:
• The degree of MFB control of the scheme and employee entitlements under it despite the fact that employees would make the
majority contribution. The perception of employer control may have an effect on take up.
• It is possible that there will be insufficient funds in the leave bank to support all claims that meet the eligibility criteria.
If there is a risk of this occurring then it is unlikely that there will be significant take up in the scheme by firefighters. It
is unlikely that firefighters will contribute if they are not guaranteed of receiving the benefit if they meet the eligibility criteria.
The data produced by the MFB showed a likely shortfall.
Revised data on duration of claims suggests that this may not be the case and this reduces the risk, but it does not eliminate the
possibility that there may be insufficient funds to meet all claims.
• The requirement that there be 90% take up amongst eligible firefighters before the scheme is able to function is likely to
result in significant delays and apprehension amongst eligible firefighters that there is a risk or uncertainty associated with joining
the scheme.
• The anticipated lack of support from the UFU and its membership for the leave bank proposal may reduce the level of participation
and the viability of the scheme.
[44] I consider the main strengths of the income protection proposal to be:
• Decisions about access and administration are independent of the MFB and the UFU.
• Contributors are guaranteed protection if they meet the eligibility criteria.
• The scheme can be up and running quickly as the level of take up amongst eligible firefighters builds.
[45] I consider the main weaknesses of the income protection proposal to be:
• The MFB concerns about the issue of who holds the policy and the selection of an appropriate provider. However, I note that
the MFB have not proposed any alternative provider, have not expressed a desire to hold the policy and have not proposed any speedy
mechanism to resolve these questions to their satisfaction.
• The significant administrative costs, the risk premium that needs to be paid to the provider and the cost of the profit share
to the provider.
• The possibility that premiums may increase in the future particularly if take up by eligible firefighters is low. My earlier
decision ensures that this risk is borne primarily by the employees as the MFB contribution is capped at 0.3125% of the total normal
weekly income (excluding overtime) for the group of employees covered.
[46] Some but not all of the identified weaknesses in both schemes can potentially be overcome by decisions I might make to modify
the proposals. For example, I could decide that MFB contributions to the premiums cannot increase during the life of the Agreement
in the income protection scheme and I could require an independent appeals and assessment process for the leave bank scheme.
[47] The fact that benefits do not have to be paid if there are insufficient funds in the leave bank is an essential feature to regulate
the costs to employees and the MFB. However, this feature will affect the attractiveness of the scheme to employees and the likely
level of take up.
[48] I consider that the extra certainty may justify some extra cost in the income protection insurance. I accept that the extra cost
may be negligible depending upon the resolution of the taxation issues and the issue of possible regulatory and administrative costs
associated with the leave bank proposal. In any case the risk associated with the extra cost is primarily with the employees given
that the MFB contribution is capped.
[49] The MFB contribution rate to the income protection insurance scheme proposed by the UFU will be significantly less than the proposed
MFB contribution rate to the leave bank scheme. The design of the scheme means that the MFB contribution to the insurance scheme
will always be less than the contribution rate required to the leave bank scheme.
[50] I am satisfied that premiums in the short term may not be affected by the level of take up but I accept the evidence of Mr Okley
that after the first year premiums will rise if the take up levels are low. However, I agree with the UFU that a high level of take
up is likely given the high take up amongst those eligible for the AXA Scheme. Furthermore, the UFU have a high level of membership
in the MFB and I am satisfied that the UFU will strongly promote the scheme and consider that promotion is likely to be effective.
That said, I have no clear evidence before me which would enable me to determine the probable level of take up of the scheme with
any confidence and hence I am not in a position to determine the likelihood of future increases in premium levels. As I mentioned
earlier it is possible to remove this problem by preventing any increase in premiums paid by the MFB during the life of the Agreement.
[51] For the reasons outlined earlier I do not consider that the issue of uncertainty about the cost of income protection insurance
premiums into the future is a significant argument against the adoption of this option.
[52] The MFB proposal does not operate until the 90% participation level is achieved. My decision implied that it would operate immediately
to the extent that funds were available on a quarterly basis. However, I did allow for additional conditions to be put forward and
discussed. Although this condition may be financially prudent for the MFB it does create significant uncertainty as to whether the
scheme will ever pay benefits and this in itself may affect take up in the scheme. The uncertainty would be reduced but not removed
if the 90% threshold was reduced. However, I would be reluctant to interfere with the MFBs decision to require a threshold participation
before the scheme commences. If I were to do so it could increase the chances that claims would be denied because of insufficient
funds in the scheme to pay for them and this increased uncertainty would be likely to decrease the take up further.
[53] Given all the circumstances of this contested matter I consider it most unlikely that 90% participation will be achieved in the
MFB’s leave bank scheme. I doubt that the threshold would be reached even if the participation threshold was significantly
[54] The UFU concerns about the lack of independence in the claims approval process are legitimate and could affect take up in the
scheme. The MFB proposal also does not have adequate details of an appeal or review process. I could rectify these problems in any
decision should I consider that the leave bank proposal should be preferred. I do not regard the UFU concerns about MFB controlling
the trust fund and manager as particularly significant.
[55] I accept that the most common practice in respect to income protection provisions in collective agreements is that the employer
is the policy holder. The electrical contracting industry is an exception to this practice but it is not the only such exception.
The provisions in collective agreements which provide for this approach have been agreed to by both parties. I am determining this
matter by private arbitration. Most income protection provisions in collective agreements provide that 100% of the premium is paid
by the employer whilst in this case the majority of the premium is paid by the employee.
[56] I would prefer that if income protection insurance was selected that I could determine the issue of appropriate provider and
who should hold the policy with the benefit of a proposal or process which the MFB had indicated it could accept. Similarly, I would
prefer that if the leave bank scheme was selected that I could determine the issues of management and appeals structure with the
benefit of a proposal or process which the UFU had indicated it could accept. When the parties failed to reach agreement on this
matter during the period I allocated following my decision in February I directed them to exchange proposals and to comment on those
proposals. I was hopeful that each party would provide comments on how they would like the option they did not prefer modified. However,
neither party was prepared to do this.
[57] I have concerns about the impact of the delays in this process. I consider that further delay would be unfair and inappropriate.
I do not consider it appropriate to require a further lengthy process to determine the appropriate insurer in the event that I consider
the income protection proposal should be preferred. Over the past four months the MFB have not put forward an alternative policy
or provider or raised any specific concerns about the provider proposed by the UFU. The employees will be the major contributors
to the cost of the premiums. Similarly, given the failure of the UFU to put forward any alternative proposals, I do not consider
it appropriate to require a further lengthy process to determine the trust and appeal arrangements in the event that I consider the
leave bank proposal should be preferred.
[58] The MFB argue that it would not be appropriate to require the MFB to enter into a relationship with a particular income protection
provider against its will. The UFU argue that provisions requiring employers to pay superannuation contributions to a particular
provider are commonplace in Awards and that there is no problem with such an order. In the circumstances of this case I regard it
as appropriate to accept the policy and insurer proposed by the UFU if I adopt the income protection insurance option. I accept the
evidence that ATC has significant experience in the provision of group income protection insurance.
[59] Firefighters should not be denied the benefit of the decision because the parties could not agree on the implementation details.
The dispute over the implementation details is a part of the original dispute and can be resolved by arbitration.
[60] Weighing up all of the factors I consider that income protection insurance is the best option in the circumstances of this case.”
We have outlined how the Scheme can potentially affect AXA Scheme covered firefighters who move to the Scheme. Further, it is apparent
that should the premium increase beyond 0.8%, for whatever reason, after the first 12 months, there will no longer be any disability
insurance scheme covering any firefighter, other than those who have remained in the AXA Scheme.
The Commissioner was alive to the difficulties occasioned by the insurer being a third party, not a party to the Agreement, and therefore
not amenable to the jurisdiction of Fair Work Australia. No order can bind the insurer. In addition to the potential consequences
for all firefighters, and in particular the AXA Scheme employees, we consider this to be a powerful reason not to impose the Scheme,
or indeed any disability insurance scheme upon the MFB.
Likewise, for the reasons identified by the Commissioner, we do not consider, in the exercise of our discretion, that it is appropriate
to impose the MFB’s leave bank proposal on the parties.
Having come to the conclusion that we have, it is not necessary to decide whether the Order was beyond jurisdiction by providing that
the UFU was to be the insured. The MFB contended that because it and its employees were the only contributors to the Scheme, the
Order, insofar as it provides that the UFU is to be the insured, does not pertain to the relationship between the MFB and the UFU,
and that neither section 172(1)(b) of the Act nor clause 19.1.3 of the Agreement founded a jurisdictional base for the making of
We are not attracted to the suggestion of the UFU that we should draft an order that better reflects the Commissioner’s decisions
because we are not of the view that any order should be made. We agree with the submissions of the MFB that the issue should be
dealt with by the parties when they negotiate their next enterprise agreement.
We allow the appeal and quash the decision and order below.
SENIOR DEPUTY PRESIDENT
Appearances
Mr M. Donald SC
Mr R. Daulton
of counsel for the Metropolitan Fire and Emergency Services Board
Mr W. Friend SC
Ms A. Forsyth
of counsel for the United Firefighters’ Union of Australia
Hearing details:
Final written submissions:
[2012] FWA 5330
[2012] FWA 1085
[2012] FWA 5330
[2010] FWAFB 8437
[1936] HCA 40
(1936) 55 CLR 499
Exhibit MFB 8, Attachment A.
Printed by authority of the Commonwealth Government Printer
<Price code G, PR531186>
No downloadable files available