Daniel and Minister for Immigration and Citizenship (Migration) [2025] ARTA 2438 (14 November 2025)
Daniel and Minister for Immigration and Citizenship (Migration) [2025]
ARTA 2438 (14 November 2025)
James Garner Daniel
Respondent:
Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
Tribunal Number:
Senior Member D Thomae
November 2025
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
(Cth), the Tribunal affirms the decision made by a
delegate of the Respondent on 22 August 2025 to not revoke the mandatory
cancellation
of the Applicant’s Class TY Subclass 444 visa.
................[Sgnd]............................................
Statement made on 14 November 2025 at 8:16am
MIGRATION – Non-revocation of mandatory cancellation of a Class TY
subclass 444 visa – where Applicant does not pass the
character test
– whether there is another reason to revoke the mandatory cancellation
decision – consideration of Ministerial
Direction No. 110 ––
decision under review affirmed
Legislation
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
Crimes Act 1914
Migration Act 1958
Bartlett and Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection (Migration)
[2017] AATA 1561
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
Brown v Minister for Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] FCAFC
CRNL v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2023] FCAFC 138
Drake v Minister for Immigration and
Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 2 ALD 60
FYBR v Minister for Home Affairs
(2019) 272 FCR 454
Hartwig v PE Hack
Love v Commonwealth
(2020) 270 CLR 152
Secretary, Department of Home
[2024] FCA 1246
Minister for Home
Affairs v Buadromo
[2018] FCAFC 151
[2018] 267 FCR 320
Minister for Home Affairs v
[2018] FCAFC 217
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection (Migration)
[2018] AATA
Suleiman v Minister for Immigration and Border
[2018] FCA 594
Tanielu v Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection
[2014] FCA 673
Secondary Materials
Direction No 110 – Visa refusal and cancellation under
section 501
and revocation of a mandatory cancellation of a visa under
section 501CA
Statement of Reasons
INTRODUCTION
application relates to the decision of the Respondent (
the Minister
the Respondent
) not to revoke the mandatory cancellation of Mr
the Applicant
) Special Category (Class TY) (Subclass 444)
hearing of this application took place in person on 6 and 7 November 2025. The
Applicant was self-represented and gave evidence
in person. Mr Jake Kyranis,
solicitor from Sparke Helmore represented the Respondent.
The Tribunal had regard to:
(a) Revocation decision receipt filed 26 August 2025 (
(b) The documents produced to the Tribunal by the Respondent pursuant to
of the Act, numbered G1 to G26, paginated from pages 1 to 190 (
(c) The Respondent’s Statement of Facts, Issues and Contentions
Respondent’s SFIC
), filed 24 October 2025 (
(d) A bundle of documents produced under summons,
witness statements, described as the ‘
Tender Bundle
paginated from pages 1 to 117 (
(e) Character Reference of Monique Remiers Edwards filed 2 September 2025
(f) Support Letter of Jason Carter filed 2 September 2025 (
(g) Character Reference of Ashley Hyvonen filed 2 September 2025 (
(h) Character Reference of Darren Cook filed 7 September 2025 (
(i) Character Reference of Trevor Silk filed 30 September 2025 (
(j) Medical Records Bundle filed 6 October 2025
(Exhibit A6
(k) Character Reference of Jarrad Derksen filed 9 October 2025 (
(l) Character Reference of Judie Allen filed 11 October 2025 (
(m) Character Reference of Leon Lewis filed 12 October 2025 (
(n) Character Reference of David Shakespear filed 12 October 2025 (
(o) Medical Records Bundle filed 27 October 2025 (
Exhibit A11
(p) Reintegration Plan filed 2 November 2025 (
Exhibit A12
(q) Updated Reintegration Plan filed 3 November 2025 (
Exhibit A13
(r) Relapse Prevention Plan filed 3 November 2025 (
Exhibit A14
(s) Applicant’s Statement filed 3 November 2025 (
Exhibit A15
(t) Psychological report of Mr Greg Hutcheon dated 13 October 2025 (
(u) The oral evidence of the Applicant.
(v) The oral evidence of M Shakespear.
(w) The closing oral submissions of the Applicant and Respondent.
the following reasons the Tribunal affirms the reviewable
LEGISLATIVE FRAMEWORK
Migration Act 1958
conjunction with
(7), obliges the Minister to cancel a visa
granted to a non-citizen if the Minister is satisfied the person does not pass
the character
character tes
t’ is defined in
of the Act that a
person will not pass the character test if they have ‘
a substantial
criminal record’.
Section 501(7)(c)
of the Act relevantly provides
that a person has a substantial criminal record if they have ‘
sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 12 months or
mandatory visa cancellation can be revoked under
of the, which
The Minister may revoke the original decision if:
(a) the person makes representations in accordance with the invitation; and
(b) the Minister is satisfied:
(i) that the person passes the character test (as defined by
section 501)
(ii) that there is another reason why the original decision should be revoked.
Applicant was born in the United Kingdom in 1985, migrating to New Zealand in
1992 with his family.
Applicant lived in New Zealand for 8 years attending school. In February 2001,
the Applicant at the age of 15 as a New Zealand
citizen, moved again with his
family to Australia. The family settled in Queensland where the Applicant
completed his schooling.
April 2004 the Applicant was convicted in the District Court of Queensland for
the offences ‘
arson, stealing (4 counts), enter or in dwelling with
intent to commit indictable offence (5 counts) and unlawful entry of vehicle
with intent to commit indictable offence
’ and was sentenced to 3 years
imprisonment wholly suspended.
12 June 2024 the Applicant was convicted of ‘
robbery armed in company
– attempted robbery – use/threaten violence, deprivation of liberty
– unlawfully detain/confine’
and sentenced to imprisonment for 5
the Index Offending
As a result of his sentence for this offending, the Applicant’s visa was
mandatorily cancelled on 21 August 2024.
representations made by the Applicant to revoke the mandatory cancellation of
his visa, on 22 August 2025 a delegate of
the Minister refused to revoke the
mandatory cancellation of his visa (
the reviewable
an application for review filed on 25 August 2025 in the Tribunal, the Applicant
seeks a review of the reviewable decision not
to revoke the mandatory
cancellation of his visa.
of the Act, the Tribunal must decide this application within 84 days
of the Applicant being properly notified of the reviewable decision.
does not occur, the decision is affirmed by operation of law. The
day in this matter falls on 17 November 2025, which is 6
working days after the hearing
ISSUES TO BE
of the 5 year sentence imposed on the Applicant on 12 June 2024, he has a
substantial criminal record and fails the character
test. The Applicant conceded
at the hearing that he does not pass the character test.
remaining issue is whether there is ‘
another reason
revoke the mandatory cancellation of his visa.
THE DIRECTION
of the Act, the Tribunal is bound by
with any directions made under the Act. In this case, ‘
Direction No 110
– Visa refusal and cancellation under
section 501
and revocation of a
mandatory cancellation of a visa under
the purposes of deciding whether to revoke the mandatory cancellation of a
non-citizen’s visa, paragraph 5.2 of the Direction
contains 8 principles
which provide the framework for decision making to revoke a mandatory
cancellation under
(1) Australia has a sovereign right to determine whether non-citizens who are of
character concern are allowed to enter and/or remain
in Australia. Being able to
come to or remain in Australia is a privilege Australia confers on non-citizens
in the expectation that
they are, and have been, law-abiding, will respect
important institutions, such as Australia's law enforcement framework, and will
not cause or threaten harm to individuals or the Australian community.
(2) The safety of the Australian Community is the highest priority of the
Australian Government.
(3) Non-citizens who engage or have engaged in criminal or other serious conduct
should expect to be denied the privilege of coming
to, or to forfeit the
privilege of staying in, Australia.
(4) The Australian community expects that the Australian Government can and
should refuse entry to non-citizens, or cancel their
visas, if they engaged in
conduct, in Australia or elsewhere, that raises serious character concerns. This
expectation of the Australian
community applies regardless of whether the
non-citizen poses a measurable risk of causing physical harm to the Australian
(5) Australia has a low tolerance of any criminal or other serious conduct by
visa applicants or those holding a limited stay visa,
or by other
non­citizens who have been participating in, and contributing to, the
Australian community only for a short period
(6) With respect to decisions to refuse, cancel, and revoke cancellation of a
visa, Australia may afford a higher level of tolerance
of criminal or other
serious conduct by non-citizens who have lived in the Australian community for
most of their life, or from a
very young age.
(7) Decision-makers must take into account the primary and other considerations
relevant to the individual case. In some circumstances,
the nature of the
non­citizen's conduct, or the harm that would be caused if the conduct were
to be repeated, may be so serious
that even strong countervailing considerations
may be insufficient to justify not cancelling or refusing the visa, or revoking
mandatory cancellation.
(8) The inherent nature of certain conduct such as family violence is so serious
that even strong countervailing considerations may
be insufficient to justify
not cancelling or refusing the visa, or revoking a mandatory cancellation, even
if the information available
at the time of consideration suggests that the
non-citizen does not pose a measurable risk of causing physical harm to the
8 of the Direction sets out 5 ‘
Primary Considerations
the Tribunal must take into account:
(1) The protection of the Australian community from criminal or other serious
(2) Whether the conduct engaged in constituted family violence;
(3) The strength, nature and duration of ties to Australia;
(4) The best interests of minor children in Australia; and
(5) The expectations of the Australian community.
Direction contains three other considerations, which are the legal consequences
of the decision, the extent of impediments if
removed, and the impact on
Australian business interests.
primary and other considerations have been considered in
PRIMARY CONSIDERATION 1: PROTECTION OF THE AUSTRALIAN
Direction requires decision-makers to keep in mind that the safety of the
Australian community is the highest priority of the
Australian Government, and
that the Government is committed to protecting the Australian community from
harm as a result of criminal
activity or other serious conduct by non-citizens,
and entering or remaining in Australia is a privilege conferred in the
expectation
that non-citizens are and have been law abiding, respect important
institutions and will not cause or threaten harm to individual
or the Australian
determining the weight allocable to this Primary Consideration 1, paragraph
8.1(2) of the Direction requires decision-makers to
(a) the nature and seriousness of the non-citizen’s conduct to date;
(b) the risk to the Australian community should the non-citizen commit further
offences or engage in other serious conduct.
The Nature and Seriousness of the Applicant’s Conduct to
assessing the nature and seriousness of a non-citizen’s criminal offending
or other conduct, paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction
specifies the criteria I
must have regard to.
BNY23 v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2025] FCAFC 14
, the Full Court of the Federal Court, per Rangiah
and Rofe JJ, stated at [107]:
In so ruling, the Tribunal
misconstrued paragraph 8.1.1. It misconstrued paragraph 8.1.1(1)(a) because that
provision does not
the Tribunal to characterise
offending as “very serious”. Paragraph 8.1.1(1)(a) only requires
that decision-makers “have
regard to”, relevantly, the view of the
Australian Government and the Australian community that “violent”
and “crimes of a violent nature against women” are
“very serious”. It is evident that such crimes may range
from common
assault to murder and that their seriousness and nature may also vary widely.
The Tribunal was not bound by the expressed
view of the Australian Government
and the Australian community to regard the appellant’s offending as
“very serious”.
The Tribunal was required to assess for itself,
“the nature and seriousness of the non-citizen’s criminal
offending”,
and the weight that should be attributed to that factor.
Applicant’s offending history is set out in the Australian Criminal
Intelligence Commission ‘
Check Results Report
October 2024 (
Check Results
Unlawful entry of vehicle with intent to commit indictable offence
– conviction recorded, sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.
– conviction recorded, sentenced to 2 years imprisonment.
or in dwelling with intent to commit indictable offence (on 7.01.03)
conviction recorded.
or in dwelling with intent to commit indictable offence and Arson (on 28.1.03)
– conviction recorded, sentenced to 2 years imprisonment.
use of motor vehicles aircraft or vessels
– conviction recorded,
sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.
entry of vehicle with intent to commit indictable offence
– 3 charges
- conviction recorded, sentenced to 2 years imprisonment each charge.
– 3 charges - conviction recorded, sentenced to 12 months
imprisonment.
or in premises with intent to commit indictable offence and break
conviction recorded.
use of motor vehicles aircraft or vessels
– 2 charges - conviction
April 2004:
stolen property with circumstances of aggravation
– no conviction
recorded, recognizance $400 and to be of good behaviour for 12 months.
April 2004 –
Breach bail undertaking
– no conviction
recorded, fined $300.
PPRA contravene direction or requirement
– convicted, fined
Breach of community service order
– convicted, sentenced to
3 years imprisonment, compensation $1,900.
Failure to appear in accordance with undertaking
–conviction recorded, fined $900.
February 2008 –
Breach of bail condition
–conviction
recorded, no further punishment.
stolen property or property fraudulently obtained
- conviction recorded,
fined $300.
Fraud – dishonestly gain benefit/advantage
–conviction recorded, restitution $20.
11 September
Breach of suspended sentence
–ordered to serve
imprisonment 6 months.
July 2022 –
Producing dangerous drugs
dangerous drugs
Possess utensils or pipe etc for use – Property
suspected of having been acquired for the purpose of committing a drug offence
no conviction recorded, fined $1,500.
armed in company
– conviction recorded, sentenced to 5 years
imprisonment.
robbery – use threaten violence, armed/pretends to be armed or in company
– conviction recorded, sentenced to 3 years imprisonment.
Deprivation
unlawfully detain/confine
– (2 charges)
conviction recorded, sentenced to 18 months imprisonment.
entry of vehicle with intent to commit indictable offence
– conviction
recorded, sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.
wilful damage
- conviction recorded, sentenced to 6 months
imprisonment.
18 July 2024 -
Unlawfully enter or remain in yard or place for business, attempted stealing,
failure to appear in accordance with undertaking, possessing
dangerous drugs,
possess property suspected of having been acquired for the purpose of committing
a drug offence, receiving tainted
property, breach of bail condition
convictions recorded, not further punished.
are other matters listed in the Check Results Report for which no conviction was
recorded when the Applicant was dealt with
by the Children’s Court of
Queensland in August 2002 and June 2003.
Minister submitted, correctly, that the Tribunal should not have any regard to
those offences, following the High Court’s
decisions in
for Immigration, Citizenship, Migrant Services
[2023] HCA 17
276 CLR 136
v Minister for Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural
[2024] HCA 6.
Checks Results Report includes records, whilst the Applicant was an adult, of
offences (6) for which no conviction is recorded
Non-convictions
the decision of Kiefel J (as her honour then was) in
[2007] FCA 1039
, and its subsequent consideration in
, the Minister contends that the Tribunal can have consideration
to the Non-convictions.
Minister may be correct as to the contention that
authority that the Tribunal can have regard to adult non-convictions in the
context of the interplay between the
Penalties and Sentencing Act 1992
section 85ZR(2)
Crimes Act 1914
(Cth) as considered
note that the Non-convictions relate to summary offences, with the earliest
being in April 2004 (2) and the most recent being in
July 2022 (4) and in the
context of the Applicant’s history of approximately 40 offences over 20
years are of little significance.
of an abundance of caution, I will not have regard to the Non-convictions. To be
clear, the Tribunal has not had any regard to
any of the matters in the Check
Results Report for which no conviction was recorded in considering the
Applicant’s conduct
and offending, including in respect to determining
whether the Applicant passes the character test and whether there is another
why the cancellation of the visa should be set
8.1.1(1)(a) of the Direction – Very Serious
Offences/Conduct
paragraph 8.1.1(1)(a) of the Direction the Index Offence falls within the
category of ‘
very serious
‘robbery armed in company – attempted robbery –
use/threaten violence, deprivation of liberty – unlawfully
detain/confine’
, with the Applicant sentenced to 5 years
imprisonment.
The Minister contends the Applicant’s offending history should be viewed
as very serious, detailing the circumstances of the
her sentencing remarks for the Index Offending, Judge Holliday KC
(a) The Applicant entered the massage parlour premises with his face covered and
carrying what appeared to be a handgun.
(b) The Applicant demanded money from the 2 adult female victims and their
(c) The Applicant used zip ties to restrain the victims.
(d) The Applicant demanded the PIN for one of the victim’s phone, and when
she refused, the Applicant smashed the phone.
(e) Once arrested, the Applicant made full and frank admissions, saying he knew
how the massage business operated as he had been
previously employed in the
massage industry as a money collector.
(f) The Applicant decided to go to the massage parlour after drinking a lot and
had purchased a replica handgun the previous day
for protection and used that
during the robbery.
(g) The Applicant was responsible as the principal offender along with the
co-accused.
(h) The Applicant was sentenced to a 3 year wholly suspended sentence and 240
hours community service in 2004, and he subsequently
breached the community
service, and he was resentenced to three years, wholly suspended.
(i) There was a substantial gap in offending for some 14 years.
(j) The psychological report tendered states the Applicant came from a stable
upbringing but associated with antisocial peers after
school. The Applicant had
three children; a son died in infancy.
(k) The report stated that the passing of the Applicant’s mother occurred
the Applicant experienced
accumulated grief that was outside his coping mechanisms, ‘
the complex
relationship between bereavement and drug addiction precipitated the offending
behaviour and, the diagnoses
’ of cannabis use disorder, stimulant sue
disorder and prolonged grief disorder.
(l) Treatment of these conditions would improve the Applicant’s prognosis
and risk of recidivism.
(m) It was said in the report that the Applicant’s risk of re-offending
was associated with the mismanagement of addiction
and pro-criminal attitudes
and associates and thus he would be required to break off all communication with
pro-criminal associates
to improve the likelihood of rehabilitation.
(n) The Applicant expressed shame and guilt about the offence and appeared
genuine in potential avenues for rehabilitation.
(o) The offending was clearly serious, and the Applicant had a larger role than
his co-accused.
(p) There are some matters in mitigation in addition to the Applicant’s
pleas of guilty, it was accepted that he had prospects
of rehabilitation, as a
young man he had accumulated a serious criminal history but managed to break
that cycle of drug addition
and antisocial behaviour, he worked, started a
family and purchased a home. He did not reoffend for 14 years, and the criminal
occurred at a time where he had significant stressors and he had
smoked cannabis, drank excessively and taken methamphetamine.
8.1.1(1)(b) of the Direction – Serious
Offences/Conduct
Applicant’s approximately 23 convictions spanning from 2004 to 2008 range
from arson, stealing, enter premises to commit
indictable offences and break,
unlawful use of a motor vehicle, breach of undertaking, community service, and
bail, and do not fall
squarely within the categories in paragraph 8.1.1(b) of
the Direction.
Minister contended prior to the hearing that the Tribunal should consider those
offences to be very serious having regard to the
sentencing remarks of 7 April
2004 where the sentencing judge described the arson and other property offences
closing submissions the Minister, appropriately conceded, that these offences
should be considered as serious offences. I agree.
The Applicant’s
convictions from 2004 to 2008 show a flagrant disregard for following the law
and the seriousness of them is
reflected in the head sentences imposed for them.
Additionally, despite the sentence of imprisonment being wholly suspended, the
Applicant subsequently was in breach of court directed orders showing his
disrespect to the Courts and the expectations of the Australian
Applicant has an extensive traffic history, most recently with a conviction for
driving without a licence and a 6-month disqualification
imposed (18/07/2024),
accumulating 116 demerit points from 2005 (for speeding, use of handheld mobile
phone, failure to stop at traffic
lights), and a low range driving under the
influence (reading 0.056
offences are not specified in paragraph 8.1.1(1)(b) of the Direction as
asked about this history of traffic offences the Applicant downplayed them and
described them as mainly some speeding offences
and going through amber lights.
In his evidence he described how in his pest control work he drove long
distances, including to regional
towns in Queensland and Northern New South
Wales to attend jobs and his intention, if not removed, to live with his father
Gold Coast and by driving maintain contact with his youngest daughter who
lives in the Northern suburbs of Brisbane.
Minister contends that Applicant’s driving offences are of a serious
nature and the adverse consequences should be
considered.
I agree, there is a
theme of recklessness and indifference by the Applicant to Australian traffic
laws and rules governing the operation
of a motor vehicle that go to the safety
of the community.
8.1.1(1)(c) of the Direction –
Sentence Imposed
of imprisonment are the most serious in the sentencing hierarchy. The Applicant
has been sentenced to imprisonment for a
head sentence of 5 years for the Index
Offending for ‘
armed robbery in company
’ with concurrent
terms of imprisonment of an aggregate of 6 years for the sentences for
attempted robbery – use/threaten violence, armed/pretends to be
armed or in company etc, deprivation of liberty – unlawfully
detain/confine, wilful damage
unlawful entry of vehicle for
committing indictable
accept the Respondent’s submissions that the sentence imposed reflects the
seriousness of the Applicant’s
8.1.1(1)(d)
of the Direction – Impact of Offending
Tribunal did not have any evidence before it of the impact on the victims of the
Applicant’s offending. I can infer from
the sentencing remarks that the
Index Offending had a negative impact on the victims, particularly the threat of
violence with a
weapon and being restrained with cable ties. The statements of
remorse by the Applicant in various documents, including the psychological
reports, attests to the Applicant understanding that he had caused fear and
distress to the two female victims during the Index
8.1.1(1)(e) of the Direction – Frequency and
Trend of Offending
accept the Respondent’s submissions that the Applicant’s offending
was frequent, albeit in 2 distinct periods separated
by some 14 years, and
escalated from property and drug offences to armed robbery and threats of
much is clear from the Check Results, the sentencing judge’s remarks and
the evidence of the Applicant in cross-examination.
Due to the significant gap
in criminal offending this is given little weight.
8.1.1(1)(f)
of the Direction – Cumulative Effect of Repeated Offending
There is limited evidence before the Tribunal as to the cumulative effect of
repeated offending and no weight is given to this issue.
8.1.1(1)(h) of the Direction –Re-offending after
27 March 2013, the Minister notified the Applicant of the decision not to cancel
his visa under s 501 of the Act. The Minister
issued the Applicant a formal
warning, which the Applicant acknowledged receiving, that if the Applicant
committed further offences
or breached the character test in the future that
disregarding the warning would weigh heavily against
Minister contends the Applicant’s disregard of the warning by offending
and failing the character test is highly relevant
and weighs heavily against
agree, the Applicant’s offending in 2024, as well as his continuing
traffic offences demonstrates the Applicant’s disregard
for the warning
and the serious consequences of him not following the law.
8.1.1(1)(h) must therefore strongly militate in favour of a finding that
totality of the Applicant’s unlawful conduct
in this country has been of a
very serious nature.
8.1.1(1)(g) & (i) of the Direction
– (False or Misleading Information, Offending in another
was no evidence of any conduct in respect of the other considerations in
paragraph 8.1.1(1)(g) and (i) of the Direction.
Conclusion on
Nature and Seriousness of Conduct to Date
the evidence before me I find the Index Offending is ‘
pursuant to paragraph 8.1.1(1)(a) of the Direction
(a) the Index Offending included the threat of violence to women and their
unlawful detention; and
(b) the sentences imposed of 5 years for the ‘
armed robbery in
and the aggregate 6 years imposed for the other convictions
reflects the seriousness of the offending as considered by the sentencing
find that the remainder of the Applicant’s criminal offending and traffic
offences as serious.
have applied each of the
relevant paragraphs
appearing in paragraph 8.1.1(1) of the Direction to the evidence. The relevant
paragraphs in paragraph 8.1.1(1)
informing my own assessment of the
Applicant’s offending cumulatively led me to the conclusion (and finding)
that the totality
of his unlawful conduct in this country can be readily
characterised as ‘
very serious
Risk to the
Australian community should the non-citizen commit further offences or engage in
other serious conduct
Tribunal must also consider the risk to the Australian community should the
Applicant commit further offences. Clause 8.1.2 of
the Direction states, in
(1) In considering the need to protect the Australian
community (including individuals, groups, or institutions) from harm,
decision-makers
should have regard to the Government's view that the Australian
community's tolerance for any risk of future harm becomes lower as
seriousness of the potential harm increases. Some conduct and the harm that
would be caused, if it were to be repeated, is so
serious that any risk that it
may be repeated may be unacceptable.
(2) In assessing the risk that may be posed by the non-citizen to the
Australian community, decision-makers must have regard to, cumulatively:
a) the nature of the harm to individuals or the Australian community should
the non-citizen engage in further criminal or other serious
conduct; and
b) the likelihood of the non-citizen engaging in further criminal or other
serious conduct, taking into account:
information
and evidence on the risk of the non‑citizen re-offending; and
of rehabilitation achieved by the time of the decision, giving weight to time
spent in the community since their most recent
offence (noting that decisions
should not be delayed in order for rehabilitative courses to be undertaken).
requires an assessment of the nature of the harm should the Applicant engage in
further criminal or other serious
also requires an assessment of the likelihood of the Applicant engaging in such
of the harm
determine the risk to the Australian community should the Applicant commit
further offences or engage in other serious conduct,
the Tribunal must consider
the nature of the harm to individuals, or to the Australian community should the
Applicant reoffend.
concept of ‘
and whether it is
unacceptable
,’ for the purpose of paragraph 8.1.2(1) of the
Direction, is not the same thing as the ‘
likelihood of the non-citizen
engaging in further criminal or other serious conduct
purpose of paragraph 8.1.2(2) of the Direction.
Tanielu v Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
[2014] FCA 673
Justice Mortimer (as her Honour then was) said (at [103]):
well established that, where the harm which might be caused by future conduct is
particularly serious, a lesser likelihood of
the conduct occurring may be
required for the risk to be identified at a level requiring a particular
decision to be made. It is
also well established that the likelihood of a person
engaging in conduct in the future is affected by both static and dynamic
that is, factors which can be assessed objectively against statistical
models to predict the risk category a person falls into, and
dynamic factors
personal to an individual which may moderate or exacerbate the risk the person
otherwise could be said to pose. Those
factors might include family support,
alcohol and drug abuse patterns, employment and the like.
contended by the Respondent, the potential harm caused by further acts of
criminal or other serious conduct committed by the Applicant
Any future offending of a similar nature would have the potential to cause
physical, emotional and/or psychological harm to members
of the Australian
community. If the applicant were to reoffend by committing violent offences
(including armed robberies), the nature
of the harm that may result includes
physical and psychological harm to the applicant’s victims.
If the applicant were to reoffend by committing further driving offences of a
like nature, the harm that could flow from that may
be physical harm, up to and
including death, to other innocent road users including drivers, cyclists,
passengers and pedestrians.
Further property offending has the potential to
cause loss to Australian citizens and businesses
accept the Respondent’s contention and give it significant
Likelihood of the Applicant engaging in further
criminal or serious conduct
likelihood is to be assessed considering information and evidence of the risk of
reoffending and evidence of rehabilitation achieved
by the time of the
Applicant relied on a report of Mr Greg Hutcheon, an educational and
developmental psychologist, dated 13 October 2025, that relevantly
re-connected with his previous wife [DFP] one year ago. They had previously
separated in 2011 after being together for 8 years.
They had two children
together [C1] (18) and Willian who passed away at 14 months. James has another
daughter [C2] (13) who lives
with her mother in Albany Creek.
His incarceration history includes two years served for armed robbery and
drug-related charges, with 15 months at Borallon and additional
time in other
facilities. In 2023, he spent five months in custody before being granted bail
to attend a rehabilitation program,
after which he was sentenced and served
further time.
James experienced the loss of his mother to breast cancer two years ago which
he reports impacted him greatly and contributed to a
period of deterioration and
eventual criminal charges and incarceration. He carries significant guilt over
past events.
He has a history of polysubstance abuse, including alcohol, methamphetamines,
and opiates. He is currently on the Opioid Substitution
Therapy Program (OSTP),
receiving Buvidal 96mg monthly. He also takes Amitriptyline (50-100mg nocte) to
assist with chronic pain
James began smoking marijuana at age 12-13 and started drinking alcohol at
15. He attended a six-month rehabilitation program at Logan
Clinic through Lives
Lived Well. He began using methamphetamine in his late twenties, following the
death of his son and continued
for five years. He has never injected drugs. His
opiate use began with prescription medications.
He has received some counselling following the death of his son, though he
notes that the effectiveness depends on the therapeutic
relationship...He
expresses an ardent desire to contribute meaningfully to society, particularly
through the creation of a rehabilitation
In the context of an immense personal tragedy with his 1-year-old son’s
death. James coped maladaptively with unresolved grief
and loss with increased
substance use and social withdrawal however his commitments as a father and
husband in addition to managing
his own business mitigated the degree of
withdrawal and isolation.
When Jame’s mother passed away resulting in depression and unresolved
grief without sufficient social support or family connection
James’s urge to withdraw and isolate. This social withdrawal and resultant
increased substance use resulted in maladaptive
substance use and escalating
criminality in the context of untreated depression.
He has identified that his urge to withdraw from supports when low in mood
and continuing to process grief can be combatted by remaining
connected and
engaged with support. His current low mood is well managed and understood as a
reasonable response to prolonged incarceration
and separation from family and
likely to resolve should he be released into the community and able to engage in
employment and have
regular contact with his family. Currently his guild and
hurt about being limited from supporting his father (during a significant
deterioration in his health) are the primary factor leading to distress however
James in engaging well openly discussing this and
allowing his upset to be
present without overwhelming him. James reports being heavily concerned
regarding his father’s declining
health and dementia and wants to be
present to support him.
It is likely that James will require to continue to engage in long-term
psychotherapy in navigating interpersonal relationships and
tendencies to
self-blame and isolate.
James has engaged well in appointments progressing with established treatment
goals. He will continue with a further 3 psychology
appointments as part of the
current treatment episode should he remain in immigration detention.
Respondent contends that the report of Mr Hutcheon should be given limited
weight as it does not address the Applicant’s
risk of recidivism. When
pressed in closing, the Respondent conceded that it at least identified the
triggers for the Applicant’s
offending, namely his substance abuse issues
and his unresolved grief disorder. I agree, the report is useful in identifying
Applicant’s triggers and provides some insight on how they might be
treated but does not opine on the Applicant’s risk
of reoffending so is of
limited use and I give it limited weight.
Applicant provided a letter from a clinical psychologist Mr Kevin Cloete, dated
27 February 2019, where he opined that the Applicant
was a low risk of
reoffending.
As the Applicant
very seriously reoffended in 2024, that opinion is of no assistance.
a report by Oliver Brecht, psychologist, dated 9 June 2024, provided to the
Applicant’s solicitor for the purpose of his
sentencing for the Index
Offending, it relevantly
stated that he became more rebellious when he left school partway through year
12 when he became associated with peers who
displayed antisocial behaviours such
as criminal activity and drug use.
As for children, Mr Daniel stated that he had a daughter aged 18. 11 months
after she was born; he said that also had a son who died
at 18 months old due to
misdiagnosis by medical professionals. He said he never seemed to recover from
the grief. He reported having
a third child, who is now aged 12, from a separate
relationship. He described his relationship with his daughters as mostly
although he wished he could be around more for them.
Following his arrest and moving into the inpatient rehabilitation facility,
Mr Daniel said that he blocked and deleted contact information
pro-criminal acquaintances and other drug users. He reported one positive and
supportive friend who checked in with him frequently.
Mr Daniel stated that he was introduced to cannabis when he was in his young
adolescence, which developed into an addiction throughout
adulthood. He said as
an adult, he often grew and sold cannabis.
Following his back injury, he said he was prescribed various pain medications
such as Tagin, Endone, and Tremaine, which he abused.
Mr Daniel listed a series of life stressor that precipitated and augmented
his drug abuse over time. Particularly circumstances that
surrounded grief and
loss. Such as the death of his son, the breakdown of his second relationship,
his mother’s death due to
cancer, selling his home and moving to a lower
socioeconomic area where illegal drugs were more accessible. He said that he
smoke up to a quarter of an ounce a day and a gram of methamphetamine
taken orally or smoked per day around the time of the offence.
He reported an
increase in alcohol at this time also.
Mr Daniel reported that he had successfully abstained from drugs since his
arrival at the rehabilitation facility at the time of the
assessment. He
reported that a few weeks ago, some residents had smuggled and used drugs in the
rehab centre. He was invited to join
but refused...He said he was also drug
tested, and it came back negative.
At the time of the offence and assessment, Mr Daniel suffered from the
following diagnoses according to the ...DSM...
Cannabis Use
Disorder, severe, in sustained remission in a controlled environment...
Stimulant Use
Disorder, severe, in sustained remission in a controlled environment...
Prolonged Grief
Disorder...
Regardless, upon re-entering society, he would require
ongoing monitoring to track progress and maintain commitment towards
rehabilitation.
His criminal history largely indicated that the risk of
reoffending was associated with mismanagement of addiction and pro-criminal
attitudes and associates. Thus, he would be required to break off all
communication with pro-criminal associates, to improve the
likelihood of
rehabilitation. He expressed shame and guilt about the offence and appeared to
have generated potential avenues for
rehabilitation such as drug addiction
treatment and grief counselling. His positive education and employment history
also suggest
positive prospects for paid employment.
Respondent contends that the Applicant’s offending
demonstrates
a concerning theme of the applicant committing very serious offences in
Australia. Previous sentences imposed, including
the applicant to serve actual
time in jail, have not deterred him from reoffending. His offending has also
increased in seriousness
with the passage of time, since his most recent robbery
escalated to brandishing a gun at the complainants, making threats to shoot
and tying them up.
The applicant has provided evidence of a number of rehabilitation courses
completed in 2025 for topics relating to drugs and alcohol,
addiction, stress
management and psychology. He also completed rehabilitation with Lives lived
Well. However, the Minister submits
that the applicant’s rehabilitation
attempts are not substantive enough to instil the Tribunal with confidence that
longer at risk of re-offending. While the applicant has made some
attempts at rehabilitation, they are not comprehensive when viewed
context of the applicant’s long-standing issues with drinking alcohol
excessively and abusing drugs. There is also insufficient
evidence before the
Tribunal that the applicant has addressed the underlying issues which have
caused him to take drugs and drink
alcohol excessively.
note that there is a factual inaccuracy in the Respondent’s contention,
namely that until the sentencing of imprisonment for
the Index Offending, the
Applicant had not served any actual jail time, his sentences for imprisonment
being wholly suspended. Despite
that factual correction, I agree that the
imposition of sentences of imprisonment and the warning given by the Minister in
not deterred the Applicant from his most serious offending in
Applicant has expressed remorse to the Australia community for his offending and
taken accountability for his conduct, he did
so again in his oral evidence. The
evidence of his participation in rehabilitation programs, including the
inpatient program with
Lives Lived Well after obtaining bail from remand and
prior to sentencing for his Index Offending is in his favour. He has not wasted
his time whilst in prison and in detention, completing over 20 courses
addressing various topics.
Character referees
supportive of their belief of the Applicant’s remorse and his prospects of
being re-integrated into the Australian Community.
His stated intention to live
and care for his ailing father, take up an offer for work and re-establish his
relationships with his
partner and children are protective factors in
considering the risk of re-offending.
do not have the benefit of any probative expert evidence as to the
Applicant’s risk of reoffending. He says that he has had
ample opportunity
in prison and detention to access drugs but has not and is committed to staying
sober and off drugs and to continue
to seek psychological support and attending
alcoholic anonymous meetings. He has supplied his
reintegration
and relapse
prevention plan
that provide
some level of detail of the supports available to him if he was returned to the
accept on face value that to be true, and he seemed to be genuine about his
resolve to not resort to his previous substance abuse
as well as managing his
grief disorder. But that resolve has not been tested in the community. I note
that he has had access to
Opioid Substitution Therapy
’ whilst in immigration detention and there was no evidence
before me on whether that would continue if he was released into
am not convinced that the Applicant has established that he is at low risk of
not returning to his substance abuse and reoffending.
As to his commitment to
seeking professional psychological support for his grief disorder I believe he
was genuine in that regard,
albeit with Mr Hutcheon’s caveat that this was
dependent on the therapeutic relationship.
consider the Applicant’s risk of offending to be in the low to moderate
range based on the evidence before me with significant
adverse consequences if
Conclusion: Protection of the Australian
by the ‘Principles’ stated in paragraph 5.2 of Direction 110, and
considering: (i) the nature and seriousness
of the Applicant’s conduct to
date; and (ii) the risk to the Australian community should he commit further
offences or engage
in other serious conduct, I consider that the first
primary consideration
’ (Protection of the Australian
community), in paragraph 8.1 of the Direction,
weighs heavily against
, noting that the safety of the ‘
’ is the highest priority of the Australian government:
paragraph 5.2(2) of Direction.
PRIMARY CONSIDERATION 2: FAMILY
VIOLENCE COMMITTED BY THE NON-CITIZEN
8.2 of the Direction provides that decision-makers, such as the Tribunal, must
have regard to family violence perpetrated by
the non-citizen when deciding
whether to revoke a visa cancellation decision.
is no information before me that the Applicant has committed family violence,
and this consideration does not weigh for or against
revoking the cancellation
of his visa.
Conclusion: Family Violence Committed by the
Non-citizen
consider that the ‘
second consideration
’ (Family Violence
Committed by the Non-citizen), in paragraph 8.2 of the Direction,
neutrally against revocation
PRIMARY CONSIDERATION 3: THE
STRENGTH, NATURE AND DURATION OF TIES TO AUSTRALIA
8.3 of the Direction says I must consider any impact of the decision on the
Applicant’s immediate family members in
Australia, where those family
members are Australian citizens, Australian permanent residents, or people who
have a right to remain
in Australia indefinitely.
consideration requires the Tribunal to have regard to the strength, nature and
duration of the Applicant’s ties to Australia.
Clause 8.3 of the Direction
provides that:
(1) Decision-makers must consider any impact of the
decision on the non-citizen's immediate family members in Australia, where those
family members are Australian citizens, Australian permanent residents, or
people who have a right to remain in Australia indefinitely.
(2) Where consideration is being given to whether to cancel a non-citizen's
visa or whether to revoke the mandatory cancellation of
their visa, the
decision-maker must also consider the strength, nature and duration of any other
ties that the non-citizen has to
the Australian community. In doing so,
decision-makers must have regard to:
a) how long the non-citizen has resided in Australia, including whether the
non-citizen arrived as a young child, noting that:
i. less weight should be given where the non-citizen began offending soon
after arriving in Australia; and
ii. more weight should be given to time the non-citizen has spent
contributing positively to the Australian community
b) the strength, duration and nature of any family or social links with
Australian citizens, Australian permanent residents and/or
people who have an
indefinite right to remain in Australia.
Time in Australia
Applicant arrived in Australia as a minor (15) in 2001 and his adult criminal
offending commenced in 2004, some 3 years after
arrival. The Applicant is now 40
years old and has lived primarily in Australia for 24 years. Put another way,
the Applicant has
spent approximately 60 percent of his life in Australia.
Applicant completed year 11 and part of year 12 in Australia and has a history
of employment from 2017 to 2023 being self-employed
and 2018 to 2021 as an
employee in in pest management. He also stated he was gainfully employed in the
construction industry and
had a job offer to work with a cleaning company doing
maintenance work using his carpentry skills.
The Applicant provided numerous referees statements that spoke to his integrity
and strong moral compass, his devotion to his family
and his desire to
rehabilitate and make a positive contribution to
It is clear from the
statements provided that the Applicant has strong links with friends and the
community in Australia.
Immediate Family
Applicant’s immediate family in Australia consists of:
(a) His de facto partner DFP (Australian citizen of first nations heritage).
(b) His Father Mr Alan Daniel (Permanent resident of Australia).
(c) His biological children, C1 (born 20 November 2012 (13)) and C2 (born 18 May
2006 (19)) (Australian citizens).
(d) His stepchild, SC1 (born 10 April 2017 (8)) (Australian citizen).
Daniel provided medical evidence that he said showed that his father had early
onset dementia. In particular a letter from Dr Joseph
Varga, a consultant
physician, dated 17 October 2025, that provides an MRI scan showed his
father had ‘
amyloid angiopathy
’ and was taking
Applicant said that was a diagnosis of early onset dementia and the medication
was to treat that diagnosis. The Minister in closing
did not dispute that the
medical evidence pointed to the Applicant’s father having early onset of
dementia. I agree. I am reasonably
satisfied that the medical evidence shows the
Applicant’s father has early onset of dementia and accept the
Applicant’s
evidence of his intention, if not removed, to care for his
father. There was no evidence of any other immediate family who could
the Applicant’s father.
10 May 2022, the Applicant resumed a de facto relationship with DFP, the mother
of his biological child C1 and SC1. DFP lives on
the Gold Coast with C1 and
Applicant says that C1 has stopped studying to work part time to support her
mother and that if he was able to return to the community,
he would support her
financially so that C1 could return to study. He emphasised DFP’s and
C1’s indigenous connection
and culture and how that has positively
impacted him. He says he has been adopted by DFP’s people and accepted by
of her indigenous
provided an email to the minister who
I am a proud
First Nations woman of Australia, and together we share a daughter, [C1], who is
also First Nations. The proposed removal
of her father from Australia will have
devastating impact on our daughter’s emotional wellbeing, cultural
identity, and connection
to family and Country.
[Partner’s Name] has made mistakes in the past, and he deeply regrets
the actions that led to his visa cancellation. However,
he has shown a strong
commitment to change and becoming a better father and partner. Since his
detention, our family has suffered
greatly. Our daughter misses him every day
and cannot understand why her father is being taken from her.
As a First Nations family, connection to culture, kinship and stability are
vital. Our daughter’s identity and emotional development
are closely tied
to the presence of both her parents, especially within the cultural context of
being raised in her ancestral homeland.
Removing her father from her life
disregards the principles of family unity and cultural preservation, which are
essential under
Australian and international law – including the
Convention on the Rights of the Child to which Australia is a signatory.
I am asking you to consider the profound an irreversible harm that this
deportation would cause to our daughter, our family, and our
community. My
partner is not a threat to Australia. He is a devoted father, a loved member of
our family, and someone deserving of
another chance to remain in this country
and raise his child with the love, support and guidance she needs.
did not understand from the Applicant’s evidence or DFP’s that the
Applicant was claiming to be falling within the category
of person in
v Commonwealth
(2020) 270 CLR 152.
I am satisfied that
on the available evidence that the Applicant is not biologically of Aboriginal
descent and thereby not a person
who is within the contemplation of the
reasoning in
Applicant in his evidence said it was his intention to live with his father to
care for him and maintain a de facto relationship
with DFP and re-establish his
relationship with his children. He says that whilst in detention he contacts his
daughters every two
days and would see them at a minimum of every
Applicant said that his late mother and son are buried in Australia and that he
has no substantial ties to any other country.
was no evidence of significant financial dependency by any of the immediate
family upon the Applicant, rather the inference
was that the Applicant makes no
significant financial contribution to his immediate family.
Extended Family
Applicant has no extended family in Australia.
Conclusion: The
strength, nature and duration of ties to Australia
into account the impact of any non-revocation decision on the Applicant’s
immediate family members in Australia, the
strength, nature and duration of ties
to Australia, I consider this
Primary Consideration 3 weighs heavily in
favour of the revocation of the cancellation of the Applicant’s
PRIMARY CONSIDERATION 4: BEST INTERESTS OF MINOR
CHILDREN IN AUSTRALIA AFFECTED BY THE DECISION
8.4 of the Direction requires the Tribunal to consider the best interests of
minor children in Australia affected by the decision.
8.4 of the Direction
requires me to determine
whether a non-revocation decision is or is not in the best interests of a child
(under the age of 18 at the
time) affected by the decision.
8.4(4) of the Direction sets out a number of factors to take into consideration,
which relevantly include:
the nature and
duration of the relationship between the child and the Applicant. Less weight
should generally be given where the relationship
is non-parental, and/or there
is no existing relationship and/or there have been long periods of absence, or
limited meaningful contact
(including whether an existing Court order restricts
the extent to
which the Applicant is likely to play a positive parental role in the future,
taking into account the length of time
until the child turns 18, and including
any Court orders relating to parental access and care arrangements;
impact of the Applicant’s prior conduct, and any likely future conduct,
and whether that conduct has, or will have a negative
impact on the child;
effect that any separation from the Applicant would have on the child, taking
into account the child’s or non-citizen’s
ability to maintain
whether there
are other persons who already fulfil a parental role in relation to the
Applicant has one biological daughter, C2 and a stepson, SC1 who are minors and
Australian citizens (
the Children
lives with her mother in the Northern suburbs of Brisbane and on the evidence
she is the primary carer. There are no court orders
in place for the Applicant
in respect of access to C2.
Applicant’s evidence was that the mother of C2 allowed him to care for his
daughter on weekends, extending to perhaps an
early pick up and/or later drop
off to school. He said that C2 spent time with C1 and SC1 and had a good
relationship.
was no evidence before the Tribunal from the mother of C2 and no evidence of any
financial support provided by the Applicant
lives with her mother, DFP, along with the adult daughter C1. The Applicant says
that he saw SC1 ‘
every weekend or every second weekend when he’s
with his mum [DFP] I see
In his oral
evidence the Applicant said that the father of SC1 has little contact with him,
once or twice a year, and the Applicant
was the primary father figure for him.
was no evidence before the Tribunal from DFP in respect to the Applicant’s
relationship with SC1.
was no evidence before the Tribunal from C2 or SC1 as to their views.
Children are 8 and 13, and if the Applicant was returned to the community, I
accept that the Applicant would have a parental role
in their lives, albeit not
as the primary carer, for an extended period until they reached adulthood.
is no evidence either way of the impact of the Applicant’s prior conduct
has had on the Children.
accept that the impact of a non-revocation decision on C2 would be to make very
difficult to maintain a close relationship with
her father and would have a
significant negative emotional impact on her.
accept that the impact of a non-revocation decision on SC1 would be to make very
difficult to maintain a relationship with the Applicant
and would have a
negative emotional impact on him.
Conclusion: Best interests of
minor children in Australia affected by the decision
am of the view that a non-revocation decision is not in the best interests of
the Children, in that it will prevent the possibility
of person to contact
between the Applicant and them in Australia as well as have a negative emotional
impact on them.
into account the best interests of the children mentioned above cumulatively,
Primary Consideration 4 weighs moderately in favour of the revocation of
the cancellation of the Applicant’s visa
CONSIDERATION 5: EXPECTATIONS OF THE AUSTRALIAN COMMUNITY
8.5(1) of the Direction says that the Australian community expects non-citizens
to obey Australian laws while in Australia.
Where a non-citizen has engaged in
serious conduct in breach of this expectation, or where there is an unacceptable
risk that he
may do so, the Australian community, as a norm, expects the
government not to allow the non-citizen to enter or remain in
8.5(2) of the Direction says that visa cancellation or refusal, or
non-revocation of the mandatory cancellation of a visa,
may be appropriate
simply because the nature of the character concerns or offences are such that
the Australian community would expect
that the person should not be granted or
continue to hold a visa. In particular, the Australian community expects that
the Australian
Government can and should refuse entry to non-citizens, or cancel
their visas, if they raise serious character concerns through conduct,
Australia or elsewhere, of the following kind, relevantly:
(a) acts of family violence; or
(b) causing a person to enter into, or being party to (other than being a victim
of), a forced marriage;
(c) commission of serious crimes against women, children or other vulnerable
members of the community such as the elderly or disabled;
in this context,
‘serious crimes’ include crimes of a violent or sexual nature, as
well as other serious crimes against
the elderly or other vulnerable persons in
the form of fraud, extortion, financial abuse/material exploitation or
(d) commission of crimes against government representatives or officials due to
the position they hold, or in the performance of
their duties; or
(e) involvement or reasonably suspected involvement in human trafficking or
people smuggling, or in crimes that are of serious international
including, but not limited to, war crimes, crimes against humanity and slavery;
(f) worker exploitation.
above expectations of the Australian community apply regardless of whether the
non-citizen poses a measurable risk of causing
physical harm to the Australian
Australian community expectations are to be
This consideration is about the expectations of the Australian community as a
whole, and in this respect, decision-makers should
proceed on the basis of the
Government’s views as articulated above, without independently assessing
the community’s
expectations in the particular case
Applicant has engaged in the commission of very serious crimes against women by
his Index Offending of ‘
robbery armed in company – attempted
robbery – use/threaten violence, deprivation of liberty – unlawfully
detain/confine,’
contrary to paragraph 8.5(2)(c) of the Direction.
am satisfied that the Applicant’s offending is sufficiently serious such
that the Australian community would expect the Australian
Government to refuse
to set aside the mandatory cancellation of his visa.
remaining question is whether there are any factors which modify the Australian
community’s expectations. This question
is relevantly to the present
circumstances informed by the principles in paragraphs 5.2(5), (6) and (7) of
the Direction. In summary
(a) The Australian community has a low tolerance of any criminal or other
serious conduct by non-citizens who have been participating
in, and contributing
to, the Australian community for only a short period of time (paragraph
(b) Australia may
afford a higher level of tolerance towards criminal or
other serious conduct by non-citizens who have lived in the Australian community
for most of their life or from a very young age (paragraph 5.2(6)).
(c) The nature of a non-citizen’s conduct, or the harm that would be
caused if the conduct were to be repeated, may be so serious
that even strong
countervailing considerations may be insufficient to justify a visa outcome that
is not adverse to the non-citizen
(paragraph 5.2(7)).
relation to sub-paragraph (a) of the above paragraph [120], the Applicant has
spent over two decades in Australia since arriving
here in February 2001 aged 15
years. He has spent about 60% of his life in this country and is currently aged
40 years. He has a
reasonable work history in Australia. He has fathered 3
biological children in this country, with one passing away, and has made
community contributions to it. The Applicant’s participation in, and
contribution to, the Australian community is therefore
. Thus, the Australian community’s tolerance is
raised by this part of the principles in 5.2(5) of the Direction.
relation to sub-paragraph (b) of the above paragraph of [120], the Applicant
arrived in Australia as a 15-year-old in February
2001. Although he has spent
most more than half is life in Australia (60%), he did not come here at a very
young age. This means
the Australian community’s level of tolerance of
criminal or other serious conduct by this Applicant is not raised.
relation to sub-paragraph (c) of the above paragraph [120], I am of the view
that the totality of the Applicant’s unlawful
conduct in this country has
been sufficiently serious such as to displace any strong countervailing
considerations militating in
favour of a positive visa outcome. I have found
that the Applicant poses a low-moderate recidivist risk but that the harm
from any reoffending would be so serious such as to render that risk
unacceptable to the Australian community.
Conclusion:
Expectations of the Australian community
the Australian community expects the visa to be cancelled as specified in the
primary consideration 5 weighs heavily in favour of not revoking
cancellation of the visa
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS
9 of the Direction states:
(1) In making a decision under section
501(1), 501(2) or 501CA(4), the considerations below must also be taken into
account, where
relevant, in accordance with the following provisions. These
considerations include (but are not limited to):
a) legal consequences of the decision;
b) extent of impediments if removed;
c) impact on Australian business interests.
Legal consequences of decision under s 501 or s 501CA
consequence of affirming the non-revocation decision would be that the
(a) will be liable to be removed from Australia as soon as reasonably
practicable
(b) must remain in detention until
(c) will be prohibited from applying for another visa while in Australia, except
for a Protection visa or Bridging
(d) will be indefinitely excluded from
is no evidence before the Tribunal that suggests that Australia’s
non-refoulment obligations are enlivened in respect
of the Applicant.
Minister cited
v Minister for Immigration and
Multicultural Affairs
[2025] FCA 143
for the proposition that the Tribunal
would not be in error to give neutral weight to the legal consequences of
affirming the non-revocation
decision because the Applicant was not a person
whom Australia owed non-refoulment obligations or faced prolonged or indefinite
accept that the reasoning in
applies to the Applicant’s
factual circumstances. As I state above, the consequence of affirming the
non-revocation decision
would be that the Applicant would remain in detention
until removed to New Zealand. He does not fit into a category where
non-refoulement
obligations apply or he faces the prospect of prolonged or
indefinite detention.
Other Consideration 1 neutral weight in favour of revocation of the
cancellation of the Applicant’s visa
impediments if removed
Tribunal must consider the extent to which the Applicant would face an
impediment or impediments if removed from Australia. This
is to take into
(a) the Applicant’s Age and health;
(b) whether there are substantial language or cultural barriers; and
(c) any social, medical and/or economic support available to them in that
Applicant is a 40-year-old man who is able bodied and does not claim to have any
significant physical medical conditions. He has
been diagnosed as having grief
disorder and substance abuse disorders.
Minister contends that the Applicant’s age and health are not impediments
to him re-settling in New Zealand. I agree.
Minister relies on the fact that the Applicant lived in New Zealand between the
ages of 8 and 15 and movement records show he
has been to New Zealand a number
of times which suggest he is familiar with and possibly retains ties with New
Applicant’s evidence was that he has no social support available to him in
when her mother lived in New
Zealand for a period before re-settling in Australia.
Minister says New Zealand is culturally, linguistically and politically like
Australia and there would be no substantial cultural
or language barriers for
him to overcome and he would be entitled to government benefits similar to those
available to him in Australia.
Further, the Applicant’s employment
experience, particularly in pest control would assist him in securing similar
in New Zealand.
Applicant’s evidence was that he had no cultural or social connection to
establishing himself. As
to employment, the Applicant stated that his pest control qualifications were
specialised in termites and
fire ants, neither of which occurred in New
accept that the Applicant would have difficulty establishing himself in New
Zealand where he has no social supports, but the similarities
in culture,
language and government supports would ameliorate any difficulties and make them
temporal rather than permanent.
evidence that he had carpentry skills and was looking to employment with a
cleaning company to do general maintenance are skills
that would be transferable
to New Zealand, accepting that they are not his preferred specialist skills in
pest control.
Other Consideration 2 limited weight in favour of revocation of the
cancellation of the Applicant’s visa
Australian business interests
Tribunal must consider any impact on Australian business interests of a decision
to affirm the reviewable decision.
Applicant did not make any contentions in respect of this ground and there was
no evidence to suggest that the Applicant’s
removal will impact any
current business interests.
Other Consideration 3 neutral weight in favour of revocation of the
cancellation of the Applicant’s visa
Considerations
the Applicant nor the Respondent raised any other
considerations.
Applicant does not pass the character test under s 501 of the Act, and the
Tribunal must consider whether there is another reason
the decision to cancel
his visa should be revoked, having regard to the primary and other
considerations in the Direction.
Direction sets out the way in which the relevant considerations are to be
considered and weighed. There has been judicial consideration
on the exercise of
balancing and weighing considerations contained in the relevant Direction,
including that the ‘
considerations are not
and the other considerations need not be
considered secondary in all
outweigh primary considerations depending on the circumstances of the
Full Court of the Federal Court
v Minister for
Immigration, Citizenship and Multicultural Affairs
[2023] FCA 252
‘[t]he real burden of the task to be undertaken by a
decision-maker who must comply with the Direction [the precursor Direction
is to bring together the considerations as part of a single evaluation of their
relative significance thereby weighing them all
weight must generally be given to the protection of the Australian community
than other primary considerations. Greater weight
will also generally be given
to primary considerations. In examining what this requires, the Full Court
at [27] states that this means greater weight will be
given unless there is some reason why that general approach should not be
Australian community expects that the Australian Government should cancel the
visas of non-citizens who commit crimes in Australia
which raise serious
character concerns. This expectation of the Australian community applies
regardless of whether the Applicant
poses a measurable risk of causing physical
harm to the Australian community.
Applicant, as a non-citizen who committed the very serious crimes of
robbery armed in company – attempted robbery –
use/threaten violence, deprivation of liberty – unlawfully
detain/confine’
should generally expect to forfeit the privilege of
staying in Australia.
weighing of the considerations in the Applicant’s circumstances was finely
one hand the seriousness of the Applicant’s offences weighed against him
heavily in respect of primary considerations 1 and
the other, the Applicant has strong connections to his family and community in
Australia, and the best interest of his father,
daughters and stepson would be
for him not to be removed. The impact on the Applicant’s immediate family,
particularly his
father and his daughters, if he is removed would be
devastating.
do not doubt that the Applicant holds a genuine view that he will not reoffend,
and he has undertaken rehabilitative course directed
towards his substance abuse
disorders and his grief disorder, but his stated intentions have not been tested
in the community.
have concluded that the countervailing considerations in favour of the Applicant
are insufficient to outweigh the primary considerations
of protection of and
expectations of the Australian community.
carefully considered the competing weight I have given to the primary and other
considerations; I am not satisfied that there
’ why the cancellation decision should be revoked.
Administrative Review Tribunal Act 2024
Tribunal affirms the decision made by a delegate of the Respondent on 22 August
2025 to not revoke the mandatory cancellation
of the Applicant’s Class TY
Subclass 444 visa
Date(s) of hearing:
6 and 7 November 2025
Date final submissions received:
Counsel for the Applicant
Applicant was self-represented
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Mr Jake Kyranis, Sparke Helmore Lawyers
It is the term of imprisonment
to which the applicant was sentenced, not the term actually served, that is
relevant when determining
the term of imprisonment - See
Drake v Minister for
Immigration and Ethnic Affairs
(1979) 46 FLR 409
Exhibit R2, G4, p 50.
Exhibit R2, G4, p 48.
Exhibit R2, G3, p 26.
Exhibit R2, G2, p 5.
Minister for Home Affairs v
[2018] FCAFC 151.
The Direction, paragraph
Exhibit R2, G5, pp 47-51.
The Direction, paragraph
8.1(1)(a)(i) and (ii).
Exhibit R2, G5, p 48.
Exhibit R3 at [26].
Exhibit R2, G5, p 52.
Exhibit R3 at [30]-[31].
Exhibit R4, TB3, pp
Citing Senior Member
Tavoularis in
Bartlett and Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
(Migration)
[2017] AATA 1561
Exhibit R2, G8, pp
Brown v Minister for
Immigration and Citizenship
[2010] FCAFC 33
PNLB and Minister for
Immigration and Border Protection (Migration)
[2018] AATA 162
Exhibit R2, G22, pp
The Direction, paragraph
8.1.2(2)(a).
The Direction, paragraph
8.1.2(2)(b).
The Direction, paragraph
8.1.2(2)(a).
Exhibit R3 at [38]-[39].
The Direction, paragraph
Exhibit A16.
Exhibit R2, G21, p 143.
Exhibit R2, G22, p137.
Exhibit R3 at [40.2] &
Exhibit R2, G14, pp 104
Exhibit A1, A2, A3, A4, A5,
A7, A8, A9, A10
Exhibit A13.
Exhibit A14.
Exhibit R2, G16, G17, G18,
G19; Exhibit A1, A2, A3, A4, A5, A7, A8, A9, A10.
Exhibit A11, p 2.
Exhibit R2, G11, pp
Exhibit R2, G13, pp
Exhibit R2, G15, pp
Kapeli v Secretary,
Department of Home
[2024] FCA 1246
Exhibit R2, G11, p 84.
Exhibit R2, G11, p 84.
Paragraph 8.4(1) of the
Paragraph 8.5(2) of the
Paragraph 8.5(3) of the
This approach is consistent
with the decision of the Full Court of the Federal Court in
FYBR v Minister
for Home Affairs
[2019] FCAFC 185.
See 198 of the
s 500(1)(c)
Migration Act
See Special Return Criteria
500(1)(c) in Schedule 2 to the
Migration Regulations 1994
Minister for Immigration and Border Protection
Minister for Home Affairs
[2018] FCAFC 217
RTF format (13.2 MB)
Signed PDF/A format