Reddie & Reddie [2013] FMCAfam 280 (28 March 2013)
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES COURT OF AUSTRALIA
[2013] FMCAfam 280
FAMILY LAW – Children – Parental
capacity – conflict between parents – young children –
practical impact
where the parents live some distance apart in same regional
Family Law Act 1975
Goode & Goode
(2006) FamCA 1346
Respondent:
File Number:
ADC 1942 of 2011
Judgment of:
Hearing dates:
8, 9 December 2011, 12 January,
1, 2 November and 20, 21 December 2012
Date of Last Submission:
Delivered at:
Delivered on:
REPRESENTATION
Counsel for the
Solicitors for the Applicant:
Westley Di Giorgio
Counsel for the Respondent:
Ms A Horvat
Solicitors for the Respondent:
Ryans Lawyers
(1) The parties share equally in parental responsibility
for the children X born on (omitted) 2004 and Y born on (omitted) 2006.
(2) The children live with the mother SAVE as otherwise specified in these
(3) The children live with the father as follows:
school terms:
alternate weekend from the conclusion of school Friday until the commencement of
school Monday (or Tuesday in the event Monday
is a public holiday) and to
recommence on the first weekend of each school term;
intervening week from the conclusion of school Thursday until the commencement
of school Friday (or until 5.00pm in the
event Friday is a public holiday or a
pupil free day);
(b) for one
half of each school holidays at times to be agreed between the parties and in
default of agreement:
(i) for the
first half of each short school holiday period commencing at the conclusion of
school on the last day of term and concluding
at 5.30pm on the Saturday one week
(ii) in the
Christmas 2013 school holidays and each alternate year thereafter from the
conclusion of school on the last day of the
school term until 5.30pm on the
fourth Saturday of the holiday period;
(iii) in the
Christmas 2014 school holidays and each alternate year thereafter from 5.30pm on
the fourth Saturday until 5.30pm on
the last Saturday of the school holiday
(4) The children spend time with each parent on special occasions as
event Mother’s Day falls on the father’s weekend, the
children’s time in the father’s care will
conclude at 5.30pm on the
Saturday prior to Mother’s Day;
event Father’s Day falls on the mother’s weekend, the children will
live with the father from 5.30pm on the
Saturday prior to Father’s Day
until the commencement of school on the Monday;
(c) with the
father from 3.00pm Easter Thursday until 5.30pm Easter Monday in 2013 and each
alternate year thereafter with such time
to be included within the calculation
of the children’s half school holiday time in the father’s care in
the event Easter
falls within the April school holidays in any given year;
(d) with the
mother from 3.00pm Easter Thursday until 5.30pm Easter Monday in 2014 and each
alternate year thereafter with such time
to be included within the calculation
of the children’s half school holiday time in the mother’s care in
the event Easter
falls within the April school holidays in any given year.
(e) at such
other times, including special occasions, as may be agreed between the
(5) Handovers on school days take place with the father to collect the children
from, or return them to the (omitted) School, or
such other school as the
children may attend.
(6) All other handovers take place at the (omitted) Police Station or such other
public venue as may be agreed between the parties
and confirmed in writing.
(7) Each parent shall facilitate telephone communication between the children
and the other parent at all reasonable times and, in
particular, on the
children’s birthdays, the parents’ birthdays and Christmas Day.
(8) Each parent shall notify the other as soon as possible in the event either
child suffers a significant injury or is diagnosed
with a significant
(9) Each parent is at liberty to communicate directly with the children’s
treating medical practitioners, specialists or any
other health professionals
regarding the children’s health and welfare.
(10) Each party shall notify the other parent of the names and contact details
of the family general practitioner and any other health
professional providing
treatment to either child and keep them informed and up to date with such
information.
(11) Each parent is authorised to:
(a) receive
copies of all school reports, newsletters, letters to parents and any other
correspondence provided from the children’s
school; and
(b) attend any
school events to which parents are usually invited including parent/teacher
interviews, open days, sports days, concerts,
presentations and any other school
related events.
(12) Each parent shall notify the other at least 21 days prior to travelling
interstate with the children.
(13) In the event the interstate trip exceeds seven (7) days, the travelling
parent shall provide the other parent with an itinerary
and contact telephone
number and shall ensure that the children telephone the other parent on at least
one occasion each week.
(14) Both parents shall:
respectfully to each other both in and out of the children’s
(b) speak in
positive terms about the other parent to or in the presence of the
(c) exchange
information relevant to the children’s welfare within a Communication Book
to be exchanged with the children’s
belongings at each handover;
(d) endeavour
to receive all communication from each other (whether in the Communication Book
or otherwise) in a framework of trust
and good intent.
(15) The parties are restrained from:
(a) insulting,
criticising or denigrating the other party or members of their family in the
presence of the children;
(b) allowing
any other person to insult, criticise or denigrate the other parent or members
of their family in the presence of the
(16) The mother is restrained and an injunction is granted restraining her
(a) using any
illegal drugs for a period of 24 hours prior to and during all periods of time
the children spend in her care; and
(b) allowing Mr
S to live with her or stay overnight in her home while the children are in her
(17) The father is restrained from consuming alcohol to excess while the
children are in his care (defined as no more than four standard
alcoholic drinks
in any 24 hour period).
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment under the
Reddie & Reddie
is approved pursuant to
s.121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
FEDERAL MAGISTRATES
COURT OF AUSTRALIA
ADC 1942 of
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
is just eight years old. Her brother Y is six years old. They lived on the
family farm outside (omitted) until their parents separated
in August 2010 and
since then the children have primarily lived with their mother, Mrs Reddie.
Their father, Mr Reddie, continues
to live on the family farm.
the children lived with their mother in the township of (omitted). However, in
May 2011, they moved to live in (omitted),
a small town some 40 kilometres away.
Ms Reddie did not tell the father that she intended to move with the children to
and it was this move that prompted the father’s application to
this Court.
father believes the children should live with him, where they can return to the
(omitted) Primary School. The mother believes
the children are settled in her
care at (omitted), are settled in the local primary school there and should
remain in her care.
parties began living together in March 2004 when the mother moved back to
(omitted). They were married on (omitted) 2004. The
mother has two older
children, M aged 16 years and B, aged 13 years. M lived with the family during
the parties’ relationship.
B lives in her father’s primary care and
spends regular time with the mother.
was born on (omitted) 2004 and Y was born on (omitted) 2006. The parties lived
on the father’s family farm and the father
continues to work the farm with
his extended family.
father claims that the mother was a heavy drug user prior to their relationship,
an allegation which has been a major theme throughout
these proceedings. The
mother acknowledges having used recreational drugs prior to their relationship,
but denies the father’s
allegations that she was “a drug
parties acknowledge that their relationship became increasingly unhappy over the
years. The father eventually came to believe
that the mother was again using
drugs, particularly as he discovered the mother had apparently made various
large unexplained cash
withdrawals in the 12 months or so leading up to their
separation.
father eventually confronted the mother regarding his concerns about the family
finances and it seems this was the catalyst that
led to the mother and M moving
out in August 2010. X and Y remained living on the family farm with their
father for two weeks or
so while the mother arranged independent accommodation
in (omitted), after which the children moved to live with their mother, by
mother commenced a new relationship with Mr S in November 2010. Mr S lives in
father says that the parenting arrangements were negotiated reasonably amicably
in the early months following separation, but
the parties’ co-parenting
communication was very limited, even at this early stage. For example, the
parties had agreed the
children would stay with their father across January
2011, but there were no clear arrangements about when the children would return
to the mother’s care. Neither party appears to have made any effective
attempt to communicate with the other parent across
that period. The children
therefore remained with the father and started the school term from his care,
without either parent having
discussed these arrangements.
mother assumed the children were returning to her care and collected X from
school in the first week of the new school term in
February 2011. She then
demanded the father also return Y to her care. The father eventually returned Y
to his mother in what was
clearly a tense and distressing handover for all
concerned, particularly Y and X.
children then remained in the mother’s care and spent infrequent time in
their father’s care on weekends across February
to April 2011. The
parties’ co-parenting communication appears to have been virtually
nonexistent across this time.
April 2011 the parties again agreed that the children would stay with their
father for the duration of the school holidays and
across this same time the
mother moved to live in (omitted). Ms Reddie concedes she did not inform the
father of her decision to
move, as she knew he would not agree to the children
moving away from (omitted).
Reddie only became aware that the children had moved away from (omitted) when he
received a call from the (omitted) Primary School
enquiring about X’s
whereabouts, as she did not attend the first week of the second school term.
was the final straw, from the father’s perspective. He already held
increasing concerns regarding the mother’s lifestyle.
He did not believe
the mother was able to provide a stable home for the children and accordingly on
26 May 2011 Mr Reddie filed
his initiating application seeking primary care of X
matter was first listed on 17 July 2011 for an interim hearing. The Court
declined to remove the children from the mother’s
primary care or to
direct the mother and children return to live in (omitted) on an interim basis.
Orders were made for the children
to live with each of their parents on a
specified schedule and orders were made addressing the father’s
allegations of drug
use by the mother.
parties attended a
Section 11F
Child Dispute Conference in July 2011 but were
unable to reach any agreement. Accordingly on 22 August 2011 the previous
Orders were continued until further Order and the matter was listed
for trial to 8 and 9 December 2011.
trial was listed for a two day hearing but did not conclude within the time
allocated. The parties agreed arrangements over the
Christmas 2011 school
holidays and the trial was adjourned part heard to conclude on 12 January 2012.
13 December 2011 the police conducted a raid on the mother’s premises at
(omitted). Ms Reddie and her partner Mr S were
arrested for possession of
illegal substances and other offences. The father became aware of this incident
and retained the children
at the end of their allocated school holiday time in
Accordingly
when the trial resumed on 12 January 2012, the Court heard evidence from the
mother regarding the events that had occurred
at her home on 13 December 2011.
Ms Reddie gave evidence that she was not the owner of any of the illegal items
or illegal substances
found at her premises, nor was she aware that they were
present in her house. She said she had subsequently ended her relationship
Mr S. Out of an abundance of caution the Court issued a Certificate pursuant to
Evidence Act 1995
in relation to the mother’s
Court concluded there was insufficient basis to vary the existing interim
parenting arrangements for the children. The Court
did however restrain the
mother from allowing any contact between Mr S and the children. Accordingly X
and Y returned to their mother’s
care pending the conclusion of the
the substantive trial was still not finished, both parties sought an adjournment
until such time as the criminal charges in relation
to the mother and Mr S were
finalised. Clearly the outcome of any criminal proceedings would be relevant to
the parenting issues
before this Court and accordingly the adjournment was
S subsequently confirmed on oath that the illegal items and substances belonged
to him and confirmed that the mother had no involvement.
Certificate was issued regarding Mr S’s evidence in relation to the events
on 13 December 2011.
of the criminal charges against the mother were eventually withdrawn or
dismissed for want of prosecution between March and May
2012. Mr S pleaded
guilty to various charges in May 2012 and was convicted on 5 counts of
Cultivating more than the Prescribed Number
of Cannabis Plants, Failure to store
Ammunition separately from Firearms, Carrying/Possession of a Silencer,
Possession of a Dangerous
Article and Carrying an Offensive Weapon.
trial in this Court was then re-listed to resume part heard on 1 and 2 November
2012 and finally concluded on 20 and 21 December
The evidence
father relied upon the following documents:
trial Affidavit filed 28 November 2011;
Affidavit filed 16 December 2011;
further trial Affidavit filed 22 October 2012;
of his brother, Mr Reddie, filed 5 December 2011;
of the paternal grandmother, Mrs Reddie, filed 5 December 2011;
of his sister, Ms B, filed 22 October 2012.
mother relied upon the following documents:
trial Affidavit filed 2 December 2011;
further affidavit filed 12 January 2012;
Addendum Trial Affidavit filed 26 October 2012;
of Mr S filed 2 December 2011, 4 April 2012 (but sworn 31 January 2012) and 25
October 2012.
mother also subpoenaed two witnesses, Dr K, a forensic scientist and Ms M, the
practice manager at the (omitted) Medical Centre.
A Regulation 7 Family
Consultant, Ms U prepared two s.62G family reports in this matter. Both parties
gave evidence and were available
for cross examination, as were the
parties’ supporting witnesses and Ms U.
Credibility of witnesses
mother’s demeanour was very defensive during her time in the witness box.
When pressed, she acknowledged that she had previously
sworn to matters that
were either incorrect, or untrue, particularly her original affidavit evidence
regarding her drug use in 2011
and the precise nature of her domestic
relationship with Mr S. Leaving aside those two topics, I consider the mother
endeavoured
to give her evidence honestly during the process of cross
examination but her answers were unduly cautious or non responsive at times,
which undermined the reliability of her evidence.
12 January 2012 the mother was cross examined at length about the police raid
that occurred on 13 December 2011. I am satisfied
that the mother played
no role in the offences detected on that date. I note my findings were
supported by the subsequent decision
by SA Police to withdraw the charges laid
against her.
am satisfied the father gave his evidence honestly and to the best of his
recollection. However, it is clear from the tenor of
his Affidavit and his
demeanour in the witness box that he holds a very negative view of the mother.
He believes that the mother
was a drug addict prior to their relationship. He
believes she resumed using illegal drugs later in their relationship and
subsequently.
This belief colours his view of the mother and appears to be the
only prism through which he is able to view the mother’s
behaviour. This
limits the weight to be placed upon the father’s evidence about the
mother’s current lifestyle.
father’s supporting witnesses all gave their evidence honestly and to the
best of their recollection.
S was a very unimpressive witness. In addition to his Affidavit filed 2
December 2011 where he acknowledged lying about the extent
of his drug use in
his earlier affidavit, I find that he lied under oath on numerous other
occasions, both in Affidavits and during
cross examination. I generally place no
weight upon his evidence, whether that evidence may be seen to be supportive of
the mother’s
case, or contradictory of it.
K gave his evidence in a calm and professional manner and his evidence was very
U prepared two family reports in this matter. In the course of preparing her
second report Ms U became aware of settlement negotiations
that had taken place
between the parties. Ultimately the relevant paragraphs of Ms U’s second
report were struck out.
father argued that Ms U’s evidence and opinions were unavoidably tainted
and sought to exclude her as an expert witness,
but I dismissed that
application. I was confident that Ms U would be able to identify the extent to
which that information affected
her final opinion and recommendations and to
reconsider or amend her conclusions, if she felt it was necessary to do so.
U dealt with this very professionally during cross examination. She
acknowledged that the information about prior negotiations
had a significant
impact on her recommendations, and even estimated it to a percentage number, to
the extent of 20%. However, she
did not consider that the impact of this
information was so significant that she would change or reconsider her
recommendations.
accept Ms U’s evidence. I am also confident of my own judicial capacity
to disregard the portion of Ms U’s report that
has been struck out. Those
paragraphs do not affect my decisions about X and Y’s living arrangements
and best interests.
father raised other criticisms of Ms U’s approach but I do not consider
those criticisms greatly undermine Ms U’s
evidence. On balance, Ms
U’s evidence was of considerable assistance to the Court, particularly as
she was able to provide
some insight into the children’s views and the
interaction between the children and each of their
The parties’ proposals
parties agree that they should share equally in parental responsibility for the
children and I agree that this order is in the
best interests of X and Y. While
their parents struggle to communicate effectively and there is very little trust
or mutual respect
between them at present, it is clear that both Mr Reddie and
Ms Reddie love their children and are committed to their welfare. I
cautiously optimistic that their co-parenting dynamic may improve once the Court
process is concluded.
father proposes that the children live with him and spend time with the mother
on alternate weekends, overnight on the intervening
week and for one half of
school holidays. He proposes the children return to (omitted) Primary School
and sets out a range of other
orders in relation to the parties’ general
responsibilities and communication, most of which are uncontroversial.
Reddie’s concerns crystallised into a formal application for primary care
of X and Y when the mother moved to (omitted) without
any notice to him. The
father saw this as a further indication of her inability to provide a stable and
secure home for the children.
father’s concerns can be summarised as follows:
mother’s past drug use, which he believes is an ongoing issue;
mother’s dishonesty and inability to provide an appropriate parental role
mother’s unstable living arrangements, including her relationship with Mr
mother’s lack of commitment to her parental
responsibilities;
mother’s failure to support the children’s ongoing right to maintain
a meaningful relationship with their father.
father argues that he is able to provide a better quality of parenting for the
children. He can provide the children with a stable
also enjoy the ongoing support of his extended family. He does not use illegal
drugs and the children will
not be exposed to any aspect of the “drug
scene” or “drug culture”. If the children live with him on the
farm near (omitted), they will return to (omitted) Primary School where X
commenced her schooling in 2010.
mother proposes that the children continue to live with her in (omitted) and
that they spend time with the father as presently
occurs. She also seeks a
range of orders in relation to the parties’ parenting and co-parenting
behaviour, similar to the
father’s proposals.
Reddie argues that she has always been the children’s primary caregiver
and continues to perform that role properly and appropriately,
despite some past
lapses. By contrast she says the father never sought a significant parenting
role during the marriage and that
his work on the farm is very time consuming.
The mother also argues that the father has an ongoing problem with alcohol abuse
anger management. She argues that all of these factors combine to leave her
in the position of the preferred primary caregiver.
Legal principles
accordance with s.65D, the Court is empowered to make such parenting order as it
thinks proper, subject to the limitations set
out in that section. When making a
parenting order, the best interests of the children are the paramount
consideration (s.60CA).
Section 60B
Family Law Act 1975
the objects and principles which govern the Court’s decision-making
responsibilities. This section focuses on the
importance of parents having a
meaningful involvement in children’s lives, upon the need to protect
children from harm and
upon parents fulfilling their parenting duties.
sets out the factors the Court must apply in determining the
children’s best interests. In
Court noted that
provides the context in which the various factors in
examined, weighed and applied in the individual
”. Although that case dealt with interim parenting issues, the
Full Court’s reasons provide guidance about the legislative
pathway the
Court should follow in any parenting case and their comments apply equally to
final hearings.
is divided into primary considerations and additional considerations. There
are two primary considerations:
benefit to the child of having a meaningful relationship with both of the
child’s parents; and
need to protect the child from the physical or psychological harm from being
subjected to, or exposed to, abuse, neglect or family
are thirteen additional considerations in
which must be taken into
account. The Court must also consider the extent to which each party has
fulfilled, or failed to fulfil,
their parental responsibilities
requires the Court to presume that it is in the children’s best
interests for their parents to share parental responsibility
equally, unless the
presumption does not apply or is rebutted. The parties agree that an order for
equal shared responsibility is
appropriate and this order triggers the effect of
, which requires the Court to consider whether it will be in the
children’s best interests to spend equal time, or substantial
significant time with each parent, provided any such arrangement is also
reasonably practicable.
Cocks, Counsel appearing for the father, quite rightly submitted that the Court
must assess each party’s proposal and weigh
up the benefits (or otherwise)
that they each put forward. While the father was only prompted to bring this
application because of
his concerns regarding the mother’s lifestyle, it
is not sufficient to simply consider whether or not his concerns are justified
and base my decision accordingly. The Court must assess the totality of each
party’s proposal in accordance with the legislation
and the criteria set
will address all of the criteria in due course, but consider it is appropriate
to commence my considerations by addressing the issues
surrounding the
mother’s past and present drug use and her relationship with Mr S, as
these issues took up a significant amount
of the court’s attention during
The mother’s drug use
mother acknowledged that she used illegal drugs on a recreational basis as a
young adult, including marijuana and methamphetamines.
She denied that she was
still using drugs at the time she and the father met or at any time subsequently
during their relationship.
father said he observed a range of behaviours that led him to conclude that the
mother was using illegal drugs in the months prior
to separation, such as weight
loss, mood swings, sleeping on the couch and late night secretive telephone
calls. I conclude that
those behaviours could just as easily be ascribed to a
party who is in an unhappy relationship and perhaps contemplating leaving
relationship. I am not satisfied that the mother had resumed using illegal
drugs during the relationship.
mother initially denied using illegal substances at all in recent times. On
that basis, she did not oppose orders made by the
Court on 17 June 2011
restraining her from using or consuming illegal substances while the children
were in her care. Nor did she
oppose further orders made on that same date
requiring her to undergo hair follicle drug screen testing upon request from the
solicitors.
were some delays in arranging a hair follicle test, but it eventually took place
in October 2011. The toxicology report dated
14 November 2011 indicated
that the hair segment taken from the mother was found to contain approximately
40pg Methylamphetamine
No other drugs
were detected.
report also notes that hair grows at an average rate of approximately one
centimetre per month. Four centimetres of hair were
analysed, which would cover
the four months prior to sampling. It was only after this test result was
received that the mother acknowledged
having consumed amphetamines at a party in
approximately July 2011. The father was highly sceptical about the
mother’s late
admission that she had used drugs only once in the relevant
K gave evidence to the effect that, while the mother’s hair follicle test
came back positive, the test results were at a
very low level, far lower than he
is use to seeing when testing known addicts. He said that the mother’s
test results were
at a level of 40 picograms, which did not indicate someone who
was using methamphetamines frequently over the four month period,
even taking
into account the variability factors inherent in any testing resume. Dr
K’s evidence provides the most reliable
assessment in relation to the
mother’s drug use, at least for the period July to October 2011.
addition to the hair follicle test results there were also various urinalysis
drug screen tests undertaken by the mother. While
all the tests returned
negative results for any illegal substances, the test undertaken on
12 August 2011 provided results that were
inconsistent with normal human
urine. The father believes that the mother must have provided a false sample by
substituting her own
urine with synthetic urine. The mother denies substituting
her urine sample.
M gave evidence about the testing process on this date. She confirmed that she
was present in the small bathroom at the medical
clinic when the mother gave her
urine sample. She said that she provided the mother with the sample cup but
turned away while the
mother gave her actual specimen. Ms M estimated she was
approximately one metre away from the mother and she could hear the sound
mother urinating.
was clear from Ms M’s evidence that she found the whole process of
supervising very uncomfortable. I accept that she did
not actually see the
mother urinating into a specimen cup but I am not able to conclude from this
that the mother provided a false
sample on this occasion.
would have been a very risky process indeed for the mother to endeavour to
provide a false sample. Ms Reddie knew that a staff
member would be in the room
with her and could not be sure that they would not be supervising more
diligently.
test results certainly raise a concern that the mother was deliberately
attempting to defeat the drug screen process. I understand
why the father
believes there is no other reasonable explanation for the results. However I am
unable to consider making a formal
finding on this point without hearing further
evidence regarding the full chain of custody protocols, the risk of accidental
misplacement at the testing facility and so on.
do not consider it necessary to make a formal finding in any event as any such
finding would go more to the mother’s credibility
rather than any
assessment of the mother’s drug use.
the period since the separation I find that the mother has used illegal
substances such as amphetamines on at least one occasion
and possibly more.
However this use was not at a level that indicates she has a drug abuse problem,
based on the evidence from Dr
K. Taking into account all the evidence I find
the evidence is insufficient to base a finding that the mother was using illegal
substances during the parties’ relationship.
use and consumption of illegal substances is a criminal offence and it is not
behaviour that should be tolerated by the Court.
However, my finding that Ms
Reddie has used illegal drugs on a limited basis is simply one factor amongst
many that I must take
into account in assessing the future best interests of X
and Y. There is no evidence to suggest that the mother has used illegal
substances in such a way or at such a level that it has compromised her
parenting or placed the children at risk in her care.
finding that a parent has been an occasional consumer of illegal drugs does not
automatically disqualify that parent from a primary
parenting role in the
future. The Court must assess all of the considerations in
allocate such weight to those findings as is appropriate and consistent with the
children’s best interest.
The mother’s relationship with Mr S
mother commenced her relationship with Mr S in October 2010, while she was
living in (omitted) and Mr S was living in (omitted).
No doubt Ms
Reddie’s decision to move to (omitted) was in part because of her
relationship with Mr S. I also accept she found
life in (omitted) difficult, as
she could not easily avoid contact with the father and his extended family. I
accept that the mother
considered the move to (omitted) as “a fresh
mother and Mr S were cross-examined about whether Mr S was living with the
mother after she moved in to her home at (omitted)
in (omitted). Mr S’s
original evidence was that he was staying at her home three or four nights per
week but was not living
there. He subsequently changed his evidence upon being
confronted with his Bail Agreement in which he was bailed to reside at the
mother’s address.
mother’s Affidavit material was silent about whether Mr S was living with
her full time or simply staying over three or
four nights each week. I do not
consider this distinction is a significant factor. The mother’s decision
to commence an intimate
relationship with Mr S is another matter. It clearly
demonstrates a very poor exercise of judgment on her part, given everything
now know about Mr S.
mother knew that Mr S used marijuana regularly around her premises. I accept
her evidence that he did not smoke marijuana in
the house or in the presence of
the children, but she must take responsibility for failing to disclose
information about his marijuana
use to the Court and failing to ensure that no
such unlawful activity was taking place within her home, where her children also
accept that it was unlikely X or Y would have found the bullets or other illegal
items found within the house, but it was nonetheless
a risk. Even more
concerning is the risk that the children were exposed to the experience of their
mother and her partner being
arrested. Ms Reddie was very fortunate that the
police allowed her to make arrangements for the children, prior to implementing
the Search Warrant.
the charges were ultimately withdrawn against the mother, nonetheless her
relationship with Mr S placed her in a situation where
she was charged with
serious criminal offences. In a small town such as (omitted) these events could
well have become a source of
great embarrassment or teasing for the
already discussed, Mr S did not present well in the witness box. He expressed
little remorse about having given false evidence,
and seemed to consider an
explanation that “he felt embarrassed” about his behaviour was
sufficient. I reject that explanation.
I consider the more likely explanation
was, as suggested to him during the hearing, that he was in fact trying to hide
his illegal
activities. Mr S conceded that may have been the case.
is most concerning about the mother’s actions across this time is that she
was aware that Mr S was regularly consuming
marijuana on her premises.
Notwithstanding this, she chose to maintain an intimate domestic relationship
with him (whether full
time or three or four nights per week makes no difference
to my mind), knowing that the father was particularly – and understandably
– concerned about the use of illegal drugs.
if Mr S behaved precisely as she says and went out to the shed or the far back
garden to smoke marijuana, the children would
inevitably notice such behaviour
and as they grew older, they would have wondered what he was doing.
S does not have a significant criminal record but his past offending clearly
demonstrates a general disregard for the law and legal
obligations. This
attitude was also on display in the witness box. I expect neither Mrs
Reddie nor Mr Reddie would want their children
to adopt such an attitude as they
S provides a very poor role model for X and Y and is not an appropriate person
to live in their household as a parental figure.
However, I am not satisfied
that his offending is at such a level that the children should have absolutely
no further social contact
mother informs the Court that she is no longer in a relationship with Mr S but
she clearly has an ongoing friendship with the
S family, in particular Mr
S’s sister and his mother. It may well be that the mother would hope to
maintain a friendship with
Mr S as well. I do not consider that occasional
social interaction between the children and Mr S will be detrimental to their
development.
Section 60CC(2)
criteria – primary considerations
(a) benefit to the children having a meaningful
relationship with both parents
parties agree that X and Y have a meaningful relationship with the other parent.
They acknowledge that, despite their criticisms
of the other parent, both
parents have a positive role to play in the children’s lives. I agree
with that view and any orders
should support the children’s meaningful
relationship with each parent.
(b) the need to protect the
children from physical or psychological harm from being subjected to, or exposed
to, abuse, neglect or
family violence
mother alleges that the father was violent to her during their relationship.
She says that his behaviour indicates an underlying
aggression and lack of
emotional control that may impact upon his parenting of the children. I will
discuss the wife’s evidence
in this regard further when addressing the
additional considerations pursuant to
, but I do not consider the
children are at risk of being exposed to or affected by family violence in the
care of either parent.
am equally confident that the children are not at risk of neglect in either
parent’s care, as discussed further in these Reasons.
Equally there are
no allegations of abuse that are relevant to the children.
Section 60CC(3)
– additional consideration
(a) the children’s views
children’s views have been obtained through two interviews with Ms U. The
first interviews took place on 25 October 2011
and are set out in Ms U’s
report dated 31 October 2011. The second interviews took place on 18 September
2012 and are set
out in her report dated 24 September 2012.
October 2011 X was clear that she liked living with her mother and in (omitted).
She went on to say that “
its fun visiting her father because he plays
” and that “
she also likes to stay with her paternal
grandparents
the second report, X was reported as saying that “
difficulties in living in two homes and enjoyed visiting her father on weekends
was also reported as saying “
she likes the (omitted) school because she
has some good friends there”
and that when she is with her mother she
is able to play with her
on to note that X was sensitive to the feelings of both of her parents and Ms U
concluded that she did not want to say
anything that might hurt or upset either
U noted that Y avoided talking about his family too much. She noted that
His biggest wish was for mum, dad and the family to live on the
” Y went on to say that he likes going to see his father and
gets on best with his
U described Y as a talkative friendly boy who likes seeing his father on
weekends and enjoys kicking the footy with his dad and
playing with him. Y went
on to say that
“... he likes going to his dad’s every weekend
because he loves his dad. He then stated that he did not love his mum
she gets angry with him when he ‘does things like touching things’
do not consider Y’s comments in the second report indicate any real
concerns regarding his relationship with his mother.
Rather, it reflects the
reality that his mother, as primary care-giver, has a greater disciplinary role
in his life. I note also
that the school has reported that Y’s behaviour
is challenging at times, which no doubt occurs at home as well.
children’s wishes do not greatly influence my decision regarding their
parenting arrangements but I note that X has clearly
adjusted well to life in
(omitted) and feels settled there.
(b) the nature of the
children’s relationship with their parents and any other relevant people
including grandparents or other
U observed the children’s interaction with each parent on two separate
occasions and noted that X and Y were comfortable
and at ease with both of their
parents. The children clearly enjoy a warm and positive relationship with both
their mother and their
am confident the children enjoy a good relationship with their extended paternal
family. Their paternal grandparents and other
family members live and work in
or around the family farm and (omitted), so the children have regular contact
with them. X told
Ms U that she likes to stay with her paternal grandparents
am confident that the children also enjoy a comfortable relationship with their
extended family on their mother’s side as
well. Ms U noted that the
children responded well to their older brother
noted that in the course of the second assessment, X allocated positive feelings
to her half sister
This indicates
that X has a strong sense that her older sister B is a part of her family, even
though the children only see each
other during school holidays.
am confident both parents will support the children’s ongoing relationship
with their extended family and will ensure that
X and Y retain a strong sense of
their own place within the larger family dynamics.
willingness and ability of each parent to facilitate and courage the
children’s relationship with the other parent
father argues that the 40 kilometre distance between (omitted) and (omitted)
makes it harder for him to maintain a day to day
involvement in the
children’s lives. While that is obviously true, I reject his
interpretation that the mother’s move
to (omitted) was an attempt to
undermine the children’s relationship with their father.
mother may have been somewhat indifferent to the impact that moving to (omitted)
would have upon the children’s time with
their father. But this must be
seen in the context of the parenting arrangements that were in place in early
2011. The father acknowledges
that the children were in the mother’s care
for most of the period between 20 February 2011 until the end of the first term
on 24 April 2011. This lends some weight to the mother’s evidence that
she did not see her move to (omitted) would be a problem,
as the father was not
spending regular time with the children in any event.
parents blame the other for this situation – the father says the mother
would not respond to his telephone calls requesting
time with the children; the
mother says that she tried to make arrangements for the children to see their
father, but he would generally
say he was too busy working. Clearly, both
parents must take some responsibility for allowing two months to pass when the
did not spend regular time with their father.
evidence overall indicates that the mother has properly facilitated the
children’s relationship with their father. She
allowed the children to
spend the whole of January 2011 and all of the April 2011 school holidays with
their father. She has complied
with all subsequent Court orders for the
children to spend time with their father.
am equally confident the father would comply with orders for the children to
spend time with their mother, were X and Y to live
in his full time care.
However, I am concerned that the father’s hostility towards the mother may
make it more difficult for
him to genuinely facilitate and encourage the
children’s relationship with their mother.
parties have exposed the children to the hostility they feel towards the other
parent. However, it is particularly concerning
that Y is reported as saying
his father ‘hates his mother’ and said he knew this
because his father had told him and that is why he
does not love
telling Ms U that he does not love his mother, Y’s interaction with his
mother was described as “
easy and comfortable
One can only
speculate about the impact this level of emotional dissonance – ie between
what Y says about his mother and how
he interacts with her – must have
upon his overall emotional welfare.
father denied ever making any such comment to Y, but Mr Reddie’s hostility
towards the mother was very obvious during his
time in the witness box. Whether
the father told Y that he hates his mother or simply conveyed this message
through other comments
or behaviour, it has clearly undermined Y’s
relationship with his mother.
father was also highly critical of the children’s older brother M,
describing him as “a lying, cheating troublemaker”.
It would be
equally confusing for X and Y to hear angry or derogatory comments about their
older brother, whom they also love.
(d) the likely effect of any
changes in the children’s circumstances
U noted that:
parents made it evident that Ms Reddie was the main carer of the children during
their early developmental years and
the roles within the family were divided.
Mr Reddie saw himself as the worker/provider with masculine pursuits after work,
Ms Reddie pursued the domestic
Clearly moving from the primary care of their mother
to the primary care of their father would be a significant emotional disruption
for the children.
and Y obviously have a strong and loving relationship with their father and I am
confident that the father would support the children
through any such emotional
upheaval. I am also confident that the children would eventually settle into
life in the primary care
of their father, if such a move was determined to be in
the children’s best interests.
cross examination Ms U conceded that she did not ask X to comment on her
experience at (omitted) Primary School, as opposed
to (omitted) Primary School
where she had commenced her schooling. She conceded that the children had not
expressed a preference
for (omitted) over (omitted).
C noted it was not her usual practice to ask children to express a preference,
whether in relation to life with their mother or
father, or life in one town
over another. Rather, she tended to rely on information obtained through more
indirect questions. She
noted the children were settled where they are in
(omitted) and repeated her observation that the children were generally cautious
not to express a negative view about either parent or about either
and Y have been living in (omitted) for over 18 months. Y has commenced school
with his older sister at (omitted) Primary School.
Moving the children from
their mother’s care in (omitted) to their father’s care in (omitted)
will bring the further
disruption of a change of school, although that impact
may be minimised for X, as she has previously attended (omitted) Primary School.
(e) practical difficult difficulty and expense
the distance between (omitted) and (omitted) limits the father’s capacity
to participate in the children’s after
school activities, I note that many
separated families in rural or regional Australia have to travel equally long
distances, whether
to attend school, participate in extracurricular activities,
or spend time with a parent, as here. Within the context of rural South
Australia, 40 kilometres is not an impossible distance.
parties presently share the travel involved in the children spending time with
their father. The father collects the children
from school on Friday afternoons
and the mother collects the children from (omitted) on Sunday evenings. Neither
party has indicated
there is any real difficulty in maintaining that
arrangement, no matter which parent has the primary care of the children.
doubt as the children get older and join local sporting teams and the like, both
parents will be equally committed to driving the
children to their training and
matches as well. It is not unusual for sporting activities to take place across
a large regional
district and the travel involved is simply part of country
life. I do not consider the distance between (omitted) and (omitted)
great as to create any real practical difficulty or expense for each parent
ensuring the children spend time with each of them.
(f) parental capacity to provide for the emotional and intellectual needs of
the children;
(i) the attitude of each party to the children and to the
responsibilities of parenthood;
(4) the extent to which each parent has
fulfilled or failed to fulfil their responsibilities as a parent
is useful to address these considerations together, as they are inter-related.
The father argues that the mother has failed significantly
in meeting her
responsibilities as a parent. He says that she has failed to demonstrate an
appropriate attitude towards the children
or towards her present role as the
children’s primary care giver.
mother is equally critical of the father’s attitude towards his parenting
responsibilities. She alleges he drinks to excess
and that he has “a
short fuse”. She says the father was violent to her and to M during their
relationship and she believes
he would continue to react aggressively if he
feels provoked.
have already discussed the father’s allegations in relation to the
mother’s drug use and do not intend repeating those
findings again.
I do not consider the mother’s past drug use is significant in my
assessment of her parenting capacity. I
will now address each parent’s
other concerns in turn.
The mother’s alleged dishonesty and poor role modelling
great deal of evidence was heard in relation to the father’s allegations
that the mother dishonestly removed funds from his
(omitted) bank account in the
months prior to separation. Ms Reddie conceded that at times she signed the
father’s signature
on withdrawal slips but says that this occurred with
the father’s full knowledge. The father denies ever authorising or
the mother to sign such withdrawal slips.
Reddie gave evidence that she managed the family’s finances. While
certain farm payments were deposited into accounts in
the father’s sole
name, she routinely moved monies between accounts, or withdrew money for family
living expenses and did so
throughout the relationship, whether from the
husband’s accounts, or other joint accounts.
the mother should not have signed cheques or withdrawal slips in relation to any
account in the father’s sole name.
By doing so she was committing fraud,
in a strict legal sense. However, I do not consider that the “strict
legal sense”
is the appropriate test to apply to the mother’s
heard evidence from both parties, I am not satisfied that there was anything in
the mother’s actions or in her management
of the family finances that was
improper or dishonest. The father knew that the mother managed the family
finances. He knew that
money routinely moved between accounts, as required.
While at times he signed cheques and/or left blank cheques signed for the mother
to complete, I consider it more likely than not that he also knew the mother
occasionally signed cheques or withdrawals slips on
his behalf, or that Mr
Reddie was otherwise disinterested in the actual mechanics of their financial
arrangements.
may be that the mother withdrew more money than the father was aware of in the
months leading up to separation (although I am not
making any finding in that
regard). It may be that the mother spent family funds in ways that the father
did not know of or would
not have approved of. However, none of the evidence
leads me to conclude that the mother was withdrawing family funds to buy drugs
or that she had developed a drug habit at that time.
the end of the day, having heard all of the evidence from the parties, I
conclude that the financial transactions that occurred
prior to separation are
irrelevant to my considerations regarding the parenting arrangements for X and
father argued that the children were exposed to a high level of risk in the
mother’s care by being exposed to Mr S’s
illegal activities in
relation to drug use, growing marijuana and the unsecured firearms. Such
behaviour is illegal and clearly
highly inappropriate. It is not a situation
that one would want to see any children exposed to. Having said that, I accept
evidence from the mother and Mr S that he made an effort to keep his drug
use away from the children. I also accept Mr S’s
evidence that he was
growing his marijuana well away from the house.
The mother’s aggression and hostility
father alleges that the mother was aggressive towards him and towards the
children, both prior to the separation and afterwards.
He says the
mother’s hostility has continued ever since and there is little civil
conversation between them. The father believes
the mother’s behaviour
prior to separation was associated with her use of illegal drugs, but I reject
that argument.
am satisfied that any deterioration in the mother’s attitude towards the
father (whether prior to, or after separation) arose
either from the breakdown
of their relationship and the stress surrounding their separation, or from
subsequent parenting disputes.
father says that the mother continues to behave aggressively towards him at
handovers. I am satisfied that the mother may have
been angry or terse at times
during handovers and that this would have been obvious to the children.
However, I have no great confidence
that the father was behaving any better,
particularly given the depth of his anger following her move to (omitted). It
seems neither
party has managed their communication with the other parent
particularly well since the separation.
The mother’s unstable living arrangements
mother has moved numerous times since the parties separated. The children first
lived with her in (omitted) until she moved to
live at (omitted) in May 2011.
The mother then moved from those premises to Mrs S’s home and then from
Mrs S’s home
into her present rental premises.
children benefit from having a settled and stable home base. The father remains
living on the family farm and has been
able to provide that stability in a way
that the mother has not. However, it must be remembered that the parties have
not yet negotiated
any property settlement. The mother has been in the rental
market which often brings with it some level of insecurity. She is getting
with the financial support provided by government benefits and child support
it would have been preferable for X and Y to live in the one address with their
mother, I do not consider that the mother’s
housing difficulties are at a
level that demonstrate inadequate parenting.
The mother’s poor parental decision making capacity and lack of commitment
to parental responsibilities
father argues that the mother is more focussed on her own personal desires
rather than the children’s needs. He points
to her move to (omitted) and
her relationship with Mr S as one such example (with the subsequent exposure to
police raids and the
like). I agree that the mother’s move to (omitted)
was more about her relationship with Mr S and her wish to get away from
husband and his family in (omitted), than any apparent benefit to X or Y.
father also argues that the mother has not demonstrated any commitment towards
the children’s educational needs with respect
to homework, school support
for Y and so on. The mother conceded that she has not always filled out the
children’s homework
diaries, but said this should not be seen as evidence
that she does not ensure the children complete their homework, but simply that
she failed to complete their diaries on occasions.
issue was raised with the mother during the hearing on 12 January 2012 and was
raised again with her in December 2012. It is
concerning that both the semester
semester two school reports refer to Y not having his homework
diary every day. As the teacher points out, this failure has made
it difficult
for Y to establish a settled morning routine, in line with his new classmates.
is no excuse for the mother to say Y forgot the diary. Ms Reddie eventually
conceded that it was her responsibility to make sure
that the diary is not only
completed by her but then placed back in Y’s school bag so that he can
participate in the morning
routine at school.
Y was already struggling with his transition to school, it was the
mother’s responsibility to make
effort to assist him in this
U spoke with the Primary Co-ordinator at (omitted) School, Ms R, in the process
of completing her second report. Ms R noted that
the school had no concerns
regarding X but noted that Y presented with more challenging behaviour and was
struggling academically.
It is concerning that Ms R also commented that the
school had not been able to put extra support in place for Y until recently,
the mother did not attend school
interviews.
mother gave evidence that she has attended an interview in relation to Y and
does not recall earlier letters she ignored or did
not respond to. However, Ms
Reddie conceded in cross examination that it was possible she may have missed
some correspondence from
the school. The mother went on to confirm that Y is
now receiving extra assistance which apparently commenced at the conclusion
the first semester.
The father’s aggression
mother alleges that the father has a short temper. She says the father would
become easily provoked over minor issues and would
react angrily, yelling abuse,
slamming doors and punching objects. The father denied the mother’s
allegations of physical
violence during the relationship but conceded that on
one occasion during an argument with M he punched a hole in the bedroom door.
father agreed that the mother had to step in between him and M in the course of
another argument. He further conceded that he
hit M on the shoulder when M was
approximately eight years old, as a disciplinary response for certain
misbehaviour.
was clearly a fair degree of tension between the father and M. The father
described M as “uncontrollable” and he
conceded that during the
marriage he may have said to M that “
you’re the reason everything
is going wrong in this family
”. He said that if he did make such a
comment (and he could not be sure), then it would have been made in the heat of
the moment.
father continues to hold a very negative and hostile attitude towards M,
describing him as a “
lying, deceitful trouble maker at home and at
”. The father acknowledged that he struggles to say a good word
may be that M was a particularly troublesome member of the family. It may be
that his behaviour was very difficult to manage but
it is equally clear that the
father was unable to develop an appropriate method of either engaging with M or
intervening with his
behaviour when necessary.
considered the evidence of both parties, I am satisfied that the father reacted
aggressively at times in a way that would have
been frightening and intimidating
for the mother, for M and certainly for X or Y, had they witnessed the father
behaving in this
behaviour raises real concerns with respect to the father’s reactivity and
his capacity to manage conflict, particularly
if he feels provoked. I accept
there is no evidence to suggest that he ever behaved aggressively towards X and
Y, but the children
have not yet reached the more challenging adolescent years.
the father struggled to manage his role as a stepfather to a pre-teen and then
teenage child, who may himself have been struggling
to establish his own role
within the new family dynamic. Hopefully the father has reflected upon his
behaviour and will be better
able to manage any challenging behaviour that X or
Y may demonstrate as they grow older.
The father’s alcohol consumption
mother believes the father drank to excess during their relationship and
believes he continues to do so. She says that this behaviour
affects his
ability to care for the children. Her concerns were heightened recently when
the father had clearly been drinking prior
to attending at handover.
father agreed that he had ‘had a few drinks’ on the day in question.
He was sufficiently concerned that he asked a
friend to drive him and the
children to the handover, rather than run the risk that he might be over the
legal limit. However, he
says that this did not undermine his ability to care
for the children.
the father was well aware of the mother’s concerns, it is surprising that
he put himself in this position prior to a handover.
If he had indeed consumed
enough alcohol to place him over the legal limit, this may suggest he had indeed
consumed alcohol to excess
while the children were in his care, in breach of the
existing injunction. However, the mother’s evidence on this topic is
limited to one or two isolated incidents in the last 12-18 months. I do not
consider these incidents are sufficient to undermine
my assessment of the
father’s parenting capacity.
Parental communication
parties have failed to demonstrate any real commitment to appropriate
co-parenting communication. The difficulties that arose
in the first week of
the school year in February 2011 are just one early example of this. If either
parent had bothered to communicate
with the other and establish a clear
arrangement for X and Y to be returned to the mother’s care, then the
unpleasant scenes
that arose around Y’s return to her care, with
allegations of violence from M to the father, and vice versa, could all have
been avoided.
has been little improvement in the parents’ communication over the
intervening two years. Each parent criticises the
other for failing to provide
relevant information in relation to the children’s welfare, but neither
parent seems to acknowledge
their own responsibility in this regard. Each
parent accuses the other of behaving rudely or abusively at handovers.
mother has made little effort towards improving the co-parenting dynamic between
her and the father. The parties’ unwillingness
to improve the level of
communication between them is particularly concerning, given that they are both
seeking an order for equal
shared parental responsibility.
was very clear from the father’s demeanour in the witness box that he
still holds a great deal of anger and resentment towards
his former wife. He
believes she is lying about her relationship with Mr S. He believes that she
continues to use illegal drugs.
He believes that she does not look after the
children properly. He believes she is a liar and struggles to accept anything
may tell him about any aspect of her life or the children’s care.
father feels vindicated in his belief, based on occasional information provided
by the children. For example, Y told the father
that he had been given a
birthday present from Mr S. X apparently told her aunt that Mr S is living in
the shed at the back of
his mother’s property. Neither the father nor Ms
B seem to have considered that X, at age eight, and Y at age seven, may not
reliable reporters of the adult lives around them.
B’s affidavit sets out her conversation with X, where X tells her that
is living in the shed at their house”.
This may be an accurate description and it may be that the mother and Mr S
are flouting the Court injunction. Equally, it may be
this description is
X’s attempt to make sense of a situation where she knows that Mr S has
equipment stored in the shed at
his mother’s house and where she knows
that he is there visiting his mother from time to time.
have commented that Mr S was generally an unimpressive witness, in particular
his evidence regarding his past drug use and the mother’s
knowledge of his
drug use. However I consider that his evidence in relation to his current
living arrangements was much more matter-of-fact.
I accept his
evidence on this specific point.
have no doubt that Mr S has visited his mother at her home over the last few
months, while X and Y have been living there. However
I am not satisfied that
this led to any breach of the injunction, as his visits could easily have
occurred when the children were
at school, or with their father.
parents need to understand that their inability to communicate effectively
places a huge burden on their two children. X and
Y should not have to worry
whether Mum or Dad is going to ‘have a go’ at the other parent
during handover, or whether
Mum has let Dad know about the parent teacher night
interviews, or whether their sports gear has been dropped off in time for this
week’s practice.
more energy the children have to direct towards these issues, the less energy X
and Y have available to direct towards their schooling
and their social
relationships. In other words, the less energy they will have to devote to
simply being a child. The less effort
that the parents make to manage their
parenting responsibilities effectively, the more burdensome the children’s
parties will need to make significant efforts in this regard to ensure that
their children’s welfare does not slip between
the fracture lines within
their own interpersonal dynamic. Both parents should investigate the
availability of parenting courses
in their region and participate in such
course, if at all possible, to help them build more co-operative parenting
(g) maturity, sex, lifestyle and background of the children and their parents
and any other characteristic that are relevant
has just commenced school and it is clear that he is struggling. I note that
the mother failed to attend an appointment with the
school in this regard,
however, it now seems that there are appropriate learning and behavioural
supports in place for Y.
is also struggling with toilet training and enuresis. Again, neither parent
seems to have initiated any discussion with the other
parent designed to support
Y through this developmental hurdle.
evidence seems to suggest that Y’s soiling problems are less obvious at
the mother’s home than at school or at the
father’s home. I do not
see this is a major point of differentiation between the parties’
parenting capacity. However
it remains a concern because it indicates that
perhaps Y is experiencing a significant level of emotional distress as he moves
his parents’ care. What is even more concerning is that his
parents have failed to talk about the issue or work together and
support Y in
this regard.
(j) family violence
have discussed these issues elsewhere in these reasons and I do not consider any
further discussion is necessary.
(l) preferable to make orders least likely to lead to further proceedings
this hearing and these orders bring an end to the Court proceedings is up to the
parties. While Mr Reddie and Ms Reddie have
struggled to put aside their past
differences and establish an effective co-parenting alliance for X and Y, I
remain convinced that
they are both devoted to the welfare of their children.
is an unfortunate reality that family law litigation prompts the parties to
focus on the criticisms and concerns they each hold
rather than encouraging parties to look beyond a ‘knee jerk’
reaction to their immediate concern
and to talk with the other parent, or seek
some explanation about their concerns.
am hopeful that once these proceedings are finalised, both parents will be able
to move forward and provide a co-operative parenting
experience that will work
to the benefit of their two children.
(m) any other factor
are no other factors that affect my decisions.
Court’s responsibility is to consider the evidence placed before it and
assess the parenting outcome that would best reflect
the children’s best
is no presumption in favour of either party within the
Family Law Act
The fact that the children have been living in the mother’s primary care
since separation does not advantage or disadvantage
either parent in the
Court’s assessment of the relevant considerations pursuant to
s.60CC(3)(d)
when assessing the likely effect of any changes in the
children’s circumstances. The Court must assess each parent’s
evidence in light of all of those considerations and in light of the
children’s overall best interests.
however, where a case is finely balanced, the impact of a significant change in
the children’s care arrangements
may be the determining factor that sways
the Court one way or another as between the competing parenting proposals.
father argues that this matter is not finely balanced. He argues that he has
stability, commitment, parental capacity and family
support in his favour
whereas the mother has demonstrated the opposite. Her living arrangements are
chaotic, her lifestyle has brought
the children into potential contact with drug
use and criminality and she fails the most basic standard of day to day
is no doubt that the mother has made some foolish decisions over the past two
years since the separation. However, I conclude
that the father’s
concerns about the mother are overstated. I do not consider the children are at
risk of being exposed to
ongoing drug use in their mother’s care. Her
relationship with Mr S exposed the children to his criminal behaviour, but I
satisfied that the mother was unaware that there were firearms on the premises,
or that Mr S was growing marijuana. When she
became aware of Mr S’s
behaviour, she quite properly ended the relationship.
father argues that the mother has not ended her relationship with Mr S. It may
be that the mother has an ongoing friendship with
Mr S but that is very
different to Mr S living in the children’s home as a quasi-parental
father has the benefit of stable accommodation as he lives on the farm where he
works. The mother is presently subject to the
vagaries of the rental market and
struggled with her financial responsibilities early in the separation. But to
describe the mother’s
accommodation as “chaotic” is
overstating the situation.
father described the mother as “disengaged” from the
children’s education and particularly Y’s needs.
acknowledged that she may have missed a meeting with the school and could only
account for this by querying whether she
overlooked a letter or notice from the
school in that regard. Even if that is the case, Y is now engaged in additional
support which
suggests that the mother has since been able to remedy the
situation in an appropriate and child focussed manner.
U’s evidence is significant. As the independent expert, she is the only
neutral voice in the courtroom. I reject any suggestion
that Ms U was biased in
favour of the mother. On the contrary, I believe Ms U has considered both
parties’ perspectives fully.
At the end of the day, she placed greater
weight upon the children’s established relationship with their primary
that is, their relationship with their mother. Therefore she also
placed significant weight upon the impact of separating the children
primary caregiver and concluded that this disruption was not in the
children’s best interests, based on the information
presented to her in
the assessment process.
was no suggestion that the children’s relationship with their father has
been compromised or undermined within the existing
parenting arrangements. It
is clear from both of Ms U’s reports that the children love their father
dearly and continue to
enjoy a meaningful relationship with him.
I am making an order for equal shared parental responsibility, the Court is
obliged to consider whether the children should be
spending equal time or
substantial and significant time with each parent. Both the mother and the
father consider that the distance
between (omitted) and (omitted) is too great
to make an order for equal time reasonably practicable. I agree that it is
unrealistic
to expect X and Y to travel 40 kilometres to and from school each
day in alternate weeks (ie whether form their father’s home
to (omitted)
Primary School, or their mother’s home to (omitted) Primary School).
determining which parent should assume the role of primary caregiver, I conclude
that the evidence favours retaining the children’s
present care
arrangements. I conclude that a change in primary caregiver would require the
children to go through a significant
emotional adjustment. This would be
particularly concerning for Y, who is already struggling with behavioural issues
I have no doubt that Mr Reddie would provide appropriate
emotional support for the children were they to move into his primary care,
I remain unconvinced that such change is in the children’s best
am also troubled by the father’s ongoing hostility towards the mother. Y
has picked up on this hostility, as discussed by
Ms U. I am concerned that it
would be extremely detrimental to the children’s emotional welfare to live
in a home where there
is such a high level of hostility towards their other
parent. This is not to say that the mother has not failed in this regard as
well but, on balance, the mother presented as better able to contain her
conclude that the children should remain living in their mother’s primary
care where they will enjoy the continuation of their
primary attachment with
the children should continue to spend substantial and significant time in their
father’s care as well. The existing
orders see the children spending time
with their father overnight on alternate Friday evenings as well as alternate
weekends and
half of school holidays. I am inclined to vary the existing
arrangements in such a way as to ensure that the children have meaningful
weekend time with both parents as well as a sense of their parents’
ongoing involvement in their school week.
my view it is not unreasonable or impracticable for the children to make the
trip from their father’s farm near (omitted)
to their school at (omitted)
once per week in the morning and once per week in the afternoon. This would
ensure both parents have
a meaningful involvement in their children’s
school routines and will also allow both parents to participate in the
weekend activities.
intend putting in place orders for the children to spend time in their
father’s care overnight on alternate Thursdays rather
than the current
Friday, in addition to their alternate weekend time. I note the mother
indicated she was prepared to continue the
existing arrangements. If the
parties ultimately consider that arrangement is more appropriate they are of
course at liberty to
reinstate that regime as opposed to the time now ordered by
I do not consider the mother is likely to resume using illegal drugs, I am
satisfied the evidence is sufficient to justify
an ongoing injunctive order in
that regard. I will also continue the injunctive order in relation to the
father’s alcohol
use, and will more closely define that order.
both parents should refrain from criticising or denigrating the other parent.
Indeed, I consider it is appropriate to cast
the parties’ obligations in a
positive sense – that is, that they speak positively and respectfully
in the presence of the children and ensure that all
family members do so as well.
parties are in agreement in relation to sharing school holidays and also consent
to orders for the children to spend time on special
occasions with each parent.
Handovers are also agreed between the parties.
father seeks to continue the injunction regarding Mr S. I am not satisfied
that a blanket injunction is necessary but I certainly
agree that Mr S does not
represent a suitable role model to be living in the children’s lives as a
step-parent. To that extent
I will restrain the mother from co-habiting with Mr
S and from allowing him to stay overnight in her home.
see no compelling reason why the children should not be able to attend
occasional outings with Mr S or to participate in family
events where Mr S may
also be present. The mother has clearly become close to Mr S’s family,
particularly his mother. I do
not consider the children’s welfare will be
jeopardised by occasional social interaction with Mr S in this manner.
Accordingly,
the orders of the Court will be as set out at the commencement of these
I certify that the preceding one hundred and
eighty-eight (188) paragraphs are a true copy of the reasons for judgment of
Date: 28 March 2013
(2006) FamCA
CIR2 to the father’s affidavit filed 28 November
Family Report
dated 31 October 2011,
Report dated 24 September 2012,
Report dated 24 September 2012,
Report dated 31 October 2011, paras.35 and
Family Report
dated 24 September 2012,
Report dated 31 October 2011,
Report dated 31 October 2011,
Report dated 24 September 2012,
report dated 24 September 2012 at
report dated 1 November 2011 at
report dated 24 September 2012 at
paras.27-28
RTF format (385 KB)
Signed PDF/A format