Wanjurri v Southern Cross Broadcasting (Aus) Ltd [2001] HREOCA 2 (7 May 2001)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION ACT 1975
Matter No. H 98/68
MINGLI WANJURRI, BEN TAYLOR, ROBERT BROPHO, EDNA BROPHO AND CLARRIE ISAACS
Complainants
SOUTHERN CROSS BROADCASTING (AUS) LTD AND HOWARD SATTLER
Respondents
REASONS FOR DECISION
of Inquiry Commissioner
Graeme Innes AM
Location of Hearing: Perth
Hearing Date: 30 April 1999
Date of Decision: 7 May 2001
Appearances: Mr Greg McIntyre instructed by Dwyer Durack for the
complainants
Ms Georgina Schoff instructed by Corrs Chambers Westgarth for the
respondents
1. INTRODUCTION
This complaint arises from a segment broadcast on the morning radio talk show
on Radio 6PR in Perth, Western Australia. The program
was, at the time, hosted
by Howard Sattler and known as the “Sattler File”. The segment was
called “Taxi Talk”
and involved Mr Sattler seeking the views of the
taxi drivers of Perth on a variety of local issues.
On 3 February 1997, issues surrounding the redevelopment of the old Swan
Brewery site, and protests against this redevelopment by
Aboriginal people, were
discussed. It is alleged that this segment of the program was offensive to
Aboriginal people because of
their race in breach of
Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) ("the RDA").
On 29 May 1997, complaints in identical terms were lodged with the Commission
by Mingli Wanjurri, Ben Taylor, Robert Bropho, Edna
Bropho and Clarrie Isaacs.
Each complainant is a Nyungah Elder and each alleged that he or she had been
vilified by the comments
made. Each sought a public apology from Howard Sattler
and the payment of compensation.
The complaint was investigated by the Race Discrimination Commissioner who
was of the view that it could not be settled by conciliation.
Consequently,
pursuant to s.24E(1)(a) of the RDA, it was referred to the Commission for public
inquiry on 30 June 1998.
On 30 April 1999 in Perth I conducted a public
hearing into the complaint. In the same week I conducted a hearing into the
Corunna and Ors v. West Australian Newspapers Ltd
which also related to allegations of racial vilification under the same
provisions of the RDA. The following are my reasons
for decision in the Wanjurri
matter, but it should be noted that on matters relating to the law I have
adopted the findings set out
decision (delivered on 12
April 2001).
2. THE SEGMENT OF THE PROGRAMME
On 3 February 1997, Mr
Vince Galati (“Vince”) and Mr Hugh McLennan (“Hughie”)
were guests on Mr Sattler’s
show. The respondents submitted that they were
regular guests on the show. The following is a transcript of the Taxi Talk
for that day:
Howard: Now you’re trying to get me offside with the people I’m
already offside with - these are the protesters trying
to stop the old Swan
Brewery redevelopment. Last week I noticed someone was putting in some pylons in
there to build a jetty up on
so that would encourage people when its developed
to go there by ferry, what a good idea!
Hughie: A tremendous idea.
Howard: They went to court to try to stop that and the good news is on the
weekend they lost right. But now they’re planning
to go to an
international court and they’re going to try to get the Prince in Holland,
the Crown Prince of Holland, to try
to intervene.
Hughie: Yeh, with a little bit of luck, when Clarrie’s over there
he’ll get his fingers stuck in the dyke and he’ll
stay there,
Howard: Whooohoho
Hughie: You know for eighty years while it was brewing grog it didn’t
worry the Waugyl, as soon as it stopped brewing grog,
up pops Waugyl. Waugyl,
Waugyl. Shame the first time he popped up the first workman didn’t clean
him up with a shovel and that
would be ...
Vince: Yeh, well what I can’t get over, remember that a few years ago
when they were camping there, no it’s a so-called
sacred site, isn’t
it. Yes. They were urinating, they were defecating and they were fornicating. If
that’s a sacred site,
how can they do those things.
Hughie: Ohhh. Look, this so-called sacred site business. There’s a spot
earth called Moore River.
Now there’s a great little shrub there in the sandhill overlooking the
caravan park where I had my
first sexual experience. Now that’s a sacred
site to me, do you reckon I could put a claim in there and get a nice little
of land at Gildon. What’s the damn difference?
Howard: I don’t know, it wouldn’t have been that long would
Hughie: No it wasn’t actually
All: Hahahahahahahahahaha
3. THE LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS
18B REASON FOR DOING AN ACT
(a) an act is done for 2 or more reasons; and
(b) one of the reasons is the race, colour or national or ethnic
origin of a person (whether or not it is the dominant reason or a
substantial
reason for doing the act);
then, for the purposes of this Part, the act is taken to be done because of
the person's race, colour or national or ethnic origin.
18C OFFENSIVE BEHAVIOUR BECAUSE OF RACE, COLOUR OR NATIONAL OR ETHNIC
It is unlawful for a person to do an act, otherwise than in
private, if:
(a) the act is reasonably likely, in all the circumstances, to offend,
insult, humiliate or intimidate another person or a group of
people; and
(b) the act is done because of the race, colour or national or ethnic origin
of the other person or of some or all of the people in
For the purposes of subsection (1), an act is taken not to be
done in private if it:
(a) causes words, sounds, images or writing to be communicated to the
(b) is done in a public place; or
(c) is done in the sight or
hearing of people who are in a public place.
18C(3) In this section:
“public place” includes any place to which the public have access
as of right or by invitation, whether express or implied
and whether or not a
charge is made for admission to the place.
SECTION 18D EXEMPTIONS
Section 18C does not render unlawful anything said or done
reasonably and in good faith:
(a) in the performance, exhibition or distribution of an artistic work;
(b) in the course of any statement, publication, discussion or debate made or
held for any genuine academic, artistic or scientific
purpose or any other
genuine purpose in the public interest; or
(c) in making or
publishing:
(i) a fair and accurate report of any event or matter of public
interest; or
(ii) a fair comment on any event or matter of public interest if the comment
is an expression of a genuine belief held by the person
making the comment.
SECTION 18E VICARIOUS LIABILITY
Subject to subsection (2), if:
(a) an employee or agent of a person does an act in connection with his or
her duties as an employee or agent; and
(b) the act would be
unlawful under this Part if it were done by the person;
this Act applies in relation to the person as if the person had also done the
Subsection (1) does not apply to an act done by an employee
or agent of a person if it is established that the person took all reasonable
steps to prevent the employee or agent from doing the act.
4. SUMMARY OF THE COMPLAINANTS’ EVIDENCE
4.1 Ben Taylor
Mr Taylor gave evidence as to his long ancestry in the Perth area. He stated
that he had visited the site on a number of occasions
and stayed overnight at
the site on several occasions. He said that it is a sacred site for his people,
that he had been prevented
from going there as a child, and that as an adult he
had wanted to go there. Mr Taylor said that he had heard the broadcast, and
he had been hurt and disgusted. He said that he had grown up to respect the
Waugyl and its role in the creation of this land,
and to have it discussed in
this way was offensive to him. Mr Taylor stated that there was no association
between the Waugyl and
the brewing of alcohol in his culture, and that he found
this comment offensive. He regarded the comment about hitting the Waugyl
the head with a shovel as analogous to irreverent comments about the crucifixion
4.2 Clarrie Isaacs
Mr Isaacs gave evidence that he was a Nyungah from the Busselton area and
that the Waugyl played a very significant role in his culture.
In fact he said
that it was as important to him as was Jesus Christ to a Christian person. Mr
Isaacs said that he had been very involved
in the protest at the site, staying
and camping there for over 200 days. He stated that in all of that time he had
not observed members
of the protest group urinating, defecating or fornicating
on the site. He said that he did not know how a person driving past the
would be able to tell if members of the protest group were drunk on the site. Mr
Isaacs also drew the analogy of denigrating
the crucifixion of Jesus Christ from
the comment about hitting the Waugyl on the head with a shovel. He said that
numerous people
had talked to him about this comment, and that it had incited
racial hatred towards his people. Mr Isaacs denied any involvement
Waugyl and alcohol in his culture. He said that such references both denigrated
the Waugyl and his people, and that the
reference to alcohol and Aboriginal
people just reinforced a stereotypical view in the community. He stated that he
had not heard
the broadcast, but that many people had talked to him about it.
Because of these conversations, he said that he could still be very
comments of this nature as they caused much discussion in the community. Mr
Isaacs agreed, in cross-examination, that he
had made a lot of complaints about
Howard Sattler, and that many people had drawn these and other comments from the
programme to
his attention.
4.3 Robert Bropho
Mr Bropho explained that he was an elder in the Perth Aboriginal community,
and that the Waugyl was a sacred being to him. He gave
evidence that he, too,
had been part of the protest for a long period of time, and that he had not
observed people urinating, defecating
or fornicating on the site. He said that
to suggest that people would behave in this way on a sacred site was denigrating
people as a whole. Mr Bropho stated that he had heard the broadcast
and that he was very upset by it. He said that for Christian
people it would be
like poking fun at Jesus Christ. He stated that for him it had been like the
radio station “poking at and
annoying his mother's body”. Mr Bropho
stated that there was no doubt that comments such as this built up racial
He said that it should be stopped. In cross-examination Mr Bropho
agreed that he had made many complaints about Howard Sattler.
Ms Wanjurri gave evidence of her involvement in the local Aboriginal
community and of the role that the Waugyl played in her culture.
She said that
it was a very important religious figure to her. Ms Wanjurri stated that she had
camped on the site for about 3 months
in the winter of 1989. She said that it
had been very cold during that time, but that she was prepared to do this
because of the
sacred nature of this site to her and her people. She explained
that Aboriginal history and culture were very important to her. Ms
Wanjurri said
that she had heard the broadcast, and that she had heard this segment on a
number of other occasions. She was surprised
and angered by it, and said that Mr
Sattler should have stopped it being broadcast. Ms Wanjurri said that when she
was staying at
the site all of the protesters used the toilets nearby. She also
said that sex was out of the question, and made the comment that
Catholic people
would not have sex in one of their churches. She asserted that when these
references were made in the broadcast Mr
Sattler should have "dumped" it. Ms
Wanjurri said that the references to the Waugyl and "grog" were a very common
way to denigrate
urban Aboriginal people. She was therefore not surprised by the
comments, but very unhappy about them.
4.5 Dr Steven Mickler
Dr Mickler explained his long employment involvement dealing with Aboriginal
issues, and the research he had carried out on the portrayal
of Aboriginal
people in WA in the media. His book "Gambling on the First Race" was received as
an exhibit at the hearing. Dr Mickler
stated that he had studied radio since the
mid nineteen eighty's, and that he was well aware of, and had listened to a
great deal,
the "Sattler File". Dr Mickler explained the technological functions
used on such a programme to give the presenter control. The
first of these is
the "dump button". When a talkback programme is going to air it is broadcast
with seven seconds delay, so that
pressing the "dump" button means that the
presenter can prevent comments that have already been made going to air. Dr
Mickler also
explained that the channel used for the presenter’s voice is
set up so that it can over-ride and blot out the voices of both
people calling
in to the programme on the phone or guests in the studio. He asserted that these
were two ways in which Mr Sattler
had control of what was said in his programme.
Dr Mickler went on to comment that it was clear from the introductory remarks to
segment made by Mr Sattler that he knew beforehand the nature of the
comments which were going to be made.
Dr Mickler confirmed the key role that
the Waugyl plays in the Nyungah culture.
From this he went on to explain the
subtexts behind the reference to the Waugyl and "grog". It is reinforcing a
well-known and derogatory
stereotypical view of Aboriginal people and their
alleged use of, and need for, alcohol. He further explained how offensive it was
to suggest that the Waugyl was happy while "grog" was being brewed on the site,
but that when this stopped "up popped Waugyl".
5. SUMMARY OF THE
RESPONDENTS’ EVIDENCE
5.1 Howard Sattler
Mr Sattler explained that he was a journalist with 36 years experience, and
that he had hosted a talkback radio program for 18 years.
He said that the
“Sattler File” was broadcast from Monday to Friday, from 8.30 am to
midday. It consisted of news, current
affairs and talkback, and dealt with
current issues of the day. The Taxi Talk segment follows the overall format- it
is an opportunity
to encourage lively discussion in which people are encouraged
to express different points of view. Taxi drivers are used because
they can be a
sounding board for the rest of the community. The segment is normally broadcast
at about 10.20 am. Mr Sattler stated
that the drivers who appeared were not
paid, but that they had been auditioned following an approach to the taxi
companies. He agreed
that, during ad breaks and news broadcasts, he had an
opportunity to talk to the drivers before they came on air, and that he would
know what was to be discussed. Mr Sattler agreed that, as host of the program,
he was responsible for all of the material that went
to air. He stated that if
he talked his voice would override someone calling in on the phone, but that
this did not apply to studio
guests. However, because the program included
talkback, it was on seven seconds delay. Mr Sattler agreed that he had had a
consultancy
with a company proposing to re-develop the brewery site, and that
his role had been to publicise the re-development. However, he
had lost that
contract in the late 1980s. He stated that discussion of plans to re-develop the
site had been ongoing for some years,
and that it became frenetic on occasions.
He said that he had always expressed the view that the site should be
re-developed. Mr
Sattler stated that the Taxi Talk segment was based on the
views of the clients of taxi drivers. He asserted that, in a world where
speech was allowed, he thought this would be okay. He said that if he "dumped"
every segment where strong opinions were expressed
there would be nothing to
listen to.In cross-examination Mr Sattler stated that he believed that for
people promoting its cause -
such as Mr Isaacs and Mr Bropho - the Waugyl would
go wherever they wanted it to go, implying that the Waugyl was used quite
to support various campaigns. However, Mr Sattler also said that he
accepted that the Waugyl did have religious significance for
some people. Mr
Sattler also stated that he would allow a comment about a workman hitting Jesus
over the head with a shovel to go
5.2 Shane Healey
Mr Healey explained that he was the General Manager for radio station 6PR,
and that he had overall responsibility for running the
business. He indicated
that the station provided news, current affairs, talkback and sports
broadcasting. He explained that the station
had to look for the most competitive
ratings possible so that it could attract advertising. He said that the station
therefore looked
for journalists with "nouse", an interesting presentation
style, intelligence and someone with opinions who is prepared to express
Mr Healey agreed that the program content responsibility lay with the presenter,
in this case Mr Sattler. He said that he expected
that both sides of an issue
would be presented, but he would also expect an opinion to be expressed. Mr
Healey advised that once
or twice a year seminars are held for presenters to
educate them about issues such as defamation and contempt. He did not say that
the provisions of the RDA had been the subject of such seminars. Mr Healey
agreed with Mr Sattler that the taxi drivers on the Taxi
Talk segment were not
paid. In cross-examination Mr Healey agreed that in running his program Mr
Sattler did "push the limit". However,
he said that he had an expectation that a
program such as the "Sattler File" would be as challenging to the audience as
Mr Healey stated that if he had been present with the "dump" button
for the segment of the program under consideration in this case
he would not
have pushed it. When asked about his reaction if the references had been to
Jesus Christ rather than to the Waugyl,
Mr Healey agreed that, as a pretty
devout Christian, he would have had second thoughts.
Mr Frank is a person of Aboriginal descent from the Eastern Goldfields or
Kalgoorlie area. He asserted that there was doubt as to
whether the old brewery
site was a sacred site for Nyungah people. He also said that the Waugyl was a
snake, and that his family
used to eat it during the great depression in the
1930's. However, he was unable to give further details about sacred sites
he said that he could get "a spear in the leg" for discussing these
things with women present. He criticised the complainants for
talking in the way
that they had about sacred sites. However, he did agree that there was a
mythical creature which created the waterways.
Mr Frank agreed that he had been
involved in activities opposed to the protests at the Swan Brewery site.
Frank stated that he had known Mr Sattler for "quite a while" in Kalgoorlie and
Port Hedland. He asserted that he had always found
him supportive of Aboriginal
people, contributing money to football clubs, buying food for them, and giving
Aboriginal women his
6. SUMMARY OF THE SUBMISSIONS OF THE
COMPLAINANTS
The complainants make the following submissions:
Was there an “act” within s.18C (1)?
Section 18C (1) is made out as both Southern Cross Broadcasting (Aus) Ltd
(“SCB”) and Mr Sattler did acts which caused
words to be
communicated to the public.
Mr Sattler caused the words to be communicated because he controlled the
radio program. He had control over whether the words would
be broadcast by his
use of the 7 second “dump button”. He was willing to permit the
words to be broadcast because they
were consonant with his views that the site
was claimed as a sacred site for dishonest reasons. Mr Sattler clearly endorsed
of Hughie McLennan and Vince Galati by his views expressed in the
introduction, by his response of “wooohooo” to Hughie
McLennan’s comments, by his failure to stop the comments, by the sarcastic
tone of his response and by his participation in
the general laughter at the end
of the segment.
SCB is responsible by reason of s.18E of the RDA.
Was the act reasonably likely to have the effects alleged?
The complainants’ case is that certain inferences can be drawn from the
segment. These inferences are offensive in the sense
required by the RDA.
The test is objective. However, the objective test must take into account the
race, colour, national or ethnic origin of the group
of persons offended. The
test is “what is reasonably likely to offend a person who is an Australian
Aborigine of the Nyungah
It is well accepted in tort that the particular circumstances or
characteristics of a person should be taken into account in respect
objective standard. It is a clear inference from s.18C that the comment must be
offensive to the person or group of the particular
race, colour or national or
ethnic origin.
This approach to the determination of the objective standard is informed by
an appeal to substantive rather than formal equality.
Ethnic group
The Nyungah elders are an ethnic group in that they have a shared history,
separate cultural tradition, common geographical origin,
descent from common
ancestors, a common language and a religion different to the general community
surrounding them.
The evidence is sufficient to draw inferences that the Nyungah people revere
the Waugyl as a creation figure and hold the area in
the vicinity of the old
Swan Brewery to be an area of traditional religious significance.
Was the act done because of race or ethnic origin?
The statements broadcast had no significance but for the race or ethnic
origin of the complainants and the Nyungah people. Thus, they
were broadcast
“because of the race ...” and fall within s.18C(1)(b) of the
Alternatively, at least one of the reasons is the “race, colour
..etc” and s.18B is applicable.
Because of s.18B, the exemptions in s.18D do not apply to the reasons other
than those relating to race, colour or ethnic origin.
There is no public interest or fair comment in the comments made which
suggest that:
- Nyungah people lie about the existence of religious
- The Waugyl’s interest in alcohol is such that there was only a
protest when alcohol was no longer produced at the site;
- The Nyungah people, for whom the Waugyl is a metaphor, have such an
interest in alcohol that there was only a protest when alcohol
was no longer
produced at the site;
- The Waugyl should have been killed with a shovel;
- Nyungah religious sites are deserving of the same level of respect as a
place where a person had his first sexual experience;
- Nyungah people engage in urinating, defecating and fornicating in a manner
disrespectful of the site’s religious significance
It does not matter that there is a public interest in comment about the
development of the site or that fair comment might be made
on these matters.
There was no public interest in raising the above matters.
To the extent that the broadcast constituted comment, any comment was not on
a matter of public interest and was not an expression
of genuine belief. It was,
rather, a collection of sarcastic comments.
For a comment to be “genuine” or done “reasonably and in
good faith” it must be based on accurate information.
The inference that
the claim for the site was dishonest flies in the face of judicial and
administrative decisions (a list of cases
is provided).
Other comparative provisions
Section 18C does not set the test as high as the
Anti Discrimination Act
Wrongs Act 1936 (SA)
which require the incitement
of hatred, serious contempt or severe ridicule.
The case of
Wagga Wagga Aboriginal Group v Eldridge
(1995) EOC 92-701
found that comments that Aboriginal people were (inter alia) “half
breeds” and made preposterous land claims amounted
to serious racial
Freedom of expression
The right to freedom of expression is not without limitations (citing Kirby P
Ballina Shire Council v Ringland
(1994) 33 NSWLR 680
, at 698) and must
be balanced with the right to live a dignified and peaceful existence free of
vilification.
Standard of proof
Briganshaw-v-Briganshaw
[1938] HCA 34
[1938] 60 CLR 336
is not the relevant standard
for a civil matter with civil remedies. The ordinary civil standard should be
applicable.
Measure of damage
The eggshell skull rule applies such that, if liability is proved, the
respondents must take the complainants as they find them. Thus,
if the act is
reasonably likely to offend, the sensitivity of the complainants by reason of
the long history of stereotypical association
with alcohol should increase the
damages. The evidence of Mr Frank does not affect this.
In respect of the position of Clarrie Isaacs who had not heard the tape until
it was played at the inquiry, Mr Isaacs falls within
the group of persons
reasonably likely to be offended (etc) by the act. It is a reasonable inference
that he had the benefit of communication
of the substance of and the fact of the
broadcast. He would have been reasonably likely to be offended by this and he
therefore has
standing to bring the complaint. The element of surprise might
have an impact on the measure of damage.
7. SUMMARY OF THE SUBMISSIONS OF THE RESPONDENTS
Was there an “act” within s.18C(1)?
Neither Vince Galati nor Hughie McLennon are employees or agents of SBC and
neither Mr Sattler nor SBC are responsible for their comments.
However, “given that Sattler did not speak the words which caused the
offence the complainants complain of the following acts”
of Mr Sattler:
introducing the topic of the Swan Brewery site for discussion; encouraging the
comments made; and not using the dump
button. “It is these acts which must
be considered pursuant to s.18C. If Sattler’s acts are unlawful then as
employee of 6PR it will be vicariously liable for his acts unless it
took all reasonable steps to prevent him from doing the acts
(s.18E(2))”.
Was the act reasonably likely to have the effects alleged?
The inferences said to be able to be drawn from the broadcast refer to
Aboriginal people, rather than the Nyungah people in particular.
The meanings contended for do not arise. The comments were directed at a
select group of protesters. They are an attack on the sincerity
protesters’ claims and not directed at Aboriginal or Nyungah
The comments are not offensive to all Aboriginal people. Arnold Frank’s
evidence made it clear that Aboriginals took opposing
stances. Thus, the
comments were not reasonably likely to cause offence to anyone who was
Aboriginal.
Ethnic group
A case based on ethnic origin was not mounted at the hearing which proceeded
on the basis of race (ie the complainants’ Aboriginality).
Was the act done because of race or ethnic origin?
Section 18C(1)(b) requires an examination of motive or “reason”.
This is clear from the language of s.18B.
Authorities on the irrelevance of motive (citing
Australian Iron and Steel
Pty Ltd –v- Banovic
[1989] HCA 56
(1987) 168 CLR 165
Commonwealth –v-
[1993] FCA 547
(1993) 46 FCR 191
Dopking No 1
)) deal with an inquiry into why
a person was disadvantaged by the conduct of the respondent. Here it is not a
question of “why
the complainants have been offended but why a person who
has caused offence has acted in that way”. Thus, it is not sufficient
say that the statements had no significance but for the race of the
complainants.
Since the impugned conduct is the actions of Mr Sattler and not the comments
themselves, the relevant questions here are “why
did Sattler introduce the
topic?”, “why did he allow the comments to be made?” and
“why did he not hit the
dump button?”.
The evidence discloses that:
- Howard Sattler allowed the comments to be made because they were the views
of Vince Galati and Hughie McLennan. This is the object
of talkback.
- Both Howard Sattler and Shane Healey gave evidence why the dump button
wasn’t used. It was not put that Howard Sattler was
a racist or did not
use the button because of race.
- The introduction of the topic was a matter of public interest as evidenced
by the newspaper reports and the evidence. Thus, it was
not because of the race
of the complainants.
Language in s.18D is well known from law of defamation. Section 18D(b) is
akin to qualified privilege and s.18D(c) is akin to fair
Good faith is discussed in
Horrocks v Lowe
[1975] AC 135
context of qualified privilege to the effect that the relevant components are
honest belief in what is said and lack of
ulterior purpose. No evidence was led
to suggest the comments were other than honest. The assertion that there be a
reasonable level
of accurate information is inconsistent with the case law.
In relation to fair comment, the test is whether a reasonable person might
reasonably regard the opinion as one no fair minded man
could have formed or
expressed. No evidence was led that the views were such that no reasonable
person could hold them.
Thus, the acts were reasonable, done in good faith in the course of a public
discussion on a matter of public interest or were fair
comment on a matter of
public interest.
It is circular to argue that there is no public interest in making comments
of the sort complained of. Section 18D operates as an
Section 18E - vicarious liability
The evidence of Healey in relation to steps taken by SCB should be enough to
prevent vicarious liability.
Standard of proof
should apply where a finding could seriously affect
reputation. In
Macedonian Teachers Association of Victoria Inc –v-
Human Rights and Equal Opportunity Commission
and another
Court of Australia, 21 December 1998), Weinberg J said it was open to the
Commission to conclude that nature of a complaint
made under s.18C calls for
application of
principles.
Other evidentiary issues
In relation to the evidence of Dr Mickler, the Mickler Report was not
prepared for this hearing. It is not an objective report prepared
to assist the
Commission and has been used against the respondents in the past.
Opinion evidence of this nature cannot assist the Commission. It is
irrelevant to the objective test in s.18C(1)(a). It also cannot
assist with
s.18C(1)(b) in respect of whether the conduct of Mr Sattler was “because
Measure of damage
Edna Bropho did not give evidence and there is no basis to award her damages.
If the complaint is not dismissed against Clarrie Isaacs
(see below) then no
damages should be awarded. Also relevant to assessment of damages is: in the
case of Clarrie Isaacs and Robert
Bropho that this complaint is part of an
ongoing campaign (see letter dated 11 October 1996 to Shane Healey) and that
only Mingli
Wanjurri had actually heard the broadcast.
Clarrie Isaacs
Clarrie Isaacs is not genuine in his complaint. It is part of an ongoing
campaign. His complaint should be dismissed under s.25X as
frivolous and
8. SUMMARY OF THE SUBMISSIONS OF THE COMPLAINANTS IN REPLY
Was the act reasonably likely to have the effects alleged?
The relevant group in relation to the offence is those people who have
religious views that hold the Waugyl and the site of significance.
Was the act done because of race or ethnic origin?
There is no need to prove intention. The statements in
(supra) are applicable. It is irrelevant whether Howard Sattler
is a racist or motivated by anti-Aboriginal sentiment.
Section 18D requires comment to be both reasonable and in good faith. The
section goes beyond good faith in defamation law due to
the role of the RDA in
proscribing prejudice.
To be “reasonable”, the views must be the views of the informed
public and not extremist (see
[1975] VicRp 75
[1975] VR 754)
and a reasonable
observer knows all the relevant objective facts and circumstances (
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal
[1990] HCA 31
(1990) 170 CLR 70).
Suggestions of good faith are negated by the support for the comments shown
by Howard Sattler. In accordance with the test in
Gardiner and John Fairfax
[1942] 42 SR (NSW) 171
no fair minded person could have permitted
the “deicidic and blasphemous utterances” to go to air.
Section 18E - vicarious liability
SBC encouraged Howard Sattler to express his views.
Measure of damage
The ongoing campaign does not detract from the offence. It is possible to
infer that Edna Bropho was affected no less than the others.
9. FINDINGS OF FACT
Based on the evidence before me I make the following findings of fact. The
Waugyl is a mythical being which plays a significant role
in the culture of the
Nyungah people. It is understood to have created the waterways. It has a similar
level of significance to Jesus
Christ in Christian religious beliefs. I am
persuaded to this view by the evidence of the complainants - all of whom have
significant
leadership roles in the Nyungah community - and of Dr Mickler.
Whilst Mr Frank expressed a different view I have, on balance, discounted
evidence because of its more general nature, the fact that his beliefs do not
come from the local Perth area, and the antipathy
which he clearly demonstrated
to the complainants.
The old Swan Brewery site in Perth is a sacred site in
the view of the Nyungah community. I am persuaded to this view by the evidence
of the complainants and Dr Mickler. Once again I have discounted the evidence of
Mr Frank because he does not come from the Perth
area, and because of the
general nature of his evidence.
The Taxi Talk segment of the "Sattler File"
programme - a transcript of which is set out earlier in this decision, was
broadcast on
3 February 1997 by radio station 6PR in Perth, and involved the
three persons named at that part of the decision. At the time the
segment was
broadcast Mr Sattler had control of what was said by two means: his ability to
use the "dump" button; and the fact that
he knew beforehand the nature of the
comments which would be made. As well as knowingly allowing the comments to be
made by Vince
Galati and Hughie McLennan, Mr Sattler supported the comments by
participating in the discussion, and laughing and making other encouraging
noises. The allegations made in the Taxi Talk segment of people urinating,
defecating, and fornicating on the site during the time
of the protests have no
basis in fact. I make this finding based on the evidence of several of the
complainants, particularly Mingli
Wanjurri, who were present during the
protests. Radio 6PR did not provide any evidence that its presenters were made
aware of the
racial vilification provisions of the RDA.
A number of the
complainants heard the broadcast, and others were made aware of its content by
conversations which they had with other
members of the Perth community.Based on
both their evidence, and their demeanour in the witness box more than two years
broadcast, it is clear that the four complainants who gave evidence
were deeply hurt and disturbed by the comments, and very angry
and upset about
10. FINDINGS ON THE LAW
As previously indicated my findings in the
decision are
adopted for the purpose of this decision. I have therefore not repeated those
findings, and assume that this section
will be read in conjunction with the
relevant sections of the
decision. Section 8 of that decision
contains my findings on the law.
10.1 General approach to the
interpretation of Part IIA
A detailed explanation of my approach is set
out at section 8.1 of the
decision. I adopt that approach for the
purposes of analysis in this decision.
10.2 Who are the
complainants?
The complainants in this matter are clearly the five elders
of the Nyungah community who lodged complaints in identical form on 29
Mingli Wanjurri, Ben Taylor, Robert Bropho, Edna Bropho and Clarrie Isaacs. The
complaints were not lodged as representative
complaints.
10.3 Was there
an "act" within section 18C(1) ?
The relevant act is the act of
broadcasting the Taxi Talk segment, and this is not in dispute. This is noted in
my findings of fact.
10.4 Was the act reasonably likely to have the effects alleged ?
This question was analysed in section 8.4 of the
decision, and
I adopt that analysis. As found in that decision, it seems to me that, in the
context of remedial legislation such
as the RDA, and noting the comments in
Australian cases and articles, and US and Canadian cases, the reasonable victim
test is the
appropriate test to adopt. This addresses the difficulty inherent in
the reasonable person test of continuing the dominance of the
dominant class or
group, yet recognises that the views of a hypersensitive "victim" or member of
the relevant class will not prevail.
It is a matter for me to decide whether a
reasonable victim, in all the circumstances, would have experienced the effects
In this context, I have considered the evidence of the complainants as
relevant to the reaction of a reasonable Nyungah person to
the segment. While
the reactions of the complainants are not determinative of the question I have
to decide, they are clearly relevant.
I have also taken into account the evidence of Dr Mickler in so far as it
provides an analytical context for the understanding of
communications regarding
indigenous persons in the West Australian media. I have not used Dr Mickler's
evidence for any broader purpose.
I am satisfied that, based on the reasonable victim test, a reasonable
Nyungah or Aboriginal person would have found the contents
of the segment
offensive, insulting, humiliating or intimidating. In fact, although my findings
above make it unnecessary to take
the further step, I also find that a
reasonable person, not necessarily of Nyungah or Aboriginal descent, would also
have found the
segment offensive or insulting. Perhaps they would not have found
it humiliating or intimidating if they were not of those races,
but a finding on
the first two would be enough to satisfy the statute. I have formed this view
because the comments suggest that:
- Nyungah people lie about the existence of religious sites;
- The Waugyl’s interest in alcohol is such that there was only a
protest when alcohol was no longer produced at the site;
- The Nyungah people, for whom the Waugyl is a metaphor, have such an
interest in alcohol that there was only a protest when alcohol
was no longer
produced at the site;
- The Waugyl should have been killed with a shovel;
- Nyungah religious sites are deserving of the same level of respect as a
place where a person had his first sexual experience;
- Nyungah people engaged in urinating, defecating and fornicating in a manner
disrespectful of the site’s religious significance.
Such suggestions,
made about the culture and religion of any people, could only be regarded as
offensive and insulting. If they were
made about my culture and religion I would
certainly regard them in that way. For a culture which constitutes a small
minority of
the West Australian population, and which has suffered from
domination and lack of acceptance over many years, these comments would
certainly be humiliating and intimidating. The respondents argue that, "the
comments were directed at a select group of protesters.
They are an attack on
the sincerity of the protesters’ claims and not directed at Aboriginal or
Nyungah people." However, I
am not persuaded by this argument. Whilst some of
the comments clearly relate to those people protesting against the development,
and to Mr Isaacs in particular, it is not possible to separate the comments from
the fact that these people are Nyungah Aboriginal
people. There is no attempt in
the comments to distance them from Nyungah Aboriginal people in general.
Further, the comments relate
to the culture, traditions and religious beliefs of
the Nyungah people as a whole. The Waugyl is not just a significant religious
figure for the protesters. Nor is the sanctity of sacred sites. Nor do
stereotypical community views about Aboriginal people and
alcohol only apply to
those who protested about the re-development of the old Swan Brewery site.
10.5 Was the act done because of racial or ethnic origin?
Section 18B provides that this must only be one of the reasons for the
doing of the act, and not necessarily the dominant or substantial
reason. I must
therefore determine whether it was one of the reasons for the broadcast of the
segment.There is no doubt in my mind
that one of the reasons for the broadcast
of the segment was the race of the persons referred to, and of the complainants.
is a well-recognised and significant religious figure for the
Nyungah community, and the old Swan Brewery site had for a long time
claimed as a sacred site of the Nyungah people. The segment was an attempt to
laughingly, sarcastically and negatively deal
with the issues around the protest
and the Waugyl. Despite Mr Healey's assertion that for any issue both sides are
put and then an
opinion is given, only one side (the critical and derogatory
one) was put on this issue. Whilst the segment may have been attempting
with this as an issue relating to the protest, this attempt was unsuccessful,
and there was a clear causal connection to
Aboriginality. Further, there were
numerous allutions in the segment to traits or aspects of Aboriginal people and
society - the
Waugyl, behaviour on sacred sites, and stereotypical views of
Aboriginal people and alcohol. Finally, the one individual referred
to, and the
people generally alluded to, in the segment were involved with the issue because
of their Aboriginality.
10.6 Was the act done otherwise than in private
Section 18C (2) (a) provides that an act is done otherwise than in
private if it "causes words, sounds, images or writing to be communicated
public". There are few better ways of communicating something to the public than
broadcasting it on a metropolitan radio station.
The legislators clearly
intended this exception to relate to private situations, where such behaviour is
not regulated. This is
not one of those situations, and there is no doubt that
this act was done otherwise than in private.
10.7 Exemptions
10.7.1 Introduction
It is clear from the above sections that there
is no doubt in my mind that the respondents have breached s 18C of the RDA. I
now consider whether any of the exemptions set out in s 18D apply in order
to determine whether the complainants have made out their
10.7.2 Approach to exemptions
addressed the issue of exemptions in section 8.7. I set out the approach to
exemptions in section 8.7.2, and I adopt that
approach in this decision.
10.7.3 The overriding requirement that the act be 'reasonable and in good
Once again, I have analysed this provision of the RDA in section
8.7.3 of the
decision. I adopt that analysis. As noted above, the
onus is on the respondent to demonstrate that it has acted "reasonably and in
good faith". In his evidence Mr Sattler agreed that, as host of the talkback
program, he was responsible for the material which went
to air. This was clearly
the case. He discussed the material in the Taxi Talk segment with the drivers
beforehand, and he had the
capacity, through use of the "dump" button, to
prevent material going to air. Mr Sattler further gave evidence that he had
supported the re-development of the brewery site. I accept this evidence.
Mr Sattler also commented that the views expressed in the
Taxi Talk segment were
the views of clients of the taxi drivers featured. Whilst this may have been the
case in general, the comments
made in this particular segment seem to me to
clearly be the views of Hughie McLennan and Vince Galati, supported by Mr
Mr Sattler went on to make a reference to the expression of these views
being appropriate in a world where free speech was allowed.
He went on to put
forward his view that, while the Waugyl had religious significance to some
people, it was used quite cynically
to support certain causes by particular
people. This reference was clearly made to Mr Isaacs and Mr Bropho. The
respondents in their
submissions argued that it was appropriate for the topic to
be discussed as it had been a matter of public interest, and referred
newspapers. This argument is true as far as it goes. However, it is the way in
which the issues were discussed, rather
than the issues themselves, which breach
section 18C of the RDA. I have set out in section 10.4 of this decision the
issues arising
from the comments which make the comments so offensive. It is
those issues which I must consider in determining whether the respondents
reasonably and in good faith. In
Bryl and Kovacevic v Nowra and Melbourne
Theatre Company
(1999) Human Rights & Equal Opportunity Commission, 21
June 1999,Commissioner Johnston noted, with respect to reasonableness,
there should be "a margin of tolerance" and that the line should not be too
easily crossed. In
Western Aboriginal Legal Service Ltd v Jones &
(2000) NSW ADT 102
the tribunal stated that for a comment to be
reasonable it must be one that the ordinary reasonable person would consider to
be reasonable
in the circumstances. The tribunal contrasts this with comments
which are exaggerated, obstinate or prejudiced, and notes that such
comments are
unlikely to be reasonable. Whilst these remarks relate to the exemption
provisions of the NSW Act, they are helpful
in clarifying the way in which
reasonableness should be defined. I am satisfied that Mr Sattler, in allowing
these comments to go
to air, did not act reasonably in these contexts. Whilst I
accept Commissioner Johnston’s encouragement of caution in making
finding, the implications of the comments made in the Taxi Talk segment, as set
out in section 10.4 of this decision, are
not in my view comments which the
ordinary person would find reasonable. To make derogatory comments about
significant religious
figures in this way, and suggest that people would behave
in the ways described on a religious or sacred site, can in no way be viewed
reasonable. This is particularly true taking into account my finding of fact
that the inappropriate conduct alleged to have occurred
on the site did not
occur. I find that, driven by his antipathy to the protests against development
on the site in general, and to
Messrs Isaacs and Bropho in particular, Mr
Sattler's judgement of what was reasonable or appropriate was seriously flawed.
host of such a program he certainly has the opportunity to ensure that a
broad range of views are expressed. But he also has the
responsibility to ensure
that particular minority groups, and their particular religious and cultural
places and practices, are not
vilified in the way that the Nyungah people were
on this occasion. Rather than supporting and participating in the ribaldry which
occurred at the Nyungah people's expense he should have terminated, or at least
re-directed the conversation. Although it is not
necessary to do so having made
the finding set out above, I have also considered whether the comments are made
"in good faith".
Commissioner Johnston in
Bryl (supra)
was of the view
that I would need to find "something approaching a deliberate intent to
mislead", or "at least a culpably reckless
and callous indifference" towards the
group to be affected. He said that "mere indifference about, or careless lack
of concern"
is not capable of grounding an adverse finding. In the
Aboriginal Legal Service
case (supra) the Tribunal said that "good faith
appears to imply the absence of spite, ill-will, or other improper motive." They
went on to say that the key factor would be whether the commentator "honestly
believed in the truth of what he or she said". I am
satisfied that the comments
which Mr Sattler allowed to go to air showed such a culpably reckless and
callous indifference towards
the Nyungah people. Taken in their entirety they
showed a total disrespect for Nyungah religious and cultural beliefs. They may
started as an expression of opposition to the protesters in general, and Mr
Isaacs in particular, but they went much further than
that. The references to
sex and sexual experiences, urination and defecation, and use of alcohol on a
sacred site demonstrate callous
indifference. Comments regarding the Waugyl
demonstrate spite and malice, supported by Mr Sattler through his laughter, and
allowing the segment to continue. I am satisfied that the segment was
not broadcast "in good faith". Based on this and the above
finding the
exemptions set out in s 18D of the RDA do not apply.
10.7.4 Section 18D(a)
Something said or done in the performance, exhibition or distribution
of an artistic work
Pursuant to the above finding it is not necessary for
me to consider the three subparagraphs of s.18D. However, for the sake of
completeness
I have considered them, again based on the principles set out in
decision. There is no doubt that the Taxi Talk segment is not
an artistic work. It meets none of the criteria referred to in the
decision. It is simply a few minutes of radio where three men,
one of whom is responsible for what is broadcast, have made thinly-veiled
derogatory and inappropriate comments about Nyungah people, their religion and
culture, under the guise of comment on a public issue.
10.7.5 Other
exemptions and public interest considerations
I adopt my comments in
, and note that public interest considerations for this
legislation should be interpreted more narrowly than in defamation law.
10.7.6 Section 18D(b): Statement, publication, debate or discussion made
or held for any
genuine academic, artistic, scientific purpose, or
other genuine purpose in the public
As I have said
above, whilst the discussion in the Taxi Talk segment began in regard to a
matter of public interest, i.e. the progress
through the courts of opposition to
development on the Swan Brewery site, it soon degenerated from that topic. It
became a derogatory
discussion of Nyungah people, their religion and culture. It
did not meet any of the purposes set out in this subparagraph, and the
would not apply.
10.7.7 Section 18D(c): Fair and accurate reports in the
public interest, and fair comment on
any matter of public interest
where the comment is a genuinely held belief
The Taxi Talk segment was
not reporting, and thus this part of the exemption does not apply. In regard to
the "fair comment" exemption
much of the segment may not be covered by it
because the comments themselves did not eminate from Mr Sattler and no evidence
sought to be led from the makers. The
decision notes the
distinction in the subparagraph between "making" and "publishing" and the need
for a respondent seeking to rely
upon the defence to adduce evidence regarding
the “genuine belief” of the maker. I have not attempted to separate
Sattler's comments because the whole of s.18D does not apply based on my
previous findings.
10.8 Vicarious Liability section 18E
no doubt in my mind that the first respondent, Southern Cross Broadcasting (Aus)
Ltd, is vicariously liable for the actions
of the second respondent, Howard
Sattler. The evidence from both Messrs Sattler and Healey was clear that
Southern Cross Broadcasting
(Aus) Ltd gave Mr Sattler responsibility for what
was broadcast. In so doing, they accept Mr Sattler’s judgements on
decisions. The evidence also made no specific mention of training
implemented by Southern Cross Broadcasting (Aus) Ltd with regard
to their and Mr
Sattler’s responsibilities under the relevant provisions of the RDA. They
have therefore not limited or removed
their liability by conducting such
There is also the issue of whether Southern Cross Broadcasting (Aus) Ltd is
directly liable as it caused the broadcast to be made.
However, as this issue
was not argued I have not found it necessary to consider.
11. DAMAGES
As my findings above indicate, the complaints are made out against both
respondents. It remains for me to make determinations of awards
I might make.
The declarations which I may make are set out in s 25Z(1)(b) of the RDA which
25Z(1) After holding an inquiry, the Commission may:
(b) find the complaint substantiated and make a determination, which may
include any one or more of the following:
(i) a declaration that the respondent has engaged in conduct rendered
unlawful by this Act and should not repeat or continue such
(ii) a declaration that the respondent should perform any reasonable act or
course of conduct to redress any loss or damage suffered
by the complainant;
(iii) a declaration that the respondent should employ or re-employ the
complainant;
(iv) a declaration that the respondent should pay to the complainant damages
by way of compensation for any loss or damage suffered
by reason of the conduct
of the respondent;
(v) a declaration that the respondent should promote the complainant;
(vi) a declaration that the termination of a contract or agreement should be
varied to redress any loss or damage suffered by the
complainant;
(vii) a declaration that it would be inappropriate for any further action to
be taken in the matter.
The "Sattler File" is no longer broadcast by 6PR in Perth. In fact, Mr
Sattler is no longer employed by the station. For these reasons
any declarations
restraining or requiring the doing of any action by the respondents would not be
appropriate. For the same reasons,
although 6PR are still broadcasting in Perth,
the fact that Mr Sattler no longer broadcasts on the station makes a public
of little value in my view. I have therefore restricted my consideration
to the question of damages.
The principles guiding the basis for the awarding of damages in this
me to set them out
again here.
In assessing the level of damages to be awarded I have taken into account the
evidence of the complainants who detailed their level
of stress and upset as a
result of the broadcast. I will not repeat it here as it is detailed in their
I have also taken into account the evidence of Dr Mickler as to the impact of
the comments.
No medical evidence was led by the complainants as to the impact of the
broadcast. I have therefore assumed that its effects were
not serious enough to
warrant the seeking of medical or counselling support.
In formulating my award I have considered other decisions on this and similar
State legislation.
Jacobs v Fardig
, a decision that I brought down on 13 May 1999 I
awarded $1,000 damages to the complainant when I found that the equivalent
of the RDA had been breached. In this case the comment was made at a
local council committee meeting in the presence of two other
people, and the
complainant was very upset by it, as it triggered very negative childhood
memories of discrimination against him
on the grounds of his race. I commented
in that decision that the award would have been higher if I had not thought that
the complainant's motivation in pursuing the complaint was political.
Rugema v. Gadsten Pty Ltd t/as Southcorp Packaging and Derkes
brought down by Commissioner Webster on 26 June 1997 the sum of $55,000 was
awarded. $25,000 of this amount related to loss of earnings
which is not
relevant to this decision. The $30,000 award of general damages was for serious
racial abuse in the workplace causing
psychiatric illness which necessitated a
three week stay in a psychiatric clinic, and a prognosis suggesting only a 50%
full recovery. Specialist medical evidence was brought to support this
claim. Whilst the impact of the abuse was much more severe
on Mr Rugema than on
these complainants the audience which heard the abuse was far smaller than the
radio audience of 6PR in Perth
for the morning program.
McMahon v. Bowman
Raphael FM (decision 13 October 2000) found that
the equivalent provisions of the Act had been breached when the respondent made
racist comments towards and about the complainant in the front yards of their
neighbouring properties. The comments led to a physical
altercation, and Mr
McMahon was hurt and upset by the comments. No evidence was led, medical or
otherwise, as to any ongoing effects,
and damages of $1,500 plus costs were
It is also helpful to refer to two decisions of the NSW Administrative
Decisions Tribunal dealing with similar provisions of the NSW
legislation. In
Anderson v. Thompson
, brought down on 5 February 2001, the tribunal found
that neighbourhood racial vilification by the respondent had caused the
complainant
"considerable stress and disquiet". No evidence, medical or
otherwise, was provided of ongoing impact of this vilification, and the
awarded damages of $5,000.
Russell v. Commissioner of Police, NSW Police Service and Ors
brought down on 26 February 2001, the Administrative Decisions Tribunal of NSW
awarded $15,000 for the racial vilification portion
of the complainant’s
claim. This case involved the arrest of the complainant by the first two
respondents - represented by
various police officers - and vilification and
discriminatory treatment during and after that arrest. The complainant - now
- suffered physical and psychological injury, and there was medical and
non-medical evidence of ongoing effects.
Western Aboriginal Legal Service v. Jones
, brought down by the
Tribunal on 31 July 2000
no damages were awarded as it was a representative
complaint. The circumstances of this complaint - vilification during a radio
- are quite similar to the present ones, but the case is of no
assistance to me in this area. Further, I should note that the decision
overturned on appeal on a technical legal point.
As I have indicated, there was no evidence before me from the complainants of
ongoing effects requiring medical or counselling support.
However, the evidence
clearly indicated that the complainants were, and continue to be, very hurt and
upset by what was said. The
comments related to religious and cultural matters
of great importance to them, and were very derogatory and insulting. Mr Bropho's
evidence that the broadcast had been like "poking at and annoying his mother's
body" was a graphic illustration of the impact which
the comments had.
It is also important to bear in mind the very public nature of the comments
made. No evidence was brought as to the estimated radio
audience for the
"Sattler File" that morning, but it is reasonable to assume that it would be in
the tens of thousands at least.
Added to this, the complainants gave evidence
that the statements had been the subject of ongoing public discussion, which
increase the number of people made aware of them. This places broadcast by
radio in a vastly different order of magnitude to "public"
comments made to
several, a dozen, or even a hundred people.
In all of these circumstances an appropriate award is $10,000 damages for
each complainant, a total of $50,000. I make this declaration
jointly and
severally against both respondents.
12. CONCLUSION
Australia is a country which can be justly proud of its support of free
speech, and its encouragement of energetic discussion and
debate on matters of
interest to the public, including matters relating to race. Such debate
continues to occur, and is not prohibited
by the racial hatred provisions of the
Commonwealth
Racial Discrimination Act
However, the Taxi Talk segment the subject of these complaints was not such a
discussion. It may have started as one, but it quickly
degenerated into a
denigration of Nyungah people, their religion and culture.
The actions of Mr Sattler, in allowing these comments to be made, and in
supporting them through his participation in the conversation,
shows a gross
disrespect for the Nyungah people, and an abuse of his position as a radio
broadcaster.
The role played by Southern Cross Broadcasting (Aus) Ltd, owners of 6PR, in
not preventing such a broadcast by better training of
staff and through having
policies detailing the relevant laws and banning such broadcasts, demonstrates
extreme neglect of their
responsibilities as a broadcaster.
The injury done cannot be completely recompensed by the payment of money. But
I hope that my decision will serve as some recompense,
and as confirmation to
the complainants that the Australian community, of which they are members, has
clearly decreed through its
Parliament that such behaviour will not be
13. DECLARATIONS
I declare that
1. The complaints of a breach of
Discrimination Act
are made out.
respondents pay to each of the five complainants the sum of $10,000 on or before
28 days from the date of publication of this
Dated this 7th day of May 2001
GRAEME INNES AM
INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
RTF format (153 KB)
Signed PDF/A format