D20-21\108 [2020] SCTA 216 (17 December 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\108
FILE NUMBER : 18-154
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Employer
The Former Fund
The Previous Fund
The Other Fund
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 29 September 2020 before:
Jocelyn Furlan,
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
decision under review is that of the Trustee declining the Complainant’s
request for compensation in excess of the $708.59
offered by the Trustee in
relation to a rollover of his superannuation.
Trustee notified the Complainant of its decision by letter dated 3 January 2018
and, following review, by letters dated 11 and
12 January 2018.
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal affirms the decision of the Trustee.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
to s23 of the Complaints Act, the Complainant sought leave to represented by his
wife. The Tribunal considered and granted
this request.
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
Submissions
were received from each Party.
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited. No responses were
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
papers provided to it, including recordings of telephone
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant commenced membership in the defined benefit (DB) Employer Division
of the Former Fund on 1 January 2003 as a consequence
of his employment with the
1 January 2005 the assets and members of the Former Fund were transferred to the
Previous Fund on a successor fund transfer (‘SFT’)
basis. On 1
January 2010 the assets and members of the Previous Fund was transferred to the
Fund on an SFT basis.
Complainant ceased employment with the Employer on 23 October 2017.
From this date he was no longer eligible to remain in the DB Employer Division of the Fund.
Trustee received notification of the cessation of the Complainant’s
employment on 10 November 2017.
Trustee wrote to the Complainant on 15 November 2017 to confirm that, as he had
ceased employment, he was no longer able to remain
in the DB Employer Division.
The correspondence further advised the Complainant that his benefit would be
transferred to the Personal
Division unless he elected an alternative option
within 30 days from the date of the letter.
6 December 2017 the Complainant’s representative called the Trustee to
enquire if the Complainant had the option to transfer
his DB to an alternative
fund instead of the Personal Division of the Fund and if the transfer could be
delayed to give the Complainant
an opportunity to seek financial advice. A
representative of the Trustee incorrectly advised the Complainant’s
representative
that the transfer could be delayed.
15 December 2017 the Trustee wrote to the Complainant to confirm that his
benefit had been transferred from the DB Employer Division
to the Personal
Division of the Fund effective 24 October 2017, being the date he ceased
employment with the Employer. The effect
of this transfer is that the
Complainant’s DB account number ending in 796 was replaced with a Personal
Division account ending
19 December 2017 the Trustee received an electronic request to rollover the
Complainant’s balance to the Other Fund via the
SuperStream Rollover
System (‘SuperStream’). However, the account number quoted in the
request was for the Complainant’s
closed DB Employer Division account
ending in 796. Accordingly, the request was automatically rejected by
SuperStream and the rollover
did not occur.
Complainant’s representative contacted the Trustee on 22 December 2017 to
complain about the transfer of the Complainant’s
benefit to the Personal
Division despite being previously advised by a representative of the Trustee
that the transfer could be delayed.
As a result of this contact, on 27 December
2017 the Trustee initiated another electronic request to rollover the
Complainant’s
balance to the Other Fund via SuperStream which quoted the
Personal Division account number ending in 518. The rollover was processed
January 2018.
Complainant’s representative further complained about the fees charged to
the Complainant’s Personal Division account
and requested that the
Complainant’s benefit be transferred without the deduction of the fees
associated with the Personal
Division account.
Trustee refunded all administration fees and insurance premiums deducted from
the Complainant’s Personal Division account
and waived the $75 exit fee.
Complainant’s representative contacted the Trustee again on 9 January 2018
to complain about the amount of the Complainant’s
benefit transferred to
the Other Fund.
Trustee responded to the complaint on 12 January 2018 and advised that due to a
negative investment return for the period 24 October
2017 to 2 January 2018, the
Complainant’s Personal Division account had a negative return of $666.37
in addition to tax of
$42.22 being deducted, a total of $708.59. The Trustee
offered the Complainant $708.59 to settle the complaint.
Complainant did not accept the offer and made a complaint that the decision of
the Trustee was
unfair or unreasonable for the reasons summarised in this
determination.
resolution sought by the Complainant is compensation of $3,063.68 representing
the financial loss for the period from the time
his rollover was rejected (19
December 2017 to 4 January 2018) at the rate of $191.48 per day.
Events not in dispute:
− the Complainant’s date of birth.
− the date the Complainant joined the Former Fund
as a result of his employment with the Employer.
− the date the Former Fund was SFTed to the
Previous Fund and the Complainant became a member of the Previous Fund.
− the date the Previous Fund was SFTed to the
− the date the Complainant ceased employment
with the Employer.
− the date the Trustee was notified of the
Complainant’s cessation of employment.
− the date of the Trustee’s letter to the
Complainant notifying him that his account would be transferred from the
Division to the Personal Division of the Fund unless he made an
election for an alternative arrangement within 30 days.
− the date the Complainant’s
representative contacted the Trustee and was informed (incorrectly) that the
transfer could
be deferred until mid-January.
− the date of the Trustee’s letter to the
Complainant confirming that his account had been transferred to the Personal
Division of the Fund, account ending in 518, effective from 24 October .
− the date the Trustee received the first
rollover request quoting the incorrect Employer Division account number ending
− the date the Complainant’s
representative called the Trustee to complain about the transfer of the
Complainant’s
account to the Personal Division.
the date the Trustee received the
second rollover request quoting the Personal Division account number ending in
the date the Trustee completed the
Complainant’s rollover request and the amount of $501,030.71 was
transferred to the Other
the date the Trustee responded to the
Complainant’s complaint.
the date of correspondence from the
Complainant’s financial adviser to the Complainant referring to an initial
meeting on 13
December 2017 and setting out the fee and expected timeframe for
preparation of a statement of advice.
the date the Complainant’s
representative contacted the Trustee again to complain about the balance of the
Complainant’s
account transferred.
− the date the Trustee responded to the
Complainant’s representative’s complaint.
− the date the Complainant lodged a complaint
with the Tribunal.
Tribunal considers that the trust deed relevant to this complaint is that of the
Fund in effect on the date the Trustee transferred
the Complainant’s
superannuation to the Personal Division of the Fund (i.e. 15 December 2017),
being the trust deed as amended
up to and including the amendment dated 24 March
2014 (the Trust Deed).
Trust Deed provisions relevant to the complaint are:
Transfer between divisions
6.17 On a Member ceasing to be an Employer-sponsored Member, the Member's
membership will be transferred from division I to division
General powers
14.2 The Trustee has power:
14.2.2 to prosecute and as it may think fit to defend, answer, discontinue,
compromise or settle any claims, actions, suits, or proceedings
whatsoever and
to refer and submit to arbitration any dispute or matter concerning any part of
the Fund or relating to the trusts
of this document;
14.2.9 to compromise, compound, abandon, release, forgive, submit to
arbitration or otherwise settle any debt, claim or thing whatsoever
relating to
the Fund or owing to the Trustee on any account whatsoever;
14.2.21 to do all acts and things the Trustee may determine necessary or
expedient (including the making of rules and the adoption
of policies) for the
administration, maintenance or preservation of the Fund and in the performance
of its obligations under this
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
main points made by the Complainant are as follows:
The Complainant
My employment was terminated and I was notified by [the
Trustee] super fund that my funds would need to be rolled over to another
I was notified (15 Nov 2017) by the fund that I would be given 30 days from the
the notification to "tell them" what I wanted to do, otherwise it
will automatically roll over into an alternate [Fund] account (see
below). I rang the Fund to seek an extension as I did not receive the letter
until two weeks had passed from the date of
printing as I was away interstate on
holiday. I explained that l needed extra time to seek financial advice. I was
granted extra
time (until mid -January, taking into account the holiday close
down period for most businesses) when I spoke to the customer service
representative (and after she said that she confirmed with her superiors that
this was approved). However, the fund was rolled over
into another [Trustee]
Fund, without my knowledge, despite a request by my preferred new super fund
([the Other Fund], dated 15/12/17)
requesting a transfer to them. This request
was rejected by [the Trustee] as they had already created a new reference number
rolled over the funds into an [Fund] alternate product. [The Trustee] now
state that the request for the extension was an error
and should not have been
granted. [The Trustee] has stated that the Fund made a loss during the time it
was not transferred and
did not transfer the full balance to the [Other]
fund. The basis of the calculation of the loss is unfounded, as the periodic
statements suggest otherwise.
[The Trustee] fund states that the extension was an error on an individual
employee and they do not accept that it is an administration
error-this is
little conciliation
to me as I incurred a loss of around $1531.85
([the Other Fund] return in 8 days based on $191.48 per day gain...)
The Trustee was
notified of the Complainant’s intention to rollover the balance of his
account to the Other Fund before the
transfer of his account from the Employer
Division to the Personal Division on 15 December 2017. This was done by:
...Notifying and confirming with [Fund] staff for an extension of
time which was granted until 15 January 2018 (and acknowledged the
error in [the
Trustee’s] correspondence )
...Corresponding with [name] ([Fund] contact for defined benefit), between 6
December and 15 December, who recommended us to a [Fund]
representative
([Financial Advisers]) in [City], to discuss suitable rollover strategies. The
[Financial Advisers’] representative
was aware our intent to rollover to
our preferred fund on the 13 December meeting. It was agreed that we were to
Fund] to instigate rollover from [the Fund].
The Complainant
took ‘all reasonable steps’ to notify the Trustee of his intentions
and sought advice from the Trustee’s
representative who specifically dealt
with his previous employer, to ensure that he received the appropriate financial
The offer of a
refund of $708.59 in fees does not take into account the financial loss to the
balance of the account.
The Complainant made a loss due to the delay in transferring to the Other Fund.
▪ The Complainant’s wife’s investment in the balanced option of the Other Fund increased by $6,657 for the period
from 24 October 2017 to 2 January 2018. For the period 15 Dec 2017 to 4 Jan 2018 there was the equivalent of more than $ 428 gain.
Opportunities to
attempt the rollover were ‘thwarted’ by the Trustee. The
Complainant stated:
...[The Other Fund] rollover request lodged on the 15 Dec 2017 was
rejected on 20 Dec 2017 due to the member number being inactive.
We were not at
any time prior given the “new” member number, therefore we were
unaware that a new member account had
already been set up (apparently effective
24 October 2017, RE: [Trustee] correspondence). We were not notified by [the
Trustee] that
the transfer was unsuccessful (and was rejected by them) until 15
December rollover to personal division letter.
He has suffered
a financial loss due to the Trustee’s error.
If the funds had
been transferred to the Other Fund at the appropriate time, he would have made a
substantial profit instead of an
‘apparent loss’:
The amount of profit, whilst in the [Other Fund] account, for the
period 4/1/18-12/1/18, is of the order $1531.85 (based on a rate
$191.48 per day...).
The Trustee
main points made by the Trustee are as follows:
Trustee acknowledges the inconvenience caused to the Complainant by the transfer
of his balance to the Personal Division
of the Fund, and the consequential delay
in completing the rollover, the Trustee administered the Complainant’s
accordance with the Trust Deed.
Although the
Complainant ceased employment on 24 October 2017, the Trustee was not informed
of this until 10 November 2017.
When a member of
the DB Employer Division ceases employment, the member’s benefit is
transferred to the Personal Division unless
the member elects to transfer their
benefit to another superannuation fund. As explained in the Trustee’s
letter to the Complainant
dated 15 November 2017, the Trustee allowed the
Complainant up to 30 days from the date of the letter before processing the
of his balance to the Personal Division. As the Trustee did not
receive any withdrawal or transfer instructions within 30 days from
issued to the Complainant on 15 November 2017, his account was transferred to
the Personal Division.
The Trustee was
unable to delay the exit of the Complainant’s membership from the Employer
Division as he no longer satisfied
the eligibility requirements following the
cessation of his employment.
The initial
rollover request was received by the Trustee on 19 December 2017 which was after
expiry of the 30 days. The Complainant’s
account balance had already been
transferred to the Personal Division of the Fund effective 24 October 2017 in
accordance with Clause
6.17 of the Trust Deed. Had the Trustee received
instruction to rollover the balance to the Other Fund prior to 15 December 2017,
the transfer to the Personal Division account would not have occurred.
negative return for the period 24 October 2017 to 2 January 2018, the
Complainant’s Personal Division account had a
negative return of $666.37.
In addition, tax of $42.22 was deducted.
Although there
were no errors in the administration of the Complainant's account, as a gesture
of goodwill to resolve the complaint,
the Trustee applied an ex-gratia payment
of $432.81 to the Complainant's account in the Fund representing the December
2017 charges
for insurance premiums, administration fees and account fees. In
addition, the Trustee waived the $75.00 exit fee which would normally
applied to the rollover of benefits regardless of whether the rollover was from
the Employer or Personal Divisions of the Fund.
In addition, as
the Complainant remained dissatisfied, the Trustee offered an ex gratia payment
of $708.59, representing the negative
investment return earned on the account
whilst it was invested in the Personal Division, but the Complainant did not
accept the offer.
The offer remains open.
acknowledged that, during a phone call with a member of the Trustee’s
Client Services Team on 6 December 2017, incorrect
information was provided to
the Complainant that the Trustee would defer the transfer of his account to the
Personal Division of
the Fund. The Trustee has acted fairly and reasonably by
reversing the December 2017 premium and fees as well as waiving the exit
offering the Complainant the ex-gratia payment of $708.59 in order to resolve
the complaint.
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must determine whether the decision of
the Trustee, to decline the Complainant’s
request for compensation in
excess of the $708.59 offered by it in relation to a rollover of the
Complainant’s superannuation,
was fair and reasonable in its operation in
relation to the Complainant in the circumstances.
issue is not what decision the Tribunal would have made on the evidence before
the Trustee but whether the decision was fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal took the whole of the evidence and
submissions into account and listened to the telephone
calls provided between
the Complainant’s representative and the Fund. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the material it has relied
on has been provided to both Parties
Complainant complained that the Trustee had transferred his benefit from the
Employer Division of the Fund to the Personal Division
of the Fund despite him
having been advised that the rollover could be delayed.
Tribunal first considered whether the transfer was in accordance with the Trust
Deed. The Tribunal noted Clause 6.17 of the Trust
Deed which provides that on a
member ceasing to be an Employer-sponsored Member, the Member's membership will
be transferred from
the Employer Division to the Personal Division. The
Tribunal is satisfied that the transfer of the Complainant’s benefit to
the Personal Division with effect from the date he ceased employment was in
accordance with the Trust Deed.
Tribunal then considered the impact of the incorrect advice to the Complainant
that the transfer could be delayed.
timeline of relevant dates is as follows:
6 December 2017 – the Complainant’s representative
(his wife) contacted the Trustee and requested an extension to the
transfer to
consider options. They had been interstate and had not received the
Trustee’s letter of 15 November 2017 until
their return.
13 December 2017 – the Complainant met with a financial adviser.
15 December 2017 – the Trustee wrote to the Complainant confirming the
transfer to the Personal Division and provided him with
the Personal Division
account number.
19 December 2017 – the Trustee received the rollover request that was
not executed because of the incorrect account number.
27 December 2017 – the further rollover instruction was received with
Personal Division account number.
2 January 2018 – the rollover was completed.
Trustee acknowledged that the Complainant was given incorrect information that
the transfer of his account from the Employer Division
to the Personal Division
of the Fund would be delayed. The Complainant’s application for rollover
of his benefit with the
incorrect Employer Division account number was received
by the Trustee on 19 December 2017. This may have crossed with the
letter of 15 December 2017 providing the Complainant with his
Personal Division account number. The correct rollover instruction
was received
on 27 December 2017, three working days later.
receipt of the Complainant’s complaints, the Trustee decided to refund the
Complainant the December fees and insurance
premiums as well as waive the exit
fee of $75, which would have been payable by the Complainant regardless of
whether his benefit
was transferred to the Other Fund from the Employer Division
or the Personal Division of the Fund.
Trustee has also offered the Complainant an ex gratia payment of $708.59 being
the adverse movement in value of the Complainant’s
funds while they were
invested in the Personal Division.
the Tribunal’s view, the offer by the Trustee of payment of this amount is
fair and reasonable in the circumstances.
Complainant requested the transfer to the Other Fund without waiting for
financial advice and the delay in the transfer (because
of the incorrect account
number) was caused by the Complainant possibly not having received the
Trustee’s letter of 15 December
2017 at the time the transfer was
requested, which was not an event caused by the Trustee.
passing, the Tribunal noted that in response to a request from the Tribunal for
details of the Other Fund’s unit prices,
the Complainant’s wife
provided a graph of her investment in the Other Fund for the period from 15
December 2017 to 4 January
2018 and stated:
You could extrapolate what my husbands gains would have been had
the investment been transferred on the 15 December 2017 instead of
2018. I estimate at least around $430.
the Tribunal’s view the reimbursement of fees and waiving of the exit fee,
together with the ex-gratia offer, was an appropriate
and adequate response by
the Trustee to compensate the Complainant for the inconvenience caused by the
incorrect information and
the rejection of the first rollover request, which was
not caused by the Trustee.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decision under review
if it is satisfied that the decision, in its
operation in relation to the
Complainant, was fair and reasonable in the circumstances. For the reasons
stated above the Tribunal
is so satisfied.
Tribunal affirms the decision of the Trustee.
Jocelyn Furlan, Member
Date of Tribunal signature: 17 December 2020
RTF format (288 KB)
Signed PDF/A format