RePipe Pty Ltd and Attorney-General's Department (Freedom of information) (No. 2) [2025] AICmr 181 (7 November 2025)
RePipe Pty Ltd and Attorney-General’s Department (Freedom of
information) (No. 2)
[2025] AICmr 181 (7 November 2025)
Decision and reasons for decision of
Rocelle Ago, General
Manager Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian
Information Commissioner for the purposes of
of Information Act 1982
RePipe Pty Ltd
Attorney-General’s Department
Decision date
Freedom of Information — Legal professional privilege — Whether
documents contain deliberative matter prepared for deliberative
— Whether contrary to public interest to release conditionally exempt
documents — Whether disclosure of personal
information is unreasonable
Freedom of Information Act 1982
s 55K of the
Freedom of Information Act 1982
(the FOI Act), I set aside
the decision of the Attorney-General’s Department (the Department) of 28
June 2021, as varied on
11 July 2022. I substitute my decision as follows:
the material
that the Department no longer maintains is exempt under s 34(3) is not exempt
the material
that the Department maintains is exempt under s 42 of the FOI Act is exempt
under that provision
the material
comprising the contact details of agency staff is irrelevant to the
applicant’s request
the material
comprising the names of Departmental staff is conditionally exempt under s 47F,
and its disclosure would be contrary
to the public interest at this time,
the material
that the Department maintains is conditionally exempt under s 47C of the
FOI Act is conditionally exempt under that provision,
but its disclosure would
not be contrary to the public interest at this time.
28 days of this decision:
the Department
must provide the applicant with a copy of the documents, edited under s 22 of
the FOI Act only to the extent necessary
to delete exempt material, and
the Department
must advise whether it has fully implemented my decision or whether it will be
seeking review of the decision by the
Administrative Review
decision discusses the application of ss 11A(5), 42, 47C and 47F of the FOI Act
to documents that were relied on or available
to the former Attorney-General,
Senator the Hon Michaelia Cash, who had refused the applicant’s request
for legal financial
assistance under the Commonwealth Public Interest and Test
Cases Scheme (CPITCS). It upholds the deletion of legally privileged material
and personal information from the documents. However, it finds that disclosure
of deliberative material would not be contrary to
the public interest.
Reasons for decision
Scope of IC review
applicant had made an application for a grant of legal financial assistance
under the CPITCS on 23 December 2021. Following the
outcome of the CPITCS
application, the applicant applied to the Department for access to all documents
that were provided to and
relied upon by the former Attorney-General in making
the CPITCS decision.
26 April 2022, the Department identified 51 documents relevant to the request.
The applicant was granted access to 45 documents
in full, and six documents in
part. In making its decision, the Department relied on the legal professional
privilege exemption (s
42), the deliberative processes exemption (s 47C) and the
certain operations of agencies exemption (s 47E(d)). The Department also
considered some material to be irrelevant to the applicant’s request (s
applicant subsequently sought (Information Commissioner) IC review of the
Department’s decision.
case management events occurred which revised the scope of the IC review:
The Department
made a revised decision under s 55G of the FOI Act and provided the applicant
with access to additional material in
the documents. In the s 55G decision, the
Department maintained its exemption claims in relation to ss 34(3), 42, and 47C
FOI Act. The Department also deleted material that it considered to be
irrelevant under s 22 of the FOI Act.
The Department
then advised that it no longer maintained its exemption claim in relation to s
34(3) of the FOI Act. Accordingly, this
material is not exempt and ought to be
disclosed to the applicant.
The Department
also confirmed that it no longer considered that the material comprising the
names of agency staff is irrelevant to
the applicant’s request. Instead,
the Department explained that the full names of agency staff whose information
the documents as a consequence of administrative processing are
exempt under s 47F. Similarly, the Department submits that the surnames
agency staff whose first names are disclosed in the documents together with
their contact information are also exempt under s
The applicant
also clarified during the course of the IC review that they were seeking access
to the full names and job titles of
agency staff involved in the rejection of
their application for legal financial assistance. The applicant further
confirmed that
they were not seeking access to contact details of agency staff.
Accordingly, information comprising the contact details of agency
irrelevant to the applicant’s request and may be deleted under s 22. I
have not considered the application of s 47F
to this material.
Accordingly,
the issues to be decided in this IC review are whether:
the material
that the Department maintains is exempt under s 42 is exempt under this
provision, and
the material
that the Department maintains is conditionally exempt under ss 47C and 47F
of the FOI Act is conditionally exempt under
either of these provisions, and if
so, whether giving the applicant access to the conditionally exempt material at
this time would,
on balance, be contrary to the public interest (s
an IC review of an access refusal decision, the agency bears the onus of
establishing that its decision is justified or that I
should give a decision
adverse to the applicant.
making my decision, I have had regard to the following:
Department’s decisions of 26 April 2022 and 11 June 2022 and its reasons
for those decisions
the documents at
the Guidelines
issued by the Australian Information Commissioner under s 93A of the FOI
to which agencies must have
regard in performing a function or exercising a power under the FOI
parties’ submissions.
Legal professional privilege exemption (s 42)
document will be exempt under s 42 if it is of such a nature that it would be
privileged from production in legal proceedings on
the ground of legal
professional privilege (s 42(1)) and privilege has not been waived (s
term ‘legal professional privilege’ is not defined in the FOI Act.
Instead, common law concepts of legal professional
privilege are to be applied
in determining whether s 42 of the FOI Act applies to a
issue of whether legal professional privilege can apply to advice or
communications to or from lawyers working within an agency
has been examined in
various decisions.
established that an independent legal adviser-client relationship can exist
between an agency’s in-house lawyers
and other staff of the
Whether a true legal
adviser-client relationship exists will be a question of fact, to be determined
by reference to:
the nature of
the lawyer’s involvement and the content and circumstances of the
communication,
the substance of
the communications, subjective intentions of those making them, and objective
conclusions that can be drawn from
Department explained that document 10 contains excerpts of privileged legal
advice and is therefore exempt on this basis.
Department relied on similar submissions that it made in
RePipe Pty Ltd and
Attorney-General’s Department (Freedom of information)
[2025] AICmr
RePipe (No. 1)’
). In particular, the Department
explained that the exemption in s 42 applied to the relevant material
adviser-client relationship existed between the Department and its lawyers
communication was for the purpose of giving or receiving legal advice or for use
in connection with actual or anticipated litigation
provided was independent, and
provided was provided on a confidential basis.
response to the Department’s contentions, the applicant submits that the
advice received by the Department was not independent
or confidential.
applicant also referred to the decision in
Burford and Tertiary Education
Quality and Standards Agency
[2025] ARTA 992, where the Tribunal explained
that the exemption in s 42 applies if the document was created for the dominant
of giving or receiving legal advice, and that purpose should predominate
all other purposes.
applicant submits that the Department did not confirm that the redacted parts of
document 10 satisfy the dominant purpose test.
have considered the parties’ submissions together with the documents and,
consistent with my findings in
RePipe (No. 1)
, I am satisfied that the
relevant material is exempt under s 42 of the FOI Act.
is apparent that the relevant material in document 10 comprises summaries of
information that was created for the dominant purpose
of giving or receiving
legal advice. I am satisfied that the relevant advice was provided by the
Department’s in-house lawyers
in their capacity as legal advisers and in
no other capacity. Accordingly, I accept that the advice was provided in the
a legal adviser-client relationship. Having regard to the nature and
content of the relevant material, I also accept that the advice
provided was
independent and confidential.
have also considered whether legal professional privilege has been waived (s
42(2)). Based on my examination of the relevant material
and the parties’
submissions, I am satisfied that there is no evidence before me which indicates
that privilege has been waived.
Accordingly, I do not consider that privilege
has been waived in this case.
Finding (s 42)
material that the Department found to be exempt under s 42 is exempt under this
Deliberative processes exemption (s 47C)
document is conditionally exempt under s 47C if its disclosure would disclose
deliberative matter
) in the nature of, or relating to, opinion,
advice or recommendation obtained, prepared or recorded, or consultation or
deliberation
that has taken place, in the course of, or for the purposes of, the
deliberative processes involved in the functions of an agency,
Minister or the
Government of the Commonwealth.
President Forgie explained in
Wood; Secretary, Department of Prime Minister
and Cabinet (Freedom of information)
[2015] AATA 945
that the words
‘opinion’, ‘advice’, and recommendations’ in s
47C(1) of the FOI Act all involve consideration,
followed by the formation of a
view either about a certain subject or a course of action, and the subsequent
transmission of that
view. Similarly, the words ‘consultation’ and
‘deliberation’ both involve the notion of consideration but
necessarily lead to the formation of an opinion, advice, or recommendation.
Department submits that the material that it withheld under s 47C in document 6
comprises deliberative matter in the form of advice
provided to the former
Attorney-General in relation to the exercise of her functions in making
decisions on applications for legal
financial assistance. The Department further
explained that this material outlines the broader policy context in which the
application for assistance was considered and discusses matters that
are tangential to the application. The Department also explained
material that it withheld under s 47C does not relate to reports and does not
comprise a formal statement of reasons.
applicant submits that the content and nature of the information withheld under
s 47C is not deliberative matter, as there was
no deliberative process in
progress, and if there was, it had already concluded.
on my examination of the documents, I accept the Department’s
characterisation of the relevant material. The material
clearly comprises advice
provided by the Department to the former Attorney-General on matters pertaining
to the CPITCS application.
this basis, I am satisfied that the material is deliberative matter for the
purposes of s 47C. Further, I do not consider that
the material comprises
operational information or purely factual material (s 47C(2)).
Finding (s 47C)
material that the Department found to be conditionally exempt under s 47C is
conditionally exempt under this provision.
Personal privacy exemption (s 47F)
I have discussed above, the Department submits that the names and contact
details of its staff members are exempt under s 47F.
Given the applicant
confirmed they were not seeking access to the contact details of agency staff, I
have only considered the Department’s
application of the exemption in s
47F to the names of agency staff.
document or material will be exempt under this conditional exemption if it
contains ‘personal information’ and disclosure
in response to the
applicant’s FOI request would be ‘unreasonable’ (s
Whether the material is personal information
information’ under the FOI Act has the same meaning as the equivalent term
That definition is set out in
the relevant material comprises the names of agency staff, I am satisfied that
the material identifies those individuals and
is ‘personal
information’ for the purposes of s 47F(1) of the FOI Act.
Whether disclosure would involve an unreasonable disclosure of
personal information
Department submits that the individuals concerned have not consented to the
disclosure of their personal information, and disclosure
of the personal
information would not shed any particular light on the workings of the
government or enhance accountability or transparency.
response to the Department’s contentions, the applicant explained that
they have sought access to the personal information
of the individuals concerned
in order to understand the ‘chain of custody’ of the analysis,
recommendations and decisions
that underpinned the rejection of its application
for legal financial assistance.
have considered the documents and the parties’ submissions together with
the mandatory factors in s 47F(2).
I accept that disclosure of the names of agency staff would promote the public
interest in transparency and integrity by
revealing the identities of the
individuals, it is apparent that the information is not well known or publicly
available and the
individuals are not broadly known to be associated with the
subject matter of the documents.
having regard to the nature of the personal information and the information that
has already been disclosed to the applicant,
I consider that disclosure of the
names would only promote the public interest in government transparency and
integrity to a limited
balance, I consider that disclosure of the relevant material would involve an
unreasonable disclosure of personal information.
Finding (s 47F)
am satisfied that the names of the Department’s staff members are
conditionally exempt under s 47F of the FOI Act.
Whether access would be contrary to the public interest (s
found material to be conditionally exempt under ss 47C and 47F of the FOI Act, I
am required to consider whether it would be
contrary to the public interest to
give the applicant access to conditionally exempt material at this time. The
requirements of the
public interest test are set out at
have considered the relevant mandatory factors listed in s 11B(3) of the FOI
Act. I have not considered the irrelevant factors as
set out in s 11B(4) of the
In considering the
public interest, I have had regard to the parties’ submissions.
The personal information of agency staff
I have discussed above, the applicant essentially contends that the individuals
concerned had a direct impact on the outcome of
their CPITCS application and
that disclosure of the personal information of the individuals would allow it to
understand who had
provided the then Attorney-General with advice prior to the
CPITCS decision being made.
Department acknowledged that disclosure of material comprising the personal
information of agency staff would promote the objects
of the FOI Act.
against this factor in favour of disclosure, the Department contends that
disclosure of the personal information could reasonably
be expected to prejudice
the privacy of the individuals concerned.
I explained in
RePipe (No. 1),
determining whether the disclosure of
conditionally exempt material is contrary to the public interest requires the
balancing of the
public interest (and value) in the information being disclosed
and any identifiable harm that could reasonably be expected to follow
disclosure.
accept that disclosure of the material comprising the personal information of
agency staff would generally promote the objects of
the FOI Act. However, having
regard to the nature of this information and the information that has already
been disclosed to the
applicant, I do not consider that this public interest
consideration carries significant weight. The personal information of the
individuals concerned is not well known or publicly available. Further, the
individuals concerned are not known to be associated
with the subject matter of
the documents more broadly.
Relevantly,
in the decision of
‘ADM’ and Services Australia (No. 3) (Freedom
of information)
[2023] AICmr 40
(‘ADM’ No. 3), former Freedom of
Information Commissioner Hardiman considered the application of the exemption in
to surnames of agency staff. In considering the public interest,
Commissioner Hardiman found that disclosure of information comprising
surnames of agency staff would not add any further context or information to the
parts of the documents that have already been
disclosed to the applicant.
the present case, it is apparent that the job titles of the individuals involved
in the provision of advice to the former Attorney-General
have already been
disclosed to the applicant. Further, the first names of some of the individuals
have also been disclosed to the
applicant. Having regard to this context, I am
not persuaded that disclosure of additional personal information would reveal
further information about the CPITCS decision, or that it would enhance the
scrutiny of government decision-making in a meaningful
way. Similarly, I do not
consider that the personal information relates to matters of public importance,
or that disclosure of the
personal information would enable effective oversight
of public expenditure.
these reasons, in balancing the public interest considerations, I consider that
greater weight should be given to the privacy
considerations of the individuals,
and I find that the factors against disclosure outweigh the factor in favour of
disclosure.
find that disclosure of the material comprising the personal information of
agency staff would be contrary to the public interest
at this time.
Material comprising deliberative matter
respect to the material comprising deliberative matter, I have considered the
parties’ submissions together with the documents,
and I am satisfied that
the following factors in favour of disclosure are relevant, whereby disclosure
of the relevant material would:
promote the
objects of the FOI Act
promote scrutiny
of the CPITCS decision and decision making processes, and
applicant access to information that concerns them.
Department submits that disclosure of this material would prejudice the
Department’s ability to make recommendations to
the minister on the
management of the CPITCS. The Department explained that the relevant material
incorporates a broader policy deliberation
on an outcome which is not
administratively feasible without policy engagement with the relevant minister
and consideration by government.
The Department contends that disclosure may
affect the provision of future grants of legal financial assistance.
Department further explained that disclosure of the relevant material may result
in misinterpretation around the relevant considerations
for the refusal of the
legal financial assistance application.
Department further explained that it engages in extensive deliberations to
ensure public funds are allocated for legal financial
assistance effectively,
and that there is a significant public interest in preserving the
Department’s ability to engage in
critical deliberations and give
strategic advice to decision makers regarding discretionary decisions concerning
grants of financial
assistance.
response to the Department’s contentions, the applicant submits that
disclosure of the relevant material would not be contrary
to the public
I have noted above, the relevant material comprises advice provided to the
former Attorney-General in relation to a CPITCS decision.
Although the
Department claims that disclosure of the relevant material would prejudice its
ability to make recommendations to the
minister on management of the CPITCS, the
Department has not provided any evidence in support of its claim. Similarly, the
has not adequately explained how or why this would be expected to
occur following disclosure of the relevant material.
Accordingly,
based on my consideration of the documents, I am not satisfied that disclosure
of the relevant material would have the
effect that the Department claims.
Accordingly, I attribute no weight to the factors against disclosure identified
by the Department.
respect to the Department’s claim that disclosure of the relevant material
may result in misinterpretation regarding the
considerations taken into account
in refusing the legal financial assistance application, s 11B(4) of the FOI Act
relevantly provides
that the following factors must not be taken into account in
deciding whether access to a document would be contrary to the public
(b) access to the document could result in any person misinterpreting or
misunderstanding the document;
(d) access to the document could result in confusion or unnecessary debate.
this basis, I do not consider the Department’s contention that disclosure
would result in misinterpretation to be a relevant
factor against
disclosure.
with my findings in
RePipe (No. 1)
, the relevant material pertains to a
decision that affected the applicant. Disclosure would, in my view, provide the
applicant with
further insight into the considerations underlying the
author’s advice and recommendations to the former Attorney-General.
is because the relevant material forms part of the author’s deliberations
and would have, in my view, influenced the advice
and recommendations that were
subsequently provided to the former Attorney-General prior to her decision on
the application.
balancing the factors for and against disclosure, I am satisfied that the public
interest factors in favour of disclosure outweigh
the factors against
disclosure.
these reasons, its disclosure would not be contrary to the public interest at
Finding (s 11A(5))
names of the Department’s staff members are conditionally exempt under s
47F of the FOI Act and it would be contrary to
the public interest to release
this material.
material that the Department found to be conditionally exempt under s 47C is
conditionally exempt under this provision, however
its disclosure would not be
contrary to the public interest.
Rocelle Ago
General Manager Freedom of Information Case Management
Delegate of the Australian Information Commissioner for the purposes
of Information Act 1982
Relevant provisions of the FOI Act, FOI Guidelines, and
Section 11A(4) of the FOI
Act states the agency or Minister is not required by this Act to give
the person access to the document
at a particular time if, at that
time, the document is an exempt document.
Legal professional privilege (s 42)
discussed in the FOI Guidelines and in IC review
a document will be exempt
under s 42 if it is of such a nature that it would be privileged from production
in legal proceedings on
the ground of legal professional privilege (s 42(1)) and
privilege has not been waived (s 42(2)).
Legal professional privilege protects confidential communications between a
lawyer and a client from compulsory production. The FOI
Guidelines relevantly
explain that, at common law, determining whether a communication is privileged
requires consideration of the
whether there is
a legal adviser-client relationship
whether the
communication was for the dominant purpose of giving or receiving legal advice,
or use in connection with actual or anticipated
whether the
advice given is independent, and
whether the
advice given is
confidential.
FOI Guidelines explain that a communication may have been brought into existence
for more than one purpose but will be privileged
if the main purpose of its
creation was for giving or receiving legal advice (legal advice privilege), or
for use in connection with
actual or anticipated litigation (litigation
privilege).
Also, they note that
when legal advice is received from an independent external legal adviser,
establishing the existence of the
requisite legal adviser-client relationship is
usually straightforward. A typical example in a government context is advice
by an agency from a law firm that is on an authorised list of panel
firms (including the Australian Government
Solicitor).
In relation to whether a legal adviser client relationship exists, the FOI
Guidelines relevantly explain:
A legal adviser-client relationship exists where a client retains the services
of a lawyer for the purpose of obtaining professional
advice. If the advice is
received from an independent external legal adviser, establishing the existence
of the relationship is usually
straightforward.
The FOI Guidelines further explain that the following factors are relevant to
establishing whether a legal adviser-client relationship
adviser must be acting in their capacity as a professional legal adviser
the dominant
purpose test must be satisfied
the giving of
the advice must be attended by the necessary degree of independence
the advice must
be confidential
the fact that
the advice arose out of a statutory duty does not preclude the privilege from
whether the
lawyer is subject to professional standards can be
communications were confidential communications between a professional legal
adviser and client for the dominant purpose of
giving or receiving legal advice,
they will attract the
Deliberative processes (s 47C)
Section 47C of the FOI Act states:
(1) A document is conditionally exempt if its disclosure under
this Act would disclose matter (
deliberative matter
) in the nature
of, or relating to, opinion, advice or recommendation obtained, prepared or
recorded, or consultation or deliberation
that has taken place, in the course
of, or for the purposes of, the deliberative processes involved in the functions
(a) an agency; or
(b) a Minister; or
(c) the Government of the Commonwealth.
Section 47C(2) of the FOI Act declares that deliberative matter does not
include operational information (defined in section 8A of
the FOI Act) or purely
factual material.
Section 47C(3) of the FOI Act states:
(3) This section does not apply to any of the following:
(a) reports (including reports concerning the results of
studies, surveys or tests) of scientific or technical experts, whether
within an agency or not, including reports expressing the opinions of such
experts on scientific or technical matters;
(b) reports of a body or organisation, prescribed by the
regulations, that is established within an agency;
(c) the record of, or a formal statement of the reasons for,
a final decision given in the exercise of a power or of an adjudicative
Note: Access must generally be given to a
conditionally exempt document unless it would be contrary to the public interest
(see section
As discussed in the FOI Guidelines, a decision maker must be satisfied of 3
requirements for this conditional exemption to apply:
Firstly, the decision maker must be satisfied that information within the scope
of the request includes deliberative matter. Secondly,
if the decision maker is
satisfied, they are then required to be satisfied that the deliberative matter
was obtained, prepared or
recorded in the course of, or for the purposes of,
deliberative processes. Thirdly, the decision maker must be satisfied that the
deliberative processes were involved in the functions exercised by or intended
to be exercised by an Australian Government agency
The FOI Guidelines further explain that:
Deliberative matter is content that is in the nature of, or relating to
• an opinion, advice or recommendation that has been obtained, prepared
or recorded or
• a consultation or deliberation that has taken place, in the course
of, or for the purposes of, a deliberative process of the
government, an agency
or minister (s 47C(1)).
‘Deliberative matter’ does not include operational information or
purely factual material (s 47C(2)). ‘Operational
information’ is
defined in s 8A and is information that an agency must publish under the
Information Publication Scheme (see
Part 13 of the FOI
Guidelines).
The FOI Guidelines state that the conditional exemption does not apply
(a) reports (including reports concerning the results of studies, surveys or
tests) of scientific or technical experts, whether employed
within an agency or
not, including reports expressing the opinions of such experts on scientific or
technical matters (see [6.73]
– [6.72] below)
(b) reports of a body or organisation, prescribed by the regulations, that is
established within an agency (currently none are prescribed)
(c) the record of, or a formal statement of the reasons for, a final decision
given in the exercise of a power or of an adjudicative
function (s
The FOI Guidelines provide:
Agencies and ministers should only claim this conditional exemption in
clearly applicable circumstances, noting that s 47C is subject
to an overriding
public interest test that is weighted toward disclosure. Not every document
generated or held by a policy area of
an agency is ‘deliberative’ in
the sense used in this provision, even if it appears to deal with the
development or implementation
of a policy. This is reinforced by the language of
the FOI Act which describes what does not constitute ‘deliberative
A decision maker should ensure that the content of a document
strictly conforms with the criteria for identifying ‘deliberative
matter’ prepared or recorded for the purposes of a ‘deliberative
process’ before claiming this conditional exemption
(see [6.46] above and
[6.59] – [6.58] below).
In relation to assessing ‘deliberative matter’ the FOI Guidelines
The presence or
absence of particular words or phrases is not a reliable indication of whether a
document includes deliberative matter.
The agency should assess the substance
and content of the document before concluding it includes deliberative matter.
the format or class of the document, such as a ministerial brief or
submission, or the document being a draft version of a later
document does not
automatically designate the content as deliberative matter.
Material that is not deliberative matter, where not already excluded as
operational information, purely factual material or a scientific
report, would
• content that is merely descriptive
• incidental administrative content
• procedural or day to day content
• the decision or conclusion reached at the end of the deliberative
• matter that was not obtained, prepared or recorded in the course of, or
for the purposes of, a deliberative
Guidelines explain that a deliberative process involves the exercise of
judgement in developing and making a selection from
different options:
The action of deliberating, in common understanding, involves the weighing up or
evaluation of competing arguments or considerations
that may have a bearing upon
one’s course of action. In short, the deliberative processes involved in
the functions of an agency
are its thinking processes – the processes of
reflection, for example, upon the wisdom and expediency of a proposal, a
decision or a course of action.
It is not enough for the purposes of s 47C(1) that an opinion, advice or
recommendation is merely obtained, prepared or recorded;
it must be obtained,
prepared or recorded in the course of, or for the purposes of, the deliberative
processes involved in the functions
of the agency, minister or government.
The functions of an agency are usually found in the Administrative Arrangements
Orders or the instrument or Act that established
the agency. For the purposes of
the FOI Act, the functions include both policy making and the processes
undertaken in administering
or implementing a policy. The functions also extend
to the development of policies in respect of matters that arise in the course
administering a program. The non-policy decision making processes required when
carrying out agency, ministerial or governmental
functions, such as code of
conduct investigations, may also be deliberative processes.
An opinion or recommendation does not need to be prepared for the sole purpose
of a deliberative process. However, it is not sufficient
that an agency or
minister merely has a document in its possession that contains information
referring to matters for which the agency
or minister has
responsibility.
In relation to ‘purely factual material’, the FOI
Guidelines explain:
'Purely factual material’ does not extend to factual material that is an
integral part of the deliberative content and purpose
of a document, or is
embedded in or intertwined with the deliberative content such that it is
impractical to excise it.
Where a decision maker finds it difficult to separate the purely factual
material from the deliberative matter, both the elements
may be exempt. If the 2
elements can be separated, the decision maker should consider giving the
applicant a copy with deletions
under s 22 to provide access to the purely
factual material.
Personal privacy exemption (s 47F)
Section 47F of the FOI Act states
‘A document is conditionally exempt if its disclosure
under this Act would involve the unreasonable
disclosure of
information
any person (including a deceased person).’
Section 4(1) of the FOI Act states ‘personal information’ has the
same meaning as the
, which provides:
personal information
means information or an opinion about an
identified individual, or an individual who is reasonably identifiable:
(a) whether the information or opinion is true or not; and
(b) whether the information or opinion is recorded in a material form or
Section 47F(2) of the FOI Act states that in
determining whether the disclosure of the document would involve the
unreasonable disclosure
of personal information, an agency or Minister
decision maker must have regard to the following matters:
the extent to
which the information is well known
whether the
person to whom the information relates is known to be (or to have been)
associated with the matters dealt with in the
the availability
of the information from publicly available sources, and
matters that the agency or Minister considers relevant.
As discussed
in the FOI Guidelines and IC review
the main requirements of
this public interest conditional exemption are that a document contains
‘personal information;’
disclosure in response to the
applicant’s FOI request would be ‘unreasonable’ (s 47(1)); and
it would be ‘contrary
to the public interest’ to release the
material at the time of the decision (s 11A(5)).
The FOI Guidelines explain that the test of ‘unreasonableness’ in
s 47F ‘implies a need to balance the public interest
in disclosure of
government-held information and the private interest in the privacy of
individuals’.
In addition to the mandatory factors outlined at s 47F(2) of the FOI Act, the
FOI Guidelines explain that other relevant factors include:
a) the author of the document is identifiable
b) the document contains third party personal information
c) release of the document would cause stress to the third party
d) no public purpose would be achieved through release.
the nature, age
and current relevance of the information
any detriment
that disclosure may cause to the person to whom the information relates
any opposition
to disclosure expressed or likely to be held by that person
circumstances of an agency’s or minister’s collection and use of the
information
the fact that
the FOI Act does not control or restrict any subsequent use or dissemination of
information released under the FOI Act
any submission
an FOI applicant chooses to make in support of their request as to their reasons
for seeking access and their intended
or likely use or dissemination of the
information and
disclosure of the information might advance the public interest in government
transparency and
last-mentioned factor – the public interest in government transparency and
integrity – is to be balanced with all
other relevant factors arising in
the particular case, including the private interest that third party individuals
may have in maintaining
information.
Public interest test
Section 11A(5)of the FOI Act states the agency
or Minister must give the person access to the document if it is
conditionally exempt
at a particular time unless (in the circumstances)
access to the document at that time would, on balance, be contrary to the public
Section 11B(3) of the FOI Act sets out a non-exhaustive list of public
interest factors favouring disclosure for consideration, those
factors being
where disclosure of the document would do any of the following:
(a) promote the objects of the FOI Act
(b) inform debate on a matter of public importance
(c) promote effective oversight of public expenditure
(d) allow a person access to their personal information.
Section 11B(4) of the FOI Act also lists the following irrelevant factors
that must not be taken into consideration when deciding
whether access would, on
balance, be contrary to the public interest:
(a) access to the document could result in embarrassment to the Commonwealth
Government, or cause a loss of confidence in the Commonwealth
(b) access to the document could result in any person misinterpreting or
misunderstanding the document
(c) the author of the document was (or is) of high seniority in the agency to
which the request for access to the document was made
(d) access to the document could result in confusion or unnecessary
In addition to the factors set out at s 11B(3) of the FOI Act, the FOI
Guidelines set out a further non-exhaustive list of public
interest factors in
favour of disclosure, as well as public interest factors against
disclosure.
The FOI Guidelines explain:
To conclude that, on balance, disclosure of a document would be contrary to
the public interest is to conclude that the benefit to
the public resulting from
disclosure is outweighed by the benefit to the public of withholding the
information. The decision maker
must analyse, in each case, where on balance the
public interest lies based on the particular facts at the time the decision is
Review rights
Review by the Administrative Review
If a party to an IC review is unsatisfied with an IC review decision, they
may apply under s 57A of the FOI Act to have the decision
reviewed by the
Administrative Review Tribunal (ART). The ART provides independent merits review
of administrative decisions and
has power to set aside, vary, or affirm an IC
review decision.
An application to the ART must be made within 28 days of the day on which the
applicant is given the IC review decision (see
Administrative
Review Tribunal Act 2024
Administrative Review
Tribunal Rules 2024
An application fee may be payable when lodging an
application for review to the ART. Further information is available on the ART's
website (www.art.gov.au) or by telephoning 1800 228 333.
Making a complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman
If you believe you have been treated unfairly by the OAIC, you can make a
complaint to the Commonwealth Ombudsman (the Ombudsman).
The Ombudsman's
services are free. The Ombudsman can investigate complaints about the
administrative actions of Australian Government
agencies to see if you have been
treated unfairly.
If the Ombudsman finds your complaint is justified, the Ombudsman can
recommend that the OAIC reconsider or change its action or decision
or take any
other action that the Ombudsman considers is appropriate. You can contact the
Ombudsman's office for more information
on 1300 362 072 or visit the
Commonwealth Ombudsman’s website at
http://www.ombudsman.gov.au
The applicant confirmed during
the course of this Information Commissioner review that they were not seeking
access to contact details
of agency staff.
FOI Act s 55D(1).
Section 11A, 22, 34(3), 42, 47C
and 47F as set out in Annexure A.
See, Office of the Australian
Information Commissioner
, Guidelines issued by the Australian Information
Commissioner under
Information Act 1982
(FOI Guidelines).
Set out in Annexure A.
FOI Guidelines [5.145].
Ransley and Commissioner of Taxation
(Freedom of information)
[2015] AATA 728
'AEE' and Department of Defence
(Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 69
'ADM' and Services Australia
(No.7) (Freedom of information)
and ‘ACV’ and Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Authority
(Freedom of information)
Waterford v
Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1986) 163 CLR 54.
and Commissioner of Taxation (Freedom of information)
[2015] AATA 728
'AEE' and Department of Defence
(Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 69
'ADM' and Services Australia (No.
7) (Freedom of information)
[2023] AICmr 66
and Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Authority (Freedom of
information)
[2023] AICmr 3
Rudd and Civil Aviation
Safety Authority
[2013] AICmr 56
Philip Morris Ltd and
Prime Minister
[2011] AATA 556
Burford and Tertiary
Education Quality and Standards Agency
[2025] ARTA 992, at [42].
Wood; Secretary,
Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet and (Freedom of
information)
[2015] AATA 945
Listed in Annexure A.
Generally, see FOI
Guidelines at [5.144] – [5.182];
‘VO’ and Northern
Australia Infrastructure Facility (Freedom of information)
[2020] AICmr 47
VH’ and Australian
Taxation Office (Freedom of information)
[2020] AICmr 43
‘PQ’ and Australian
Taxation Office
(Freedom of information
[2019] AICmr 1
‘PO’ and Australian
Federal Police (Freedom of information)
[2018] AICmr 72
hris Lewis and Australian National
University (Freedom of information
[2018] AICmr 63
Rex Bashford and Department of
Jobs and Small Business (Freedom of information
[2018] AICmr 55
Department of Home Affairs (Freedom of information)
[2018] AICmr 36
FOI Guidelines
FOI Guidelines
FOI Guidelines
FOI Guidelines
FOI Guidelines
[5.154] (footnotes omitted).
AWB v Cole (No. 5)
[2006] FCA 1234
(2006) 155 FCR 30
Waterford v Commonwealth
[1987] HCA 25
(1986) 163 CLR 54
FOI Guidelines at
FOI Guidelines at [6.48].
FOI Guidelines at
FOI Guidelines at [6.52].
FOI Guidelines at [6.61]
– [6.62] (footnotes omitted).
FOI Guidelines at [6.54]
– [6.58] (footnotes omitted)
FOI Guidelines at [6.70]
– [6.71] (footnotes omitted).
Section 6(1)
(Cth) (emphasis in original).
Generally, see FOI
[6.119] – [6.155];
‘AEE’ and Department of Defence (Freedom of information)
‘AED’ and Australian Criminal Intelligence
Commission (Freedom of information)
'OE' and Australian Taxation Office (Freedom of
information)
[2018] AICmr 29
FOI Guidelines at
FOI Guidelines at [6.137]
– [6.138] (footnotes omitted).
at [6.139].
FOI Guidelines at [6.229]
FOI Guidelines at [6.238]
(footnote omitted).
RTF format (22.3 MB)
Signed PDF/A format