Q and Financial Institution [2011] AICmrCN 11 (22 December 2011)
Case citation: Q and Financial Institution
[2011] AICmrCN 11
definition of personal information and disclosure of personal information
Section 6 and National Privacy Principle 2.1 in
Schedule 3 of the
The complainant contracted with a buyer to sell his
car, which was under finance to a financial institution. The financial
institution
had taken an interest in the car as security for the
complainant’s loan.
The financial institution advised a prospective buyer of his car that it had
been under finance but the account had recently been
paid in full. The
prospective buyer later obtained a letter from the financial institution
confirming that it had received funds
to finalise the account and, subject to
the clearance of these funds, it would release its security interest in the
vehicle in ten
working days.
In providing this information to the prospective buyer, the financial
institution denied disclosing the complainant’s personal
information
because the letter it sent to the prospective buyer only contained details about
the complainant’s vehicle and
did not mention the complainant’s name
or account number.
'Personal information' is defined in
section 6(1)
as information or an opinion whether true or not, and whether
recorded in a material form or not, about an individual whose identity
apparent, or can reasonably be ascertained, from the information or opinion.
NPP 2.1 provides that an organisation must not use or disclose personal
information about an individual for a purpose other than the
primary purpose of
collection, unless an exception in NPP 2.1(a)–(h) applies.
The Commissioner investigated the matter under
section 40(1)
To determine if the financial institution had disclosed personal information
particular circumstances
in which the financial institution sent the letter to the prospective buyer.
The letter did not contain details such as the complainant’s name,
address or date of birth. However, it did contain information
of the complainant’s account with the financial institution, and
specifically, that funds had been received
to finalise the account and the
financial institution’s security interest in the car.
At the time the letter was sent, the prospective buyer was aware that the
complainant owned the car in question and the car had been
under finance. The
prospective buyer also had information confirming that the financial institution
had a security interest in the
complainant’s car. However, the fact that
the prospective buyer had previous knowledge of these details did not lessen the
financial institution’s obligation under NPP 2.1 to only disclose an
individual’s personal information for the primary
purpose of its
collection, or for a secondary purpose where it can rely on one of the
exceptions at NPP 2.1(a) to (h).
The Commissioner formed the view that, in the circumstances, the prospective
buyer could have reasonably ascertained that the details
in the letter related
to the complainant’s account with the financial institution. On that
basis, the information contained
in the letter was personal information about
the complainant.
Therefore, the Commissioner found that the financial institution had not
complied with NPP 2 as it disclosed personal information
to the prospective buyer.
While the financial institution did not agree with the Commissioner’s
findings, it immediately ceased its practice of sending
such letters to third
parties without the written consent of the account holder.
The financial institution agreed to conciliate the matter under
. In addition to its change in practice, it
apologised and offered a goodwill payment.
Consequently the Commissioner closed the complaint under
section 41(2)(a)
on the ground that the financial institution had adequately
dealt with the matter.
Office of the Australian Information Commissioner
December 2011
RTF format (813 KB)
Signed PDF/A format