Emu NL 02R [2025] ATP 12 (5 May 2025)
Reasons for Decision
[2025] ATP 12
Catchwords:
Decline to conduct proceedings – association – board spill
– collective action – evidence
Corporations Act 2001
sections 12
Takeovers Panel Procedural Rules 2020, rules 20(1) and 20(2)
Guidance Note 2: Reviewing Decisions
ASIC Regulatory Guide 128: Collective action by investors
Emu NL [2025] ATP 11, Global Lithium Resources Limited 02R [2025] ATP 4,
Auris Minerals Limited [2018] ATP 7, Dragon Mining Limited
[2014] ATP 5, Orion
Telecommunications Ltd [2006] ATP 23,
Interim order
IO undertaking
Declaration
Final order
Undertaking
INTRODUCTION
review Panel, Yasmin Allen AM (sitting President), Con Boulougouris and Marissa
Freund, declined to conduct proceedings on an
application by Emu NL in relation
to its affairs. The application concerned an alleged association in the context
of a requisitioned
board spill meeting. The review Panel considered that the
applicant did not provide a sufficient body of evidence to justify the
Panel making further enquiries and did not set out in a clear way what the
relevant circumstances were. The review Panel
was not satisfied that, on the
materials provided, there was a compelling case of association and considered
that there was no reasonable
prospect that it would declare the circumstances
unacceptable.
these reasons, the following definitions
has the meaning given in paragraph
has the meaning given in paragraph
Interested Persons
has the meaning given in paragraph
has the meaning given in paragraph
Mayfair Communications Pty Ltd
Martin Place Securities Pty Ltd
has the meaning given in paragraph
has the meaning given in paragraph
Potentially Associated Parties
has the meaning given in paragraph
Procedural Rules
Takeovers Panel Procedural Rules 2020
Requisition Meeting
has the meaning given in paragraph
Requisition Notice
has the meaning given in paragraph
Requisitioning Shareholders
has the meaning given in paragraph
has the meaning given in paragraph
facts are set out in detail in the initial Panel’s reasons for decision in
Below is a summary
of those facts and any other relevant facts at the time of Emu’s review
application.
is an ASX-listed copper exploration company (ASX code: EMU).
the time of the application, its directors were Mr Peter Thomas, Mr Tim
Staermose and Mr Roland Bartsch.
21 October 2024, Emu announced a placement to sophisticated and professional
investors to raise up to $1.525 million to fund exploration
and for general
working capital, to be effected in two tranches (
Placement was managed by MPS, of which Mr Barry Dawes is the sole Director and
28 October 2024, Emu issued 21,000,000 new shares under the first tranche of the
Placement. Relevantly, the following persons
first acquired a relevant interest
in Emu shares at this
Shareholder
No. of shares
Farris Corporation Pty Ltd as trustee for the Farris Family Trust
Oakmount Nominees Pty Ltd as trustee for the Narromine Super Fund
Mr Keith Rowe
Mr John Anderson
22 November 2024, Farris acquired 300,000 Emu shares.
2 December 2024, Emu announced the results of its AGM, including that:
(a) a “second strike” had occurred in relation to the adoption of
the remuneration report
(b) the board spill motion put to shareholders as a result of the second strike
did not carry and
(c) the resolution regarding the approval of the second tranche of the Placement
2 December 2024 announcement also disclosed that Mr Gavin Rutherford (a director
of Emu at the time) had requested immediately
before the meeting that he did not
wish to be put up for re-election and that Emu had appointed Mr Bartsch as a
non-executive technical
16 December 2024, Emu issued the second tranche of Placement shares.
Relevantly, the following persons acquired Emu
Shareholder
No. of shares
Mayfair Communications Pty Ltd (
Coolibah WA Pty Ltd as trustee for the Wippl Family Superannuation Fund
Wayburn Holdings Pty Ltd (
Madini Minerals (
3 January 2025, Farris acquired 200,000 Emu shares.
23 January 2025, Emu announced that it had received a notice under section
Requisition Notice
signed by Mayfair, Coolibah, Oakmount and Farris (together, the
Requisitioning Shareholders
) to consider resolutions to remove
Mr Thomas and Mr Bartsch as directors of Emu and to appoint Mr Rowe and Mr
Anderson as directors.
23 January 2025 announcement included a notice of initial substantial holder on
behalf of the Requisitioning Shareholders and
others including Mr Rowe and Mr
Anderson, disclosing a voting power of 8.89% and an association pursuant to
sections 12(2)(b) and
12(2)(c) by reason of the Requisition Notice.
11 February 2025, Emu released a notice of meeting in relation to the
Requisition Notice with the meeting (
Requisition Meeting
) to be held on
18 March 2025.
18 March 2025, Emu announced that on 17 March 2025 it had terminated with
immediate effect its contract for the services of Mr
Douglas Grewar as CEO of
the company due to “
the very recent discovery
” of breaches of
on 18 March 2025, Emu announced that it had resolved to postpone the Requisition
Meeting to 16 April 2025 citing as reasons the
termination of its CEO on 17
March 2025.
3 April 2025, Emu sought a declaration of unacceptable circumstances. It
submitted (among other things) that 25 Emu shareholders
(including the
Requisitioning Shareholders), who first became members, or alternatively
increased their holdings, in December 2024
Interested Persons
month before the Requisition Notice, were associates in relation to Emu. Emu
submitted that the Interested Persons were acting
in concert with the intention
of removing the majority of the incumbent board and replacing them with those
sympathetic towards the
alternate business goals of the Interested Persons. Emu
also submitted that the Interested Persons collectively held
in Emu and failed to fully
disclose their holdings to the market.
14 April 2025, Emu announced that it had resolved to postpone the Requisition
Meeting for a further 28 days to 14 May 2025, citing
as reasons the initial
Panel proceedings so that “
the Resolutions to be put to the EGM can be
voted upon in the context of the determination of the Takeovers Panel and any
remedial Orders.
16 April 2025, the initial Panel declined to conduct proceedings on the basis
that Emu did not provide a sufficient body of material
to justify the Panel
making further enquiries.
APPLICATION
22 April 2025, Emu sought the President’s consent to apply for a review of
the decision by the initial Panel pursuant to
section 657EA. Emu submitted
(among other things) that the “
overwhelming commonality
the voting of certain shareholders at the AGM as well as through the proxies
received for the Requisition Meeting indicated
an association.
review application included a list of Emu shareholders which included the
Requisitioning Shareholders and some, but not all, of
the Interested Persons and
in relation to which Emu submitted that “
[w]ith their shareholdings all
the number of shares held by the potentially Associated parties
goes significantly beyond the 20% threshold
(Potentially
Associated Parties
President’s consent
President considered, in accordance with Guidance Note 2: Reviewing Decisions
(see [27]-[30]), whether there was any basis for
granting consent, including
whether there was any new evidence and the importance of the dispute.
President considered that the review application brought new arguments to light
in relation to the voting patterns of the Interested
Persons (as discussed
further below) but was not, on first view, convinced that the new arguments were
adequately supported by evidence
so as to assist a review Panel in its
determination.
the President considered that the importance of the dispute, and the fact that
the issues raised were current, justified him
granting consent to the review.
have considered all the materials but address specifically only those we
consider necessary to explain our reasoning. The materials
included the
material before the initial Panel in
its initial application, Emu submitted that the Interested Persons voted
as a cabal and uniformly
” showing “
association between the Interested Persons
its review application, Emu appeared to narrow down the scope of its association
claim and focus on the Potentially Associated
Parties. Emu submitted that the
Potentially Associated Parties shared structural links and included the
Requisitioning Shareholders
and some, but not all, of the Interested Persons.
also made new allegations in its review application, submitting that:
(a) the signatory of the substantial holder notice
lodged by the Requisitioning Shareholders “
appears to have led the EGM
requisition”
and that he had had meetings with a number of other
relevant parties “
as evidenced by email trails that EMU has
”, including Mr Vernon
Mr Anderson and Mr Iain
the overwhelming commonality of the
voting result of the alleged interested persons was the consequence of the then
existing collusion
of the shareholders itself, who had become members of the
Applicant Company, overwhelmingly through the actions and conduct of one
individual.
list of Potentially Associated Parties did not include Mr Grewar or Mr Dawes but
the applicant submitted that Mr Grewar “
has been instrumental in the
actions of the concert parties
” and that “
it is also probable
that Dawes is involved
Panel has limited investigatory powers, and the onus is on the applicant to do
more than make allegations of association and rely
on a Panel to substantiate
Here, Emu did not persuade
us by the evidence it adduced that we should conduct proceedings.
was unclear, based on the materials before us, who the applicant alleged to be
associated with whom, since when and on what basis.
The applicant referred to
different groups of people, including the Interested Persons, the Potentially
Associated Parties and others.
As a result, among other things we could not
determine the impact on the relevant shareholders’ relevant interest, if
for the purposes of section 657A(2). The applicant also referred to events
and relationships among a very small group which do not
appear to be relevant to
the association claim (see below at paragraph
). No evidence of a common purpose
among all the Interested Persons, or all the Potentially Associated Parties, was
articulated in
relation to Emu’s affairs.
also consider that Emu did not provide evidence which would have been readily
available to substantiate its case, including:
(a) evidence of the proxies for the Requisition Meeting, when they were lodged
and by whom
(b) evidence of the emails between the signatory of the Requisition Notice, Mr
Wills, Mr Anderson and potentially others as referred
to in the review
application (see above at
(c) who is the “
one primary individual
” referred to in the
review application (see above at
we acknowledge the difficulties that an applicant faces in gathering evidence in
an association matter, we consider that certain
tools were available to Emu to
build its Panel application, including issuing tracing notices to the nominee
shareholders which it
alleged were among the Interested Persons.
submitted that “
[a]ll the 11 placees who voted against the Remuneration
Report and Options packages for Directors had been shareholders for less than
weeks when that meeting was held
” and that “
[a]s well as 11
of the initial 12 placees, of the second group of 12 placees, 9 have filed
proxies voting to remove Thomas and Bartsch
and appoint Rowe and Anderson at the
postponed EGM
we consider that the voting patterns reflected at the AGM and in the proxies
lodged in advance of the Requisition Meeting were
relevant circumstances, we
consider that:
(a) shareholders voting in the same manner is usually not sufficient evidence to
demonstrate an association unless there is an understanding
or an agreement
entered into regarding the exercise of voting
(b) a number of the shareholders alleged to be associates, including some of the
Requisitioning Shareholders, were not on the register
at the time of the AGM,
therefore the commonality of voting did not apply to them with regards to the
AGM but only, potentially,
to the Requisition Meeting and
(c) Emu did not provide evidence of the proxies received for the Requisition
Meeting (as discussed above at
submitted that “
the number of shares held by the potentially Associated
parties goes significantly beyond the 20% threshold
on publicly available information and information available to the initial Panel
Potentially Associated Parties, as we understand them to be listed in the review
application, appear to hold together less than
20% in Emu. That includes the
8.89% relevant interest held by the Requisitioning Shareholders and already
disclosed in their substantial
holder notice.
are not satisfied that, on the materials provided, there is a compelling case
that goes beyond permissible collective action aiming
at enhancing corporate
governance.
We note relevantly
(and among other things) that:
(a) Emu shareholders voted against the remuneration report at the AGM, two years
(b) the chair of Emu, Mr Thomas, served on the board for a substantial period
(c) Emu postponed the Requisition Meeting twice
(d) Mr Grewar submitted “
I was unaware of any 249D activity although I
was hardly surprised given increased conversations with shareholders relating to
performance over the past 2 years
(e) the Requisitioning Shareholders otherwise lodged a substantial holder notice
together with the two nominee directors, disclosing
their voting power in Emu
which appeared to comply with their legal obligations.
also consider that some of the claims made by the applicant did not appear to be
relevant to Emu’s association claim, including
reference to the work done
by Mr Grewar on the Mabuhay Project in the
Philippines
not on account of
Emu and for which evidence was submitted that the Emu board authorised Mr
Grewar’s involvement.
included a large number of shareholders in its allegations of association. As a
practical matter, it may be more difficult for
an applicant to demonstrate
patterns of conduct or relevant probative material to satisfy the application
Here, without providing
any evidence or establishing any connections between these shareholders, the
application fell short of the
application hurdle. We also consider that
applicants should be cautious about making allegations against shareholders when
is little material to support those claims.
were informed by the Panel Executive that, after we had received preliminary
submissions from other parties, the applicant over
several days signalled an
intention to make an out of process submission. We did not receive any out of
process submission from
the applicant and, to our knowledge, it was not made at
the time we communicated our decision to the parties.
note that the applicant had the opportunity, in its review application, to make
any submissions it considered necessary to support
its case. We remind parties
that, in accordance with our Procedural Rules, applicants are not entitled to
make preliminary submissions
(rule 20(2)) and parties (including applicants) are
not entitled to make rebuttal submissions to a preliminary submission, unless
the Panel agrees to accept such submission (rule 20(1)).
Takeovers Panel is a prompt dispute resolution body and it is incumbent on
applicants to set out their case and provide appropriate
supporting material,
where relevant.
the reasons above, we do not consider that there is any reasonable prospect that
we would make a declaration of unacceptable circumstances.
Accordingly, we have
decided not to conduct proceedings in relation to the application under
regulation 20
Australian Securities and Investments Commission
Regulations
that we have decided not to conduct proceedings, we do not (and do not need to)
consider whether to make any interim or final
President of the sitting Panel
Decision dated 5
Reasons given to parties 2 July 2025
published 14 July 2025
Norton Smith
Mr Douglas Grewar
Mr Barry Dawes
Madini Minerals
TrustQore (BVI) Ltd as trustee of the Macpherson Family Trust
Directly and through a
controlled entity
controlled entity
otherwise indicated, all statutory references are to the
Corporations
(Cth) and all terms used in Chapter 6, 6A or 6C have the
meaning given in the relevant Chapter (as modified by
Based on 193,601,409
total shares on issue
controlled entity, Wayburn, is one of the Interested Persons listed by Emu.
Further background is provided in the
initial Panel’s reasons, see
[2025] ATP 11 at [23], [30] and
Two entities connected to
Mr MacPherson, Madini and TrustQore (BVI) Ltd as trustee for the MacPherson
Family Trust are some of the
Interested Persons listed by Emu. Further
background is provided in the initial Panel’s reasons, see
[2025] ATP 11 at [23] and [36].
Dragon Mining Limited
[2014] ATP 5 at [59]-[60]
Orion Telecommunications Ltd
[2006] ATP 23 at [111];
Lithium Resources Limited 02R
[2025] ATP 4 at
ASIC Regulatory Guide
128: Collective action by
Further background
is provided in the initial Panel’s reasons, see
11 at [23] and [38].
Auris Minerals Limited
[2018] ATP 7 at [20]
RTF format (7.15 MB)
Signed PDF/A format