URL: https://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/viewdoc/au/cases/cth/UKPCHCA/1967/2.html
Scraped: 2025-11-17 11:43:37
================================================================================

Cases & Legislation
Journals & Scholarship
Communities
New Zealand
Specific Year
Australian Consolidated Press Ltd v Uren [1967] UKPCHCA 2; (1967) 117 CLR 221 (24 July 1967)
PRIVY COUNCIL
AUSTRALIAN CONSOLIDATED PRESS LTD v. UREN
[1967] UKPCHCA 2
(1967) 117 CLR 221
Defamation - Precedents - Privy Council
Privy Council
Lord Morris of Borth-y-Gest(1), Lord Pearce(1), Lord Upjohn(1),
Lord Wilberforce(1) and Sir Alfred North(1).
Defamation - Damages - Exemplary damages - Circumstances in &which award may
Precedents - Privy Council - High Court decision following previous
decisions - Conflict between decisions of House of Lords and
High Court.
Privy Council - Jurisdiction - Grant of special leave - Ruling sought on
point of law decided in High Court - Prerogative of justice
- Effect of
legislation thereon - The Judicial Committee Act, 1833 (Imp.), s. 3.
1967, April 27; May 1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10; July 24. 24:7:1967
APPEAL from the High Court of Australia.
LORD MORRIS OF BORTH-Y-GEST delivered the judgment of their Lordships as
On 14th February 1963 the respondent commenced an action in the Supreme
Court of New South Wales claiming damages for defamation
against the appellant
company. The respondent complained of certain passages which were printed in
three newspapers published by
the appellant. Damages were claimed in respect
of words set out: (1) in an issue dated 8th December 1961 of the Daily
Telegraph (a
morning newspaper distributed mainly in New South Wales); (2) in
an issue dated 3rd November 1962 of The Bulletin (a weekly magazine
distributed throughout Australia); (3) in an issue dated 10th February 1963 of
the Sunday Telegraph (a Sunday newspaper distributed
mainly in New South
Wales) and (4) in a further edition of the Sunday Telegraph also dated 10th
February 1963. The action was heard
in February and March 1964 by his Honour
Mr. Justice Collins and a jury of twelve persons. The trial occupied some
thirteen days.
The appellant denied that the matters complained of bore or
were capable of bearing the meanings alleged by the respondent. It relied
a defence of qualified protection, under s. 17 (h) of the Defamation Act, 1958
(N.S.W.), that the publications were made in
the course of the public
discussion of subjects of public interest the public discussion of which was
for the public benefit, and
that in so far as the matters complained of
consisted of comment, the comment was fair. By amended replication made at the
by leave of the judge the respondent alleged that the publications were
not made in good faith. It was a contention of the respondent
at the trial
that the conduct of the appellant in the period between publication and the
termination of the trial showed that it
was actuated by ill will towards the
respondent. (at p223)
2. In his charge to the jury on 10th March 1964 the learned judge left it
open to them in the event of their finding for the respondent
punitive or exemplary damages. He said:
"The plaintiff is entitled to compensation at your hands
for the damage that has been done to his reputation. He is
entitled to compensation, and that compensation to be awarded
may be increased if you find that the publications were made
with ill will to the plaintiff, were made as part of a campaign.
The damages may be aggravated by those circumstances.
But in addition to compensatory damages, the law permits,
in a case such as this, the award of what are called punitive
damages; it permits a jury to award punitive damages. It
certainly does not require a jury to award punitive damages;
it all depends on the view that the jury takes of the case.
They are in addition to compensation; they are called by a
number of names, two of which have been used in the course
of the case, punitive damages and exemplary damages, damages
awarded to punish, damages awarded to make an example of
the defendant. They are awarded, of course, to the plaintiff.
They are not in the nature of a fine, and they should only be
awarded where the conduct of the defendant merits
punishment,
and this could only be considered to be so where its
conduct has been malicious; that it has shown what has
been described as contumelious disregard for the rights of
the plaintiff, here, of the plaintiff's right to enjoy the reputation
that he possesses.
"Mr. Evatt has urged upon you that this is a case for
punitive damages; Mr. Larkins has put to you that, in all the
circumstances of this case, this is not one for punitive damages,
that this is certainly not a case where punishment is called for,
that compensation is sufficient. It is a matter for you. It has
been said that exemplary or punitive damages are given to
show the indignation of the jury in the case where they have
been properly moved to indignation by the conduct of the
defendant. That is a very broad statement. Emotion generally
plays no part in judicial process, and you are here as judges,
and it is not whether you feel emotions of indignation, but
whether you think, in the exercise of your judicial function,
you could see that you have been led to have feeling of judicial
indignation by the conduct of the defendant in this case. If
you do feel that, then it is a case in which you may award
punitive damages, the amount again being a matter entirely
for you." (at p224)
3. On 11th March 1964 after a retirement of about five hours the jury
returned a verdict for the respondent and awarded damages
as follows - 5,000
pounds in respect of the Daily Telegraph issue of 8th December 1961, 10,000
pounds in respect of The Bulletin
issue of 3rd November 1962, and 15,000
pounds in respect of the two issues of the Sunday Telegraph of 10th February
1963. The total
was therefore 30,000 pounds. No objection to the direction of
the learned judge in regard to exemplary damages had been taken. The
in the House of Lords in Rookes v. Barnard (1) had only been delivered on 21st
January 1964 and it can readily be appreciated
that there had hardly been time
for legal advisers in Australia to become familiar with their content. (at
4. The appellant by notice of motion dated 1st April 1964 to the Full Court
of the Supreme Court of New South Wales sought an order
that the verdict be
set aside and that a new trial should be granted. Included amongst the grounds
for the order which was sought
was that the learned judge at the trial had
been in error in directing the jury that it was open to them to award punitive
or exemplary
damages. The Full Court held that the point could be argued on
appeal. The appeal was heard in February and March 1965 by Herron
C.J., Walsh
and Wallace JJ. By rule dated 4th May 1965 the Full Court unanimously set
aside the verdict and by a majority decided
that there should be a new trial
limited to damages. Walsh J. would have ordered a general new trial. It is not
necessary to refer
to all the grounds for the order made. While Herron C.J.
and Walsh J. favoured the course of following the principles laid down in
Rookes v. Barnard (1) they did not consider that there was evidence justifying
an award of exemplary damages. Wallace J. favoured
the course of following the
principles laid down by the High Court of Australia in preference to those
laid down by the House of
Lords in Rookes v. Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
(1964) AC 1129
his reason for ordering a new trial solely on the ground that
the evidence did
not justify an award of exemplary damages
on the basis of the principles laid
down by the High Court of Australia.
5. There was another appeal which was heard in the Full Court. It was heard
before the hearing of the appeal of the appellant. That
was an appeal by a
company John Fairfax and Sons Pty. Limited publisher of a Sunday newspaper
called the Sun-Herald. The respondent
had succeeded in an action against it
for defamation in respect of matter published in the Sun-Herald on 10th
February 1963 comparable
to that published on that date by the appellant in
the Sunday Telegraph. In that appeal it was argued on behalf of John Fairfax
Sons Pty. Limited, as was argued on behalf of the appellant in its appeal,
that the principles laid down in Rookes v. Barnard (1)
in regard to awards of
exemplary damages should be followed. The Full Court in that appeal ordered a
new trial limited to damages.
6. Following the order of the Full Court that there should be a new trial
limited to damages, the appellant applied ex parte to
the High Court of
Australia for leave to appeal from the refusal of the majority of the Full
Court to order a general new trial.
Leave was given. Similar leave was given
to the Fairfax company in its case. The respondent applied for and was granted
appeal in the two cases from the orders of the Full Court setting
aside the verdicts in favour of the respondent and ordering new
each appeal the arguments were concerned inter alia with the question whether
Rookes v. Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
be followed. Judgment in both appeals
was delivered by the High Court on 2nd June 1966. The main reasoning in regard
whether Rookes v. Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
(1964) AC 1129
should be followed
was contained in the judgments delivered
in Uren v. John Fairfax & Sons
[1966] HCA 40
(1966) 117 CLR 118
: that reasoning was then incorporated by reference
the judgments delivered in the present case.
In the present case the
appellant's
appeal was by a majority allowed. A new trial
on all issues was
directed. The respondent's cross
appeal, by which he had asked that
verdict of the jury be restored, was dismissed.
7. There was a division of opinion in the High Court as to whether on the
basis that exemplary damages are in law permissible the
evidence which had
been given in the case did or did not in fact justify the award of exemplary
damages. But as regards the law their
Honours all expressed similar opinions.
McTiernan J. held that "the question whether there was proof of circumstances
which would
entitle the jury to award exemplary damages should be decided
according to decisions" (1966) 117 CLR, at p 191 of the High Court
Australia. Taylor J. held that the categories of cases in which it is proper
to permit an award of exemplary damages are not restricted
in the manner laid
down in Rookes v. Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
(1964) AC 1129
. Menzies J. held that in a libel
action the law permits
the award, in
addition to compensatory damages, of
punitive damages and
that the High Court should not follow Rookes v. Barnard
(1964) AC 1129
. Windeyer J. held that in a proper case exemplary damages for
defamation could be given and that the cases
in which they may be
not as limited as laid down in Rookes v. Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
(1964) AC 1129
. Owen J. held
the right of a jury to award punitive
damages in appropriate cases should
not be limited as laid down in Rookes
(1964) AC 1129
. (at p226)
8. The appellant then presented a petition by which it sought special leave
to appeal "from so much of the decision of the High
Court of Australia
delivered on 2nd June 1966 on the plaintiff's cross appeal as held that Rookes
[1964] UKHL 1
was wrongly
decided". The petition was heard on 20th
July 1966 by Viscount Dilhorne and Lords MacDermott, Hodson, Donovan
Wilberforce.
was no appearance for the respondent. In the course of his
submissions then made learned counsel for the appellant
stated that
nothing contained in the order of the High Court dated 2nd June 1966 that he
wished to have altered. He had
succeeded in
an order for a general
new trial. The submissions of the respondent as to the principles which should
the new trial
had however prevailed. He submitted therefore
that it was desirable that he should have leave to appeal
in order to
(which would govern the course of the new trial which had been
ordered) that the law governing awards
of exemplary
damages was as
in Rookes v. Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
(1964) AC 1129
. If leave was not given and if on the
trial any issue of punitive damages was
left to the jury and if a verdict for
of over a certain amount was recovered
by the respondent, the result
would be that
an appeal to Her Majesty in Council could result
in which the
legal issue would then
call for decision. So it was submitted that
preferable, in the interests of both parties,
to seek a decision at the
rather than at the later stage. Submissions
were also made by learned
counsel in regard to the
question whether having regard to
the stage reached
in the litigation it was competent
for the Board to advise that leave to
should be given. Towards the end
of the hearing of the petition, acting
on a suggestion
of the Board, leave was sought and then was
obtained to amend
the prayer of
the petition so that it should relate to so much of the
of the High Court of Australia delivered
on 2nd June 1966 on the
plaintiff's
cross appeal as determined that as a matter
of law it was competent to award
punitive damages
in the case. (at p227)
9. The Board reported to Her Majesty, as their opinion, that leave ought to
be granted to enter and prosecute an appeal against
so much of the decision of
the High Court of Australia delivered on 2nd June 1966 as determined that it
was competent to award punitive
damages in the case. It is clear that the
advice to Her Majesty was only tendered after the Board had considered whether
there would
be jurisdiction to hear an appeal. There is no suggestion that the
Board were under any misapprehension as to any of the circumstances
the limited nature of what the appellants sought to establish. No leave was
reserved to the respondent to raise a preliminary
point at the hearing (see
Dennis Hotels Pty. Ltd. v. Victoria
[1961] UKPCHCA 1
(1962) AC 25
(1961) 104 CLR 621
been stated,
however, there
was no appearance by and therefore no argument on
behalf of the respondent. Thereafter an Order
in Council was made
on 28th July
1966 in accordance with the report presented by the Board. Their Lordships sat
to hear the appeal
as directed by the
terms of that
order. (at p228)
10. When the appeal was being opened counsel for the respondent took a
preliminary objection. He contended that the appeal was not
Act, 1833 (Imp.). He contended that the order
of the High Court of Australia
merely directed that there should be a new trial on all issues and that the
High Court had not determined
that it was competent to award punitive damages
in this case. Reliance was placed upon what was said in The Commonwealth v.
(1950) AC 235
(1949) 79 CLR 497
, where in delivering the
judgment of the Board Lord Porter, in reference
to the words
Constitution
restricting appeals in inter se questions, viz. the words "no
appeal shall be permitted to The Queen in Council from a decision of
Court upon any question, howsoever arising as to the limits inter se of the
constitutional powers of the Commonwealth and
those of any State or States, or
as to the limits inter se of the constitutional powers of any two or more
States, unless the High
Court shall certify that the question is one which
ought to be determined by Her Majesty in Council" said that an appeal is the
proceeding by which an unsuccesssful party seeks to have the formal
order of a court set aside or varied in his favour by an appellate
that it is only from such an order that an appeal can be brought (1950) AC, at
p 294; (1949) 79 CLR, at pp 624, 625 . Reference
was also made to the judgment
of the Privy Council in Rajah Tasadduq Rasul Khan v. Manik Chand
(1902) LR 30
considering the meaning of the word "decision" in s. 596
of the Code of Civil Procedure, it was said that the natural
obvious and
facie meaning of the word "decision" is decision of the suit by the Court. (at
11. A plea to the jurisdiction may always be made, and the mere circumstance
that special leave to appeal has been granted does
not ordinarily preclude a
respondent from raising a challenge to the jurisdiction (see Zahid Husain v.
Mohammed Ismael (No. 2) (1930)
LR 57 Ind App 186 ; Mukhlal Singh v. Kishuni
(1930) LR 57 Ind App 279
; Nelungaloo Pty. Ltd. v. The Commonwealth
[1950] UKPCHCA 2
(1950) 81 CLR 144
, at p 159 ; Patterson v. Solomon
(1960) AC 579
). If, however, on a petition for special
leave a question
the Board's jurisdiction to hear the appeal is disclosed, and if
then hear argument on that question,
give a final decision on the
point before advising the grant of leave (see
Dennis Hotels Pty. Ltd. v.
59; (1961) 104 CLR, at p 633 ). In the present
case the Board on 20th July 1966, when deciding whether to advise the
to appeal, gave consideration to the question whether there would be
the respondent
was not then
present, their Lordships have proceeded on the basis that they would not in
the circumstances of this
case regard the
decision on 20th July 1966 to advise
the grant of leave to appeal as having been a final decision on any question
as to the Board's
a case where on a full investigation of facts or on
a further elucidation
facts any different state of affairs is revealed than that which with every
frankness was put forward on
behalf of the appellant
when leave to appeal was
sought on 20th July 1966. (at p229)
12. In the view of their Lordships, leave to appeal was granted in the
present case under the ample powers of the prerogative. Within
those powers
the grant of leave to appeal endowed their Lordships with jurisdiction. Their
Lordships so ruled. The question as to
the extent to which any ruling as to
principle should be given became a matter of discretion. (at p229)
13. In Hull v. M'Kenna; "Freeman's Journal" v. Fernstrom & Traesliberi
Viscount Haldane pointed out in the Judicial
Committee of the Privy
Council that save to such extent as it might be modified by statute
example that which dealt with
constitutional questions in Australia) the
Sovereign retained the prerogative of justice. (at
14. While their Lordships will adhere to their practice of declining to give
speculative opinions on hypothetical questions, their
Lordships cannot think
that the questions now raised are to be regarded as hypothetical. In
Attorney-General for Ontario v. Hamilton
Street Railway Co.
(1903) AC 524
Lord Chancellor in delivering the judgment of the Board pointed out that it
would be worthless
and furthermore "contrary to principle
inconvenient and
inexpedient" that opinions should be given on hypothetical questions as
to questions arising in concrete
cases and involving private rights.
The present appeal relates to the decision of the High Court
as to the law to
be applied in an
actual case which is shortly to be retried. The circumstances
differ from those in R. v. Louw
, where it was sought to have
determination of "an abstract point of law which did not arise in the case".
15. The contention advanced on behalf of the respondent that "the appeal
herein is not within the jurisdiction of the Judicial Committee
under s. 3 of
The Judicial Committee Act, 1833" is in their Lordships' view not valid. That
section is as follows:
"All appeals or complaints in the nature of appeals
which either by virtue of this Act, or of any law, statute
or custom, may be brought before His Majesty or His Majesty
in Council from or in respect of the determination, sentence,
rule or order of any Court, judge or judicial officer, and all
such appeals as are now pending and unheard, shall from and
after the passing of this Act be referred by His Majesty to
the said Judicial Committee of his Privy Council, and that
such appeals, causes and matters shall be heard by the said
Judicial Committee, and a report or recommendation thereon
shall be made to His Majesty in Council for his decision thereon
as heretofore, in the same manner and form as has been
the custom with respect to matters referred by His
Majesty to the whole of the Privy Council or a committee
thereof (the nature of such report or recommendation being
always stated in open Court)." (at p230)
16. It is to be observed that the section is not primarily dealing with any
question as to what appeals will be entertained by the
Sovereign but is a
section which enacts that appeals which may be brought will be referred by the
Sovereign to the Judicial Committee
of the Privy Council. The words of the
section are wide: they cover "all appeals" and also all "complaints in the
nature of appeals
whatever" which may be brought before the Sovereign (either
by virtue of that Act or by virtue of any law, statute or custom) either
"from" or "in respect of" the determination, sentence, rule or order of any
court. The section does not purport to be a definition
of the range of appeals
which will be entertained and is not a section which purports to contain any
restriction upon or to impose
any limitation upon any right to bring any
appeal or complaint in the nature of appeal before the Sovereign. Nor does the
either expressly or impliedly impose any limitation upon the
prerogative rights and powers of the Sovereign. The word "determination"
wide one, but in their Lordships' view no present occasion arises to consider
its scope. (at p230)
17. It is clear that the judgments in the High Court delivered on 2nd June
have laid it down that what are known as exemplary or
punitive damages may be
awarded in a libel action in Australia if the facts and circumstances justify
such an award, and that the
limiting circumstances suggested in Rookes v.
[1964] UKHL 1
(1964) AC 1129
need not be applied. On a retrial of the respondent's
against the appellant a learned judge would follow the guidance given
by the High Court. If there were a decision adverse
appellant it would
wish by appropriate appeal procedure to seek to obtain
a judgment of the Privy
Council that the directions
the learned judge were incorrect. It cannot
therefore be said that the issue
which the appellant has raised is merely
when leave to appeal was granted it was expressed as being
related to so
much of the decision of the High Court as determined
was competent to award punitive damages in this case" counsel for the
appellant made it clear that what he sought was a
as to whether it
would be competent to award punitive damages in the future
course (i.e., the
rehearing) of this case. The
in issue would seem therefore to be within
the scope of what was referred to
in Reg. v. Bertrand
[1867] EngR 20
(1867) LR 1 PC 520
the prerogative
was described as "the inherent prerogative right and on all
proper occasions, the duty, of the Queen in Council
exercise an appellate
administration of justice in the
case, but also
to preserve the due
course of procedure generally". (at p231)
18. In circumstances which are somewhat special and are not often likely to
arise their Lordships held therefore that they had jurisdiction
to hear the
limited matter referred to them. Its limits are manifest. Their Lordships are
in no way concerned to express any opinion
as to whether if punitive damages
can in some libel cases be awarded, the evidence that was given on the hearing
of this case before
the Supreme Court was such as to justify an award of that
nature. Their Lordships were not referred to the evidence previously given
have not seen it. It would not have been appropriate to have invited their
Lordships to consider it. A new trial has been ordered
and is to take place.
The evidence which will have to be considered will be the evidence that will
then be given. Their Lordships
indulge in no surmise as to what that evidence
will be. They give no ruling on the basis of any assumed or possible or
probable content
of that evidence. All that counsel for the appellant now seek
is that their Lordships should hold that the High Court erred in law
they should have laid it down that punitive or exemplary damages in a libel
action can only be awarded if a case can be brought
within one of the
categories described by Lord Devlin in his speech in Rookes v. Barnard (1).
19. In a careful and painstaking argument counsel for the appellant analysed
in detail the judgments delivered in the High Court.
He submitted that if he
could show that the expressed considerations or criticisms or some of them
which led the majority to reject
Rookes v. Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
(1964) AC 1129
well founded then that case should have been followed on the basis that
Without commenting as to the logic
of such an approach their
Lordships consider that the present inquiry must begin
at an earlier
is necessary to consider
whether in Australia in the years before 1964 the law
concerning the award of exemplary
in a libel action was settled. (at
20. In Whitfeld v. De Lauret & Co. Ltd.
[1920] HCA 75
(1920) 29 CLR 71
it was clearly
recognized that exemplary damages may
in certain circumstances
be awarded. The
case was not one in which the tort
of defamation was involved but in regard to
the awarding
of damages in tort Knox
C.J. said: "Damages may be either
compensatory or
exemplary. Compensatory damages are awarded as compensation
for and are measured
by the material loss suffered by the plaintiffs.
Exemplary damages are given only in cases of conscious wrongdoing
contumelious
disregard of another's rights" (1920) 29 CLR, at
judgment of Isaacs J. contained a valuable exposition
of certain features
the law relating to damages. "Damages" he
said "are in their fundamental
character, compensatory. Whether
the matter complained
of be a breach of
contract or a tort, the primary
theoretical notion is to place the plaintiff
in as good a
position, so far as money
can do it, as if the matter complained
not occurred (see per Lord Blackburn in Livingstone v. Rawyards
(1880) 5 App
, at p 39 ). This primary notion is controlled and
limited by various considerations, but the central
idea is compensation,
Blackstone (Commentaries on the Laws of England, vol. II, p. 438) says,
'compensation and satisfaction'"
(1920) 29 CLR, at
He then proceeded to
point out that in certain cases (mainly torts) and in certain circumstances it
for long been accepted
very eminent judges" that exemplary damages
could be awarded, and that such damages had been considered
"to be punitive
for reprehensible
conduct and as a deterrent" (1920) 29 CLR, at p 81 . He
cited various descriptive words and phrases
which had been employed judicially
in reference to exemplary damages. (at p232)
21. Without referring more elaborately to that decision their Lordships
consider that at its date (1920) it was firmly accepted
by the High Court that
in cases of tort marked by conscious wrong-doing in contumelious disregard of
another's rights it would be
permissible in law for damages to include an
element described broadly as being exemplary or punitive. (at p233)
22. In The Herald & Weekly Times Ltd. v. Mc Gregor
[1928] HCA 36
(1928) 41 CLR 254
was a libel action, there was a
firm recognition of
the principle that penal
or vindictive damages could be awarded. There
was a difference of opinion as
the summing up had
been correct or sufficient as to the way in
which the jury should have
taken into account the effect of a plea
justification.
It was, however, accepted by all the judges that vindictive
damages could
be awarded if there was malice at the
time of publication.
23. Smith's Newspapers Ltd. v. Becker
[1932] HCA 39
(1932) 47 CLR 279
was a libel action in
which many points were involved but
the case proceeded
on the basis that
vindictive damages could be awarded
in a libel action. Dixon J. in his
judgment (1932) 47 CLR,
at p 300 said that
only by the exercise of a
discretionary judgment could
the question be solved as to what amount of
damages "awarded
to the victim
of a public outrage is enough to serve at once
as a solatium,
vindication and compensation to him and a requital to
wrongdoer".
McTiernan J. in his judgment spoke of "the deserts of the
respondent"
(1932) 47 CLR, at p 315 . (at p233)
24. Triggell v. Pheeney
[1951] HCA 23
(1951) 82 CLR 497
was another libel action in which
various points were involved but which
proceeded on
the basis that exemplary
damages could be awarded
in a libel action. (at p233)
25. Their Lordships do not find it necessary to refer in any detail to cases
relating to other torts (such cases as Williams v.
[1959] HCA 51
(1959) 103 CLR 30
and Fontin v. Katapodis
[1962] HCA 63
(1962) 108 CLR 177
) which proceeded on the basis
exemplary damages could be
awarded. (at p233)
26. It would seem to be clear that it has been accepted by the High Court of
Australia that if the circumstances give warrant for
it there can in libel
actions be awards of damages which in their assessment include both
compensatory and exemplary elements. The
exemplary element (as in cases of
conscious wrongdoing in contumelious disregard of another's rights) has been
variously described
by the use of words such as vindictive, retributory,
punitive. (at p233)
27. A sustained argument was addressed to their Lordships to the effect that
certain phrases or words used by the judges in 1920
in Whitfeld v. De Lauret &
[1920] HCA 75
(1920) 29 CLR 71
were the words or phrases used by Sir John Salmond
then current edition
(the 5th) of his authoritative Treatise on The Law
of Torts, and that by using them they were intending to adopt
the theory of
which underlay the passage in which Sir John
Salmond employed them. In
the 5th ed. at p. 129 is the passage:
"Damages are further distinguishable as being either
compensatory or exemplary. The latter are also known as
vindictive or punitive. Compensatory damages are awarded
as compensation for, and are measured by, the material loss
suffered by the plaintiff. Exemplary damages, on the other
hand, are a sum of money awarded in excess of any material
loss and by way of solatium for any insult or other outrage
to the plaintiff's feelings that is involved in the injury
of. Thus, an assault may do no physical harm whatever;
it may amount, for example, to a mere threat of violence; yet
if it is committed in such a manner or in such circumstances
as to be a grave attack upon the dignity of the plaintiff, he
may recover very substantial damages for it. So a trespass
to land may be committed with such insolent defiance of the
rights of the plaintiff that a jury will be justified in awarding
heavy damages although no actual loss is proved. So in an
action by a father for the seduction of his daughter, the only
actual loss which gives him a right of action is the loss of his
daughter's services; yet damages are not limited to the
amount of this loss, but are awarded in respect of the injury
to his parental feelings and personal dignity. Exemplary
damages, therefore, are given only in cases of conscious
wrong-doing
in contumelious disregard of another's rights." (at p234)
28. It was submitted that Sir John Salmond regarded exemplary damages as
being only by way of solatium for the actual hurt to a
plaintiff's feelings
since he continued at p. 130: "It is often said that exemplary damages are
awarded not by way of compensation
for the plaintiff but by way of punishment
for the defendant. It seems more accurate however to regard them as a solatium
for wounded
dignity and feelings: as a remedy for injuria in the sense in
which Roman lawyers used that term." Another argument was that words
adopted by the Court from Sir John Salmond's treatise without a correct
appreciation of the sense in which Sir John Salmond
had employed them. It was
submitted that error had crept into the law and that there had been
perpetuation of error. Their Lordships
were referred to many of the subsequent
editions of Sir John Salmond's work, and it was contended that though in later
editions modifications
of the passages cited were made, they were made in
order to accord with judicial utterances. The law had proceeded, it was
without the adequate analysis which it received in Rookes v.
[1964] UKHL 1
(1964) AC 1129
. (at p234)
29. Their Lordships must observe that they are concerned in this case with
the law as laid down by the High Court of Australia.
Without citing passages
in detail it seems clear that it has been considered in Australia that in
libel actions damages may exceed
the figure which would be assessed solely by
reference to the hurt to a plaintiff's reputation or to his actual feelings.
have been misleading to have indicated that in certain circumstances
damages could be intended to operate as a deterrent if their
assessment had
solely to have reference to actual harm suffered by a plaintiff. Whatever
force there may or may not be in the submission
that an alternative approach
might have been desirable, their Lordships cannot think that there is any
doubt as to the basis upon
which the High Court have proceeded. Furthermore
their Lordships cannot think that words or phrases denoting a punitive or
element have been used other than deliberately and advisedly and
with appreciation of their meaning. (at p235)
30. If this be so, then the question now arising would seem to be whether the
High Court were in error in choosing to re-affirm
Australian law as they had
held it to be, rather than to adopt the view proclaimed by the House of Lords
in Rookes v. Barnard
. Two conclusions are to be noted which
were expressed by Lord Devlin in his speech (1964) AC, at p 1226
: the first
House "could not, without a complete disregard of precedent, and
indeed of statute, now arrive at a determination
that refused
recognize the exemplary principle": the second was that "there are certain
categories of cases in which
an award of
damages can serve a useful
purpose in vindicating the strength of the law and thus affording a practical
justification
for admitting
into the civil law a principle which ought
logically to belong to the criminal". It is quite clear that in so referring
to the exemplary
principle and to exemplary damages Lord Devlin was speaking
of awards of damages which could not be explained as
or be regarded as
compensatory. Lord Devlin denoted as exemplary damages the sort of damages
referred to by Pratt C.J. in Wilkes
[1763] EngR 103
(1763) Lofft 1
(98 ER 489) , when
he said: "Damages are designed not only as a satisfaction to the injured
person, but likewise
as a punishment
to the guilty, to deter from any such
proceeding for the future, and as a proof of the detestation of the jury to
the action itself."
31. The issue before their Lordships becomes therefore whether the High Court
while being abundantly justified in recognizing "the
exemplary principle" in
the award of damages ought to have agreed that such awards of exemplary
damages should only be made in cases
falling within the limited categories
which were described in Rookes v. Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
(1964) AC 1129
. It was recognized
in Rookes v. Barnard
(1964) AC, at p 1226 that an acceptance of the described
or defined categories would "impose
limits not hitherto
expressed on such
awards and that there is powerful, though not compelling, authority for
allowing them a wider
range". (at p236)
32. The first category was "oppresive, arbitrary or unconstitutional action
by the servants of the government". Such a category
does not call for
consideration in the present case. Cases in the second category were defined
as being "those in which the defendant's
conduct has been calculated by him to
make a profit for himself which may well exceed the compensation payable to
the plaintiff".
In reference to this category it was said: "It is a factor
also that is taken into account in damages for libel; one man should not
allowed to sell another man's reputation for profit. Where a defendant with a
cynical disregard for a plaintiff's rights has calculated
that the money to be
made out of his wrongdoing will probably exceed the damages at risk, it is
necessary for the law to show that
it cannot be broken with impunity. This
category is not confined to moneymaking in the strict sense. It extends to
cases in which
the defendant is seeking to gain at the expense of the
plaintiff some object - perhaps some property which he covets - which either
he could not obtain at all or not obtain except at a price greater than he
wants to put down. Exemplary damages can properly be awarded
whenever it is
necessary to teach a wrongdoer that tort does not pay" (1964) AC, at p 1227 .
33. It was pointed out that to the two defined categories there should be
added cases in which exemplary damages are expressly authorized
by statute.
34. Various submissions were made to their Lordships. It was contended that
what was said in Rookes v. Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
in so far as related to
any tort other than that of intimidation, was obiter. It was contended further
that the passage
denoted that libel cases were virtually being
segregated into a special or limited category of their own and were not
as within the second defined category. It was said that libel cases
had always been regarded as illustrations par
exemplary damages could properly be awarded. Thus in Mayne & McGregor on
Damages, 12th ed. (1961),
it is stated
and p. 197 in reference to
exemplary damages: "Such damages are variously called punitive damages,
damages, and even retributory damages. They can
apply only where the conduct of the defendant merits punishment,
to be so where his conduct is wanton, as where it discloses fraud,
malice, violence, cruelty, insolence
like, or, as it is
sometimes put,
where he acts in contumelious disregard of the plaintiff's rights . . . Such
damages are
to be recoverable
in appropriate cases of defamation."
It was contended that the opinion of Lord Devlin, having admitted
terms the fact
that libel actions against newspapers came within the second
category (by virtue of the fact that all newspaper
were in general
selling of a man's reputation for a profit), was not intending to deal with
them in detail, or to affect
existing law with
regard to them, and for
that reason did not refer to them in detail. It was pointed out however that
accepted by the
Court of Appeal in England that libel actions
should be regarded as now being governed by what was said in Rookes
[1964] UKHL 1
. (See McCarey v. Associated Newspapers Ltd.
(1965) 2 QB 86
Broadway Approvals Ltd. v.
Odhams Press Ltd. (No. 2)
further contention related to the question as to how far there had been
pronouncements
in regard to damages in libel
in the House of Lords. In
Rookes v. Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
(1964) AC 1129
it was said: "There
is not any decision of
this House approving
an award of exemplary damages and your Lordships
therefore have to
consider whether it
is open to the House to remove an
from the law of England" (1964) AC, at p 1221 . It was contended that
though only one libel
case was referred to in Rookes v. Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
(1964) AC 1129
, that one (Ley v. Hamilton
(1935) 153 LT 384
) was a case
in which the House,
in upholding the dissenting judgment
of Scrutton L.J. in the Court of Appeal
(1934) 151 LT 360
, did in fact
approve an award of exemplary damages.
Submissions were made
in regard to passages in the speech of Lord Atkin (1935)
p 386 and it was contended that Lord Atkin was indicating that
where exemplary damages can be and are to be awarded by
a jury, the
the award is not in fact reached by assessing a separate
figure to represent
the element of compensation and
another separate
figure to represent the
punitive element and then adding those
two separate figures together, but
rather by taking
both elements
into account in the process of arriving at one
original figure.
Reference was made to the speech of Lord Loreburn L.C.
& Co. v. Jones
(1910) AC 20
in which he said: "In the second
jury were entitled to say this kind of article is to be
condemned. There is no
more fitted to decide in regard
to publications, especially
publications in the newspaper Press,
whether they bear a stamp and character
which ought to enlist sympathy
and to secure protection. If they think that
the licence is
not fairly used and that the tone and
style of the libel is
reprehensible
and ought to be checked, it is for the jury to say so .
(1910) AC, at p 25 . It was contended
that Lord Loreburn was either
or impliedly recognizing that in the assessment
of damages in libel the
punitive as well
as the compensatory element may
be regarded. (at p238)
35. Their Lordships do not find it necessary to record an opinion in regard
to all these contentions. They might arise for consideration
in some future
case in England. The present case relates to the law in Australia and raises
the question whether, if for the purposes
of this case it be assumed that
Rookes v. Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
(1964) AC 1129
has categorized the cases in which in England
may be awarded in libel cases, the High Court of Australia
in deciding not to change the law in Australia as it
understood to be. There are doubtless advantages if, within those parts
Commonwealth (or indeed of the English speaking
where the law is built
upon a common foundation, development proceeds
along similar lines. But
development may gain its impetus
any one and not from one only of those
parts. The law may be influenced
from any one direction. The gain that
uniformity of
may yield is, however, far less marked in some branches
of the law than
in others. In trade between countries and nations
where common acceptance of view is desirable may be wide. Thus in Monarch
Steamship Co. Ltd. v. Karlshamns Oljefabriker
Lord Wright
in his speech (1949) AC, at p 231 expressed the view that it is desirable that
as far as possible
there should
be uniformity
between the law merchant as
administered in the United States and in Britain. To a similar effect were
Viscount Simonds
in his speech in Riverstone Meat Co. Pty. Ltd. v.
Lancashire Shipping Co. Ltd.
(1961) AC 807
840, 841 when
rejecting a
view which involved a departure from "the prevailing harmony" of the law of
England and the United
in relation
to the carriage of goods by sea. But
in matters which may considerably be of domestic or internal significance
for uniformity
is not compelling. Furthermore, a decision on such a
question as to whether there may be a punitive element
assessment of
for libel must be much affected by the fact, if fact it be, that in a
particular country the law is well
There may be difficulty
action in putting the measure of hurt to a plaintiff into money terms (whether
can not be regarded as
being of an aggravated nature). To seek
to translate an injury to reputation into money terms imposes
akin to that
of equating incommeasurables. There is, however, no difficulty in
distinguishing between the notion
of awarding
money to a plaintiff
compensate him for his hurt, and the notion of awarding money to him of an
amount which
may be increased
because in assessing
its amount regard may have
been had to the conduct of the defendant. (at p239)
36. The distinction between an award of damages which includes a punitive
element and an award which is only designed to compensate
was well in the mind
of Lord Greene M.R. when in Rook v. Fairrie
(1941) 1 KB 507
he said: "In a
case of personal injury, apart possibly
from the element of pain and
suffering, the injury complained of is one which
can be linked with a
pecuniary valuation according
to ordinary notions to a greater or less extent,
but when you are dealing with
damages in a libel case you are endeavouring to
in terms of money several different things which are not really
susceptible
of a money valuation in any true sense. You are considering
injury which the plaintiff has suffered which may or may not be capable
pecuniary valuation. You are considering the conduct
of the defendant, because
you may award punitive or exemplary damages against
him. You are considering
the deterrent effect, and
so forth" (1941) 1 KB, at p 516 . (at p239)
37. It is argued that it is an anomaly to allow the intrusion of any punitive
element: such, it is said, ought more properly to
be the concern of the
criminal law. Here, however, is an issue which is resolved not so much by
asserting that reasoning can lead
to only one conclusion, but rather by coming
to a decision as to what the policy of the law should be. (at p239)
38. Their Lordships have expressed the view that it is not open to doubt that
it was generally understood in Australia, in the years
before Rookes v.
[1964] UKHL 1
(1964) AC 1129
was decided, that the awarding of exemplary damages in
libel cases was not
so circumscribed
as to be permissible only within the
limits of the categories defined in that case. Nor have their Lordships been
able to accept
that the law was laid down in Australia
with imperfect
appreciation of what it involved. (at p239)
39. In analysing the nature of the damages which are awarded to a plaintiff
for an injury to his reputation Windeyer J. pointed
out that the amount of a
verdict will often be the product of a mixture of inextricable considerations,
and that though the intentions
and conduct of the defendant (in particular
whether he was actuated by express malice) have always been regarded as
important in
estimating damages, the harm that a plaintiff suffers cannot be
measured by, and will not necessarily depend upon, the motive or
intentions of
the defendant. There may be cases in which the existence of express malice in
a defendant will bring it about that
the plaintiff's feelings will be all the
more hurt. But there may be cases in which the existence of express malice in
a defendant
will not in fact have added to the hurt experience by the
plaintiff. In such cases unless the existence of the malice is to be ignored,
which would hardly be reasonable, the effect of considering it when assessing
damages must be to introduce an element which is punitive
rather than
compensatory. (at p240)
40. In addition to the submission that there was no sufficient reason why the
right of a jury to award exemplary damages in appropriate
cases should be
placed within such narrow limits as the categories which were defined in
Rookes v. Barnard
[1964] UKHL 1
also contended that there would be
considerable difficulties and uncertainties in libel actions in bringing a
category. "Cases in the second category are those in
which the defendant's conduct has been calculated by him to
a profit for
himself which may well exceed the compensation payable to the plaintiff"
(1964) AC, at p 1226 . How, it was asked,
a plaintiff
to prove that the
defendant ever made such a calculation? How is he to prove that a defendant
set out to make some
or some direct pecuniary benefit out of
the publication of the words complained of? Does "calculation" denote a
process in a defendant involving firstly, an assessment of
the amount that a jury would or might award for the libel complained
assuming that exemplary damages cannot be awarded, and secondly, an assessment
of the financial gain solely attributable to the
publication
of the libel? It
was said that the words in the later sentence, viz. "Where a defendant with a
cynical disregard for
a plaintiff's
rights has calculated that the money to be
made out of his wrongdoing will probably exceed the damages at risk . .
at p 1227 showed that a deliberate calculating process was denoted.
Does that mean, it was asked, that a defendant
who was indifferent
financial results and had no thought at all of profit but was actuated by
venomous malice towards the plaintiff
would be absolved
from any risk of
having to pay exemplary damages? Reference was made to the view expressed by
Taylor J. when he
said: "I am quite
unable to see why the law should look with
less favour on wrongs committed with a profit-making motive than upon
with the utmost degree of malice or vindictively, arrogantly or
high-handedly with a contumelious disregard for
the plaintiff's rights"
117 CLR, at p 138 . (at p241)
41. Their Lordships recite these various contentions but find it unnecessary
to record final opinions in regard to them. The issue
that faced the High
Court in the present case was whether the law as it had been settled in
Australia should be changed. Had the
law developed by processes of faulty
reasoning, or had it been founded upon misconceptions, it would have been
necessary to change
it. Such was not the case. In the result in a sphere of
the law where its policy calls for decision, and where its policy in a
country is fashioned so largely by judicial opinion, it became a
question for the High Court to decide whether the decision in Rookes
[1964] UKHL 1
(1964) AC 1129
compelled a change in what was a well-settled judicial
approach in the law of libel in
Australia. Their
Lordships are not prepared
say that the High Court were wrong in being unconvinced that a changed
approach in
Australia was desirable.
Accordingly their
Lordships will humbly
advise Her Majesty that the appeal be dismissed. The appellant must
costs of the
appeal. (at p241)
Appeal dismissed with costs.
Print (pretty)
Print (eco-friendly)
No downloadable files available
LawCite records
NoteUp references
Join the discussion
Tweet this page
Follow @AustLII on Twitter