D20-21\104 [2020] SCTA 212 (10 December 2020)
DETERMINATION NUMBER : D20-21\105
FILE NUMBER : 18-1587
REVIEW DETERMINATION AND
The Complainant
The Trustee
OTHER PERSONS OR ENTITIES REFERRED TO
The Former Fund 1
The Former Fund 2
(together the ‘Former Funds”)
The Insurer
REVIEW MEETING
under the provisions of the
Superannuation (Resolution of Complaints) Act
(Cth) (the Complaints Act) and held on 22 June 2020 before:
Justin Malbon,
Presiding Member
Lynn Ralph,
DECISION UNDER REVIEW
decision under review is that of the Trustee to refuse to compromise the
Complainant’s claim for reimbursement of losses
arising from his reliance
on a benefit estimate provided by the Trustee.
Trustee notified the Complainant of its decision by email dated 27 June 2018.
DETERMINATION OF THE TRIBUNAL
Tribunal determines to set aside the decision under review and substitute its
own decision that the Trustee compromise the Complainant’s
claim in the
following amounts plus interest:
$55,868.00,
being the estimated excess tax paid;
$990.00 for
financial advice which relied on the incorrect information provided by the
Trustee; and
$1,837.17 for
additional Child Support levied on the Complainant.
Tribunal considers that interest is payable by the Trustee as the Complainant
has not had the benefit of the money. The Trustee
is to apply interest at the
rate that would be declared by the Fund for the investment plans in which the
benefits were invested
for the period commencing on the day from which it was
unreasonable for the Trustee not to have compromised the Complainant’s
claim, being 27 June 2018, and ending on the day on which the payment is made to
the Complainant.
*Copied with names deleted for public distribution.
PROCEDURAL MATTERS
to s32 of the Complaints Act, the Tribunal requested submissions from the
submission was received from the Trustee.
Complainant declined to provide a submission, choosing instead to rely on
information previously submitted to the Tribunal.
submissions were exchanged and responses were invited. No party responded.
Tribunal conducted the review meeting based on the material contained in the
papers provided to it.
COMPLAINT AND BACKGROUND
Complainant made a complaint that the decision of the Trustee was
or unreasonable for the reasons summarised in this determination.
Complainant joined the Former Fund 1 on 21 August 1995.
Former Funds merged in 2006 to become the Fund.
Complainant was diagnosed with Parkinson’s Disease and on 11 January 2018,
he lodged an Income Protection (IP) claim. Subsequently,
on 5 March 2018, the
Complainant concurrently lodged a Total and Permanent Disability (TPD) claim,
which was admitted by the Fund’s
insurer on 4 April 2018.
letter dated 9 April 2018 was sent by the Trustee to the Complainant via email
on 16 April 2018, containing a benefit estimate which
disclosed the following
tax components:
Benefit Estimate
Effective date of calculation: 9 April 2018
Eligible service start date:
Tax-free component
$ 772,676.45
Taxable component
$ 519,584.32
Total benefit
$1,292,260.77
17 April 2018, the Complainant submitted a withdrawal request for his benefit to
be paid out in full as a lump sum.
19 April 2018, the Trustee processed the Complainant’s withdrawal request
and remitted $1,125,320.37 (net) to the Complainant.
The PAYG Payment Statement
provided by the Trustee to the Complainant advised total tax withheld of
$170,471 and the following taxable
components:
Taxable component
Taxed element $774,869
Untaxed element $0
Tax free component
April 2018 (and continuing up until 24 April 2018),
the Complainant’s adviser made enquiries of the Trustee as to the cause
the tax paid being in excess of the anticipated tax based on the benefit
estimate. After some investigation, the Trustee admitted
that through an
administrative error, the taxable and tax-free amounts shown in the benefit
estimate in the letter of 9 April 2018
had in fact been switched.
Complainant lodged a complaint on 7 May 2018 seeking a reimbursement in the
amount of the unanticipated tax paid as a result of
the incorrect benefit
a letter dated 27 June 2018, in response to the Complainant’s complaint,
the Trustee conceded the amounts shown in the benefit
estimate of 9 April
attributable to the tax-free and taxable components had been switched due to an
administrative error. The Trustee
offered to remediate the error by reversing
the transaction upon full return of the funds by the Complainant.
resolution sought by the Complainant is set out below:
An explanation
of how the miscalculation occurred and why the Complainant was not provided with
an opportunity to change his decision
prior to the benefit being paid;
Reimbursement of
the additional tax paid of $55,868;
Reimbursement of
accounting and financial planning advice fees of $990.00 as the advice the
Complainant sought and received was based
on the erroneous benefit estimate
statement and therefore not correct; and
Reimbursement
for additional child support costs of $1,837.17 incurred as a result of
higher-than-expected taxable income.
Amount in dispute
Complainant seeks a total payment in the amount of $58,695.17.
Events not in dispute:
– The date the Complainant joined Former Fund
− The assets and members of the Former Funds
merged to form the Fund.
− The date the Complainant last worked.
− The date of the Complainant’s
disablement.
− The date the Complainant lodged an IP claim
for Parkinson’s disease.
− The date the Complainant lodged a concurrent TPD
− The date the Insurer admitted the
Complainant’s TPD claim.
− The date of Fund’s Benefit Payment
Notification letter.
− The date of Complainant’s application for
payment of the benefit.
− The date of Fund’s letter to the
Complainant advising that the amount of $1,125,320.37 had been transferred to
nominated bank account.
− The date the Complainant lodged a formal complaint
with the Trustee.
− The date Trustee’s review decision was
notified to Complainant.
− The date of complaint to Tribunal.
Tribunal considers that the trust deed relevant to this complaint is that of the
Fund in effect on the date of the Trustee’s
decision not to compromise the
Complainant’s claim (i.e. 27 June 2018), being the trust deed as amended
up to and including
the amendment dated 2 January 2013 (the Trust Deed).
Trust Deed provisions relevant to the complaint are:
of the Fund and powers of the Trustee
4.1 Subject to the Relevant Requirements and in the case of a
delegate of the Trustee under Rule 5 the terms and conditions of the
delegation,
the Trustee, and any delegate of the Trustee under Rule 5; has, in the exercise
or non-exercise or partial exercise of
each power exercisable by the Trustee, or
that delegate, as the case may be, absolute and uncontrolled discretion and
the Relevant Requirements is not bound to give to any person any
reason for or explanation of its exercise, non-exercise or partial
exercise of
any such power.
4.2 Subject to the Relevant Requirements, the Trustee has the complete
management and control of all proceedings, matters and things
in connection with
the Fund and, without derogating from any other provision of this Deed may do
all acts and things which it considers
necessary, desirable or expedient for the
proper application, administration, maintenance and preservation of the Fund or
of the Fund.
4.4 Without limiting the generality of Rule. 4.2, and in addition to any
other powers conferred on the Trustee by this Deed, the Trustee
shall have the
following specific powers:
(11) To settle, compromise or submit to arbitration or to a court of law, any
doubts, disputes, claims, controversies or difficulties
whatsoever arising out
of or relating to this Deed or the construction of any provision in this Deed,
the Fund or the rights of Members
and Beneficiaries and to act on the award or
determination of the arbitrator or court or, (where a Member submits a dispute
Superannuation Complaints Tribunal) on a determination of the
Superannuation Complaints Tribunal;
4.5 The powers conferred on or exercisable by the Trustee under this Deed
are, additional to and not in substitution for the powers
conferred on or
exercisable by the Trustee at law.
33.1 If any dispute or doubt arises as to the interpretation of
this Deed or as to the rights of:
(1) A Member;
(2) A Standard Employer Sponsor; or
(3) Any other person under this Deed then, except to. the extent provided in
this Deed, the decision of the Trustee is final and conclusive
against all
persons subject to any overriding powers of a court or tribunal of competent
33.2 If the Relevant Requirements require, the Trustee shall take, reasonable
steps to ensure a procedure is in force under which:
(1) Any person entitled to a Benefit from the Fund may inquire into, or
complain about, the operation or management of the Fund in
relation to that
person; and
(2) Enquiries or complaints will be considered and dealt with within 90 days
of being made.
THE PARTIES’ RESPECTIVE POSITIONS
The Complainant
Complainant claims he relied on information provided by the Trustee which
contained an administrative error that resulted in him
paying unnecessary tax.
main points made by the Complainant are as follows:
The benefit
estimate sent to the Complainant in a letter dated 9 April 2018 was incorrect
due to an error made by the Trustee. The
taxable component and tax-free
component amounts shown on the benefit estimate were ‘reversed’.
The result of
the reversal was that an amount of tax of approximately $54,000 more than the
Complainant had anticipated, was deducted
and paid to the Australian Taxation
Office (ATO).
Upon receipt of
the funds deposited to his bank account on 19 April 2018, the Complainant
identified the unexpected tax deduction
and contacted the Trustee through his
On 24 April, the
Trustee’s representative informed the Complainant’s adviser that it
was the Trustee’s mistake and
that there was nothing further that could be
done. The Trustee admitted in an email dated 27 June 2018, that ‘we
acknowledge
the Taxed/Untaxed elements on the approval letter issued to you on 9
April 2018 were switched due to an administration oversite (sic).’
The Trustee had
enough time (over a week) to accurately prepare the letter of 9 April 2018 which
went through the Trustee’s
own quality assurance team for checking.
Complainant concedes the table included in the letter of 9 April 2018, describes
the benefit as an ‘estimate’,
he believes this is intended to mean
that actual benefit amounts may vary due to market movements, investment
earnings, fees or tax
to be deducted and that the word ‘estimate’ is
not meant to include substantive variances due to human error.
The Complainant
sought financial advice, and he and his adviser relied on the erroneous
information provided in the letter dated 9
April 2018 when he made his decision
to receive a lump sum payment.
received an answer to his query as to why the tax paid was over $50,000 more
than he had estimated, the Complainant went
ahead and implemented the strategy
agreed with his adviser. Shares were purchased and a mortgage was repaid a full
month prior to
the Trustee’s remediation offer of 27 June 2018. It was
not possible to unwind these actions two months later.
The Complainant
claims that if a remediation option had been suggested to him in the initial
(April) communication, he would have
not spent the funds.
The Complainant
did not respond to the Trustee’s offer as it was unacceptable, and the
letter of 27 June 2018 clearly stated
that if he was unhappy with the response,
he should contact the Superannuation Tribunal (sic).
The Complainant
submits he would not have requested a full lump sum withdrawal if he had known
the correct tax status of the components
of the benefit. ‘I would have
left a significant portion of my benefit with the Fund until such time as the
taxable component
had further reduced’. Further, the Complainant states
This $200K was not actually required by ourselves and has
been invested, however had we known that additional tax was payable on this
amount, we would have elected to keep it within the super fund account to remain
invested there and then drawn down on it later if
required and at a lower tax
rate,(sic) Thus leaving $250K invested with [the Fund] vs $200K invested
elsewhere with $50K paid as
additional amount to what we had calculated.
The Complainant
incurred $990.00 in costs for financial planning advice which was useless as it
was based on the incorrect information.
The Complainant
was assessed for an additional amount of child support of $1,837.17 based on his
reported income.
The Trustee
main points made by the Trustee are as follows:
Payment Notification letter was issued to the Complainant vis his
spouse/financial advisor, as an authorised Third Party
(TPA) on 9 April
An acceptance
and request for full payment was received on 17 April 2018.
On 18 April 2018
the Complainant was paid $1,295,791.37 from his account, on the grounds of TPD.
This included an insured component
of $720,000.
payment of the TPD benefit claim on 19 April 2018, the Complainant’s TPA
the tax deducted. On review it was
found the Taxed/Untaxed elements were reversed due to an administration
oversight in the letter
of 9 April 2018. However, the correspondence of 9 April
2018 states the benefit payable quoted in the letter is only an estimate.
In an effort to
resolve the Complainant’s concerns, remediation was offered on 27 June
2018. The Complainant was advised, if
he returned the funds paid to him on 18
April 2018, in full, the Trustee could reprocess his benefit for a lesser amount
to be advised
by the Complainant, using the correct Taxed/Untaxed elements. The
Complainant did not respond to the proposed remediation and lodged
a complaint
with the Tribunal.
The fact that
the Complainant received an incorrect Benefit Payment Notification did not
create, change or increase a tax liability
that would not have otherwise been
payable by the Complainant. As the tax was deducted correctly when processing
the payment to the
Complainant on 18 April 2018, the request for compensation
has not been considered.
The Trustee
submits the tax benefit payment on 18 April 2018 was in accordance with taxation
legislation but offered to re-process
the benefit for an advised lesser amount
upon full return of the funds paid to the Complainant
A resolution was
offered in June 2018 however this was not accepted by the Complainant. The
Trustee acknowledges that this was because
the Complainant felt he was no longer
in the position to be able to return the funds in full and adjust his withdrawal
deducted from the payment represents taxation levied by the Australian Taxation
Office as required under the legislation,
therefore the Trustee is unable to
waive the tax payable.
The Trustee
confirms that its offer of remediation is no longer available as ‘two
financial years have lapsed since the benefit
was paid and any amendment to
previous years PAYG statements and personal income tax returns would be costly,
confusing and time
consuming.’
TRIBUNAL’S DELIBERATIONS AND FINDINGS
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must initially determine whether the
decision of the Trustee to refuse to compromise
the Complainant’s claim
for reimbursement of losses arising from his reliance on a benefit estimate
statement provided by the
Trustee was fair and reasonable in its operation in
relation to the Complainant in the circumstances.
issue is not what decision the Tribunal would have made on the evidence before
the Trustee but whether the decision was fair and
reasonable.
reaching its determination, the Tribunal took the whole of the evidence and
submissions into account. The Tribunal is satisfied
that the material it has
relied on has been provided to both Parties
Was the Complainant misled?
Tribunal notes there is no dispute between the Parties that the benefit estimate
information provided by the Trustee to the Complainant
in the letter of 9 April
2018 contained erroneous information, specifically that the dollar amounts shown
as ‘taxable’
and ‘tax free’ were reversed.
Trustee submits the letter provided an estimate only. The Trustee’s letter
of 9 April 2018 says:
This is only an estimate. The amount of money in the super account
could change if there are investment earnings to be added or any
admin fees or
tax to be deducted. Investment returns can also sometimes be negative which may
cause your client’s account
balance to reduce between the date that their
claim is approved and the date of the payment.
Complainant accepts the amount may have varied for the reasons stated in the
letter but believes the acceptable reasons for any
variance to the estimate
should not extend to substantive administration errors.
Tribunal does not accept the Trustee’s implication that the Complainant
should not have relied on the information in the
Benefit Estimate Statement.
Rather the Tribunal accepts the Complainant’s contention that the use of
the word ‘estimate’
in this case should not include an
administrative error of this nature, and therefore he was entitled in these
circumstances to rely
on the figures provided in the estimate as being
reasonably close to the actual amounts, which in this case, they were not.
the Tribunal accepts the Complainant was misled by the information provided by
the Trustee.
Did the Complainant rely on the information provided?
Tribunal accepts the decision the Complainant made to withdraw his entire
benefit as a lump sum was based on the financial advice
he sought and received,
which was based on the erroneous benefit estimate statement.
the Tribunal is satisfied that the Complainant relied on the information
provided by the Trustee in the letter of 9 April
2018 when making his withdrawal
decision to his detriment.
Did the Complainant incur a loss as a result of his
Complainant claims he paid $55,868.00 more tax than he had anticipated, and, had
he been given the correct amounts on the benefit
estimate statement, he would
have left more of the benefit in the Fund until he reached the age when no tax
would have been payable.
Additionally,
the Complainant contends he incurred costs of approximately $1,000.00 for
financial advice which ultimately was incorrect
and useless. Finally, the
Complainant is also claiming he was assessed for an additional amount of
$1837.17 in child support due
to higher than anticipated taxable income
Trustee submits the incorrect statement did not create or change the tax
Tribunal is of the view the Trustee’s contention it paid the correct
amount of tax to the ATO only holds true if the tax
was paid in circumstances
where the entire lump sum was properly and appropriately withdrawn – which
includes circumstances
where the Complainant was properly informed about the
taxable component. However, if the Complainant had adjusted the amount of money
he withdrew and left a portion of the benefit in the Fund – which, in the
Tribunal’s view, he would have done if he had
been provided the correct
information in the Trustee’s 9 April 2018 letter – the amount of tax
payable would have been
less than the amount that was actually paid by the
fact of the Trustee’s offer of remediation to reprocess the transaction
for a lesser amount withdrawn is evidence that,
in fact, the amount of tax
payable is dependent on the amount (and timing) of the withdrawal.
the Tribunal is satisfied the Complainant incurred a loss as a result of his
reliance on the information provided by the
Was the Trustee’s offer of remediation fair and
reasonable?
lodging the complaint with the Trustee, but prior to receiving a response, the
Complainant implemented the recommendations he
had received from his financial
adviser, and he spent and/or invested some or all of the benefit monies.
Trustee contends its offer of remediation was fair and reasonable. The Trustee
contends that the Complainant’s non-response
to the offer and the using of
the monies are the cause of his losses, and that the Trustee’s offer could
have placed him in
the position he would have been in, had the error not been
Tribunal accepts that the Trustee’s June 2018 offer of remediation could
have restored the Complainant to the position he
would have been in, had the
information been correct.
Tribunal also accepts that the Trustee’s offer of remediation was made
within the 90 day time limit set out in the Trust
Tribunal considered evidence surrounding the Trustee’s contention the
Complainant’s actions are the cause of his losses.
Tribunal notes that:
disputed the Trustee made an administrative error in the benefit estimate letter
of 9 April 2018.
Complainant who identified the mistake soon after receiving his payout and he
took prompt action to raise a query with
the Trustee.
The Complainant
was told in late April the benefit estimate had been incorrect, but there was
nothing the Trustee could do about it.
The Complainant
lodged a formal complaint with Trustee on 7 May in which he sought compensation
for the unanticipated tax paid. He
informed the Trustee that he required an
answer in 14 days.
The Trustee
emailed the Complainant on 10 May acknowledging his 7 May email and stated that
‘The process of investigating the
issues raised by you is underway’.
It added that it was a legislative requirement for the Trustee to respond to his
within 90 days, but it wanted to address his concerns as quickly as
possible. It further stated that he was welcome to contact the
Trustee at any
stage to request an update on the progress of his compliant.
the Trustee took these constructive actions to investigate and resolve the
matter, the Tribunal notes the Complainant chose
not to await a response from
the Trustee before investing the monies. This is despite being told in the
Trustee’s letter of
10 May that his complainant could take up to 90 days
to resolve. In fact, the Trustee’s 27 June 2018 offer to remediate was
made well within this time limit.
investing the monies before a response from the Trustee, the Complainant:
Did not allow
for the exhaustion of all possible remedies; and
Benefitted from
the use of the funds for the period April – June 2018.
the Tribunal accepts the Trustee’s contention the Complainant, by
investing the monies prior to receiving a response
from the Trustee, removed the
option of remediating the Complainant’s losses by reprocessing the
transaction, the Tribunal
also notes that:
It was open to
Trustee to correct their error by reversing the transaction at the time of its
discovery in late April 2018.
There is no
evidence the Trustee or its representatives ever indicated to the Complainant
prior to 27 June that the error could be
corrected by reversing the transaction.
Rather the evidence is that he was told by an employee of the Trustee in late
April there
was not anything further that could be done. The Trustee has not
refuted this evidence.
The Trustee in
telling the Complainant there was nothing further that could be done put the
Complainant in the position of having
to lodge a formal complaint seeking
compensation, which further delayed resolution of the matter. It also meant he
was not made
aware that reversal of the transaction was a possibility.
There is no
evidence of the Trustee advising the Complainant not to spend or invest any of
the funds until the Trustee’s 27
June letter.
The letter of 27
June 2018 made a single offer: to reprocess the benefit for an advised lesser
amount on return of the funds in full.
The offer did not include any options,
such as a partial return of the funds, or an opportunity to discuss or negotiate
The letter of 27 June 2018 stated ‘If you are not satisfied
with the outcome of this internal complaints process, you have
the option of
further proactive steps such as phoning
the Complainant to discuss ways of
reversing the payment of the benefit, including (if possible) the option of
partial repayment.
The remediation
offer was made on 27 June 2018, which was only three days before the end of the
financial year. This may well have
created a situation of undue urgency if the
benefit was required to be repaid before the end of the financial year to deal
Tribunal is satisfied the Trustee created an environment which resulted in the
Complainant taking the steps he did. After admitting
it had made an
administrative error, the Trustee informed him that nothing could be done about
the matter. When it sent him the 10
May letter, it did not suggest he should not
expend the funds pending the completion of the investigation.
remedy the Complainant was seeking, as outlined in his 9 May email to the
Trustee, was: ‘Payments of the funds withheld
due to the error on your
behalf (payment is required prior to the end of the financial year as this is
not carried over with further
impact to other personal affairs’ along with
a ‘Full explanation on what has happened’. It does not appear to
occurred to the Complainant that the Trustee might offer to resolve the
matter by asking him to return the full amount of the funds
in late June.
the Tribunal’s view, it was not unreasonable not to have considered that
as a possibility at the time he expended some or
all of the funds.
the Tribunal notes the Trustee’s own admission that too much time has
lapsed for it to now implement its offer of the
compromise.
conclusion, the Tribunal finds that the Complainant was misled by incorrect
information provided by the Trustee, that he relied
on that information in
making his withdrawal decision, and that he incurred detriment (increased tax
payable plus costs) as a result
of this reliance.
s37(6) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal must affirm the decision under review
if it is satisfied that the decision, in its
operation in relation to the
Complainant, was fair and reasonable in the circumstances.
for the reasons stated above, the Tribunal determines that it was unfair and
unreasonable of the Trustee to refuse to compromise
the Complainant’s
claim for reimbursement of losses arising from his reliance on a benefit
estimate statement provided by the
determined that the Trustee’s decision is unfair and unreasonable, the
Tribunal determines to set aside the decision
under review and substitute its
own decision in accordance with s 37(3) of the Complaints Act.
s37(1)(a) of the Complaints Act, in reviewing a decision of a Trustee, the
Tribunal has all the powers, obligations and discretions
that are conferred on
the Trustee.
making its decision, s37(5) of the Complaints Act requires that the Tribunal
must not do anything that would be contrary to law
or to the governing rules of
s37(4) of the Complaints Act the Tribunal may only exercise its determination
making power for the purpose of placing the Complainant
as nearly as
practicable, in the position that they would have been in but for the unfairness
or unreasonableness, or both, that
the Tribunal has determined to exist in
relation to the Trustee’s decision.
accordance with these provisions, the Tribunal determines to set aside the
decision under review and substitute a decision that
the Trustee compromise the
Complainant’s claim in the following amounts plus interest:
$55,868.00,
being the estimated excess tax paid;
$990.00 for
financial advice which relied on the incorrect information provided by the
Trustee; and
$1,837.17 for
additional Child Support levied on the Complainant.
Tribunal considers that interest is payable by the Trustee as the Complainant
has not had the benefit of the money. The Trustee
is to apply interest at the
rate that would be that declared by the Fund for the investment plans in which
the benefits were invested
for the period commencing on the day from which it
was unreasonable for the Trustee not to have compromised the Complainant’s
claim (27 June 2018) and ending on the day on which the payment is made to the
Complainant.
Justin Malbon, Presiding
Date of Tribunal signature: 10 December
RTF format (323 KB)
Signed PDF/A format