Samsung Bioepis AU Pty Ltd v Janssen Biotech, Inc. [2025] APO 32 (3 October 2025)
IP AUSTRALIA
PATENT OFFICE
Samsung Bioepis AU Pty Ltd v Janssen Biotech, Inc.
[2025] APO 32
Patent Application: 2019346134
Title: Safe and effective method of treating ulcerative colitis with
anti-IL12/IL23 antibody
Patent Applicant: Janssen Biotech,
Opponent: Samsung Bioepis AU Pty Ltd
Delegate: Dr A.
Decision Date: 3 October 2025
Hearing Date: 18 December 2024 in Sydney
Further submissions filed 7 February 2025 and 21 February 2025
Catchwords:
– section 59 – opposition to the grant
of a patent – lack of novelty in light of documents established –
whether disclosure of the results of the Phase III clinical trials is necessary
for anticipation – the concept of parametritis
considered – lack of
inventive step in light of cited documents considered together with common
general knowledge established
– lack of support not established –
opposition succeeds – costs awarded against applicant – opportunity
Representation: Counsel for the applicant: Julian Cooke SC, Joseph Elks
Patent attorney for the applicant: Davies Collison Cave
Counsel for the opponent: Christian Dimitriadis SC,
Clare Cunliffe
Solicitor for the opponent: Maddocks
IP AUSTRALIA
AUSTRALIAN PATENT OFFICE
Application: 2019346134
Title: Safe and effective method of treating ulcerative colitis with
anti-IL12/IL23 antibody
Patent Applicant: Janssen Biotech,
Date of Decision: 3 October 2025
The opposition is successful on the grounds of
novelty and inventive step. All the claims of the opposed application lack
in view of the cited prior art. All the claims of the opposed
application lack inventive step in light of cited prior art considered
The opponent has not established that any of the claims lack
support from subject matter disclosed in the opposed application.
Biotech, Inc. is given two months from the date of this decision to propose
amendments to overcome the deficiencies in the
Costs according to
Schedule 8 are awarded against Janssen Biotech, Inc..
REASONS FOR DECISION
application 2019346134 (the
opposed application
) was filed on 24
September 2019 under the provisions of the Patent Cooperation Treaty. The
opposed application claims priority from
three US provisional applications and
the earliest filing date of these applications is 24 September
opposed application was examined and advertised accepted by the Commissioner on
12 January 2023. Samsung Bioepis AU Pty Ltd (the
notice of opposition on 12 April 2023 and filed a statement of grounds and
particulars (
) on 12 July 2023. The opponent requested amendments to
the SGP on 12 October 2023, the applicant was given an opportunity to provide
comments but chose not to do so, and the requested SGP amendments were
in support (
) was filed by the opponent on 12 October 2023. Janssen
Biotech, Inc. (the
) filed evidence in answer (
January 2024, and a request to make voluntary amendments to the claims of the
opposed application on 29 January 2024. Leave
to amend the specification was
granted and details of the request to amend were subsequently advertised on 28
March 2024 for opposition
purposes. No opposition was filed regarding the
applicant’s amendments of 29 January 2024. The amendments were allowed,
allowance of the amendments was published on 20 June 2024. Consequently,
the applicant’s amendments of 29 January 2024 form
part of the
specification and the opposition proceeds in respect of the amended
) was filed by the opponent on 18 March
hearing was scheduled for Wednesday 18 December 2024 in Sydney. In accordance
with the Commissioner’s direction in the hearing
notice, the opponent and
applicant both filed a written summary of submissions before the hearing on the
04 December 2024 (the
) and 11 December 2024 (the
respectively. On 16 December 2024, the opponent filed further written
submissions in reply to the applicant’s written submissions
. On 17 December 2024, the applicant wrote a letter to the
Commissioner alleging that the opponent’s written reply submissions
“would result in
significant prejudice to the Applicant
were to be considered by the Hearing Officer without the Applicant being
afforded an adequate opportunity to consider the
submissions and respond in
writing” (emphasis in original). The applicant requested that the
Commissioner urgently issue a
direction to defer the hearing and provide the
applicant with at least five business days to respond to the
delegate of the Commissioner responded to the applicant’s letter on the
same day and indicated that it was not necessary to
vacate the hearing scheduled
for 18 December 2024 to afford the applicant procedural fairness. The delegate
noted that to the extent
that the applicant considered it was unable to properly
respond to the ORS, the Commissioner can provide the Applicant with a period
after the hearing to file written submissions that address the ORS. The
delegate suggested that the applicant raise the issue of
post-hearing
submissions at the hearing and indicate how much time it considers appropriate
to file further submissions. The delegate
also noted that this would ensure
procedural fairness while allowing the hearing to proceed.
the hearing the applicant requested until 07 February 2025 to file written
submissions to address the ORS. In all the circumstances,
including the time of
year being close to the Christmas and New Year holidays, I considered this
period reasonable. I also agreed
to the opponent’s request for an
opportunity to respond to the applicant’s post-hearing submissions and
gave the opponent
two weeks after the filing of the applicant’s
post-hearing submissions to respond. I confirmed the provision of post-hearing
submissions in a letter dated 19 December 2024 and noted that any post-hearing
submissions had to be strictly limited to addressing
matters in the
07 February 2025, the applicant filed post-hearing reply submissions (the
) to the ORS. The opponent filed responsive submissions to the APHS
on 21 February 2025 (the
). I am satisfied that the APHS have been
limited to the ORS and the OPHS have been limited to the APHS.
The opposition
grounds of opposition stated in the SGP are:
inventive step, and
evidence is summarised in the able below.
Stephen James Rohl
SJR-1 to SJR-6
Veysel Kayser
VK-1 to VK-4
PP-1 to PP-11
Matthew Aaron Ciorba
MAC-1 to MAC-8
John Kornak
JK-1 to JK-5
Stephen James Rohl
SJR-7 to SJR-19
PP-12 to PP-13
the opposed application was filed on 24 September 2019 this application is
governed by the
Patents Act 1990
) as amended by
Intellectual Property Laws Amendment (Raising the Bar) Act 2012
This includes subsection 60(3A) of the
which states:
(3A) If the Commissioner is satisfied, on the balance of probabilities,
that a ground of opposition to the grant of the standard patent
exists, the
Commissioner may refuse the application.
standard of proof that applies to the present opposition is the balance of
probabilities, and the opponent carries the onus of
The specification
field of the invention relates to
“methods of providing a clinically proven safe and clinically proven
effective treatment of ulcerative colitis, particularly
moderately to severely
active ulcerative colitis in patients who have had an inadequate response to or
are intolerant of a conventional
or existing therapy by intravenous and/or
subcutaneous administration of an anti-IL-12/IL-23p40
specification as amended up to this point in time has 30 claims. Claims 1, 17,
29 and 30 are the independent claims. The claim
set is reproduced in Annex A of
this decision.
Principles of construction
commencing to construe the specification, I note what Middleton J said in
Lilly and Company Limited v Apotex Pty Ltd
“It is well settled that the Court should, from the outset, approach
the task of patent construction with a generous measure
of common sense. The
Court must place itself in the position of a person skilled in the relevant art,
being the subject matter of
the patent. From this perspective, the patent is to
be read as a whole, in the context of the specification and in light of the
prevailing common general knowledge and state of the relevant art at the
priority date.”
The person skilled in the art (PSA)
is well established that many of the issues in an opposition are answered by
reference to the PSA:
“He is the person to whom the patent is addressed and who must construe
it. He is the person whose knowledge will determine
whether a patent is novel.
He is the person who will judge whether a patent is
the PSA is an artificial construct that is used as a tool of analysis, and there
is a danger in trying to identify them as
an actual person or
“The notional person is not an avatar for expert witnesses whose
testimony is accepted by the court. It is a pale shadow of
a real person
– a tool of analysis which guides the court in determining, by reference
to expert and other evidence, whether
an invention as claimed does not involve
an inventive step.”
understanding of the PSA is based on evidence from persons with knowledge of the
art as to the things that they know and do, and
what they understand to be
commonly known and done. The qualifications of the expert witnesses, relevant
to the present opposition,
are summarised below. The opponent relies on the
evidence of Professor Paul Pavli, Associate Professor Veysel Kayser, and Mr
James Rohl. The applicant relies on the evidence of Professor Matthew
Aaron Ciorba and Professor John Kornak.
Pavli is a gastroenterologist with almost 40 years of
experience.
He has worked in the
field of gastroenterology since 1984 and has lectured on the pathophysiology,
treatment and management of IBD
for over 25
Professor Pavli has
undertaken research focusing on the clinical and basic scientific aspects of
IBD, particularly on the causes
of Crohn’s disease (
ulcerative colitis (
), the role of inflammatory cells in these
diseases, and treatments for these
Since 1999, Professor
Pavli has been involved in a number of clinical trials including investigation
of new therapeutic agents and
existing therapeutic agents (approved for
conditions other than CD and/or UC) in the treatment of CD and/or UC as part of
multinational,
multicentre research programs, frequently as a principal
investigator.
He has also acted as
an independent evaluator of applications to register new medicines and new
indications for the Therapeutic
Goods Administration on several occasions
between 2001 and 2004, and served on the Australian Drug Evaluation Committee
between 2005
Professor Kayser is a pharmaceutical scientist with almost 20 years’
experience, particularly in relation to development,
formulation and stability
of biologic medicines and vaccines. He is an Associate Professor at the
University of
Rohl is a solicitor for the opponent. His declarations deal with the cited
prior art and particular matters the opponent considered
relevant to the
Ciorba is a gastroenterologist, Professor of Medicine, and Director of IBDs
Research at Washington University in St Louis,
Missouri, in the United
Professor Ciorba has
been specialising in gastroenterology since 2004 and his clinical practice and
research is primarily directed
to advancing care for patients affected by CD, UC
and colon cancer.
His research
includes defining pathways and mechanism of intestinal inflammation and the
transition to colon cancer.
Professor Ciorba has been a principal investigator in multiple clinical trials
for CD and UC treatments.
has been a member of numerous scientific panels including the Colitis Foundation
of America and the American Gastroenterological
Association
Kornak is a biostatistician at the University of California, San Francisco, in
the United States.
Kornak gives evidence on the role of statistical analysis in clinical
opponent submitted that the role of statistical analysis in clinical studies is
entirely irrelevant to the questions of novelty,
inventive step and
In the present
circumstances, I consider that the grounds of opposition can be addressed
adequately by considering the disclosure
in the (1) cited prior art, together
where appropriate, with CGK, or (2) specification. Therefore, for this
opposition I am of the
view that evidence on the role of statistical analysis in
clinical studies is not necessary.
opponent also submitted that Professor Ciorba’s evidence (1) reflects
matters peculiar to the USA, not the CGK worldwide,
and (2) addresses the wrong
standard as he often substitutes a test for prediction for a test of
expectation.
applicant submitted that Professor Pavli’s evidence (1) is limited to the
CGK in Australia only, and (2) regarding the hypothetical
task he was given for
the assessment of inventive step, is tainted by hindsight because of his
involvement in the Phase III clinical
trial for ustekinumab (known as the UNIFI
clinical trial) and his off-label experience with
ustekinumab.
consider that Professor Pavli and Professor Ciorba emphasised the practices in
their own jurisdiction but were aware of the CGK
worldwide. I will consider the
evidence of all declarants in the context of their experience and knowledge.
The weighing and evaluating
of the evidence are part of the normal work of a
delegate of the Commissioner.
The background to the invention
specification describes inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), which include
ulcerative colitis (UC), as chronic relapsing disorders
characterised by
destructive inflammation and epithelial injury in the gastrointestinal (GI)
etiology of UC is described as unknown but abnormal immune responses to contents
in the gut, including intestinal microbes, are
thought to drive disease in
genetically predisposed
individuals.
specification describes the involvement of the IL-12/IL-23 pathway in the
pathogenesis of IBD to be well-established and that
an important role for the
IL-12/IL-23 pathway in intestinal inflammation has been elucidated in
therapies that are currently approved for the treatment of UC are described to
be either tumour necrosis factor (TNF) or
integrin inhibitors. However, out of
all the approved treatments, only vedolizumab has demonstrated efficacy in
subjects who have
had an inadequate response or are intolerant to
Furthermore, it has
been observed that there are subjects receiving vedolizumab for the treatment of
UC who show inadequate response
and intolerance to their
therapies that are currently approved for the treatment of UC are described to
also demonstrate efficacy in CD.
The specification explains that multiple lines of evidence suggest that
inflammatory bowel disease (UC and CD) is mediated by T helper
T helper 17 (
) cells with strong contribution from the
proinflammatory cytokines, IL-12 and
specification describes ustekinumab (STELARA®) to be a fully human
monoclonal antibody to human IL-12/23p40 that prevents
IL-12 and IL-23
bioactivity by inhibiting their interaction with the cell surface IL-12Rß1
receptor protein. Ustekinumab effectively
neutralises IL-12 (Th1)- and IL-23
(Th17)-mediated cellular responses through this mechanism of
Ustekinumab is
described as having received marketing approval in countries in North America,
Europe, South America and the Asia-Pacific
region, for the treatment of adults
with moderately to severely active CD, moderate to severe plaque psoriasis, or
active psoriatic
arthritis, as well as for paediatric subjects (12 to 17 years
old) with moderate to severe plaque psoriasis. The first approval
received on 11 November
specification explains that the efficacy and safety of intravenous ustekinumab
therapy in CD have been evaluated in clinical
Ustekinumab is
reported to demonstrate clinically significant efficacy compared with placebo
and was well tolerated with a favourable
Aim of the invention
specification explains that there is a need in the art for improved methods of
treating UC, particularly moderate to severely
active UC in subjects who had
previously failed or were intolerant of a biologic therapy or other conventional
therapy, or subjects
who had demonstrated corticosteroid
dependence.
summary of the invention is described in similar terms of the field of the
invention outlined above, this being:
“clinically proven safe and clinically proven effective methods and
compositions for treatment of moderately to severely active
ulcerative colitis
(UC), particularly in subjects who have had an inadequate response to or are
intolerant of a conventional or existing
therapy, by administration of an
anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody to subjects, thereby addressing a clear unmet
medical need in this
population.”
infer that the aim of the invention is to provide an alternative method of
treating UC, particularly in a subject who has had an
inadequate response to, or
is intolerant of, a conventional or existing therapy, by administration of an
anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody.
is useful to note here that the specification uses the terms
“anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody”, “IL-12/23p40 antibody”,
“anti-IL-12 antibody” and “anti-IL-23 antibody”,
interchangeably to refer to a monoclonal antibody (mAb)
or antigen binding
fragment thereof, that binds to the 40 kDa (p40) subunit shared by cytokines
interleukin-12 and interleukin 23
(IL-12/23p40).
Ustekinumab is
an embodiment of such a
The invention as described in the specification
specification uses some terms to describe various parts of an antibody that are
understood by the skilled person. It is useful
to provide an explanation of
some of these terms here. Professor Ciorba provides a drawing of a typical
structure of an antibody
adapted from
Hansel et al
Nature Reviews
Drug Discovery 9
, 325-338).
I reproduce the drawing below.
Ciorba explains that:
“Broadly speaking, an antibody molecule is made up of four polypeptide
chains; two heavy chains and two light chains (colored
blue and orange
respectively, in [the drawing above]). The heavy chains are partially bound
together in a ‘Y’ shape,
and each heavy chain is linked to a light
chain by disulphide bonds.
Each arm of the Y-shaped antibody structure is formed by the association of a
light chain with the amino-terminal half of a heavy
chain, to form the Fragment
Antigen Binding (
) region that contains the antigen-binding site. The
antigen binding site contains complementarity determining regions (
which are short stretches of amino acid sequences within the variable domains of
the heavy chain and light chains (
, respectively), that
come into contact with the antigen (i.e., a specific site on a target molecule).
Generally speaking, the amino
acid sequence of the CDRs informs the binding
specificity and affinity of the antibody molecule. The stem of the Y-shaped
structure is the Fragment Crystallizable (
) region, formed by
the constant regions of the heavy chains, and is responsible for antibody
effector function, as the region interacts
with Fc receptors and complement
proteins. The Fc region is typically not important for targeting and
neutralising soluble antigens,
including soluble inflammatory cytokines.
However, the Fc region can play a role in pharmacokinetics /
bioavailability.”
font in original)
specification describes several aspects of the invention, and each aspect
generally mirrors an independent claim in the claim
set (as amended on 29
January 2024) of the present invention. A first aspect is a method of treating
moderately to severely active
UC in a subject in need thereof,
comprising:
administering to
the subject a pharmaceutical composition comprising an effective amount of
anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody,
after treating
with the antibody, the subject is a responder to treatment by at least one
measure of response to treatment selected
from a group consisting of seven
efficacy criteria which are
efficacy criteria are defined by reference to (a) various indices for
measurement of disease activity including a Mayo Score,
or a Mayo subscore, or
(b) an Inflammatory Bowel Disease Questionnaire (IBDQ) score which is an
assessment of disease-specific health-related
Mayo score is described as an established, validated disease activity index for
mild, moderate, and severe ulcerative colitis
(UC) that is calculated as the sum
of the four subscores of stool frequency, rectal bleeding, findings of
endoscopy, and physicians’
global assessment (PGA), and its value ranges
from 0-12. A score of 3-5 indicates mildly active disease, a score of 6-10
moderately active disease, and a score of 11-12 points indicates
severe disease.
specification defines “clinical response” as a decrease from
induction baseline in the Mayo score by ≥30% and
≥3 points, with
either a decrease from baseline in the rectal bleeding subscore ≥1 or a
rectal bleeding subscore of 0
second aspect of the invention described is a method of treating moderately to
severely active UC in a subject in need thereof,
comprising:
intravenously administering to the subject an anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody in a
first pharmaceutical composition at a dosage of
the subject or 130 mg, 260 mg, 390 mg or 520 mg per administration at week 0 of
the treatment,
subcutaneously administering to the subject the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody in
a second pharmaceutical composition at a dosage
of 90 mg per administration at
week 8 of the treatment,
the subject is a
responder to treatment by at least one measure of response to treatment selected
from a group consisting of seven
efficacy criteria which are
and wherein
the subject had
previously failed or was intolerant of at least one therapy selected from a
group consisting of five defined therapies
(these being, an anti-TNF,
vedolizumab, corticosteroids, azathioprine (AZA), and 6 mercaptopurine (6 MP)),
or the subject had demonstrated
corticosteroid
dependence.
third aspect of the invention described is a method of treating moderately to
severely active UC in a subject in need thereof, comprising:
intravenously administering to the subject an anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody in a
first pharmaceutical composition at a dosage of
the subject or 130 mg, 260 mg, 390 mg or 520 mg per administration at week 0 of
the treatment,
subcutaneously administering to the subject the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody in
a second pharmaceutical composition at a dosage
of 90 mg per administration at
week 8 of the treatment,
followed by a
maintenance therapy, wherein the maintenance therapy comprises subcutaneously
administering to the subject the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40
antibody at a dosage of 90
mg per administration, once every 8 weeks or once every 12 weeks, wherein the
maintenance therapy is provided
for 44 weeks
after treating
with the antibody, the subject is a responder to treatment by at least one
measure of response to treatment selected
from a group consisting of seven
efficacy criteria which are
anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody of the first, second and third aspects of the
invention is described to comprise a heavy chain variable
region and a light
chain variable region,
the heavy chain
variable region comprising a complementarity determining region heavy chain 1
(CDRH1) amino acid sequence of SEQ ID
No:1, a CDRH2 amino acid of SEQ ID No:2,
and a CDRH3 amino acid of SEQ ID No:3;
the light chain
variable region comprising a complementarity determining region light chain 1
(CDRL1) amino acid sequence of SEQ ID
No:4, a CDRL2 amino acid of SEQ ID No:5,
and a CDRL3 amino acid of SEQ ID
fourth aspect of the invention described is a method of treating moderately to
severely active UC in a subject in need thereof,
comprising:
intravenously administering to the subject an anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody
comprising a heavy chain variable region of amino acid
of SEQ ID No: 7 and a
light chain variable region of amino acid SEQ ID No: 8 in a first pharmaceutical
composition at a dosage of
260 mg, 390 mg or 520 mg per administration at week 0 of the
subcutaneously administering to the subject the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody in
a second pharmaceutical composition at a dosage
of 90 mg per administration at
week 8 of the treatment,
followed by a
maintenance therapy, wherein the maintenance therapy comprises subcutaneously
administering to the subject the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40
antibody at a dosage of 90
mg per administration, once every 8 weeks or once every 12
after treating
with the antibody, the subject is a responder to treatment by at least one
measure of response to treatment selected
from a group consisting of seven
efficacy criteria which are
some embodiments, the methods of the opposed application are described to
comprise intravenously and/or subcutaneously administering
to the subject a
pharmaceutical composition comprising the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody
ustekinumab, which comprises a heavy chain
amino acid sequence of SEQ ID 10 and
a light chain amino acid sequence of SEQ ID
some embodiments, the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody is in a pharmaceutical
composition for intravenous administration comprising
a solution comprising 10
mM L-histidine, 8.5% (w/v) sucrose, 0.04% (w/v) polysorbate 80, 0.4 mg/mL
L-methionine, and 20 µg/mL
EDTA disodium salt, dehydrate, at pH
other embodiments, the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody is in a pharmaceutical
composition for subcutaneous administration comprising
a solution comprising 6.7
mM L-histidine, 7.6% (w/v) sucrose, 0.004% (w/v) polysorbate 80, at
1 and 2 of the specification describe an induction study and a maintenance
study, respectively, designed to assess the efficacy
of ustekinumab in human
subjects with moderately to severely active UC who demonstrated inadequate
response to, or failure to tolerate,
conventional (corticosteroids or
6-mercaptopurine (6-MP) or azathioprine (AZA)) or biologic therapy
(TNF-antagonist and/or the integrin
antagonist,
vedolizumab).
Example 1 refers
to a “Phase 3, Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo-controlled,
Parallel-group, Multicenter Study to Evaluate
the Safety and Efficacy of
ustekinumab Induction and Maintenance Therapy in Subjects with Moderately to
Severely Active Ulcerative
Professor Pavli
and Professor Ciorba recognise Examples 1 and 2 of the specification as the
induction study and the maintenance
study, respectively, within a Phase III
clinical trial for ustekinumab known as the UNIFI clinical
The UNIFI clinical trial
is described in a record that was published on the ClinicalTrials.gov website,
and this publication has
been raised as a prior art citation (CTR 236) in the
present opposition.
discuss CTR 236 in due course.
the induction study, subjects were randomised at week 0 to one of three
treatment groups:
ustekinumab”, which received a single 130 mg intravenous (IV) dose of
ustekinumab; or
ustekinumab”, which received a single weight-range based dose of
approximately 6 mg/kg IV of ustekinumab, this
being 260 mg for a body weight
≤55 kg, 390 mg for a body weight ˃ 55 kg but ≤85 kg, and 520 mg
for body weight ˃85
subjects were evaluated for clinical remission and clinical response at week
Subjects who demonstrated no
clinical response at week 8 received an additional IV or subcutaneous (SC) dose
of ustekinumab.
Subjects who
demonstrated a clinical response at week 8 or week 16 (following the additional
dose) were eligible to enter the maintenance
study, which is described to
evaluate maintenance therapy using SC
ustekinumab.
evaluations were collected throughout the clinical trial and the efficacy
criteria for the induction study
remission (global definition): Mayo score ≤2points, with no individual
subscore ˃1;
remission (US definition): absolute stool number ≤3, rectal bleeding
subscore of 0, and Mayo endoscopy subscore of
response: a decrease from induction baseline in the Mayo score by ≥30% and
≥3 points, with either a decrease
from baseline in the rectal bleeding
subscore ≥1 or a rectal bleeding subscore of 0 or 1;
healing (i.e., improvement in the endoscopic appearance of the mucosa): Mayo
endoscopy subscore of 0 or 1
histological
healing: based on the Geboes score and is defined as 0 to ˂5% neutrophils
in the epithelium and no crypt destruction,
erosion, ulcerations, or
granulations;
healing: both endoscopic healing and histologic healing
efficacy results for the induction study are described as
“Clinical Remission at Week 8- Global Definition
At Week 8, significantly greater proportions of subjects in the ~6 mg/kg and
130 mg groups achieved clinical remission (15.5% and
15.6%, respectively)
compared with subjects in the placebo group (5.3%; p<0.001 for both
comparisons; Table
“Clinical Remission at Week 8- US Definition
At Week 8, significantly greater proportions of subjects in the ~6 mg/kg and
130 mg groups achieved clinical remission (18.9% and
16.6%, respectively)
compared with subjects in the placebo group (6.3%; p<0.001 for both
comparisons; Table
“Clinical Response at Week 8
At Week 8, significantly greater proportions of subjects in the ~6 mg/kg and
130 mg groups achieved clinical response (61.8% and 51.3%,
respectively)
compared with subjects in the placebo group (31.3%; p<0.001 for both
comparisons; Table
“Endoscopic Healing at Week 8
At Week 8, significantly greater proportions of subjects in the ~6 mg/kg and
130 mg groups achieved endoscopic healing (27.0% and
26.3%, respectively)
compared with subjects in the placebo group (13.8%; p<0.001 for both
comparisons; Table
“Histologic Healing at Week 8
Histologic healing was defined as 0 to <5% neutrophils in epithelium and
no crypt destruction, erosions, ulcerations, or granulations.
significantly greater proportions of subjects in the ~6 mg/kg and 130 mg groups
achieved histologic healing (35.6% and
37.9%, respectively) compared with
subjects in the placebo group (21.9%; p<0.001 for both
comparisons).”
specification reports that median IBDQ scores were similar across all treatment
groups at baseline, and
“[a]t Week 8, the median improvements from baseline in the IBDQ scores
were significantly greater in the ~6 mg/kg and 130 mg
groups (31.0 and 31.5,
respectively) compared with the placebo group (10.0; p<0.001 for both
comparisons).”
specification also describes other efficacy criteria and reports the results for
these other criteria.
Additionally, the results for the safety, pharmacokinetics and immunogenicity of
administering ustekinumab intravenously are also
2 is a “[m]aintenance Study of ustekinumab in the treatment of ulcerative
colitis in humans”
specification describes the “primary” population in the maintenance
study as subjects who were in clinical response
to IV Ustekinumab following the
induction study, specifically:
a) Subjects who received 130 mg or ~6 mg/kg IV ustekinumab at induction week 0
and were in clinical response at induction week 8;
b) Subjects who received placebo at induction week 0, were not in clinical
response at induction week 8 but were in clinical response
at induction week 16
after receiving ~6 mg/kg IV ustekinumab at induction week
subjects were randomised at maintenance week 0 to receive ustekinumab 90 mg SC
every 8 weeks (q8w), ustekinumab 90 mg SC every
12 weeks (q12w), or placebo
specification describes the primary endpoint for the maintenance study to be
clinical remission at week 44.
I understand the time for the primary endpoint to be maintenance week 44 of the
study of Example 2 and diagrammatically represented
in Figure 1 of the
specification as “Overall Exposure” Week 52. In other words, the
primary endpoint for the maintenance
study of Example 2 is 52 weeks from
induction week 0 as the period for the induction study was 8
definition of clinical remission (and the testing procedure) in the US is
different to that outside the US. Two definitions of
clinical remissions were
applied to all subjects in the efficacy evaluation for the primary endpoint to
accommodate the differences,
definition stated as a Mayo score ≤2 points, with no individual subscore
definition stated as an absolute stool number ≤3, a Mayo score rectal
bleeding subscore of 0, and a Mayo endoscopy subscore
The efficacy results for clinical remission are described as
definition: At week 44, the proportions of subjects in clinical remission were
significantly greater in the ustekinumab q8w
group and ustekinumab q12w group
(43.8% and 38.4%, respectively) compared with subjects in the placebo group
(24.0%; p<0.001 and
p=0.002, respectively).
US definition:
At week 44, the proportions of subjects in clinical remission were significantly
greater in the ustekinumab q8w group
and ustekinumab q12w group (42.6% and
39.5%, respectively) compared with subjects in the placebo group (24.6%;
p<0.001 and p=0.002,
respectively).
Additionally,
the specification
“[a]pplying both global and US-specific definitions of clinical
remission, the proportions of subjects achieving corticosteroid-free
for at least 90 days prior to Week 44 was significantly greater (p<0.01) in
the ustekinumab q8w and q12w groups compared
with that in the placebo group.
Furthermore, among subjects receiving corticosteroids at maintenance baseline,
significantly greater
proportions of subjects (p<0.05) were in clinical
remission and not receiving concomitant corticosteroids for at least 90 days
prior to Week 44 in the ustekinumab q8w and q12w groups compared with those in
the placebo group.”
efficacy results are also described for other efficacy criteria including
maintaining clinical response, achieving endoscopic
healing, achieving
histologic healing and achieving mucosal
Additionally, the
results for the safety, pharmacokinetics and immunogenicity of administering
ustekinumab subcutaneously are also
specification states that the ustekinumab maintenance study provided evidence
that the two dose regimens of administering 90 mg
ustekinumab SC, q8w or q12w,
were both effective in adult subjects with moderately to severely active UC who
had responded to a single
IV ustekinumab induction
Additionally, the safety
and efficacy data from the maintenance study support a “positive
benefit/risk profile for ustekinumab
SC maintenance
specification observes that STELARA® (ustekinumab) for the treatment of UC
was approved in Europe as of 04 September
. Annex 1 of the opposed
application reproduces the approved label (this being, the summary of product
characteristics) for 130 mg
(IV) STELARA®, and 45 mg or 90 mg (SC)
The invention as claimed
correct approach to the construction of claims was discussed by Bennett J in
H Lundbeck A/S v Alphapharm Pty Ltd.
“the words in a claim should be read through the eyes of the skilled
addressee in the context in which they appear ... while
the claims define the
monopoly claimed in the words of the patentee's choosing, the specification
should be read as a whole ... it
is not permissible to read into a claim an
additional integer or limitation to vary or qualify the claim by reference to
of the specification ... terms in the claim which are unclear may be
defined or clarified by reference to the body of the
specification”
is convenient to parse claim 1, the first independent claims of the opposed
application as follows:
a) A method of treating moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis (UC) in
a subject in need thereof, comprising
b) administering to the subject a pharmaceutical composition comprising an
effective amount of an anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody,
the antibody comprises a heavy chain variable region and a light chain variable
region, the heavy chain variable region comprising:
a complementarity
determining region heavy chain 1 (CDRH1) amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:1; a
CDRH2 amino acid sequence of SEQ
ID NO:2; and a CDRH3 amino acid sequence of SEQ
ID NO:3; and the light chain variable region comprising: a complementarity
determining
region light chain 1 (CDRL1) amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:4; a
CDRL2 amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:5; and a CDRL3 amino acid
sequence of SEQ
d) wherein after treating with the antibody, the subject is a responder to
treatment by at least one measure of response to treatment
e) selected from the group consisting of: (i) clinical remission based on at
least one of the global definition of clinical remission
with Mayo score ≤
2 points with no individual subscore > 1 and the US definition of clinical
remission with absolute stool
number ≤ 3, rectal bleeding subscore of 0
and Mayo endoscopy subscore of 0 or 1, (ii) endoscopic healing with a Mayo
subscore of 0 or 1, (iii) clinical response based on the Mayo
endoscopy subscore, (iv) mucosal healing, and (v) clinical response
determined by a decrease from baseline in the Mayo score by ≥30% and
≥3 points and a decrease from baseline in the
rectal bleeding subscore
≥1 points or a rectal bleeding subscore of 0 or 1.
will now consider the meaning of several terms of claim
A method of treating moderately to severely active
ulcerative colitis (UC) in a subject in need thereof
applicant submitted that:
“the Specification is clearly directed to ‘clinically proven
safe’ and ‘clinically proven effective’
methods of treating
moderately to severely active UC. These terms, and the term ‘clinically
proven’, are defined in
the Specification...As Prof. Ciorba explains, upon
reading the Specification, it is apparent that:
to ‘treat’ a condition with a drug requires administering
a drug that is known at that time to be capable of treating
that condition in
the relevant patient population
. A drug is only known to be capable of
treating a condition if both its safety and efficacy have been established by
Phase III clinical
trial results ([except] where there is real world data
collected from a large number of patients over a prolonged period of time
establishes safety and efficacy of that drug). [emphasis
opponent submitted that the applicant’s position is founded
“the novel proposition that, in the context of the Application,
‘treating’ moderately to severely active UC involves
administering a
drug that is ‘known’ at the time of treatment to be safe and
effective in a patient with moderately to
severely active UC in the sense that
the treatment had been the subject of a successful Phase III clinical trial.
Unsurprisingly,
that proposition does not reflect any definition of
‘treating’ which is incorporated into the Application. Nor does
reflect the plain and ordinary English meaning of the term
‘treating’ and normal use or understanding by any of the
the term. Further, the proposition is inconsistent with established case law in
this area concerning methods of treatment,
which demonstrates that the
disclosure of something much less than the results of a Phase III clinical trial
can anticipate: e.g.,
even a clinical protocol, or hypothesis, without any
results or proof: see
Health Pty Ltd v Sun Pharma ANZ Pty
[2020] FCAFC 116
(2020) 279 FCR 354
, especially [104]-[106]. Similar
attempts to support the novelty or inventiveness of claimed methods of treatment
based on an artificially
elevated construction of ‘treatment’ have
failed in other cases: see e.g.
Pharma Inc v Aragon
Pharmaceuticals Inc
[2022] APO 36
applicant also submitted that based on a consideration of the Delegate in
Astellas Pharma Inc. v Aragon Pharmaceuticals, Inc.
) a claim to a method of treatment should be understood
as referring only to use in a population as distinct from one or more individual
the oral hearing, the opponent submitted that such a construction would lead to
an odd scenario where a claim to a method of treating
a condition in a subject
could not be considered an improvement unless there was improvement in subjects
in a whole population.
The opponent also observed that the claims in the
present case are directed to a method of treating a condition
. Additionally, the opponent submitted that a consideration based on
the understanding in
would be inconsistent with authorities and
noted the finding of Nicholas J in
Apotex Pty Ltd v Warner-Lambert Company
LLC (No 2) (
Warner-Lambert
who stated that “a claim will be
infringed if a person administers a therapeutically effective amount of the
relevant compound
to a patient in need of treatment... for the purpose of
providing such treatment even though the treatment may not be effective in
opponent also submitted that the fact that claims are to methods of treatment
does not mean that the claimed responses must be
achieved in every case and
noted that Professor Pavli and Professor Ciorba agreed, as a matter of fact,
that not all patients will
respond to a particular treatment.
Furthermore, the opponent observed
the results of the studies described in the present application (which are the
UNIFI Phase III
clinical trials) demonstrate this
I understand I am to construe the claims in the context of the specification as
a whole, it is “not legitimate to narrow
or expand the boundaries of
monopoly as fixed by the words of a claim by adding to those words glosses drawn
from other parts of
specification.”
specification does describe examples of studies within a Phase III clinical
trial to assess the efficacy of ustekinumab in human
subjects with moderately to
severely active UC. However, the words of claim 1 do not limit the method (a)
to a treatment method
that has already been clinically proven to be safe and
effective, or (b) to a treatment method that is performed on any patient
population.
I would be impermissibly importing the requirements that the method
be clinically proven on a patient population–in other
words adding a
gloss–if I were to adopt the applicant’s construction of
Macquarie Dictionary defines “treat” as “to deal with (a
disease, patient, etc) in order to relieve or
Therefore, I
interpret the plain meaning of the phrase “[a] method of treating
moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis
(UC) in a subject in need
thereof” as indicating a method that is used with
an intended purpose
to relieve or cure
a patient with moderately to severely active
also interpret the method of treatment defined in claim 1 to mean the treatment
of one or more individuals suffering from moderately
to severely active UC and
is not limited to a subject population.
administering to
the subject a pharmaceutical composition comprising an effective amount of an
anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody
consider the PSA reading the specification would interpret this phrase to mean a
subject is administered a pharmaceutical composition
with a monoclonal antibody
or antigen binding fragment that binds to the 40 kDa (p40) subunit shared by
cytokines interleukin-12
and interleukin 23
(IL-12/23p40).
This antibody
includes ustekinumab which was originally marketed by the applicant as
From a plain
meaning of the words, an “effective amount” of antibody is an amount
that is intended to effectively treat
moderately to severely active
wherein the antibody comprises a heavy chain variable
region and a light chain variable region, the heavy chain variable region
comprising:
a complementary determining region heavy chain 1 (CDRH1) amino acid
sequence of SEQ ID NO:1; a CDRH2...of SEQ ID NO:2; and a CDRH3...of
SEQ ID NO:3;
and the light chain variable region comprising: a complementary determining
region light chain 1 (CDRL1) amino acid
sequence of SEQ ID NO:4; a CDRL2...of
SEQ ID NO:5; and a CDRL3...of SEQ ID NO:6
consider the PSA would understand the antibody of claim 1 to have a heavy chain
variable region and a light chain variable region
with the amino acid sequences
as defined in the claim and with reference to the specification and sequence
listing of the opposed
application.
Pavli observed that:
(a) the amino acid sequences of SEQ ID NO:1 to No:3 (heavy chain CDRs) are
present in SEQ ID NO:7 (heavy chain variable region),
and the amino acid
sequence of SEQ ID NO:7 is present in SEQ ID NO:10 (heavy chain);
(b) the amino acid sequences of SEQ ID NO:4 to NO:6 (light chain CDRs) are
present in SEQ ID NO:8 (light chain variable region),
and the amino acid
sequence of SEQ ID NO:8 is present in SEQ ID NO:11 (light
(c) ustekinumab comprises a heavy chain having the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID
NO:10 and a light chain having an amino acid sequence
Pavli stated that he understands claim 1 to refer to an antibody having the same
CDRs as ustekinumab and includes ustekinumab
itself. Additionally, Professor
Pavli understands the antibody of claim 1 includes an antibody with the same
variable regions as
ustekinumab but with different constant regions to
ustekinumab. However, he stated that he was not aware that any such antibody
had been developed before 24 September 2018 nor to the day he made his statement
on 12 October
Ciorba also referred to the specification and sequence listing of the opposed
application when commenting on the claim 1
and observed that SEQ ID NO:1 to NO:6
are the CDR sequences of the variable regions of the heavy and light chains of
ustekinumab.
have reviewed the sequence listing and description of the opposed application,
and I accept the explanations of Professor Pavli
and Professor Ciorba regarding
how the sequences defined in claim 1 relate to those of ustekinumab. I
interpret the scope of claim
1 includes ustekinumab itself and an antibody with
the same six CDRs as ustekinumab. I note that the specification uses
ustekinumab
and Stelara® interchangeably and describes ustekinumab
(Stelara®) as comprising a heavy chain having the amino acid sequence
ID NO:10 and a light chain having an amino acid sequence of SEQ ID
I also note Stelara®
is a commercial formulation of the antibody ustekinumab that was originally
marketed by the applicant.
consider the skilled person would understand that ustekinumab and Stelara®
refer to an antibody having the six CDRs sequences
defined in claim
Ciorba also explained that generally the CDRs inform the binding specificity and
affinity of an antibody molecule and antibodies
with the same six CDRs would be
expected to have the same binding specificity and affinity as
ustekinumab.
the oral hearing the opponent submitted that Professor Ciorba’s statement
(at [74] of his evidence) that “
[g]enerally speaking
, the amino
acid sequence of the CDRs informs the binding specificity and affinity of an
antibody”, should not be understood
as a universal proposition and that it
will not always be true that antibodies with the same six CDRs would have the
same specificity
and affinity as ustekinumab.
statement by Professor Ciorba was made in the context of providing the CGK about
antibodies. Therefore, I consider it is reasonable
to interpret the statement
as meaning that it was generally known and accepted, at the priority date of the
opposed specification,
that the amino acid sequence of the CDRs informs the
binding specificity and affinity of an antibody. My interpretation is
with the language used in the specification to describe the influence
of CDRs on the binding capacity of an antibody. The specification
states that
“[i]n general, the CDR residues are directly and most substantially
involved in influencing antigen
I also consider
it is reasonable to interpret that an antibody with the same six CDR sequences
as ustekinumab would be expected
to have the same binding specificity and
affinity as ustekinumab.
wherein after treating with the
antibody, the subject is a responder to treatment by at least one measure of
response to treatment
consider that it is reasonable to interpret this phrase in the context that the
method of treatment is for the
intended purpose
of effectively relieving
or curing a subject with moderately to severely active UC. Firstly, I interpret
the phrase to mean that
after treating with the antibody, the
is that the one or more subjects suffering from moderately to severely active UC
show a measure of effectiveness to the treatment
which is evaluated by at least
one of the efficacy criteria defined. Secondly, I consider that the claim
define a requirement that at least one of the defined efficacy
achieved in every case and that every subject must be
sorted into one of these criteria. This is because in any given population
there will be non-responders even in actual use. For the purposes of
interpretation, I consider it is sufficient that
one or more
show a clinical response to treatment, as defined by the efficacy criteria. My
interpretation is consistent with the description
in the specification where
treatment with the antibody achieves a clinical response in some subjects but
not others irrespective
of the efficacy criteria being evaluated. My
interpretation is also consistent with evidence of Professor Ciorba and
Professor Pavli
who both stated that for each medication which was approved for
UC before the priority date of the opposed application, there were
some patients
who did not respond to the
medication.
from the group consisting of: (i) clinical remission based on at least one of
the global definition of clinical remission
with Mayo score ≤ 2 points
with no individual subscore > 1 and the US definition of clinical remission
with absolute stool
number ≤ 3, rectal bleeding subscore of 0 and Mayo
endoscopy subscore of 0 or 1, (ii) endoscopic healing with a Mayo endoscopy
subscore of 0 or 1, (iii) clinical response based on the Mayo endoscopy
subscore, (iv) mucosal healing, and (v) clinical response
as determined by a
decrease from baseline in the Mayo score by ≥30% and ≥3 points and a
decrease from baseline in the
rectal bleeding subscore ≥1 points or a
rectal bleeding subscore of 0 or 1
1 defines five efficacy criteria by reference to indices for disease activity
including a Mayo score, or a Mayo subscore. I
have previously discussed the
Mayo score and Mayo subscores.
Claims 2 and 3
2 and 3 are appended to claim 1. I have previously explained how the various
sequences defined in claims 1, 2 and 3 relate
to one another and noted that
ustekinumab (Stelara®) comprises a heavy chain having the amino acid
sequence of SEQ ID NO:10 and
a light chain having an amino acid sequence of SEQ
ID NO:11. Therefore, I interpret the antibody of claim 3 to be ustekinumab
(Stelara®).
Claims 4 and 5
4 and 5 are ultimately appended to claim 1. I interpret the antibody of claim 4
to be in a pharmaceutical composition suitable
for intravenous administration
having a solution with the components defined in the claim. I interpret the
antibody of claim 5 to
be in a pharmaceutical composition suitable for
subcutaneous administration having a solution with the components defined in the
week 0 of the
6 is appended to claim 4. I consider the words of claim 6 define week 0 of the
treatment as a time point when the first IV
induction dose of the antibody is
administered to the subject, this being at week 0 of the induction study. The
antibody is administered
at a dosage of 6.0 mg/kg body weight of the subject or
130 mg, 260 mg, 390 mg or 520 mg per administration. The antibody is in a
pharmaceutical composition as defined in claim 4.
....week 8 of the treatment
7 is appended to claim 6. I interpret week 8 of the treatment to be eight weeks
after the time point for the first IV dose
defined in claim 6. In other words,
a SC dose of the antibody is administered to the subject eight weeks after week
0 of the induction
study. The antibody administered as a SC dose is in a
pharmaceutical composition as defined in claim 5.
of claims 8 and 9 is appended to claim 7. I interpret the subject of claim 8 to
have previously failed or was intolerant to
at least one therapy from the five
therapies defined in the claim or had demonstrated corticosteroid
dependence.
consider the words of claim 9 to define a treatment method that includes
administering a maintenance dose every 8 weeks, or every
12 weeks, after the
subcutaneous administration of the antibody at week 8 of the treatment defined
in claim 7.
Claims 10 to 16
...44 weeks
after week 0
of claims 10 to 16 is appended to claim 9. The applicant
“The experts disagree on the meaning of the phrase ‘44 weeks
after week 0’ as used in claims 10-16 of the Opposed
Application, although
the Opponent also does not appear to press Prof. Pavli’s contorted
construction of this term in the OS...
Prof. Pavli asserts that this phrase is a reference to ‘44 weeks after
the first dose of ustekinumab (i.e. the IV induction
dose referred to in claim
6)’, despite acknowledging that this construction is inconsistent with the
teaching of the Specification,
and in particular ‘differs from the format
of the UNIFI Phase III clinical trial, in which patients were assessed at 44
after the first maintenance dose of ustekinumab’, and which is the
subject of the Examples.
Consistent with the evidence of Prof. Ciorba, a PSA would understand the term
‘44 weeks after week 0’, when read in the
context of the
Specification as a whole, to mean ‘44 weeks after the first maintenance
dose’. In particular, Prof. Ciorba
As Prof. Pavli notes, in the UNIFI Phase III trial, as reflected in Examples
1 and 2 of the Opposed Application, ‘
patients were assessed at 44 weeks
after the first maintenance dose of ustekinumab
’. This is also
consistent with Annex I, including Label Table 6, which refers to key efficacy
measures at ‘
week 44; 52 weeks from initiation of the induction
’. I also note that elsewhere the claims state ‘week 0 of
the treatment’ when referring to the first induction
dose (see claims 6,
19, 33 and 34). Therefore, it is apparent to me that the reference to ‘at
least 44 weeks after week 0’
(absent the qualifier ‘of the
treatment’ following ‘week 0’) in claims 10-18 is a reference
to at least 44
weeks after the first maintenance dose.
It is also clearly the case that the feature ‘44 weeks after week
0’ presented some linguistic difficulty that this terminology
attempts to
avoid. This is apparent from Figure 1, which shows that subjects who achieved a
clinical response at week 8 and at week
16 of the Induction Study entered the
Maintenance Study.
The Applicant submits that the evidence of Prof. Ciorba should be preferred
because it represents a whole of specification approach
to claim construction
that involves construing the claims in ‘a practical, commonsense
opponent submitted during the oral hearing that it adopts Professor
Pavli’s interpretation of the phrase “44 weeks
I also observe
that Professor Pavli noted that “[presently amended claims 10-16] do not
refer to 44 weeks of maintenance therapy,
or 44 weeks after week 0 of
maintenance
tend to be of the view that if the patentee had intended week 0 of claim 10-16
to be week 0 of the maintenance therapy, the words
of the claims should have
been chosen to reflect this qualification. I would be impermissibly importing a
gloss from the figures
and examples of the specification if I were to interpret
“44 weeks after week 0” of claims 10-16 to be 44 weeks after
of the maintenance therapy
there is no qualifier in the claims that week 0 is week 0 of the maintenance
therapy, the plain meaning of the words indicates
to me that week 0 of claim
10-16 is the time when the first IV induction dose of the antibody is
administered to the subject. In
other words, week 0
of the treatment
defined in claim 6. My interpretation would be consistent with the structure of
the claim appendencies. Additionally, claim
10 defines “week 16 of the
treatment” which I interpret to be a time 16 weeks after the first IV dose
as defined in claim
6. Therefore, it seems reasonable to me that the same
starting time point is intended for week 16 and week 0 in claim 10 and claims
11-16. I consider this to be a case where “the language of the claim must
be understood to mean what it actually
interpret the phrase “44 weeks after week 0” of claims 10-16 to be
44 weeks after the first IV dose of the antibody
is administered to the subject
as defined in claim 6.
...corticosteroid-free clinical remission
consider the plain meaning of the phrase to be that the subject in clinical
remission is not receiving concurrent corticosteroids
to prevent the return of
the symptoms of UC. I note that my interpretation of the phrase is consistent
with the definition of this
efficacy criteria provided in the
specification.
17 is a second independent claim to a method of treating moderately to severely
active UC in a subject. I interpret the subject
of claim 17 to be one or more
individuals suffering from moderately to severely active UC and is not limited
to a subject population.
Additionally, I interpret the subject to be one who
(a) had previously failed or was intolerant to at least one therapy from the
five therapies defined in the claim, or (b) had demonstrated corticosteroid
dependence. The therapies which the subject had failed
or was intolerant to are
(i) an anti-TNF (anti- Tumor Necrosis Factor), (ii) vedolizumab (an integrin
antagonist). (iii) corticosteroids,
(iv) azathioprine (AZA), and (v) 6
mercaptopurine (6 MP).
the treatment method of claim 17, the subject is
(a) administered
an intravenous dose of an anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody at week 0 of the
treatment, and
(b) administered
a subcutaneous dose of the same anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody at week 8 of the
I interpret the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody of claim
17 to be defined in identical terms as the antibody in claim 1, that is with
identical CDR sequences on the heavy and light chain variable regions as those
defined for claim 1. The quantity of the intravenous
anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody at week 0 is defined in identical terms to the dose
defined in claim 6. The quantity of the
subcutaneous dose of
anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody at week 8 is defined in identical terms to the dose
defined in claim 7. I interpret
the scope of claim 17 to include an antibody
with the same six CDRs as ustekinumab and includes ustekinumab itself.
subject of claim 17 is defined to be a responder to treatment by at least one
measure of response to treatment. For the same
reasons as discussed for claim
1, I interpret that after administering the antibody, the intention is that one
or more subjects suffering
from moderately to severely active UC show a measure
of effectiveness to the treatment which is evaluated by at least one of the
efficacy criteria defined. Noting that there will be non-responders to
treatment in any given population, as I previously discussed,
I also consider
that the claim does not define a requirement that at least one of the defined
efficacy criteria will be achieved
in every case and that every subject must be
sorted into one of these criteria.
Claims 18-21
18-21 are ultimately appended to claim 17 and define features in addition to
those in claim 17. The antibody of claims 18
and 19 are defined in identical
terms to the antibody in claims 2 and 3, respectively. The pharmaceutical
composition of claim 20
is defined in identical terms as the composition of
claim 4 which is suitable for intravenous administration. The pharmaceutical
composition of claim 21 is defined in identical terms as the composition of
claim 5 which is suitable for subcutaneous
administration.
Claims 22-27
22-27 are appended to claim 17 and each appended claim defines that the intended
response is that the subject demonstrates
a specific efficacy criterion
week 16 of the treatment, that is any time before and until week 16 of
the treatment. I interpret “week 16 of the treatment”
weeks after the subject is administered an intravenous dose of
anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody at week 0.
consider that the skilled person would interpret “endoscopic
healing” defined in claim 23 as improvement of the mucosal
appearance as
assessed by endoscopy. This is because endoscopic appearance of the mucosa is a
component of the full Mayo score which
is part of the
consider the plain meaning of “mucosal healing” defined in claim 25
means healing of the mucosa as assessed by any method
well understood by the
skilled person. This includes endoscopic assessment but is not limited to an
improvement of the endoscopic
mucosal appearance. For example, the
specification describes histological healing of the mucosa and explains this is
based on the
Geboes score.
Professor Pavli stated that the Geboes score is widely known and generally
accepted and used in Australia and overseas as criteria
for UC clinical trials
before the priority
28 is appended to claim 17. I interpret the subject of claim 28 not to have
shown a measure of effectiveness to treatment with
the antibody, as evaluated by
the five efficacy criteria defined in claim 17, by week 8 but does show a
measure of effectiveness
to treatment with the antibody by week 16. I interpret
“week 8” and “week 16 of the treatment” in claim
be the number of weeks after week 0 when the subject is administered an
intravenous dose of anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody.
29 is a third independent claim to a method of treating moderately to severely
active UC in a subject. In the treatment method
of claim 29, I interpret the
(a) administered
an intravenous dose of an anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody at week 0 of the
treatment, and
(b) administered
a subcutaneous dose of the same anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody at week 8 of the
treatment, and
(c) provided a
maintenance therapy for 44 weeks following the subcutaneous dose of the antibody
administered in step (b), and
(d) it is the
intention that one or more subjects show a measure of effectiveness to the
treatment which is evaluated by at least
one of the efficacy criteria defined,
noting that there will be non-responders to treatment in any given
population.
interpret the maintenance therapy of claim 29 to comprise an administration of a
subcutaneous dose of the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody
at a dosage of 90 mg per
administration, once every 8 weeks or once every 12 weeks, in the 44-week period
after week 8 of the treatment.
Where the maintenance therapy is provided once
every 8 weeks, the scope of claim 29 includes administration of a subcutaneous
of the antibody 16, 24, 32 and 40 weeks after week 0 of the treatment.
Where the maintenance therapy is provided once every 12 weeks,
the scope of
claim 29 includes administration of a subcutaneous dose of the antibody 20, 32
and 44 weeks after week 0 of the treatment.
This is illustrated in Figure 1 of
the opposed application.
interpret the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody of claim 29 to be defined in
identical terms as the antibody in claim 1, that is with
identical CDR sequences
on the heavy and light chain variable regions as those defined for claim 1. The
quantity of the intravenous
dose of anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody administered at
week 0 is defined in claim 29 in identical terms to the dose defined in claim
The quantity of the subcutaneous dose of anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody
administered at week 8 is defined in claim 29 in identical
terms to the dose
defined in claim 7. I interpret the scope of claim 29 to include an antibody
with the same six CDRs as ustekinumab
and includes ustekinumab
30 is a fourth independent claim to a method of treating moderately to severely
active UC in a subject. In the treatment method
of claim 30, I interpret the
(a) administered
an intravenous dose of an anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody at week 0 of the
treatment, and
(b) administered
a subcutaneous dose of the same anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody at week 8 of the
treatment, and
(c) administered
a maintenance therapy following the subcutaneous dose of the antibody
administered in step (b), and
(d) it is the
intention that one or more subjects show a measure of effectiveness to the
treatment which is evaluated by at least
one of the efficacy criteria defined,
noting that there will be non-responders to treatment in any given
population.
interpret the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody of claim 30 to be defined in
identical terms as the antibody in claim 2; that is, with
the heavy chain
variable regions of amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:7 and light chain variable
regions of amino acid sequence of
SEQ ID NO:8. Since the amino acid sequences
of SEQ ID NO:7 and SEQ ID NO:8 are, respectively, present in the heavy chain and
light chain of ustekinumab, I interpret the scope of claim 30 to include an
antibody with the same six CDRs as ustekinumab and includes
ustekinumab
quantity of the intravenous dose of anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody administered at
week 0 is defined in claim 30 in identical terms
to the dose defined in claim 6.
The quantity of the subcutaneous dose of anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody
administered at week 8 is defined
in claim 30 in identical terms to the dose
defined in claim 7.
interpret the maintenance therapy of claim 30 to comprise an administration of
an additional subcutaneous doses of the same anti-IL-12/IL-23p40
antibody as
administered in step (b) which is provided at a dosage of 90 mg per
administration. The antibody is administered once
every 8 weeks, or once every
12 weeks, after week 8 of the treatment. Unlike claim 29, claim 30 does not
limit the period of the
maintenance therapy. For example, the scope of claim 30
includes (1) an additional subcutaneous dose of the antibody 16, 24, 32,
or 56 weeks after week 0 of the treatment, where the maintenance therapy is
provided once every 8 weeks, or (2) an additional
subcutaneous dose of the
antibody 20, 32, 44, 56 or 68 weeks after week 0 of the treatment, where the
maintenance therapy is provided
once every 12 weeks.
is a requirement of subsection 18(1) of the
that the invention, so
far as claimed in any claim, is novel. Subsection 7(1) states that an invention
is taken to be novel unless
it is not novel in the light of the prior art base
as it stood before the priority date. For the purposes of the present
consideration,
the following kinds of information are relevant:
information made publicly available in a single document; and
information made publicly available in two or more related documents if the
relationship between the documents is such that
a person skilled in the relevant
art would treat them as a single source of that information
is well established that the general test for lack of novelty is the reverse
infringement test. The classic formulation of this
test is that given by Aickin
Meyers Taylor Pty Ltd. v Vicarr Industries Ltd.
“The basic test for anticipation or want of novelty is the same as that
for infringement and generally one can properly ask
oneself whether the alleged
anticipation would, if the patent were valid, constitute an
infringement”
test is satisfied if the alleged anticipation discloses all the essential
features of the invention as
courts have often identified the principles of the UK Court of Appeal in
General Tire & Rubber Company v The Firestone Tyre and Rubber Company
General Tire
) as the criteria for determining anticipation by a
prior publication. Most relevantly, to anticipate the patentee’s claim
the prior publication must contain clear and unmistakable directions to do what
the patentee claims to have invented:
“If the prior inventor’s publication contains a clear description
of, or clear instructions to do or make, something that
would infringe the
patentee’s claim if carried out after the grant of the patentee’s
patent, the patentee’s claim
will have been shown to lack the necessary
novelty, that is to say, it will have been anticipated. ... if carrying out the
contained in the prior inventor’s publication will inevitably
result in something being made or done which, if the patentee’s
were valid, would constitute an infringement of the patentee’s claim, this
circumstance demonstrates that the patentee’s
claim has in fact been
anticipated.
If, on the other hand, the prior publication contains a direction which is
capable of being carried out in a manner which would infringe
patentee’s claim, but would be at least as likely to be carried out in a
way which would not do so, the patentee’s
claim will not have been
anticipated ... To anticipate the patentee’s claim the prior publication
must contain clear and unmistakeable
directions to do what the patentee claims
to have invented.”
Novozymes A/S v Danisco A/S
, Jessup J stated that the inevitability of
outcome to which the
General Tire case
refers must be such as would arise
from recourse to information referred to in subsection 7(1) of the
“the inevitability of outcome to which
General Tire
refers must
be such as would arise from recourse to the
information
referred to in
the section. At the expense of repetition, it is here useful to remind
ourselves of what the Court of Appeal said
in that case ([1972] RPC at
... if carrying out the directions contained in the prior inventor's
publication
inevitably result in something being made or done which,
if the patentee's patent were valid,
constitute an infringement of
the patentee's claim, this circumstance demonstrates that the patentee's claim
has in fact been anticipated.
[Emphasis added]
This proposition is explicitly hypothetical. It is concerned not with what
has happened or with what could have happened, but with
happened if the directions were carried out. As such, the proposition is in
complete harmony with s 7(1), and with every other
presently relevant aspect of
the jurisprudence in this area. It is not the doing of it, nor even the ability
to do it, that amounts
to anticipation: it is the content of the information.
If the information contains directions which,
carried out,
constitute an infringement of the patent in suit, the invention
under the latter is not
[Emphasis in
Full Court in
Mylan Health Pty Ltd v Sun Pharma ANZ Pty Ltd
) held that a clinical trial protocol (the Accord Protocol)
without scientific proof or substantiation anticipated a claimed
“We do not accept that a documentary disclosure containing an
hypothesis cannot be an anticipatory disclosure that deprives
an invention of
novelty. In such a case the question, simply put, remains: what does the prior
document disclose? The occasion
on which, or the context in which, a particular
documentary disclosure is made may well inform the interpretation of the
content. But if, as a matter of interpretation, the document
nonetheless discloses that which is later claimed as an invention,
disclosure will anticipate the invention and deprive it of novelty.
It is important to stress that validation of the ACCORD Protocol’s
hypothesis was certainly not required in order to achieve
the equality of
disclosure referred to in
Hill v Evans
. Looked at from a different
perspective, it is not a requirement for a patentable invention that the
invention, as claimed, be based
on scientific proof or substantiation:
Generic Health Pty Ltd v
Bayer Pharma Aktiengesellschaft
267 FCR 428
. That being so, no greater requirement is
imposed on a prior documentary disclosure in order for it to be anticipatory.
required is that the prior document discloses that which is subsequently
claimed as an invention. If that is disclosed, the invention
cannot be new. If
it should also be proved that the invention is not useful (for example, a
claimed method of medical treatment
is wholly or partly ineffective), then the
patent can be challenged on that basis as well. But that raises a separate and
invalidity.”
the oral hearing the opponent relied on the following prior art citations to
allege lack of novelty:
The clinical
trial record of the clinical trial titled
“A Study to Evaluate the
Safety and Efficacy of Ustekinumab Induction and Maintenance Therapy in
Participants With Moderately
to Severely Active Ulcerative Colitis
and identifiable by ClinicalTrials.gov identifier NCT02407236
published on the ClinicalTrials.gov website on 13 August 2018 (
Ochsenkühn,
“P759 Ustekinumab as rescue treatment in
therapy-refractory or -intolerant ulcerative colitis”
, Journal of
Crohn’s and Colitis, Volume 12, Issue supplement 1, published on 16
January 2018 (
Abstract P759
Poster titled
“Tu1713: Clinical outcomes with ustekinumab as rescue treatment in
therapy-refractory or-intolerant ulcerative colitis: real
world experience in a
large single centre cohort”
presented at the AGA’s annual
conference, Digestive Disease Week, on 5 June 2018 (the
Ochsenkühn,
“Tu1713: Clinical outcomes with ustekinumab as
recue [sic] treatment in therapy-refractory or-intolerant ulcerative colitis:
real worl [sic] experience in a large single centre cohort”
Gastroenterology, Volume 154, Supplement 1, Issue 6, S-997, published in May
Abstract Tu1713
Combinations of
the above-mentioned documents with the approved Product Information for
Stelara® (Ustekinumab) dated 27 February
Stelara 2017
the OS alleged lack of novelty in light of information made publicly available
by the conduct of Clinical Trial 236, the opponent
did not make further
submissions at the oral hearing concerning this
allegation.
It is not clear
to me the kinds of information encompassed by what the opponent referred to as
“information made publicly
available by the conduct of Clinical Trial
236”. When I asked the opponent to clarify this issue at the oral
hearing, the
opponent did not elaborate on the matter. I understand the
opponent does not pursue the allegation of lack of novelty outlined in
[6](a)(v) of its written submissions filed 4 December 2024.
the oral hearing, the opponent submitted that it does not rely on the Stelara
2017 PI as an independent novelty citation. This
is because the
opponent’s primary argument concerning lack of novelty is that each of the
four prior art citations, CTR 236,
Abstract P759, the DDW Poster and Abstract
TU1713, anticipate the claims of the opposed application. However, the opponent
that, if necessary and as a secondary argument, the Stelara 2017 PI
can be read together with a prior art citation (for example,
Abstract P759) and
the two documents treated as a single source of information according to s
7(1)(b) of the
note that the Stelera 2017 PI was obtained from the Australian Public Assessment
Reports (AusPAR) webpage, accessed through the
Therapeutic Goods Australia
) website, at URL:
https://www.tga.gov.au/resources/auspar.
I also note that page 40 of the Stelera 2017 PI states that the “Date of
the most recent amendment: 27 February 2017”.
It is not in dispute that
the Stelera 2017 PI was publicly available before the priority date of the
opposed application.
236 is a record of the UNIFI Phase III clinical trial published on the
ClinicalTrials.gov website on 13 August
The clinical trial was
performed to evaluate the efficacy and safety of ustekinumab in participants
with moderately to severely
active UC and was sponsored by Janssen Research
& Development, LLC.
official title of the study described in CTR 236 is “A Phase 3,
Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo-controlled, Parallel-group,
Multicenter
Protocol to Evaluate the Safety and Efficacy of Ustekinumab Induction and
Maintenance Therapy in Subjects with Moderately
to Severely Active Ulcerative
“Detailed Description” explains that the study consists of two
studies: an 8 week “Induction study”
and a 44 week
“Maintenance study” where only those participants who demonstrated a
response in the Induction study were
eligible for the Maintenance
The table under the
heading “Arms and Interventions” describes different groups
participants were randomly assigned
Briefly, participants
were grouped according to the dosage of ustekinumab administered to them, the
SC) and when ustekinumab was administered. In the
induction study, patients were administered one of IV placebo, IV ustekinumab
a dose of 130 mg or IV ustekinumab at a dose of 6 mg/kg. In the maintenance
study, patients were administered one of SC placebo,
SC ustekinumab at a dose of
90 mg every 8 weeks, or SC ustekinumab at a dose of 90 mg every 12 weeks.
primary and secondary outcome measures (and the relevant endpoints) for the
trial are described in the section under the heading
The primary
outcome measure for the Induction study is the number of participants with
clinical remission (8 weeks after commencement
of the Induction study) and for
the Maintenance study is the number of participants with clinical remission
among participants with
clinical response in the Induction study (44 weeks after
commencement of the Maintenance study). In both cases clinical remission
defined as “the global definition of Clinical remission is defined as Mayo
score less than or equal to (<=) 2 points,
with no individual subscore
greater than (>) 1, for countries outside the United Sates (US). For the US,
Clinical remission is
defined as absolute stool number <=3, a rectal bleeding
subscore of 0, and a Mayo endoscopy subscore of 0 or
of the secondary outcome measures disclosed in CTR 236 evaluates the number of
participants with a defined clinical response.
Each clinical response is
characterised in terms of a specific and measurable improvement compared to a
baseline which I understand
to be the severity of UC in a participant assessed
at the commencement of the induction study (week
The measure of
improvement assessed for each clinical response is defined with reference to the
Mayo score, endoscopic healing or
IBDQ score.
eligibility criteria for participants of the CTR 236 Phase III clinical trials
are disclosed as including:
diagnosis of UC at least 3 months before screening;
moderately to severely active UC, defined as Baseline (Week 0) Mayo score of 6
to 12, including a screening endoscopy subscore
of the Mayo score ≥ 2 as
determined by a central reading of the video endoscopy; and
failure to respond to, or tolerate TNF antagonists, vedolizumab, oral
corticosteroids, immunomodulators (6-mercaptopurine
[6-MP] or Azathioprine
[AZA]), or the participant had a history of corticosteroid dependence (that is,
an inability to successfully
taper corticosteroids without the return of
Consideration
mentioned above, Professor Pavli and Professor Ciorba recognise Examples 1 and 2
of the specification as the induction study and
the maintenance study,
respectively, within a Phase III clinical trial for ustekinumab known as the
UNIFI clinical trial.
other words, the studies disclosed in CTR 236 are the same studies that are
described in the present specification. However,
I accept the applicant’s
observation that CTR 236 does not include any results from the UNIFI Phase III
clinical trials.
I also note
the observation by the opponent that the results from the UNIFI Phase III
clinical trials were published in a journal
article, referred to as the Sands
2019, after the priority date. The opponent relies on Sands 2019 as evidence of
the result that
will be inevitably achieved in following the dosage regime set
out in CTR 236.
The opponent
submitted that the “results” referred to in the claims of the
opposed application are achieved by administering
ustekinumab to UC patients in
accordance with the dosage regimen disclosed in CTR
relevant question, in the present circumstances, for the purposes of novelty is
whether disclosure of the results of the Phase III
clinical trials in CTR 236 is
necessary to anticipate the claims of the opposed application.
applicant submitted that:
“...method of treatment claims are characterised by their therapeutic
purpose, such that there must be a
deliberate administration
claimed active agent
with the intention to treat
the claimed condition
for a method of treatment claim to be infringed. By corollary, applying the
“reverse infringement test”
for novelty, the prior art must provide
a disclosure that is equal to the deliberate administration of the relevant
active agent
with the intention to
the specific condition defined
in the claims in order to deprive the claims of
(emphasis in
the original)
“...for a claim to lack novelty the prior art must provide information
that is equal to the invention that is claimed, in the
sense that it must
disclose the claimed invention with specificity and completeness. In other
words, there must be a disclosure
that is equal to an
intention to treat
While a clinical trial disclosure may describe steps that, if followed in
patients in need of treatment,
result in some patients being
treated, the case law establishes that merely describing those steps does not
rise to the necessary
level of specificity and completeness required for
anticipation (even in the event a treatment effect is later established); it is
not “treatment”
in the patent sense
because it is not
possible to form an intention to treat when it is not yet known whether a drug
of treating a
condition.”
in the original)
“...the reason
was decided differently was not because the
prior art was a clinical trial protocol; it was because the clinical trial
protocol included
the disclosure of a ‘reasoned hypothesis’ that
provided the necessary specificity and completeness to amount to
‘treatment’
in the patent
in the original)
“...CTR 236 is a Phase III clinical trial protocol that, critically,
does not contain any results, nor it does provide any rationale
ustekinumab
treat moderately to severely active UC. It is a study
designed to evaluate the safety and efficacy of ustekinumab in participants
moderately to severely active UC, and the first clinical trial of ustekinumab in
this patient population. There is no teaching
in CTR 236 of a ‘reasoned
hypothesis’; it is no more than a disclosure of a ‘hypothesis to be
tested’. Thus,
CTR 236 discloses no more than the mere possibility of the
use of ustekinumab in UC patients (cf.
Interpharma
) and therefore lacks
the necessary specificity and completeness to amount to ‘treatment’
in the patent
in the original)
opponent submitted:
“...it is difficult to conceive of a reason to give a patient a drug
other than as a deliberate administration with an intention
to treat their
disease. All of the prior art documents disclose such a deliberate
administration. That is all that is required
for the claims here to be
anticipated. To the extent any of the “results” in the claims need
to be achieved, it is inevitable
that they will be
...did not endorse Mylan’s submission that
there was a relevant distinction between a ‘hypothesis to be tested’
and a reasoned hypothesis. Contrary to [the applicant’s submissions in
reply filed 07 February 2025 at [9]], the Full Court
at [69] was setting out
Mylan’s submission, not adopting it. At [108]-[109], the Full Court
rejected Mylan’s submission
InterPharma
Hospira, Inc (No 5)
(2019) 149 IPR 182
was a relevant authority, and
expressly noted that the correctness of Kenny J’s factual conclusions in
InterPharma
as to the nature of the disclosure in that case was not
before them.”
(emphasis in the original)
“...the disclosure in CTR 236 can be distinguished from the disclosure
Interpharma
, which related to a “
Phase II single-centre trial
involving only 24 patients
an early stage (phase
II) clinical study
” involving “
a small number of patients and
a single site
” (at [404] of
Interpharma
), where the expert
evidence was that the purpose of the study was to see if the relevant drug
(dexmedetomidine) “
may be worth investigating further as a potential
” (at [405] of
Interpharma
, and see generally the
discussion at
[399]-[424]).”
(emphasis in the original)
“The disclosure [in CTR 236] can be distinguished on a different basis
from the prior art under consideration in
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company v FH
& Company Limited
[2000] FCA 316
(2000) 97 FCR 524
, where five pieces
of prior art were reports of or articles on Phase I clinical trials of taxol,
which were trials to establish a
safe dosage limit of the compound. The Full
Court explained at [67]:
[...] Each of the trials reported in the articles referred to was an
investigation directed towards finding a solution of the difficulties:
directed, particularly, to ascertaining safe dosage levels
. But, though
methods falling within the claims of the patents were used in each trial,
none of the reports can be said to teach (a word which in
context encompasses direct, recommend and suggest) that which the petty patents
(emphasis in the original)
As the Full Court in
explained at [90], the reason that the Full
concluded that the reports of the Phase I trials did
not anticipate is because they were disclosures about finding a solution to the
difficulties of ascertaining safe dosage levels of taxol, and did not disclose
all the essential integers of the invention as claimed,
which was directed to
the use of taxol to treat cancer.
Significantly, the Full Court in
emphasised (at [90]) that the
challenge to novelty in
did not fail simply because the reports
were about Phase I
(emphasis in
the original)
question of whether CTR 236 is an anticipatory disclosure that deprives an
invention of novelty is “what does the prior
summary, CTR 236 discloses Phase III clinical trial studies performed to
evaluate the efficacy and safety of ustekinumab in participants
with moderately
to severely active UC. As previously discussed, ustekinumab is an antibody
which the skilled person would understand
as including the six CDRs as defined
in independent claims 1, 17 and 29 of the opposed application. Since the
studies disclosed
in CTR 236 are the same studies that are described in the
opposed application, the dosage regimen for administering ustekinumab to
patients disclosed in CTR 236 is the same as that described in the present
application and claimed in the claims.
236 discloses that the safety and efficacy of the Phase III Clinical trials are
evaluated by determining the
number of participants with
(1) defined
clinical remission criteria (primary outcome measure), and (2) defined clinical
responses which are characterised with
reference to the Mayo score, endoscopic
healing or IBDQ score (secondary outcome measure). I understand that the
defined clinical
remission criteria and clinical responses to be specific and
measurable results and that the Phase III Clinical trials of CTR 236
designed with the intended purpose of achieving these results. Therefore, CTR
236 discloses the intended specific and
measurable results defined in the claims
of the opposed application.
observe that what is not disclosed in CTR 236 is the proportion of participants
who demonstrate each of the intended and defined
clinical remission criteria and
clinical responses (primary and secondary outcome measures). However, the
method of administering
ustekinumab (that is, the form of administration and the
dosage regimen) and the intended results (that is, the defined clinical
remission criteria and clinical responses) are disclosed in CTR 236. Therefore,
I consider the administration of ustekinumab disclosed
in CTR 236 is a
disclosure of a deliberate administration of the antibody to achieve the
intended results which the clinical trials
have been designed to
my view, the applicant’s proposition which requires ustekinumab be known
at the time of administration to be capable of treating
UC is inconsistent
which found that it is not a requirement for the purposes of
an anticipatory disclosure that the claimed invention be based on scientific
proof or substantiation.
applicant’s proposition for an anticipatory disclosure is also
inconsistent with
Warner-Lambert
, discussed above, which found that a
claim will be infringed where a patient is administered a compound for the
purposes of treating
a condition even where the treatment is ineffective in the
the present case, the results of the clinical trials of CTR 236 establish the
proportion of participants who achieved the intended
and defined primary and
secondary outcome measures (intended and defined clinical remission criteria and
clinical responses). Therefore,
I accept that the results provide a
substantiation or validation of the safety and efficacy of administering
ustekinumab to subjects
with UC and prudent practitioners might well prefer to
know the results of the trials before embracing a treatment method. However,
validation of the safety and efficacy of administering ustekinumab to subjects
with UC is not required for an anticipatory disclosure.
It follows that, in the
present case, regardless of the proportion of participants in the Phase III
clinical trials established
to demonstrate the defined primary and secondary
outcome measures, there has been a disclosure of the method of
Additionally,
I consider that CTR 236 contains a clear direction, recommendation or suggestion
to deliberately administer ustekinumab
with an intended purpose of treating a
subject with UC by achieving the defined primary and secondary outcome measures.
This is because
regardless of how effective the method of treatment is
established to be in the Phase III clinical trials, no further information,
therefore no further discovery, is required to achieve the equality of
disclosure referred to in
Hill v Evans
for a skilled person to perform
the invention in practice.
My consideration is consistent with how I interpret “method of
treating” (see above) and the statements of Professor
Pavli and Professor
Ciorba that, as a matter of fact, not all patients will respond to a particular
I consider CTR 236 to be an anticipatory disclosure of the method of treating
moderately to severely active UC as claimed
in independent claims 1, 17 and
I have found CTR 236 to anticipate claim 1 based on what the prior art itself
document discloses, it follows I consider that
the inclusion of a disclosure of
a “reasoned hypothesis” is not necessary in the present
circumstances. In any event,
I agree with the opponent that a reasoned
hypothesis did underlie the CTR 236 trial. The CTR 236 protocol summarises the
before 24 September 2018:
“Data from completed Phase 2 studies of ustekinumab in Crohn’s
disease, along with the shared biology and the similar
response to current
treatments between Crohn’s disease and UC, provide a substantial
scientific and clinical rationale to justify
a direct-to-Phase-3 approach to the
study of ustekinumab in
validation of the safety and efficacy of administering ustekinumab is not
required for an anticipatory disclosure, I consider
it is not necessary to rely
on Sands 2019 as evidence that the results of the Phase III clinical trials
would be inevitably achieved
in following the dosage regime set out in CTR 236.
In any event, the results are inevitably achieved.
the sake of completeness, I will now address the applicant’s submissions
that an “inevitable result exception”
for method of treatment claims
apply to the present claims as:
“they are directed to a new method of treatment involving the
administration of a known compound (ustekinumab or an antibody
having the same
six CDR sequences) for a ‘hitherto unknown and unexpected, but
nevertheless useful, therapeutic use’
AstraZeneca
[27] above (i.e., the treatment of UC by achieving
agree with the opponent that the so-called “exception” discussed at
AstraZeneca AB v Apotex Pty Ltd
[2014] FCAFC 99
AstraZeneca
) applies to second medical use claims, where the
prior use has been for a first medical
In other words,
AstraZeneca
dealt with a different situation where the prior art was for
a treatment regimen, but the treatment was administered for some other
than the claimed purpose.
In the present case, CTR 236 discloses the administration of ustekinumab for
treating UC, the purpose claimed in the claims of the
application.
opponent submitted that:
“...Faulding,
are Full Court
decisions in which a claim to a method of treatment was anticipated by prior
art, notwithstanding the fact that the
prior art preceded the results of Phase
III clinical trials. It is clear from these authorities that there may be a
suggestion to
use a claimed method even before Phase III clinical trials are
conclude that independent claims 1, 17 and 29 of the opposed application lack
novelty in view of CTR 236.
Claims 2, 3, 18, 19 and
the discussions above, ustekinumab is an antibody which the skilled person would
understand as including the sequences defined
in claims 2, 3, 18, 19 and 30.
Consequently, I conclude claims 2, 3, 18, 19 and 30 lack novelty in view of CTR
Claims 4, 5, 20 and 21
opponent submitted:
“Since the skilled addressee would have understood that the ustekinumab
which is administered is formulated as Stelara, being
the only ustekinumab
product available at the time, each of claims 4 and 5 is anticipated, because
the IV and SC Stelara formulations
had the claimed excipients, and CTR 236
discloses IV and SC
administration.”
“Professor Pavli explains that if he had been provided with or obtained
any of CTR 236, Abstract P759, the DDW Poster and Abstract
Tu1713, he would have
read each of those documents together with the Stelara 2017 Pl because Stelara
was the only form of ustekinumab
which had been approved by the regulator (and,
in any event, of which he was aware) at the priority date. The Stelara PI
the excipients used in the Stelara formulation. If there were any
doubt that any of these pieces of prior art anticipated claims
4 and 5, it is
apparent that the claims are anticipated by reading the prior art together with
the Stelara
applicant submitted:
“...CTR 236 does not disclose the formulation that was proposed to be
used in the clinical trial, let alone the specific formulations
claimed in each
of claims 4, 5, 20 or 21. Contrary to the Opponent’s assertion, the fact
that a product containing ustekinumab
(Stelara®) already existed on the
market says nothing about the formulation that was used in CTR
“Even if Prof. Pavli had drawn some common thread between the documents
(e.g., that the impugned novelty citations refer to
the same drug), that says
nothing of the requirement under s 7(1)(b) that it is the documents themselves
which must be shown to have
a relationship such that they would be treated as a
single source. Prof. Pavli’s evidence is insufficient to satisfy the
requirements
of s 7(1)(b) and, to the contrary, the following factors tend
against finding the documents would be treated as a ‘single source’:
(i) There is no stated connection (i.e., cross reference) between the impugned
documents. This is an important consideration. None
of CTR 236, Abstract P759,
Abstract Tu1713 and the Purported DDW Poster refers to the Stelara 2017 PI, and
vice versa.
(ii) There is no apparent connection between the authors of the Abstracts and
the Purported DDW Poster on the one hand, and the Stelara
2017 PI on the other.
(iii) The documents were not published simultaneously.
(iv) The documents were published to different audiences in different
circumstances. The Stelara 2017 PI was published in connection
manufacture of Stelara®, whereas CTR 236 was published in an online archive
containing other clinical trial data; the
Abstracts were published in academic
journals; and the DDW Poster is said to have been presented at a conference but
has not been
(v) The documents concern the use of ustekinumab for different diseases. The
Stelara 2017 PI addresses the use of ustekinumab for
treating CD, psoriasis and
psoriatic arthritis, whereas CTR 236, Abstract P759, Abstract Tu1713 and the
Purported DDW Poster relate
to the use of ustekinumab in UC patients.”
Accordingly, it would not be appropriate to treat any of documents CTR 236,
Abstract P759, Abstract Tu1713 and the Purported DDW Poster
as a single source
of information with the Stelara 2017
accept Professor Pavli’s evidence that before 24 September 2018,
Stelara® was the only ustekinumab formulation approved
by the TGA and
marketed by Janssen.
However, I agree with the applicant that CTR 236 is silent about the formulation
that was used in the UNIFI Phase III clinical trials.
I also consider, for the
reasons provided by the applicant, that the relationship between CTR 236 and the
Stelera 2017 PI is insufficient
for the documents to be considered as a single
source of information.
I consider CTR 236 does not disclose the specific formulations claimed in claims
4, 5, 20 and 21. Furthermore, the evidence
filed does not established that the
IV and SC formulations of Stelara® were part of the CGK such that the
skilled person would
have construed the disclosure of ustekinumab in CTR 236 to
anticipate the specific formulations claimed in claims 4, 5, 20 and 21.
Consequently, I conclude that the opponent has not established that each of
claims 4, 5, 20 and 21 lacks novelty in view of CTR
is apparent that the dosage regimen defined in claims 6, 7 and 9 is disclosed in
CTR 236. Additionally, the inclusion criteria
for the UNIFI Phase III clinical
trials disclosed in CTR 236 involved failure or intolerance to the agents
claimed in claim 8. Consequently,
I conclude that claims 6, 7, 8 and 9 lack
novelty in view of CTR 236.
236 discloses that ustekinumab delayed responders (subjects who were not in
clinical response to IV ustekinumab at induction week
8 but were in clinical
response at induction week 16 after receiving ustekinumab 90 mg SC at induction
week 8) were eligible to enter
the maintenance study and administered a SC dose
of ustekinumab every 8 weeks, or 12 weeks, through till maintenance week
I consider it is
reasonable to interpret this disclosure as saying that the clinical responses
evaluated for the delayed responders
included clinical remission at induction
week 16 and then at maintenance week 44 (this being 52 weeks after week 0) since
remission is a primary outcome measure. Therefore, I consider CTR 236
discloses administering ustekinumab to delayed responders
with an intention to
achieve clinical remission at week 16 of the treatment and for continuation of
clinical remission till week
52 after week 0. I also consider the intended time
disclosed for continued clinical remission to fall within the scope of “at
least 44 weeks after week 0”. Therefore, I conclude that claim 10 lacks
novelty in view of CTR 236.
236 discloses a secondary outcome measure as “Number of Participants with
Clinical Remission and not Receiving Concomitant
Corticosteroids Among those
Receiving Concomitant Corticosteroids at Maintenance
this disclosure to be saying that an intended purpose of the method of treatment
is for the subject to be corticosteroid-free
when in clinical
applicant submitted that the patient population of claim 11 “encompasses
subjects who were
receiving concomitant corticosteroids at
maintenance baseline (i.e., at week
I consider that
the words of the claim do not place any limitations on the patient population
and that the treatment status of the
subject at the maintenance baseline is
irrelevant. I also consider CTR 236 discloses administering ustekinumab to
subjects with
an intention to achieve corticosteroid-free remission which
continues till week 52 after week 0. As previously discussed, the intended
disclosed for continued remission falls within the scope of “at least 44
weeks after week 0”. Consequently, I conclude
that claim 11 lacks novelty
in view of CTR 236.
Claims 12-14 and 16
236 discloses that the secondary outcome measures (that is, clinical responses)
of the maintenance study which are evaluated at
maintenance week 44 include (1)
a decrease from induction baseline in the Mayo score by ≥ 30% and ≥
3 points, with either
a decrease from induction baseline in the rectal bleeding
subscore ≥ 1 or rectal bleeding subscore = 0 or 1; and (2) participants
with endoscopic healing (this being, improvement in the endoscopic appearance of
the mucosa and defined as Mayo endoscopic subscore
I consider the
disclosure to teach a method of administering ustekinumab to subjects with an
intention to achieve these clinical
responses which continue till week 52 after
week 0. I also consider the intended time disclosed for a continuation of the
response to fall within the scope of “at least 44 weeks after
week 0”. Consequently, I conclude claims 12-14 and 16
lack novelty in
view of CTR 236.
236 does not disclose the identification of a subject having a normalisation of
a biomarker, this being one or more of C-reactive
protein, fecal lactoferrin and
fecal calprotectin, as claimed in claim 15. However, Professor Pavli stated
that outcome measures
based on the C-reactive protein, fecal lactoferrin and
fecal calprotein concentration tests are widely known, generally accepted
used as criteria or clinical endpoints for UC clinical trials before 24
September 2018.
Pavli also stated that he would have expected some of the patients treated with
ustekinumab according to the method disclosed
in CTR 236 would have been
identified as having a normalisation of one or more of the biomarkers as claimed
in current claim 15.
understand Professor Pavli to be saying that by administering ustekinumab to
subjects according to the method disclosed in CTR
236, the clinical endpoint of
current claim 15 would inevitably be achieved in some subjects.
will discuss the issue of parameteritis shortly. For the present purposes, I
consider the identification of a subject having a
normalisation of one or more
of the biomarkers as claimed in current claim 15 is not a feature that can
provide a meaningful difference
over what was disclosed in the prior art but is
“merely supplementary information” about the measure of success
the method of administering ustekinumab is intended to
Consequently, I
conclude that claim 15 lacks novelty in view of CTR
Claims 22-25 and 27
consider it is reasonable to interpret CTR 236 as saying that the primary and
secondary outcome measures used to evaluate the ustekinumab
induction responders
at week 8 are also used to evaluate the clinical responses of the delayed
responders at week 16. These outcome
measures include (1) clinical remission
based on the global definition and the US definition, (2) a decreased from
induction baseline
in the Mayo score by ≥ 30% and ≥ 3 points, with
either a decrease from induction baseline in the rectal bleeding subscore
≥ 1 or rectal bleeding subscore = 0 or 1; and (3) participants with
endoscopic healing (this being, improvement in the endoscopic
appearance of the
mucosa and defined as Mayo endoscopic subscore = 0 or 1). Consequently, I
conclude that that claims 22-25 and
27 lack novelty in view of CTR
236 does not disclose the identification of a subject having a normalisation of
a biomarker, these being one or more of C-reactive
protein, fecal lactoferrin
and fecal calprotectin, as claimed in claim 26. For the same reasons as
discussed for claim 15, I consider
the identification of a subject having the
clinical endpoint as claimed in claim 26 is not a feature that can provide a
difference over what was disclosed in the prior art but is
“merely supplementary information” about the measure of success
which the method of administering ustekinumab is intended to
Consequently, I
conclude that claim 26 lacks novelty in view of CTR
236 discloses that participants without a clinical response to induction
treatment at week 8 but in clinical response at week
16 after receiving
induction ustekinumab at week 8 (delayed responders) will receive ustekinumab
90mg subcutaneously every 8 weeks,
beginning week 0 of the maintenance study
through week 44.
Consequently, I conclude that claim 28 lacks novelty in view of CTR
summary, I find claims each of claims1-3, 6-19 and 22-30 lacks novelty in view
of CTR 236. However, it has not been established
that claims 4, 5, 20 and 21
lack novelty in view of CTR 236.
Abstract P759
P759 discloses a small-scale study that aimed to “assess the clinical
outcomes achieved with ustekinumab as rescue
treatment in therapy-refractory or
intolerant UC”. The “Background” of the Abstract P759 refers
to ustekinumab
as “commonly and successfully used in Crohn’s
disease”. It also states that “...[p]re-approval trials are
on-going and so far no clinical observation data on the use of ustekinumab in
ulcerative colitis (UC) is available.”
the heading “Methods”, the study is reported as “[a]
retrospective data analysis...performed in 17 UC patients
of our tertiary
referral centre who received ustekinumab between 2016 and 2017 as rescue
therapy.” The primary outcome of
the study is disclosed as “the
achievement of clinical remission at 3 and 6 months. Clinical remission was
defined as score
of ≤5 points in the modified Truelove and Witts colitis
activity index
Pavli acknowledged the names as a reference to Dr Sidney Truelove and Dr Leslie
Witts who, in 1955, published a seminal
paper regarding the use of steroids in
the treatment of UC which drastically improved the prospects of patients with
the disease.
Professor Pavli also stated that he was aware that, before 24
September 2018, Dr Truelove and Dr Witts had published a classification
disease severity for UC but he had typically used one or more of the various
Mayo scores to assess the severity of a patient’s
Therefore, I
understand the disease index disclosed for assessing the severity of UC in
Abstract P759 differs from that used to
define the efficacy criteria (outcome
measures) in the claims of the opposed application.
P759 discloses that:
“A total of 17 UC patients were treated with ustekinumab. All patients
(17/17) previously had been steroid refractory or dependant
and had recently
failed all of the following drugs: purine-analogues, anti-TNF-antibodies and
anti-integrin-antibodies. Of those,
41% (7/17) had failed infliximab and either
golimumab or adalimumab, and 29% (5/17) had also failed i.v.
ciclosporine.”
“To all patients ustekinumab was provided as a rescue treatment after
colectomy had been offered to them as only other
is apparent from the paragraphs quoted above that the only remaining options for
the 17 UC patients were surgery or ustekinumab.
This understanding is
consistent with that of Professor Pavli and Professor
I note that
Professor Pavli’s statement that “the only remaining options for
these patients were surgery or an unapproved
therapy (specifically, here,
ustekinumab).
Professor Pavli and Professor Ciorba referred to the use of ustekinumab in
Abstract P759 as “off-label” use of ustekinumab.
Professor Pavli
explained that off-label usage of a medication involves prescribing a patient a
drug which has been approved by
the TGA, or the relevant regulatory body in
other countries, but not for the disease in question (e.g., prescribing a drug
has been approved for use in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis for use
in patients with CD or UC).
Professor Ciorba described the off-label use of ustekinumab in Abstract P759 to
correspond to a scenario which he categorised as
high-risk, without Phase III
clinical data, and where there is no way of predicting whether or not the
off-label use of the medication
is safe or efficacious in relation to the
indication of
“Results” section of Abstract P759 discloses:
“At the start of the rescue therapy, 65% of patients (11/17) had
moderately or severely active disease and 35% (6/17) were in
remission, but had
intolerable side effects under TNF or integrin blocking treatment, which had to
be stopped. Therefore, the CAI
at the start of the therapy ranged between 1 and
11 with a median of
understand that 11 of the 17 patients had moderately or severely active UC
before treatment with ustekinumab and the remaining 6
of the 17 patients were in
remission due to treatment with an anti-TNF-antibody or an
anti-integrin-antibody. However, the antibody
treatments had to be stopped
because of intolerable side effects.
“Results” section states:
“All patients received
ustekinumab as approved for Crohn’s
(6 mg/kg body weight as an infusion and 90 mg ustekinumab as s.c.
injection every 8 weeks). Median follow-up was 27 weeks (range:
In two patients therapy was stopped due to refractory disease at months 6 and 24
and in 1 patient, therapy was stopped
due to drowsiness at week 4. All 3
patients underwent colectomy. Median CAI at 4 weeks was 5 points (range
1–8). Median
CAI at 3 months was 4.5 points (range 0–9). Median
CAI at 6 months was 2 points (range 0 7) Including [sic] the three drop
clinical remission was achieved in 65% (11/17) at 1, 3, and 6 months, whereas
only 35% (6/17) of patients were in remission
at the start of the
understand that all patients received ustekinumab in accordance with the
approved dosage regimen for CD, this being 6 mg/kg body
weight as an infusion
and 90 mg ustekinumab as a SC injection every 8 weeks. My understanding is
consistent with that of Professor
also understand that treatment with ustekinumab was unsuccessful in 3 of the 17
UC patients, and colectomy was required in all 3
patients. Including these 3
patients, clinical remission was reported in 11/17 patients at 1, 3 and 6
months, compared to 6/17 patients
in remission before ustekinumab
“Conclusions” section states:
“Ustekinumab was effective as rescue medication in therapy refractory
or intolerant UC in a large IBD referral center. It seems
possible that large
ongoing trials will confirm our findings and ustekinumab could become a new
therapeutic option for refractory
Consideration
the reference in Abstract P759 to ustekinumab a reference to
the oral hearing the opponent submitted that the reference in Abstract P759 to
the administration of “...
ustekinumab as approved for Crohn’s
...” (section reproduced above in context) is a reference to
administration of Stelara® because (1) Stelara® was the
medication for CD and (2) the dosage regime approved for CD (and disclosed in
Abstract P759) was in accordance with the
Stelara® product.
Pavli stated that:
“...off-label usage of a medication involves prescribing a patient a
drug which has been approved by the TGA (or, for those
in other countries, the
relevant regulatory body in those countries) but not for the disease in
question. I therefore understand
the references to the administration of
ustekinumab in Abstract P759 to be references to the administration of Stelara,
IV and SC formulations which had obtained regulatory approval before
24 September 2018, and the only ustekinumab formulations of
which I was aware
before that time.”
consider it is reasonable to infer that a skilled person would read the
references to ustekinumab in Abstract P759 in the context
that ustekinumab was
being administered as an off-label treatment (or rescue treatment) and construed
in view of the CGK. I consider
the evidence establishes that it was part of the
CGK that ustekinumab (Stelara®) was approved for treating CD by the FDA in
and by the TGA in 2017.
I also accept Professor Pavli’s evidence that Stelara® was the only
ustekinumab formulation at the time (between 2016
and 2017) the patients
received the off-label treatment.
I consider that a skilled person would understand that the reference in Abstract
P759 to the administration of “...
ustekinumab as approved for
Crohn’s disease
(6 mg/kg body weight as an infusion and 90 mg
ustekinumab as s.c. injection every 8 weeks)...” is a reference to
administration
of Stelara® and with the IV and SC dosage regime as approved,
by the relevant regulatory body, for CD.
Is off-label use of
ustekinumab disclosed in Abstract P759 a method of treatment?
applicant submitted that:
“...a disclosure of off-label use of a drug cannot deprive a claim of
novelty unless it is accompanied by a disclosure of a
hypothesis’ that the drug
treat the condition. Otherwise, it
is no more than a disclosure that a drug might treat the condition and lacks the
necessary specificity
and completeness to deprive the claims of
(emphasis in
“...the Opponent has conflated a
that a drug
treat a disease with a
reasonable belief
the disease. As Prof. Ciorba notes, administering a drug off-label in the
circumstances described in the Abstracts and the
DDW Poster is a ‘Hail
Mary’; a desperate, last-resort attempt to avoid surgery in circumstances
where all approved options
have failed. Such desperate measures, taken in the
that a condition
be treated, cannot be characterised as
a deliberate administration for the purpose of “treating”
patent sense
, as contemplated by the High Court in
(emphasis in original)
“...the Applicant does not suggest that ‘off-label use is
inherently incapable of anticipating’. Indeed, the evidence
Ciorba supports that off-label use can be characterised as
‘treatment’ under certain circumstances, namely,
where a detailed
understanding of the safety and efficacy profile of the drug has been
established based on a large volume of real
world data gathered over many years.
This is not the case with the small number of off-label uses described in the
Abstracts or the
DDW Poster (and in the absence of a placebo control), the
results of which are equivalent to the placebo effect observed in UC clinical
opponent submitted:
“...A skilled addressee reading each of the reports of off-label use
would have appreciated that the relevant patients were
treated by those uses.
Each report contained a direction, recommendation or suggestion, in the sense
identified by the Full Court
at [84]....
The suggestion at JSR [21]-[24] that a report of a Phase I trial will not
anticipate in the absence of a reasoned hypothesis does
not reflect the
observations of the Full Court in
at [90]. The only relevant
question is whether the prior art discloses that which is claimed: that is, in
this case, the administration
of ustekinumab to treat
agree with the opponent that the relevant question of whether Abstract P759 is
an anticipatory disclosure that deprives an invention
of novelty is “what
does the prior art
though ustekinumab was administered as an off-label treatment in Abstract P759
and to avoid surgery, it is apparent that ustekinumab
is being used with the
intended purpose to relieve or cure a patient with moderately to severely active
UC. Abstract P759 relates
to a small group of patients who were deliberately
administered ustekinumab and also reports the proportion of patients who
clinical remission as an indication of the efficacy of ustekinumab
applicant submitted:
“...retroactive studies of off-label use such as that described in
Abstract P759 are subjective in nature, rely heavily on hindsight
assessment and
are not generalisable to the broader population of UC patients...Abstract P759
also contains myriad deficiencies that
warrant further caution being exercised
in drawing any conclusions from this document. These deficiencies include:
retrospective data analysis
lacks a control (e.g., placebo) group, blinding and
randomisation
small sample size
lacks important participant information
lacks any statistical hypothesis
(emphasis in the original)
Pavli stated:
“Retrospective studies provide an opportunity to share knowledge
regarding off-label treatment with a medication for a particular
before, and potentially many years before, it is approved by a regulatory
authority for that indication. Before 24 September
2018, I, and based on my
discussions with my colleagues and to my observation other gastroenterologists
in Australia (and overseas),
considered retrospective studies and the reporting
of retrospective studies to be an important component of the sharing of medical
knowledge and the development of new approaches to the treatment of IBD and used
the information from these studies to inform my
(or their) clinical
practice....”
accept that (i) there may be limitations regarding the conclusions that can be
drawn from retrospective studies, and (ii) these
studies are still important in
the development of approaches to the treatment of IBD. However, even if there
are limitations, these
limitations do not undermine the disclosure in Abstract
P759. Consequently, I consider the off-label use of ustekinumab disclosed
Abstract P759 is a method of treatment that is relevant for the purposes of
assessing novelty.
Can the specific efficacy criteria or
clinical endpoints defined in the claims confer novelty?
opponent submitted that the clinical endpoints and the length of the maintenance
treatment recited in the claims of the opposed
application amount to
“parameteritis” in the sense that the recitations are an attempt to
re-patent the prior art by
limiting the claims by reference to a parameter not
specifically mentioned but nonetheless encompassed in the prior art, and
do not reflect a new use.
The opponent relies on the
findings of Yates J at first instance in
Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd v
Generic Health Pty Ltd (No 4)(
and the comments of Beach J on
Otsuka Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd v Generic Health Pty Ltd (No
Otsuka Full court
applicant submitted that the clinical endpoints have a technical effect, are
part of the invention, and are directly related to
a claimed advantage of the
invention. The applicant relies on the considerations of Nicholas J in
Neurim Pharmaceuticals 91991) Ltd v Generic Partners Pty Ltd (No 5)
, Nicholas J considered whether the ‘inevitable
result exception’ discussed in
AstraZeneca
applies in the case of a
subset of a previously disclosed use or method. In
, the claims at
issue were directed to a prolonged release formulation of melatonin treatment of
‘primary insomnia characterized
by non-restorative sleep and improving the
restorative quality of sleep in said patient’, whereas the prior art
use of prolonged release formulations of melatonin for treating
various indications, including insomnia and improving sleep quality.
Nicholas J rejected the respondent’s characterisation of the claims
directed to a narrower use than the prior art as ‘parameteritis’.
In that regard, his Honour considered that the newly claimed features
‘have a technical effect, are part of the invention,
and are directly
related to a claimed advantage of the invention’ (i.e., were more akin to
a selection invention). Accordingly,
his Honour considered that the claims are
novel (and involve an inventive step) because they are directed to a new
therapeutic use
and ‘it was not an inevitable result of the prior use of
melatonin that it had been or would be used as such a
treatment’”
applicant also submitted:
“...each of the above Clinical Endpoints requires
assessment of the subject, which is the most reliable and objective measure of
disease activity in UC patients. In contrast, a classification
‘remission’ according to the modified Truelove and Witts CAI, also
known as the Lichtiger CAI, is less reliable and
more subjective than each of
the Clinical Endpoints recited in the present claims because it does not involve
endoscopic assessment.
Further, there are differing reports in the literature
modified Truelove and Witts CAI, ranging from a score of 2 to 5 (inclusive).
Accordingly, it is entirely possible that a patient
could meet the criteria for
remission according to the modified Truelove and Witts CAI but fail to meet the
more reliable and objective
Clinical Endpoints recited in the claims of the
Opposed Application.” (emphasis in the
opponent responded:
“...the clinical endpoints are mere parameteritis. Janssen does not
suggest (nor could it suggest) that there is any difference
between the method
disclosed in the Application and the method disclosed in the prior art which
would mean that the use of ustekinumab
in the claims would achieve hitherto
unattainable results: its case is not that the Application discloses a new
therapeutic use,
but merely that the efficacy of the previously disclosed use
can be more precisely measured. The endpoints do not have a ‘technical
That being the case, the fact that the Application uses a more
reliable and objective measure of disease activity
those reported in the prior art is not to the point. The identification of the
specific clinical endpoints which are
achieved by the use of ustekinumab is not
free- standing essential feature of the invention which is to be
considered as meaningfully adding
” to what was disclosed by the prior
art. When the question of novelty is considered (as it must be) as a question
of substance,
rather than mere claim form, these endpoints are “
supplementary information
”: see, analogously,
Otsuka Pharmaceutical
Co Ltd v Generic Health Pty Ltd (No 2)
(2016) 120 IPR 431
[173]-[176].”
in the original)
have previously found that the disease index used for assessing the severity of
UC in Abstract P759 differs from that used to define
the efficacy criteria in
the claims of the opposed application. However, it is apparent that the form
and dosage regimen of administering
ustekinumab disclosed in Abstract P759
– that is, 6 mg/kg body weight as an infusion and 90 mg ustekinumab as a
SC injection
every 8 weeks – is the same as that disclosed in the opposed
application and as defined in some of the claims, for example,
claims 9, 17 and
30. Therefore, I agree with the opponent that the opposed application does not
disclose a new therapeutic use,
but merely that the efficacy disclosed in
Abstract P759 can be more precisely measured.
of whether a subject is (1) identified as having a specific clinical endpoint as
defined in the claims of the opposed application,
or (2) identified as having
achieved clinical remission according to the modified Truelove and Witts CAI,
the method of treatment
disclosed in Abstract P759 is the same as that defined
in the current claims. The intended purpose of the method of both the prior
and the current claims is to effectively treat moderately to severely active UC.
I consider that by administering ustekinumab
according to the method disclosed
in the prior art, the specific clinical endpoints defined in the current claims
would inevitably
be achieved in one or more subjects. The facts of the opposed
application are distinguished from those in
while the specific clinical endpoints can be considered “information given
as part of the definition of the invention
in a claim [that] is new
information” – in the sense that the specific clinical endpoints are
not disclosed in Abstract
P759 – I consider the endpoints, as defined in
the present case, are not features that can provide a meaningful difference
what was disclosed in the prior art but are “merely supplementary
information” about the measure of success which
the method of
administering ustekinumab is intended to
Consequently, I
consider the specific clinical endpoints cannot confer novelty.
I consider the length of the maintenance treatment recited in claim 29, this
being 44 weeks, does specify the duration of
the maintenance therapy and is
therefore a limitation on the dosage regimen. Consequently, I consider the
length of the maintenance
treatment is a limitation on the claim and can confer
Claims 1, 2, 3, 17, 18, 19, 29 and 30
the discussions above, ustekinumab is an antibody which the skilled person would
understand as including the sequences defined
in claims 1, 2, 3, 17, 18, 19, 29
and 30 of the opposed
application.
Since I have
found that the specific clinical endpoints cannot confer novelty to the method
of administering ustekinumab, I conclude
that claims 1, 2, 3, 17, 18, 19 and 30
are not novel in view of Abstract P759.
Abstract P759 does not disclose administering 90 mg ustekinumab as a SC
injection once every 8 weeks for 44 weeks. Therefore,
Abstract P759 does not
disclose a maintenance therapy provided for 44 weeks. Since I consider the
length of the maintenance treatment
is a limitation on the method of
administering ustekinumab, I conclude that it has not been established that
claim 29 lacks novelty
in view of Abstract P759.
Claims 4, 5,
have previously found that a skilled person would understand that the reference
in Abstract P759 to the administration of “...
ustekinumab as approved
for Crohn’s disease
(6 mg/kg body weight as an infusion and 90 mg
ustekinumab as s.c. injection every 8 weeks)...” is a reference to
administration
of Stelara® and with the IV and SC dosage regime as approved,
by the relevant regulatory body, for CD. The IV formulation of
comprises a solution with the excipients claimed in claims 4 and 20, as a matter
The SC formulation
of Stelara® comprises a solution with the excipients claimed in claim 5 and
claim 21, as a matter of
Consequently, I
conclude that claims 4, 5, 20 and 21 are not novel in view of Abstract
is apparent that the dosage regimen defined in claims 6, 7 and 9 is disclosed in
Abstract P759. Additionally, all patients of
the study in Abstract P759 were
disclosed as intolerant or refractory to purine analogues, TNF antibody therapy
and vedolizumab.
Consequently, I conclude that claims 6, 7, 8 and 9 lack
novelty in view of Abstract P759.
P759 discloses that all patients received 6 mg/kg body weight ustekinumab as an
infusion and 90 mg ustekinumab as a SC injection
every 8 weeks. The median
follow-up period was disclosed as 27 weeks with a range of 15-40 weeks.
Relevantly, there is no disclosure
that clinical remission continues at least 44
weeks after the first IV dose of ustekinumab. Consequently, I conclude that it
not been established that claims 10-16 lack novelty in view of Abstract
Claims 22-28
P759 discloses that clinical remission was achieved in 65% patients at 1, 3 and
6 months. I understand that clinical remission
was achieved in some of the
patients at week 4, week 12 and week 24 after the first IV dose of ustekinumab.
Therefore, Abstract
P759 discloses that clinical remission was achieved in some
patients by week 16 after the first IV dose of ustekinumab. Consequently,
conclude that claims 22-25, 27 and 28 lack novelty in view of Abstract
P759 does not disclose identification of a subject having a normalisation of one
or more of the biomarkers claimed in claim
26. For the reasons previously
discussed, I consider the identification of a subject having the clinical
endpoint as claimed in
claim 26 is not a feature that can provide a meaningful
difference over what was disclosed in the prior art but is “merely
supplementary information” about the measure of success which the method
of administering ustekinumab is intended to
Additionally, I
consider that administering ustekinumab according to the method disclosed in
Abstract P759 would inevitably achieve
this clinical endpoint in one or more
subjects. Consequently, I conclude that claim 26 lacks novelty in view of
Abstract P759.
conclude that claims 1-9, 17-28 and 30 lack novelty in view of Abstract P759.
However, it has not been established that claims
10-16 and 29 lack novelty in
view of Abstract P759.
the oral hearing the applicant submitted that I cannot be certain that DDW
Poster contains the same information as the actual poster
that was exhibited at
the Digestive Disease Week conference (the
DDW conference
) on 5 June
2018. The applicant also submitted that since information regarding the poster
was obtained by Mr Rohl in a telephone
conversation with Professor
Ochsenkühn, the information is hearsay evidence and DDW Poster is not
admissible as a prior art
Rohl has stated in evidence that Professor Ochsenkühn had informed him in a
telephone conversation that a printed poster containing
the same information as
the DDW Poster was displayed on the 5 June 2018 at the DDW conference. Mr Rohl
also stated that Professor
Ochsenkühn also informed him that there was no
limitations or restrictions on the use of the content of the poster by anyone
who saw or read the poster, and that any attendee of the DDW conference was able
to read the information in the displayed
the evidence concerning the DDW Poster before me is not directly from Professor
Ochsenkühn, I find no reason to doubt the
veracity of Mr Rohl’s
evidence. In my view, it is reasonable to consider that the DDW Poster contains
the same information
as the printed poster that was displayed by Professor
Ochsenkühn at the DDW conference on the 5 June 2018. I also consider
the actual poster was publicly available because anyone who saw the poster could
use the information contained in the poster
without restriction. It follows
that I consider that the DDW Poster to be a copy of a publicly available
document (the actual printed
poster) containing information that was publicly
available on 5 June 2018. Therefore, in my view, the DDW Poster is a prior art
document for the present purposes of assessing novelty.
authors of the DDW Poster are the same as the authors of Abstract P759. The DDW
Poster appears to expand on the study described
in Abstract P759 as it relates
to 19 patients (rather than 17) and up to 9 months treatment (rather than 6
months’ treatment).
Otherwise, the contents of the DDW Poster are very
similar to that of Abstract P759.
study disclosed in the DDW Poster is described as a retrospective data analysis
performed on 19 patients between 2016 and 2017.
All patients are described to
be “steroid-refractory or -dependant [sic] and had recently failed or were
intolerant to all
of the following drugs: purine-analogues, anti-TNF-antibodies
and anti-integrin-antibodies”. Some had failed with two
anti-TNF-antibodies
cyclosporine.
DDW Poster states that ustekinumab was provide as a rescue treatment after
colectomy had been offered to them as the only other
option. I understand the
only options offered to patients were colectomy or ustekinumab therapy. My
understanding is consistent
with that of Professor
DDW Poster also states:
“The primary outcome was achievement of clinical remission at 3, 6 and
9 months. Clinical remission was defined as score of
≤5 points in the
Lichtiger score (=modified Truelove and Witts colitis activity index,
understand that the disease index disclosed for assessing the severity of UC in
the DDW Poster is the same as that disclosed in
Abstract P759 but differs from
that used to define the efficacy criteria (outcome measures) in the claims of
the opposed application.
DDW Poster states:
“At the start of rescue therapy, 63,2% of patients (12/19) had
moderately or severely active disease and 36,8 (7/19) were in
remission, but had
intolerable side effects under TNF- or integrin blocking treatment, which
therefore had to be
understand the paragraph quoted above to mean that 12 of the 19 patients had
moderately or severely active disease before ustekinumab
treatment and the
remaining patients were in remission due to therapy with anti-TNF-antibodies and
anti-integrin-antibodies. However,
the antibody therapies were associated with
unacceptable side effects such that it was not viable to continue this approach
the patients. I understand the antibodies were stopped before ustekinumab
treatment. My understanding is consistent with that of
DDW Poster states:
A total of 19 UC patients were treated with ustekinumab
patients received ustekinumab as approved for Crohn’s disease (6 mg/kg
body weight as an infusion and 90 mg ustekinumab
as s.c. injection every 8
- In 4 patients, therapy was stopped due to refractory disease at 2 months
(one patient) and 6 months (three patients) and in 1 patient
therapy was stopped
due to drowsiness at week 4. In one woman, breast cancer was diagnosed after
the induction dose, she received
surgery, chemo- and hormonal therapy and wished
to continue on ustekinumab (8 weeks) due to its good effect on her UC. No other
events, new signals or side effects were observed in our patients. Of those 5
patients who stopped ustekinumab, 2 underwent
colectomy.”
in original)
DDW Poster reports that among the 14 patients who continued to be observed there
was a progressive drop in the median CAI, median
CRP (C-Reactive protein) and
median calprotein over a 3-, 6- and 9-month
I understand the
reference to calprotein is a reference to fecal calprotein. My understanding is
consistent with that of Professor
DDW Poster also reports:
“Of all 19 patients:
(7/19) were in remission at the start of the observation.
- At 3, 6 and 9 months, clinical remission was observed in
(13/19) and
(14/19) of patients,
respectively.
- At 3, 6 and 9 months all but one of these patients in remission were free
of steroids, although 8 of them started with steroids.
Of 12 patients with active disease at the start of the
observation:
- 5 patients achieved clinical remission at 1 month (
), 10 patients
at 3 months (
), 9 patients at 6 months (
) and 10 patients at
(emphasis in original)
conclusions drawn from the retrospective data analysis reported in the DDW
Poster were that:
“...ustekinumab was safe and effective as rescue medication in
therapy-refractory or -intolerant ulcerative colitis. It seems
possible that
large ongoing trials confirm our findings and ustekinumab could become a new
therapeutic option for ulcerative
Consideration
the same reasons as I provided for Abstract P759, I consider
skilled person would understand that the reference in the DDW Poster to the
administration of “...
ustekinumab as approved for Crohn’s
(6 mg/kg body weight as an infusion and 90 mg ustekinumab as s.c.
injection every 8 weeks)...” is a reference to administration
Stelara® and with the IV and SC dosage regime as approved, by the relevant
regulatory body, for CD;
use of ustekinumab disclosed in the DDW Poster is a method of treatment that is
relevant for the purposes of assessing novelty;
specific clinical endpoints of the claims of the opposed application are not
features that can provide a meaningful difference
over what was disclosed in the
DDW Poster but are “merely supplementary information” about the
measure of success which
the method of administering ustekinumab is intended to
the same analyses I considered for Abstract P759 apply to the DDW Poster when
assessing novelty. It follows that, for
the same reasons as provided for
Abstract P759, I conclude that claims 1-9, 17-28 and 30 lack novelty in view of
the DDW Poster.
Additionally,
I note that the DDW Poster reported that:
“...median CRP
dropped from 9 mg/L (range 1-33) to 5 mg/L (range 1-33) at 3 months, 2 mg/L
(range 0-12) at 6 months and 2mg/L
at 9 months (range 1-10).
- Median calprotectin dropped from 428 ug/g (range 165-6000) to 236 ug/g
(range 97-6000) at 3 months, 316 ug/g (range 84-3161) at
6 months and 260ug/g
(range 63-1596) at 9
is, the DDW Poster discloses that at 3 months (week 12 after the first IV dose
of ustekinumab) some patients demonstrated (a)
fecal calprotein levels within a
range 97-6000 µg/g, and (b) the median fecal calprotein is 236 µg/g.
The opposed application
describes the normalisation of fecal calprotein as being
fecal calprotein concentration of ≤250 mg/kg. (the equivalent of
Therefore, I consider some patients of the study disclosed in the DDW Poster are
subjects that have a normalisation of fecal calprotein
by week 16 after the
first IV dose of ustekinumab. While I note that Professor Ciorba stated that
individual patient data were not
reported (i.e., which patients had improvements
in biomarker levels), I consider the limitations do not undermine the disclosure
in the DDW Poster.
Consequently, I conclude that claim 26 lacks novelty in view of the DDW
summary, I conclude that claims 1-9, 17-28 and 30 lack novelty in view of the
DDW Poster. However, it has not been established
that claims 10-16 and 29 lack
novelty in view of the DDW Poster.
Tu1713 is an abstract for the DDW Poster. It was published by the AGA in
association with the DDW conference, held in June
2018. Abstract Tu1713 is
virtually identical to Abstract
the same analyses I considered for Abstract P759 applies to Abstract Tu1713. It
follows that, for the same reasons as
provided for Abstract P759, I conclude
that claims 1-9, 17-28 and 30 lack novelty in view of Abstract Tu1713. However,
been established that claims 10-16 and 29 lack novelty in view of
Abstract Tu1713.
Conclusion on novelty
conclude that claims 1-30 of the opposed application lack novelty in view of the
cited prior art.
Inventive step
is a requirement of subsection 18(1) of the
that the invention, so
far as claimed in any claim, involves an inventive step. Subsection 7(2)
For the purposes of this Act, an invention is to be taken to involve an
inventive step when compared with the prior art base unless
the invention would
have been obvious to a person skilled in the relevant art in the light of the
common general knowledge as it
existed (whether in or out of the patent area)
before the priority date of the relevant claim, whether that knowledge is
separately or together with the information mentioned in subsection
7(3) prescribes the information that may be considered as:
The information for the purposes of subsection (2) is:
(a) any single piece of prior art information; or
(b) a combination of any 2 or more pieces of prior art information that
the skilled person mentioned in subsection (2) could, before
the priority date
of the relevant claim, be reasonably expected to have combined.
prior art base for the purposes of inventive step is made up of (1) information
in a document that is publicly available anywhere,
and (2) information that is
made publicly available through doing an act
the CGK and relevant information have been identified, the test for whether an
invention is obvious is to ask whether it would
have been a matter of routine to
proceed to the claimed invention. In
Wellcome Foundation Ltd v V.R.
Laboratories (Aust.) Pty Ltd
Aickin J stated:
“The test is whether the hypothetical addressee faced with the same
problem would have taken as a matter of routine whatever
steps might have led
from the prior art to the invention, whether they be the steps of the inventor
J provided a statement of principles relevant to assessing inventive step in
Hood v Bush Pharmacy Pty Ltd
“Section 7(2) of the Act uses the word ‘obvious’ in the
course of describing what must be established before an
invention can be held
not to involve an inventive step. Something may be ‘obvious’ in
light of the common general knowledge,
or the common general knowledge coupled
with relevant s 7(3) information, if it is ‘plain or open to the eye or
mind, something
which is perfectly evident to the person thinking on the
subject’ or something which ‘would at once occur to anyone
with the subject and desirous of accomplishing the end’
An invention may also be obvious in light of the common general knowledge if
the person skilled in the art faced with the same problem
as the inventor would
have taken as a matter of routine whatever steps might have led from the prior
art to the invention, whether
they be the steps of the inventor or not or (using
the language of the ‘modified Cripps question’) if the person
in the art would be directly led as a matter of course to take such
steps in the expectation that doing so might well produce a useful
alternative to the prior art. However, a claimed invention is not obvious
merely because the person skilled in the art
would consider that it was
‘worthwhile to
is important to note the requirement for a reasonable expectation of success.
This is explicit in the expectation that an approach
“might well”
succeed, and implicit in the characterisation of steps as those to be taken as a
matter of routine.
success need not be guaranteed: “the relevant test is not knowing that
steps will or would or even may well work,
but merely expecting that the steps
may well work.”
Further, it is possible that the skilled person might be directly led to try
more than one alternative expecting that each may well
produce a useful or
an invention comprises a combination of integers, the question is whether the
combination, not the individual integers, is obvious:
“the selection of
the integers out of ‘perhaps many possibilities’ ... must be
shown... to be obvious, bearing
in mind that the selection of the integers in
which the invention lies can be expected to be a process necessarily involving
of other possible
As Aickin J
said in the
, “[t]he opening of a safe is easy when the
combination has already been
Common general knowledge (CGK)
is the background knowledge and experience available to all those working in the
relevant art:
“The notion of common general knowledge itself involves the use of that
which is known or used by those in the relevant trade.
It forms the background
knowledge and experience which is available to all in the trade in considering
the making of new products,
or the making of improvements in old, and it must be
treated as being used by an individual as a general body of
knowledge.”
Pavli and Professor Ciorba both set out what they believe to be the CGK
regarding IBD, therapies for IBD and the clinical
trial process in their
declaration.
Having read the
statement of the expert witnesses of both parties, I consider it is reasonable
to conclude that there is general
agreement between the experts that the
following forms part of the CGK as of 24 September 2018:
and UC are the two main forms of IBD. In CD, inflammation can affect any part
of the gastrointestinal tract, whereas in UC inflammation
only affects the
the practices for treating UC may have peculiarities in different jurisdictions,
the general approach to treating UC included
the use of 5-aminosalicylates
(5-ASA), corticosteroids, immunomodulators (e.g., 6-mercaptopurine,
azathioprine, methotrexate, or
cyclosporine), biologic medicines that target
specific inflammatory medicators of UC in the GI tract (e.g., infliximab,
vedolizumab)
and surgery. A combination of medications could be used, and the
treatment depended on the severity of the condition as well as
how a patient
responded to one or more prescribed medications.
Infliximab (an anti-TNF-α
agent) and vedolizumab (an α
inhibitor) were biologic medicines used for a more targeted treatment of
moderate to severe UC.
Surgery would be considered when all approved medication options had been
exhausted or when a patient became refractory to one or
medications.
medications were approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the USA
at the priority date for treating UC and/or
A table, from Professor
Ciorba’s evidence, with the US FDA approved medications is reproduced in
Annex B of this decision.
Professor Pavli prepared a similar table (also
reproduced in Annex B of this decision) with all biologic medicines approved by
Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) in
From the tables,
I note that the FDA and TGA had approved (1) infliximab, adalimumab and
vedolizumab for the treatment of both CD
and UC, and (2) ustekinumab
(Stelara®) for the treatment of CD. While the FDA had approved tofacitinib
for the treatment of
UC before the priority date, the TGA had
clinical trials can be divided into four phases. Phase I trials involve a small
number of healthy people to evaluate safety.
Phase II trials involve a larger
number of patients to determine efficacy and appropriate dosing levels, as well
as safety. Phase
III trials, which form the basis for regulatory approval,
involve an even larger number of patients to confirm efficacy and safety,
including to gather information on potential adverse events not noticeable in
the previously tested smaller and narrower patient
population. Phase IV trials,
conducted after regulatory approval has been obtained, involve monitoring
efficacy and adverse events
in a wider patient population over a longer period
III clinical trials for ustekinumab in the treatment of UC were
measure of success in a clinical trial is typically specified using one or more
endpoints that are predetermined before commencing
the trial to avoid the
possibility of changing the endpoint to suit the data. The endpoints for
clinical trials for CD or UC are
typically clinical remission and/or clinical
response measured in terms of one or more disease activity indices
most commonly used DAI for UC is the Mayo score (or full Mayo score), which
involves providing a score from 0 to 3 for each of
the following four domains
over a seven-day period: stool frequency, rectal bleeding, mucosal appearance
at endoscopy and a physician’s
global assessment (PGA), for a total score
of 0 to 12. A score of ≤ 2 is considered remission, 3 to 5 is considered
active, 6 to 10 is considered moderately active and 11 or 12 is
considered severely active. A modified version of the Mayo score
which excludes
the endoscopic assessment, and frequently used in clinical practice, is referred
to as a partial Mayo score. Another
modified version of the Mayo score which
excludes the PGA, a subjective measure using the physician’s assessment of
activity and symptom activity, is referred to as the modified Mayo
DAI specific to UC is the Lichtiger index or modified Truelove and Witts colitis
activity index (CAI). The Lichtiger index
is based on clinical symptoms alone
and is therefore more
subjective.
clinical trials, clinical remission is commonly defined as a Mayo score ≤
2, with none of the individual subscores for each
of the four domains exceeding
1. In the US, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recommends defining
clinical remission in terms
of the modified Mayo score, with an absolute stool
number ≤ 3, a rectal bleeding subscore of 0 and an endoscopy subscore of
response is typically defined as a decrease from the baseline in the full Mayo
score of at least 3 points and at least 30%,
which must include a decrease in
the score for rectal bleeding of at least one point, or an absolute score for
rectal bleeding not
Obviousness in light of CGK alone
Hypothetical task
the expert witnesses had set out what they considered to be the CGK, each were
presented with a hypothetical task which required
considering “some
possibilities for an improvement in the existing state of things, whether by the
solution of a problem or
otherwise.”
Pavli was asked to consider the following:
“Maddocks asked me to assume that I was part of a notional research
group as at 24 September 2018, including one or more additional
experts having
different roles (the
Maddocks also asked me to assume that the
Group has been asked to propose a medication for the treatment or management of
would be a useful alternative to, or better than, the medications that
were approved for use for the treatment and/or management
of UC, based on
information that I knew and accepted and regarded to be widely known and
generally accepted by other gastroenterologists
(whether in Australia or
overseas) working in the field of the diagnosis, treatment and management of IBD
before 24 September 2018
in original)
Pavli explained that as the gastroenterologist in the Group, his role in respect
of the Task would have involved selecting
which medication(s) to put forward and
appropriate dose(s) or dosage regimen(s) for those
medication(s).
Pavli explained that the response to the task which immediately would have
sprung to mind is the use of ustekinumab, based
on the facts that: (a)
ustekinumab had been TGA approved (in February 2017) and PBS-listed (in
September 2017) for use in the treatment
of CD; (b) most medications which were
indicated for the CD were also indicated for the treatment of UC; and (c)
ustekinumab was
the subject of the ongoing UNIFI Phase Ill clinical trial for
the treatment of UC which had commenced in around
These matters alone,
to Professor Pavli’s mind, would have made ustekinumab the standout
Pavli explained that his involvement in the UNIFI trial, and his off-label
experience with ustekinumab, before 24 September
2018 would have further
cemented ustekinumab in his mind as the clear first choice in response to the
task. Although he was blinded
during the clinical trial, because of his
clinical assessment of the patients participating in the trial, he had observed
number of patients had improved during the trial and he believed that at
least some of these patients must have responded to
ustekinumab.
Ciorba was asked to consider the following:
“..DCCL asked me to assume that as at the Relevant Date I was a member
of a pharmaceutical research team (
) seeking to develop a
pharmaceutical product (being either an entirely new drug candidate or an
existing drug or drug candidate)
for the treatment of UC, which would be an
improvement on, or useful alternative to, the products that were approved at
for use for the treatment of UC, based on information that I knew and
accepted and regarded to be widely known and generally accepted
gastroenterologists working in the Field (
Hypothetical
in original)
response to the task, Professor Ciorba had regard to the unmet needs associated
with existing drug products, which included the
efficacy ceiling, speed of onset
of action, immunogenicity, oral administration and gut
specificity.
Ciorba described the three main classes of therapeutic targets being
investigated at the priority date were (1) cytokine
signalling molecules (e.g.,
JAKS), (2) mediators of leukocyte trafficking (e.g., integrins and their
corresponding endothelial cell
adhesion molecule receptors, and SIP modulators),
and (3) pro-inflammatory
Professor Ciorba
was aware that while tofacitinib (a pan-JAK inhibitor that inhibits all JAK
isoforms) had FDA approval for UC at
the relevant date, there were concerns that
the mechanism of action of pan-JAKS inhibitors might be overly broad and could
to off-target effects. However, he was aware that single-JAK
inhibitors were being developed at the priority date and considered
“have the potential to balance the benefits of blocking multiple cytokines
against the possibility of off-target
Ciorba response to the hypothetical task was to recommend investigation of the
development of single-JAK inhibitors as
these would have the potential to
address the unmet needs in the treatment of
applicant submitted that Professor Pavli’s approach to the hypothetical
task was overly narrow and impermissibly led Professor
Pavli towards the claimed
invention. This was because Professor Pavli (1) selected from existing
medications that were already available
on the market for the purpose of
off-label use in UC patients, (2) the medication had to already be available on
the market in Australia,
and (3) the medication had to already be undergoing
clinical trials for UC.
applicant further submitted that Professor Pavli appeared to have assumed the
position of a gastroenterologist working in Australia
who was tasked with an
immediate need to treat an individual UC patient who had exhausted all approved
treatment options. The applicant
also alleged that Professor Pavli’s
involvement in the UNIFI trials and his off-label experience with ustekinumab
his evidence was tainted by hindsight and the information available
to Professor Pavli was not available to other gastroenterologists
in the field
and not part of the
observe that the only medications that had been approved for use in the
treatment of CD or UC in Australia in the ten years or so
before 24 September
2018 were biologic medicines, these being infliximab, adalimumab, golimumab,
vedolizumab and ustekinumab (see
the table from Professor Pavli’s EIR,
reproduced in Annex B of this
I also observe
that before 24 September 2018 the FDA had approved (1) certolizumab pegol and
natalizumabmesal for the treatment
of CD, and (2) tofacitnib for the treatment
I consider that it is
reasonable that the CGK of the skilled person included knowledge of the drugs
that had obtained regulatory
approval for the treatment of CD and UC in
Australia and at least the USA. Therefore, following Professor Pavli’s
that most medications which were indicated for the treatment of CD
were also indicated for the treatment of UC (and vice versa),
I consider that
there were at least four potential drug candidates – ustekinumab,
tofacitnib, certolizumab pegol and natalizumabmesal
– that the skilled
person could reasonably have considered to be a potential drug candidate for the
hypothetical task.
Pavli omitted references to tofacitnib, certolizumab pegol and natalizumabmesal
because (a) these medications had been not
approved by the TGA for the treatment
of CD or UC, and (b) he could not prescribe these medications, even
However, I note
that Professor Pavli did consider tofacitinib, which was TGA-approved for use in
rheumatoid arthritis and was the
subject of Phase III clinical trials for use in
the treatment of UC before 24 September 2018. However, because tofacitnib had
been approved for the treatment of CD and Professor Pavli had some
reservations about the use of JAK inhibitors, tofacitnib would
have been a very
distant second choice compared to
ustekinumab.
if Professor Pavli ruled out tofacitnib as a potential drug candidate for the
hypothetical task, there remained three drug candidates
– ustekinumab,
certolizumab pegol and natalizumabmesal – which had obtained FDA approval
for the treatment of CD that
the skilled person could reasonably have considered
to be a potential drug candidate for the hypothetical task. While it was
for Professor Pavli to consider practices of gastroenterologists
working in Australia, on the balance of probabilities I consider
skilled person would still have included certolizumab pegol and natalizumabmesal
in their consideration and it was not necessary
to have limited the potential
drug candidates to those that had already been approved by the TGA. This is
because the CGK of the
skilled person is not limited to the jurisdiction in
which they practice. Additionally, Professor Pavli admitted that he was aware
of, and had regard to, drug approvals by the FDA, and this information would
have formed part of the CGK of the skilled
my view, the idiosyncrasies associated with Professor Pavli’s experience
as a practitioner in Australia led him to select
ustekinumab and exclude other
potential drug candidates for the hypothetical task. I consider Professor
Pavli’s approach was
influenced by his personal attributes and this
approach may not reflect that of the notional skilled
Off-label usage
Pavli stated that while off-label use of a drug is possible it is neither a
simple nor inexpensive
The process
involved submissions of applications to the TGA and hospital pharmacy to support
off-label use of a drug when all other
medical options had been exhausted and
the patients were being considered for major surgery. In support of these
applications, Professor
Pavli cited published reports of case studies regarding
successful off-label use of medications for the indication he sought to
Professor Pavli had
prescribed ustekinumab off-label to 10 patients with either CD or UC before the
can accept that the off-label prescription of some medications for the treatment
of CD or UC is a practice that is known and generally
accepted by
gastroenterlologists in Australia and overseas.
However, Professor Pavli’s
explanation of the off-label prescription of drugs indicates to me that
off-label use of drugs
like ustekinumab, for the treatment of UC, was not done
as a matter of routine but in order to avoid surgery. Professor Ciorba
this as a “Hail Mary” attempt to save a patient from
undergoing surgery and is not necessarily the most appropriate approach
depending on the individual circumstances of the
Additionally, I am
not satisfied that Professor Pavli’s off-label experience with ustekinumab
would have been available to
other gastroenterologists in the field at the
priority date. Therefore, I consider Professor Pavli’s off-label
with ustekinumab is not part of the CGK and cannot be used to support
his selection of only ustekinumab as a standout choice for
the hypothetical
Clinical trials
the fact that ustekinumab was the subject of the UNIFI Phase III clinical trial
for the treatment of UC support the selection
of ustekinumab as a standout
choice for the hypothetical task?
Pavli stated that Phase III IBD clinical trials typically cost in the order of
tens or hundreds of millions of dollars and
were only embarked upon when the
pharmaceutical company sponsoring then had a high expectation that the drug
would be approved.
However, he also stated that medications might not progress
to regulatory approval for reasons including safety, efficacy relative
drugs or other commercial
Additionally,
Professor Pavli explained that clinical trials for IBD often involved
medications which had already been approved for
This was because
there are fewer patients with IBD compared with, for example, rheumatoid
arthritis and there is generally a greater
incentive for pharmaceutical
companies to bring to market medications for treatment of diseases with larger
patient populations.
Furthermore, once a drug is approved for one indication,
pharmaceutical companies have also considered the use of the medication
other diseases, especially for medications which are directed to an idiopathic
inflammatory disorder (this being, inflammation
for which there is no obvious
infection as the cause) because there are features common to the inflammation
arising from these disorders.
He also stated that:
“If a drug works for one of these idiopathic inflammatory diseases,
then there is generally
a rational basis for an expectation that it would
work (at least to some extent)
on another of these idiopathic inflammatory
diseases. This is more so where there is a greater overlap between the relevant
inflammation mechanisms, such as the involvement of TNF-α in
inflammation in the joints and gut (i.e. infliximab) and the involvement
IL-23 in inflammation in the skin and gut (i.e.
ustekinumab).”
(emphasis added)
Professor Pavli’s evidence, I understand that there are various reasons a
pharmaceutical company might be motivated to
select a drug for Phase III IBD
clinical trials, some of which are commercial reasons. Therefore, I agree with
the applicant that
a skilled person cannot infer an expectation of success
merely from the fact that a drug had progressed to a Phase III clinical
I also note that
Professor Pavli ruled out tofacitnib as a potential candidate for the
hypothetical task even though tofacitnib
had been approved by the FDA for the
treatment of UC. Consequently, I am of the view that the mere fact that
ustekinumab was the
subject of UNIFI Phase III clinical trial for the treatment
of UC does not support the opponent’s case that ustekinumab was
choice for the hypothetical task.
am cognisant of the statement of the Full Court in
Sandoz AG v Bayer
Intellectual Property GmbH
that the risk of failure to gain regulatory
approval is common in the field of drug development and establishes the baseline
for the inventive step inquiry; it should not be determinative of the
However, the
evidence in the present circumstances has required fine balancing and for the
reasons already discussed, I consider
Professor Pavli’s exposure to
ustekinumab is such that I cannot safely conclude that his evidence is
indicative of the notional
skilled person. Therefore, I attach limited weight
to Professor Pavli’s evidence regarding ustekinumab as the standout choice
for the hypothetical task of assessing inventive step.
Conclusion on obviousness in light of CGK alone
consider the opponent has not established that when considering the CGK alone,
the PSA would be directly led as a matter of course
to select only ustekinumab
to treat moderately to severely active UC in the expectation that doing so might
well produce a useful
alternative to the prior art. Consequently, I conclude
that the opponent has not established that any of the claims of the opposed
application lacks an inventive step in light of CGK alone before the priority
date of the claims.
Obviousness in light of citations considered together with
opponent relies on the following documents to allege lack of inventive
DDW Poster;
Obviousness
in light of CTR 236 considered together with common general
have previously found that the disclosure of CTR 236 anticipates claims 1-3,
6-19 and 22-30 of the opposed application. Relevant
for the present purposes,
there is a clear teaching of a deliberate administration of ustekinumab for the
intended purpose of treating
moderately to severely active UC to achieve the
intended results
claimed in the claims. It follows from the discussion
that each of claims 1-3, 6-19 and 22-30 lacks an inventive step in light of
236 considered together with CGK.
Claims 4, 5, 20 and
236 does not disclose ustekinumab formulated with the claimed excipients.
However, before 24 September 2018, it is a fact that
Stelara® was the only
ustekinumab formulation that had obtained regulatory approval and marketed by
The Stelara® IV
and SC formulations had the claimed
excipients.
The question for
the purpose of inventive step is whether it would have been a matter of routine
for a skilled person to use Stelara®
in the UNIFI Phase III clinical
Pavli stated that as a practical matter an antibody must be formulated to be
administered to a patient (e.g., with other
constituents put into a liquid
formulation for IV infusion or SC injection). He also stated that given that
Janssen was the sponsor
of the UNIFI Phase III clinical trials, he understood
the references to the administration of ustekinumab in CTR 236 to be references
to the administration of
consider it is reasonable to infer from Professor Pavli’s evidence that it
would be a matter of routine for a skilled person
to use Stelara® in the
methods taught by CTR 236 since this was the only ustekinumab formulation which
was approved for administration
in humans at the priority date. Professor Pavli
stated that gastroenterologists, including himself, would refer to Product
Information
documents or equivalent documents approved by the regulator of the
relevant country (e.g., “Labels” approved by the FDA)
information regarding the medications. He further stated that if provided with
any of CTR 236, Abstract P759, the DDW Poster
and Abstract Tu1713, he would have
read each of the documents together with the Stelara 2017 PI.
I understand Professor Pavli to
mean that it was standard practice for a skilled person to combine the
information in the Stelara
2017 PI, which included the IV and SC formulations,
with the information disclosed in any one of the prior art
Therefore, I
consider that the skilled person, having led as a matter of routine to use
Stelara® in the UNIFI Phase III clinical
trials, would also arrive at method
of administering ustekinumab with the excipients as claimed in each of claims 4,
5, 20 and 21.
Consequently, I conclude that each of claims 4, 5, 20 and 21
lacks inventive step in light of CTR 236 considered together with
Conclusion on obviousness in light of CTR 236 considered
together with CGK
conclude that each of claims 1-30 lacks inventive step in light of CTR 236
considered together with CGK.
Obviousness in light of
Abstract P759 considered together with common general knowledge
have previously found that the disclosure of Abstract P759 anticipates claims
1-9, 17-28 and 30. Relevant for the present purposes,
there is a clear teaching
of a deliberate administration of ustekinumab for the intended purpose of
treating moderately to severely
active UC to achieve the intended results
claimed in the claims. It follows from the discussion that claims 1-9,
17-28 and 30 lack an inventive step in light of Abstract P759
together with the CGK.
Claims 10-16
have previously found Abstract P759 to disclose that clinical remission was
achieved in some patients by week 16 after the first
IV dose of ustekinumab, but
there is no disclosure that clinical remission continues at least 44 weeks after
the first IV dose of
ustekinumab.
Pavli stated that he would have expected some participants treated with
ustekinumab in accordance with the dosage regime
set out in Abstract P759 to
have achieved clinical remission by week 16 and continued to remain in clinical
remission (1) until at
least 44 weeks after the first IV induction dose of the
ustekinumab, as well as (2) until at least 44 weeks after the first maintenance
dose of ustekinumab (this being 52 weeks after the first IV induction dose of
ustekinumab).
Ciorba stated that periods of remission amongst CD and UC patients can vary,
lasting weeks, months or years. However, Professor
Ciorba also stated that
patients typically experience relapsing disease, which involves periods of
active disease (“flares”)
alternating with periods of
question for the purposes of inventive step is whether a skilled person would
have as a matter of routine continued antibody treatment
with an expectation
that clinical remission would continue in some subjects, for at least 44 weeks
after the first IV dose of antibody,
in light of the disclosure in Abstract
P759. I consider that it is reasonable to infer from the evidence of the expert
that the answer is yes. Therefore, I conclude that each of claims
10-16 lacks an inventive step in light of Abstract P759 considered
together with
Abstract P759 does not explicitly disclose a maintenance period of 44 weeks, the
disclosure does not limit the number of repeats
of the maintenance dose (this
being 90 mg ustekinumab as a SC injection every 8 weeks). The median follow-up
period was disclosed
as 27 weeks with a range of 15-40 weeks. Therefore, I
consider it is reasonable that the skilled person would understand that Abstract
P759 teaches a maintenance period of various lengths. However, I consider the
evidence does not establish that it would be a matter
of routine for the skilled
person to use a maintenance period of 44 weeks. Consequently, I conclude it has
not been established
that claim 29 lacks an inventive step in light of Abstract
P759 considered together with CGK.
Conclusion on obviousness
in light of Abstract P759 considered together with CGK
conclude that each of claims 1-28 and 30 lacks inventive step in light of
Abstract P759 considered together with CGK. However,
it has not been
established that claim 29 lacks an inventive step in light of Abstract P759
considered together with CGK.
Obviousness in light of DDW
Poster considered together with common general knowledge
have previously found that the disclosure of DDW Poster anticipates claims 1-9,
17-28 and 30 as there is a clear teaching of a deliberate
administration of
ustekinumab for the intended purpose of treating moderately to severely active
UC to achieve the intended results
claimed in these claims. It follows
from the discussion that claims 1-9, 17-28 and 30 lack inventive step in light
of the DDW Poster
considered together with the CGK.
10-16 and 29
have previously found that the disclosure of DDW Poster is very similar to that
of Abstract P759. Therefore, the same analyses
for assessing inventive step
that I considered for Abstract P759 concerning claims 10-16 and 29 apply to the
DDW Poster. It follows
that, for the same reasons provided for Abstract P759, I
conclude that each of claims 10-16 lacks inventive step in light of the
Poster considered together with the CGK. However, it has not been established
that claim 29 lacks an inventive step in light
of the DDW Poster considered
together with the CGK.
Conclusion on obviousness in light of
the DDW Poster considered together with CGK
conclude that each of claims 1-28 and 30 lacks inventive step in light of the
DDW Poster considered together with the CGK. However,
it has not been
established that claim 29 lacks an inventive step in light of the DDW Poster
considered together with the CGK.
Obviousness in light of
Abstract Tu1713 considered together with common general knowledge
the disclosure in Abstract Tu1713 is virtually identical to Abstract P759, the
same analyses I considered for Abstract P759
applies to Abstract Tu1713. It
follows that, for the same reasons as provided for Abstract P759, I conclude
that claims 1-28 and
30 lack inventive step in light of Abstract Tu1713
considered together with CGK. However, it has not been established that claim
29 lacks an inventive step in light of the Abstract Tu1713 considered together
with the CGK.
Conclusion on obviousness
conclude that each of claims 1-30 of the opposed application lacks inventive
step in light of cited prior art considered together
40(3) of the
requires that the claims must be supported by matter
disclosed in the specification. Burley J considered the requirement of support
Merck Sharp & Dohme Corporation v Wyeth LLC (No 3)
and noted the claims will be appropriately supported if they “correspond
to the technical contribution to the
technical contribution to the art is a subtle concept that is not to be confused
with the inventive concept that is often discussed
in relation to inventive
step. The distinction was explained by Walker LJ in
Generics (UK) Limited v
H Lundbeck A/S
[2009] UKHL 12
“The expressions are certainly connected, but I do not think it is
generally) to treat
them as having precisely the same meaning. ‘Inventive concept’ is
concerned with the identification
of the core (or kernel, or essence) of the
invention – the idea or principle, of more or less general application
Kirin-Amgen
[2004] UKHL 46
[2005] RPC 9
paras 112-113) which entitles the
inventor’s achievement to be called inventive. The invention’s
technical contribution
to the art is concerned with the evaluation of its
inventive concept – how far forward has it carried the state of the art?
The inventive concept and the technical contribution may command equal respect
but that will not always be the
important question will often be whether the technical contribution to the art
is a general principle or the specific examples
in the specification. Lord
Hoffmann gave some examples in
Biogen v Medeva Plc
[1996] UKHL 18
[1997] RPC 1
“Thus if the patentee has hit upon a new product which has a beneficial
effect but cannot demonstrate that there is a common
principle by which that
effect will be shared by other products of the same class, he will be entitled
to a patent for that product
but not for the class, even though some may
subsequently turn out to have the same beneficial effect. On the other hand, if
disclosed a beneficial property which is common to the class, he will be
entitled to a patent for all products of that class (assuming
them to be new)
even though he has not himself made more than one or two of
Burley J referred to
CSR Building Products Limited v United
States Gypsum Company
[2015] APO 72
, where the delegate
adopted the summary provided by Aldous J in
Schering Biotech Corp’s
Application,
[1993] RPC 249
at 252-253, to answer the question of the claim
support obligation:
“... to decide whether the claims are supported by the description it
is necessary to ascertain what is the invention which
is specified in the claims
and then compare that with the invention which has been described in the
specification. Thereafter the
court’s task is to decide whether the
invention in the claims is supported by the description. I do not believe that
mention in the specification of features appearing in the claim will
necessarily be a sufficient support. The word ‘support’
than that and requires the description to be the base which can fairly entitle
the patentee to a monopoly of the width
“That approach encapsulates broadly the claim support obligation under
s 40(3). To it may be added the requirement that the
technical contribution to
the art must be ascertained. Where it is a product, it is that which must be
supported in the sense that
the technical contribution to the art disclosed by
the specification must justify the breath of the monopoly
considerations for the approach as stated in
, which the Federal Court
have approved, are:
“i) construe the claims to determine the scope of the invention as
ii) construe the description to determine the technical contribution to the
iii) decide whether the claims are supported by the technical contribution to
opponent’s allegations
opponent alleged that the claims of the opposed application include use of
anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody having the same CDRs as ustekinumab to
treat UC but the disclosure in the specification does not extend
ustekinumab. The opponent also alleged that the scope of the claims includes an
antibody with an altered Fc region which
can play a role in pharmacokinetics and
bioavailability. Therefore, the opponent alleged that the work involved in
identifying any
other antibody which would work in the claimed method involves
undue experimentation. Consequently, the opponent alleged that a
claim to any
other antibody, apart from ustekinumab, exceeds the technical contribution of
the application and lacks
opponent’s allegations rely on:
Pavli’s understanding that claim 1 includes ustekinumab itself and also an
antibody with the same variable regions
as ustekinumab but with different
constant regions as ustekinumab;
Ciorba’s explanation of the typical structure of antibodies which included
the following observations:
“...Generally speaking, the amino acid sequence of the CDRs informs
the binding specificity and affinity of the antibody molecule.
The stem of the
Y-shaped antibody structure is the Fragment Crystallizable (
formed by the constant regions of the heavy chains, and is responsible for
antibody effector function, as the region interacts
with Fc receptors and
complement proteins. The Fc region is typically not important for targeting and
neutralising soluble antigens,
including soluble inflammatory cytokines.
However, the Fc region can play a role in pharmacokinetics /
bioavailability.”
font in original)
What is the technical contribution to the
the examples in the opposed specification describe the use of ustekinumab to
treat moderately to severely active UC, the specification
also provides a
general disclosure that antibodies with the same six CDRs as ustekinumab can be
used to treat the condition. As
previously discussed, the specification uses
the term “anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody” to refer to a monoclonal
(mAb) or antigen binding fragment thereof, that binds to the 40 kDa
(p40) subunit shared by cytokines interleukin-12 and interleukin
(IL-12/23p40).
Ustekinumab
(STELARA®) is an embodiment of such a mAb and prevents IL-12 and IL-23
bioactivity by inhibiting their interaction
with the cell surface IL-12Rß1
receptor protein. Ustekinumab effectively neutralises IL-12 (Th1)- and IL-23
(Th17)-mediated
cellular responses through this mechanism of
have also previously found that an antibody with the same six CDR sequences as
ustekinumab would be expected to have the same binding
specificity and affinity
as ustekinumab. Furthermore, the specification states that the affinity of an
antibody can be tested using
methods that are known to the skilled
Therefore, I
consider the technical contribution to the art is the use of an
anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody having the six defined
CDRs sequences (these being
amino acid sequences SEQ ID NO: 1 to SEQ ID NO: 6) to bind to the common p40
subunit of IL-12 and IL-23
and thereby neutralise the cellular responses
mediated by these cytokines.
the specification states that certain embodiments of the antibody comprise an
altered (e.g. mutated) Fc region to reduce or
enhance the effector function of
the antibody, the specification also discloses that effector functions can be
assessed using various
assays, for example Fc binding assays, ADCC assays, CDC
assays, etc.
I consider that
a skilled person would understand the specification to teach that assays for
testing effector functions are generally
known and part of routine
experimentation.
while the inclusive nature of the term “comprising” means the claims
can include an altered Fc region, I consider
that the work involved in
identifying an antibody with an altered Fc region which would work in the
claimed method would be part
of routine experimentation a skilled person can
expect to perform.
also note that apart from Professor Ciorba’s statement regarding the role
of the Fc region (which was made in the context
of explaining the structure of
an antibody), there is no evidence that there were in fact issues of
pharmacokinetics and bioavailability
which involve undue experimentation.
Therefore, I consider the opponent has not discharged its burden of proof that
the work involved
in identifying whether any other antibody, apart from
ustekinumab, would work in the claimed method involves undue
experimentation.
Are the claims supported?
have previously interpreted the scope of independent claims 1, 17, 29 and 30 to
include use of an antibody with the same six CDRs
as ustekinumab, and
ustekinumab itself, in a method of treating UC. Since the amino acid sequence
of the CDRs informs the binding
specificity and affinity of the antibody
molecule, I consider the scope of claims 1, 17, 29 and 30 corresponds to the
technical contribution
to the art.
also consider the scope of the appended claims 2-16 and 18-28 corresponds to the
technical contribution to the art for similar reasons
as discussed for the
independent claims.
Consequently,
I conclude that the opponent has not established that any of the claims lack
support from the subject matter disclosed
in the opposed application.
of claims 1-30 of the opposed application lacks novelty in view of the cited
prior art. Each of claims 1-30 of the opposed application
lacks inventive step
in light of cited prior art considered together with CGK.
has not been established that any of the claims lack support from the subject
matter disclosed in the opposed application.
not certain, it is possible that there is subject matter disclosed in the
specification which could be used as a basis to amend
the claims to overcome my
findings. Consequently, Janssen Biotech, Inc. is given two months from the date
of this decision to propose
suitable amendments.
is normal that costs should follow the event. I see no reason to depart from
that result. Costs according to Schedule 8 are awarded
against Janssen Biotech,
Delegate of the Commissioner of
The claims of the opposed specification
method of treating moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis (UC) in a
subject in need thereof, comprising administering
to the subject a
pharmaceutical composition comprising an effective amount of an
anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody, wherein the antibody
comprises a heavy chain
variable region and a light chain variable region, the heavy chain variable
region comprising: a complementarity
determining region heavy chain 1 (CDRH1)
amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:1; a CDRH2 amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:2;
and a CDRH3
amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:3; and the light chain variable
region comprising: a complementarity determining region light chain
amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:4; a CDRL2 amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:5;
and a CDRL3 amino acid sequence of SEQ
ID NO:6, wherein after treating with the
antibody, the subject is a responder to treatment by at least one measure of
response to
treatment selected from the group consisting of: (i) clinical
remission based on at least one of the global definition of clinical
with Mayo score ≤ 2 points with no individual subscore > 1 and the US
definition of clinical remission with absolute
stool number ≤ 3, rectal
bleeding subscore of 0 and Mayo endoscopy subscore of 0 or 1, (ii) endoscopic
healing with a Mayo
endoscopy subscore of 0 or 1, (iii) clinical response based
on the Mayo endoscopy subscore, (iv) mucosal healing, and (v) clinical
as determined by a decrease from baseline in the Mayo score by ≥30% and
≥3 points and a decrease from baseline
in the rectal bleeding subscore
≥1 points or a rectal bleeding subscore of 0 or 1.
2. The method of
claim 1, wherein the antibody comprises the heavy chain variable region of the
amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:7
and the light chain variable region of the
amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:8.
3. The method of claim 1, wherein the
antibody comprises a heavy chain of the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:10 and
a light chain
of the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:11.
4. The method
of any one of claims 1-3, wherein the antibody is in a pharmaceutical
composition for intravenous administration comprising
a solution comprising 10
mM L-histidine, 8.5% (w/v) sucrose, 0.04% (w/v) polysorbate 80, 0.4 mg/mL
Lmethionine, and 20 μg/mL
EDTA disodium salt, dehydrate, at pH
5. The method of any one of claims 1-3, wherein the antibody is in a
pharmaceutical composition for subcutaneous administration comprising
comprising 6.7 mM L-histidine, 7.6% (w/v) sucrose, 0.004% (w/v) polysorbate 80,
6. The method of claim 4, wherein the antibody is administered
intravenously to the subject at week 0 of the treatment, at a dosage
6.0 mg/kg body weight of the subject or 130 mg, 260 mg, 390 mg or 520 mg per
administration.
7. The method of claim 6, wherein the antibody is further
administered subcutaneously to the subject at week 8 of the treatment, at
dosage of about 90 mg per administration.
8. The method of claim 7,
wherein the subject had previously failed or was intolerant of at least one
therapy selected from the group
consisting of an anti-TNF, vedolizumab,
corticosteroids, azathioprine (AZA), and 6 mercaptopurine (6 MP), or the subject
had demonstrated
corticosteroid dependence.
9. The method of claim 7,
wherein the antibody is administered in a maintenance dose every 8 weeks after
the treatment at week 8 or
every 12 weeks after the treatment at week
10. The method of claim 9, wherein the subject is identified as having
a clinical remission based on at least one of the global definition
definition by week 16 of the treatment and the clinical remission continues at
least 44 weeks after week 0.
11. The method of claim 9, wherein the
subject is in corticosteroid-free clinical remission at least 44 weeks after
12. The method of claim 9, wherein the subject is identified as
having an endoscopic healing continuing at least 44 weeks after week
13. The method of claim 9, wherein the subject is identified as
achieving a clinical response based on the Mayo endoscopy subscore
continuing at
least 44 weeks after week 0.
14. The method of claim 9, wherein the
subject is identified as having a mucosal healing continuing at least 44 weeks
after week 0.
15. The method of claim 9, wherein the subject is
identified as having a normalization of one or more biomarkers selected from the
group consisting of C-reactive protein, fecal lactoferrin and fecal calprotectin
continuing at least 44 weeks after week 0.
16. The method of claim 9,
wherein the subject is in clinical response as determined by a decrease from
baseline in the Mayo score
by ≥30% and ≥3 points and a decrease from
baseline in the rectal bleeding subscore ≥1 points or a rectal bleeding
subscore of 0 or 1 continuing at least 44 weeks after week 0.
method of treating moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis (UC) in a
subject in need thereof, comprising:
a. intravenously administering to the subject an anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody
in a first pharmaceutical composition at a dosage of
of the subject or 130 mg, 260 mg, 390 mg or 520 mg per administration at week 0
of the treatment, and
b. subcutaneously administering to the subject the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40
antibody in a second pharmaceutical composition at a dosage
of 90 mg per
administration at week 8 of the treatment,
wherein the antibody comprises a heavy chain variable region and a light
chain variable region, the heavy chain variable region comprising:
complementarity determining region heavy chain 1 (CDRH1) amino acid sequence of
SEQ ID NO:1; a CDRH2 amino acid sequence of SEQ
ID NO:2; and a CDRH3 amino acid
sequence of SEQ ID NO:3; and the light chain variable region comprising: a
complementarity determining
region light chain 1 (CDRL1) amino acid sequence of
SEQ ID NO:4; a CDRL2 amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:5; and a CDRL3 amino acid
sequence of SEQ ID NO:6; and
wherein the subject is a responder to
treatment by at least one measure of response to treatment selected from the
group consisting
of: (i) having a clinical remission based on at least one of
the global definition of clinical remission with Mayo score ≤
with no individual subscore > 1 and the US definition of clinical remission
with absolute stool number ≤ 3, rectal
bleeding subscore of 0 and Mayo
endoscopy subscore of 0 or 1, (ii) having an endoscopic healing with a Mayo
endoscopy subscore of
0 or 1, (iii) achieving a clinical response based on the
Mayo endoscopy subscore, (iv) having a mucosal healing, and (v) in clinical
response as determined by a decrease from baseline in the Mayo score by
≥30% and ≥3 points and a decrease from baseline
in the rectal
bleeding subscore ≥1 points or a rectal bleeding subscore of 0 or 1,
wherein the subject had previously failed or was intolerant of at
least one therapy selected from the group consisting of: an anti-TNF,
vedolizumab, corticosteroids, azathioprine (AZA), and 6 mercaptopurine (6 MP),
or the subject had demonstrated corticosteroid dependence.
18. The method
of claim 17, wherein the antibody comprises the heavy chain variable region of
the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:7
and the light chain variable region of
the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:8.
19. The method of claim 17,
wherein the antibody comprises a heavy chain of the amino acid sequence of SEQ
ID NO:10 and a light chain
of the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID
20. The method of any one of claims 17-19, wherein the first
pharmaceutical composition further comprises a solution comprising 10
L-histidine, 8.5% (w/v) sucrose, 0.04% (w/v) polysorbate 80, 0.4 mg/mL
L-methionine, and 20 μg/mL EDTA disodium salt, dehydrate,
21. The method of claim 20, wherein the second pharmaceutical
composition further comprises a solution comprising 6.7 mM L-histidine,
(w/v) sucrose, 0.004% (w/v) polysorbate 80, at pH 6.0.
22. The method of
any one of claims 17-19, wherein the subject is identified as having a clinical
remission based on at least one
of the global definition and the US definition
by week 16 of the treatment.
23. The method of any one of claims 17-19,
wherein the subject is identified as having an endoscopic healing by week 16 of
the treatment.
24. The method of any one of claims 17-19, wherein the
subject is identified as achieving a clinical response based on the Mayo
subscore by week 16 of the treatment.
25. The method of any one
of claims 17-19, wherein the subject is identified as having a mucosal healing
by week 16 of the treatment.
26. The method of any one of claims 17-19,
wherein the subject is identified as having a normalization of one or more
biomarkers selected
from the group consisting of C-reactive protein, fecal
lactoferrin and fecal calprotectin by week 16 of the treatment.
method of any one of claims 17-19, wherein the subject is in clinical response
as determined by a decrease from baseline in
the Mayo score by ≥30% and
≥3 points and a decrease from baseline in the rectal bleeding subscore
≥1 points or
a rectal bleeding subscore of 0 or 1 by week 16 of the
28. The method of any one of claims 17-19, wherein the subject
is not a responder to the treatment with the antibody by week 8 and
responder to the treatment by week 16 of the treatment.
29. A method of
treating moderately to severely active ulcerative colitis (UC) in a subject in
need thereof, comprising:
a. intravenously administering to the subject an anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody
in a first pharmaceutical composition at a dosage of
of the subject or 130 mg, 260 mg, 390 mg or 520 mg per administration at week 0
of the treatment, and
b. subcutaneously administering to the subject the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40
antibody in a second pharmaceutical composition at a dosage
of 90 mg per
administration at week 8 of the treatment,
wherein the antibody comprises
a heavy chain variable region and a light chain variable region, the heavy chain
variable region comprising:
a complementarity determining region heavy chain 1
(CDRH1) amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:1; a CDRH2 amino acid sequence of SEQ
ID NO:2; and a CDRH3 amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:3; and the light chain
variable region comprising: a complementarity determining
region light chain 1
(CDRL1) amino acid sequence of SEQ ID NO:4; a CDRL2 amino acid sequence of SEQ
ID NO:5; and a CDRL3 amino acid
sequence of SEQ ID NO:6, followed by a
maintenance therapy,
wherein the maintenance therapy comprises
subcutaneously administering to the subject the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody at
of 90 mg per administration, once every 8 weeks or once every 12 weeks,
and wherein the maintenance therapy is provided for 44 weeks
and after treating
with the antibody, the subject is a responder to treatment by at least one
measure of response to treatment selected
from the group consisting of: (i)
having a clinical remission based on at least one of the global definition of
clinical remission
with Mayo score ≤ 2 points with no individual subscore
> 1 and the US definition of clinical remission with absolute stool
≤ 3, rectal bleeding subscore of 0 and Mayo endoscopy subscore of 0 or 1,
(ii) having an endoscopic healing with a Mayo
endoscopy subscore of 0 or 1,
(iii) achieving a clinical response based on the Mayo endoscopy subscore, (iv)
having a mucosal healing,
and (v) in clinical response as determined by a
decrease from baseline in the Mayo score by ≥30% and ≥3 points and a
decrease from baseline in the rectal bleeding subscore ≥1 points or a
rectal bleeding subscore of 0 or 1.
30. A method of treating moderately
to severely active ulcerative colitis (UC) in a subject
in need thereof,
comprising:
a. intravenously administering to the subject an anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody
comprising a heavy chain variable region of the amino
acid sequence of SEQ ID
NO:7 and a light chain variable region of the amino acid sequence of SEQ ID
NO:8, in a first pharmaceutical
composition at a dosage of about 6.0 mg/kg body
weight of the subject or 130 mg, 260 mg, 390 mg or 520 mg per administration at
0 of the treatment, and
b. subcutaneously administering to the subject the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40
antibody in a second pharmaceutical composition at a dosage
of 90 mg per
administration at week 8 of the treatment, followed by a maintenance
wherein the maintenance therapy comprises subcutaneously
administering to the subject the anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody at a dosage
mg per administration, once every 8 weeks or once every 12 weeks, and after
treating with the antibody, the subject is a responder
to treatment by at least
one measure of response to treatment selected from the group consisting of: (i)
having a clinical remission
based on at least one of the global definition of
clinical remission with Mayo score ≤ 2 points with no individual subscore
> 1 and the US definition of clinical remission with absolute stoolnumber
≤ 3, rectal bleeding subscore of 0 and Mayo endoscopy
subscore of 0 or 1,
(ii) having an endoscopic healing with a Mayo endoscopy subscore of 0 or 1,
(iii) achieving a clinical response
based on the Mayo endoscopy subscore, (iv)
having a mucosal healing, (v) in clinical response as determined by a decrease
from baseline
in the Mayo score by ≥30% and ≥3 points and a decrease
from baseline in the rectal bleeding subscore ≥1 points
or a rectal
bleeding subscore of 0 or 1.
Table reproduced from Professor Ciorba’s EIA
at [75] showing medications approved by the FDA for treating either CD or UC, or
both, before 24 September 2018. The green cells indicate the FDA approval date
for the relevant indication. The yellow cells indicate
that the drug was either
in ongoing clinical trials or no clinical trials were conducted in relation to
the relevant indication.
The red cells indicate a lack of safety and/or
efficacy in the relevant indication.
reproduced from Professor Pavli’s EIR at [34] showing biologic medications
approved by the TGA for the treatment of CD
or UC, or both, before 24 September
The three US provisional
applications from which the opposed application, 2019346134, claims priority are
US 62/735,501 having a
filing date of 24 September
2018, US 62/769
,818 having a
filing date of 20 November 2018, and US 62/895,774 having a filing date of 04
September 2019.
specification at page 1, lines
[2013] FCA 214
[2013] FCA 214
100 IPR 451.
Root Quality
Pty Ltd v Root Control Technologies Pty Ltd
[2000] FCA 980
[2000] FCA 980
AstraZeneca AB v Apotex
[2015] HCA 30
[2015] HCA 30
Pavli # 1 at
Pavli # 1 at [15],
Pavli # 1 at
Pavli # 1 at [29]-[30];
Annexure PP-3 to Pavli # 1.
Pavli # 1 at [46]-[47].
Kayser at [1].
[1], Part B; Annexure MAC-2 to
Ciorba at [1],
The OS at [12(a)];
the ORS at [6].
[18], [199]; Annexure PP-3 to Pavli #
The specification at page
1, lines 20-22.
specification at page 1, lines
The specification at
page 2, lines 6-8.
specification at page 2, lines 24-27. I understand vedolizumab to be an
integrin inhibitor.
specification at page 2, line 29 to page 3, line
The specification at page
3, lines 3-4.
specification at page 3, lines
The specification at
page 3, lines 7-12.
specification at page 3, lines
The specification a
page 3, lines 18-19.
specification at page 3, lines
The specification at
page 4, lines 1-4.
specification at page 4, lines
The specification at
page 10, lines 19-22.
specification at page 31, lines
The specification
at page 4, line 14 to page 4a, line 7. I note that two of the seven efficacy
criteria were subsequently deleted
from independent claim 1 in the amendments of
29 January 2024.
specification at page 4, line 25 to page 4a, line 7, and page 77, line
The specification at
page 13, lines 19-24.
specification at page 14, lines
The specification at
page 4a, line 8 to page 4b, line 5. I note that two of the seven efficacy
criteria were subsequently deleted
from independent claim 17 in the amendments
of 29 January 2024.
specification at page 4b, line 6 to page 4c, line 4. I note that two of the
seven efficacy criteria were subsequently deleted
from independent claim 29 in
the amendments of 29 January
The specification at
page 4, lines 17-23, page 4a, lines 15-21, page 4b, lines 13-19. The amino
acids of SEQ ID No: 1 to SEQ ID
No: 6 are described in the sequence listings of
the opposed application.
specification at page 4c, lines 5-26. The amino acids of SEQ ID No: 7 and SEQ
ID No: 8 are described in the sequence listings
of the opposed application. I
note that two of the seven efficacy criteria were subsequently deleted from
independent claim 30 in
the amendments of 29 January
The specification at
page 6, lines 3-7. The amino acids of SEQ ID No: 10 and SEQ ID No: 11 are
described in the sequence listings
of the opposed
application.
specification at page 7, lines 18-20. As noted in the decision, specification
uses the terms “anti-IL-12 antibody”,
“anti-IL-23
antibody”, “anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody” and
“IL-12/23p40 antibody” interchangeably
to refer to a monoclonal
antibody (mAb) or antigen binding fragment thereof, that binds to the 40 kDa
(p40) subunit shared by cytokines
interleukin-12 and interleukin 23
(IL-12/23p40), see specification page 10, lines
The specification at
page 7, lines 23-24. As noted in the decision, specification uses the terms
“anti-IL-12 antibody”,
“anti-IL-23 antibody”,
“anti-IL-12/IL-23p40 antibody” and “IL-12/23p40
antibody” interchangeably
to refer to a monoclonal antibody (mAb) or
antigen binding fragment thereof, that binds to the 40 kDa (p40) subunit shared
by cytokines
interleukin-12 and interleukin 23 (IL-12/23p40), see specification
page 10, lines 19-22.
Example 1 begins on page 63 of the specification. Example 2 begins on page 75
of the specification.
specification at page 63, lines 12-14, page 64, lines
Pavli #1 at [259];
Ciorba at [237].
Pavli #1 at
The specification at
page 64, line 15-17, page 65, lines
The specification at
page 64, lines17-18.
dosages are described in the specification at page 65, lines 10-14. Subjects
who were randomised to placebo at Week 0 received
one weight-range based dose of
approximately 6 mg/kg IV of ustekinumab +placebo SC, to maintain the blind, at
Week 8. Subjects who
were randomised to ustekinumab at Week 0 received one dose
of 90 mg SC of ustekinumab + placebo IV, to maintain the blind, at Week
The specification at page
64, lines 18-29.
specification at page 66, line 24 to page 67, line
The specification at page
69, lines 20-24.
specification at page 70, lines
The specification at
page 71, lines 4-6.
specification at page 70, lines
The specification at
page 72, lines 15-19.
specification at page 71, line 11 to page 72, line 2. While the specification
does not explain the reference point for “at
baseline”, the
opponent’s interpretation that this is Week 0 (see OS at [34]) seems
reasonable in the context of the
efficacy evaluation being made for changes to
IBDQ scores.
specification at page 67, lines 9-22, page 72, lines 3 to page75, line
The specification at page
67, line 24 to page 69, line
The specification at
page 75, lines 9-10.
specification at page 75, lines
The specification at
page 75, lines 22-23.
specification at page 77, line
The specification at
page 77, line 23 to page 78, line
The specification at page
80, lines 21-28.
specification at page 82, lines
The specification at
page 81, line 7 to page 82, line
The specification at page
84, line 20 to page 88.
specification at page 88, lines
The specification at
page 88, lines 22-23.
specification at page 89, lines
The specification
reproduces the summary of product characteristics for 130mg (IV) STELARA®,
at at pages 90-112, and that for
45 mg or 90 mg (SC) STELARA® at pages
[2009] FCAFC 70
[2009] FCAFC 70
81 IPR 228.
AS at [72] which refers to Ciorba at
[2022] APO 36
[2016] FCA 1238
OS at [47], citing Pavli #1 at 118(a) and Ciorba at
Jupiters Ltd v
Neurizons Pty Ltd
[2005] FCAFC 90
[2005] FCAFC 90
The Macquarie Dictionary
www.macquariedictionary.com.au
accessed 05 March 2025.
specification at page 10, lines
The specification at
page 31, lines 16-18; Pavli #1 at [112],
Pavli #1 at
Pavli#1 at [281],
[254] and cites the specification at page 31, paragraph 3 and the sequence
listing of opposed
application.
Pavli #1 at
The specification at
page 3, lines 7 and 10; page 31, lines 16-18; page 89, line
Pavli # 1 at
Ciorba at [74],
The specification at
page 18, lines 20-21.
at [121]; Pavli #2 at [62].
The AS at [83]-[87] citing Pavli #1 at [308], Pavli #2 at [130], Ciorba at [255]
and the specification at page 75, lines
Pavli #1 at [308],
Pavli #2 at [130].
#1 at [308].
GlaxoSmithKline Consumer Healthcare Investments (Ireland) (No 2) Limited v
Generic Partners Pty Limited
[2018] FCAFC 71
131 IPR 384
The specification
at page 78, lines 6-7.
Pavli # 1 at [91].
specification at page 67, lines
Pavli # 1 at
[1977] HCA 19
[1977] HCA 19
137 CLR 228
Nicaro Holdings Pty Ltd v Martin Engineering Co
[1990] FCA 40
[1990] 91 ALR 513
[1990] FCA 40
16 IPR 545.
at 485-486.
[2013] FCAFC 6
[2013] FCAFC 6
99 IPR 417.
[2020] FCAFC 116
See also the OS at
[5]-[6]; Pavli #1 at [177]; Ciorba at
CTR 236 at page
CTR 236 at pages
CTR 236 at pages
CTR 236 at page
Pavli #1 at [187];
Ciorba at [139].
Pavli #1 at [259],
Ciorba at [237].
at [129], citing Ciorba at [143], [212], [234],
The OS at [67]
citing Sands, B.E.,
“Ustekinumab as Induction and
Maintenance Therapy for Ulcerative Colitis”
, The New England Journal
of Medicine, Volume 381, No. 13, published 26 September
The OS at Annexure
The APHS at
The APHS at
The APHS at [12],
InterPharma Pty Ltd v Hospira, Inc (No 5)
InterPharma
[2019] FCA 960
149 IPR 182.
of the APHS
the applicant submitted that the Full Court in
distinguished between a ‘reasoned hypothesis’ and a
‘hypothesis to be tested, the latter
being sufficient to
establish anticipation”. At [11] of the APHS the applicant submitted that
the clinical protocols in
InterPharma
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company
v FH Faulding & Company Limited,
, merely disclosed ‘a hypothesis to be
The OPHS at
The OPHS at
The OPHS at
[106] citing the principles used in
Generic Health Pty Ltd v Bayer Pharma
Aktiengesellschaft
[2018] FCAFC 183
267 FCR 428
[2016] FCA 1238
Hills v Evans
[1862] EngR 365
(1862) 45 ER 1195
Pavli #1 at
[118(a)] and Ciorba at
Annexure SJR-7 to
Rohl #2 at page 33, third paragraph in non-bold font under heading
“Synopsis”.
The APHS at [27]-[28], citing
AstraZeneca AB v Apotex Pty Ltd
(2014) 226 FCR 324
AstraZeneca
The OPHS at [19].
The OPHS at
[23], citing
Bristol-Myers Squibb Company v FH Faulding & Company
[2000] FCA 316
Co Inc v Arrow Pharmaceuticals Ltd
[2006] FCAFC 91
(2006) 154 FCR 31
Mylan Health Pty Ltd v Sun Pharma ANZ Pty Ltd
[2020] FCAFC 116
279 FCR 354
The OS at [68], citing Pavli #1 at [186],
[288]-[291].
[68], citing Pavli #1 at
[168]-[169].
Pavli #1 at
These arms are
titled “Induction study–Ustekinumab Nonresponders at Week 8”,
“Experimental: Maintenance Study–Ustekinumab
90mg SC every 12
weeks”, “Experimental: Maintenance Study–Ustekinumab 90mg SC
every 8 weeks (q8w)” and “Maintenance
Study–Delayed
Responder–Ustekinumab 90mg SC q8w”, see CTR 236 at pages
CTR 236 at page
CTR 236 at page
Pavli # 1 at
Pavli # 1 at
Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd v Generic Health Pty Ltd (No 4)(
[2015] FCA 634
113 IPR 191
[321]-[322].
Abstract P759 at
page 1, paragraph under
“Background”.
Abstract P759 at page 1, paragraph under
Pavli #1 at [195].
Abstract P759 at page 1, paragraph under
Abstract P759 at page 1, paragraph under
Pavli #1 at [197], Ciorba at
Pavli # 1 at
Pavli # 1 at
[137], [198].
[101], [102], [146],
Abstract P759 at pages 1-2, paragraph under
Abstract P759 at page 2, paragraph under
Pavli # 1 at [201].
Abstract P759 at page 2, paragraph under
“Conclusions”.
Pavli #1 at [198].
at [75], [170]; Pavli #1 at
The APHS at
The APHS at
The APHS at
The OPHS at
Pavli # 2 at
[54]-[57]; the ORS at
[2015] FCA 634
113 IPR 191
Otsuka Full court Decision,
[2016] FCAFC 111
120 IPR 431
[109]-[110], [147], citing
[2024] FCA 360
The AS at [149],
citing Ciorba at [53], [57], [59], [140], [214]; Pavli #2 at [22]; Ciorba at
[67], [150], [160], [214]; Ciorba at
[162], [210] and Ciorba at [150],
The OPHS at
[321]-[322].
Pavli #1 at
[282]; Ciorba at
See Stelara 2017 PI
filed as Annexure VK-4; Kayser at
See Stelara
2017 PI filed as Annexure VK-4; Kayser at
at [321]-[322].
at [15]-[17].
DDW Poster,
first and second paragraphs under the heading “Methods”.
Pavli #1 at
DDW Poster, last
paragraph under the heading
Pavli #1 at [222].
Poster, first section under the heading
DDW Poster, second section under the heading
Ciorba at [165].
Poster, third and fourth sections under the heading
[321]-[322].
DDW Poster,
second section under the heading
The specification at page 67, lines
Rohl #1 at [16],
[18]-[20]; Pavli # 1 at [231], Ciorba at
[155]-[156]
Schedule 1, definition of prior art
[1981] HCA 12
148 CLR 262
[2020] FCA 1686
158 IPR 229
Health Pty Ltd v Bayer Pharma Aktiengesellschaft
[2014] FCAFC 73
Corporation v Arrow Electronics Australia Pty Ltd
[2019] FCAFC 2
[2019] FCAFC 2
175 IPR 187
Aktiebolaget Hassle v Alphapharm Pty Ltd.
[2002] HCA 59
Aktiebolaget Hassle)
[2002] HCA 59
212 CLR 411
at 429 citing Aickin J in the
[1980] HCA 9
[1980] HCA 9
144 CLR 253
[1980] HCA 9
144 CLR 253
Minnesota Mining
and Manufacturing Co v Beiersdorf (Aust) Ltd
[1980] HCA 9
[1980] HCA 9
at page 292.
[71]-[162]; Ciorba
[32]-[115].
Pavli # 1 at
[79], [81], [83]; Ciorba at [34]-[35],
Pavli #1 at
[121]-[122]; Ciorba at [90]-[95],
[188]-[189].
Pavli #1 at
[123]; Ciorba at [85], [91]-[94],
Pavli #1 at [126];
Pavli #2 at [45]; Ciorba at
Pavli #2 at
Pavli #1 at [135],
[172]; Pavli #2 at [34], [39]; Ciorba at
Pavli #1 at [127];
Ciorba at [111].
Ciorba at [64];
Pavli #1 at [91]-[95].
Ciorba [67], [150].
Ciorba at [65], [140].
Pavli #1 at [91].
AstraZeneca
Pavli #1 at
Pavli #1 at
Pavli #1 at
Pavli #1 at
Pavli #1 at
[120]-[125].
[198]-[199].
Pavli #2 at
[11], [34].
Pavli #1 at
Pavli # 2 at [36],
[103(e)], [105]
at [172], [135(a)].
# 1 at [149], [208]; Pavli # 2 at
Pavli #1 at
Pavli #1 at [140];
Pavli # 2 at [47(b)].
Pavli #1 at [162].
# 2 at [8], [47(d)]; Ciorba at
Ciorba at [103],
[105], [235].
at [128]-[129].
Pavli # 1 at
The AS at [91],
citing Ciorba at [191].
[2024] FCAC135 at [92];
[2024] FCAFC 135
[138]-[142].
Pavli #1 at
[186]; Pavli #2 at [34]; Ciorba at
Pavli # 1 at
[288]-[291]; Kayser at
Pavli # 1 at
Pavli # 1 at
[208], [234].
Stelara® IV and SC formulations are disclosed on pages 1-2 of the Stelara
Pavli # 1 at
[333], [335].
[37], [40].
citing Walker LJ in
Generics UK(HL)
who referenced
Fuel Oils/EXXON
(T409/91) [1994] OJ EPO 653
OS at [149]; the ORS at [39]-[40]; the OPHS at
Pavli # 1 at
The specification
at page 10, lines 19-22.
The specification at page 3, lines 7-12 and page 31, lines
The specification
at page 25, lines 11-19.
The specification at page 20, lines 17-23; page 21 lines 1-9.
RTF format (7.98 MB)
Signed PDF/A format