Elderberry Resources Pty Ltd v Bunuba Dawangarri Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC and Another [2025] NNTTA 14 (28 May 2025)
NATIONAL NATIVE TITLE TRIBUNAL
Elderberry Resources Pty Ltd v Bunuba Dawangarri Aboriginal Corporation
RNTBC and Another
[2025] NNTTA 14
(28 May 2025)
Application No:
WF2025/0001
IN THE MATTER of the
Native Title Act 1993
IN THE MATTER of an inquiry into a future act determination
application
Elderberry Resources Pty Ltd
(grantee party)
Bunuba Dawangarri Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC (WCD2012/006; WCD2015/009;
WCD2015/010)
(native title party)
State of Western Australia
(Government party)
FUTURE ACT DETERMINATION THAT THE ACT MAY BE DONE
Ms Nerida Cooley
Catchwords:
Native title – future act – s 35 application for determination
– exploration licence application – uncontested
application –
where the grantee party and the native title party have reached agreement but
there is no agreement of the kind
mentioned in s 31(1)(b) –consideration
of agreed issues in accordance with s 39(4) – consent given for s 39(4)(b)
s 39 criteria considered – economic or other significance of act
– public interest in doing of act – determination
that the act may
Legislation:
Heritage Act 1972
Title Act 1993
(Cth) ss 28, 31, 36, 38, 39, 151
Bunuba Dawangarri Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC v Elderberry Resources
Pty Ltd and Another
Elderberry Resources 2018
Cheedy and Others v Western Australia and Others
[2011] FCAFC 100
(2011) 194 FCR 562
Elderberry Resources Pty Ltd v Wanjina-Wunggurr (Native Title)
Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC and Another
Elderberry v Wanjina-Wunggurr
Gomeroi People v Santos NSW Pty Ltd and Santos NSW (Narrabri Gas) Pty
Gomeroi v Santos
Santos NSW Pty Ltd and Another v Gomeroi People and Another
Gomeroi 2025
Western Australia v Thomas and Others
(1996) 133 FLR 124
Western Australia v
Representative of the native title party:
Maddy Wonders, Kimberley Land Council
Representative of the grantee party:
Olivia Turner, IGO Limited
Representatives of the Government party:
Matthew Offer, State Solicitor’s Office; Dennis Jacobs, Department of
Energy, Mines, Industry Regulation and Safety
REASONS FOR DETERMINATION
Resources Pty Ltd has applied to the Tribunal for a determination under
s 38 of the
Native Title Act
exploration
E 04/2487, located north-westerly of Fitzroy
Crossing in Western Australia, may be granted.
[2] Elderberry’s
application comes after a period of negotiation between Elderberry, the relevant
native title party
Dawangarri Aboriginal Corporation RNTBC and the
of Western Australia in accordance with
. The negotiations between the parties followed an earlier
determination by the Tribunal that the grant of the licence is not an act
attracting the expedited procedure under the
Native Title Act
Elderberry Resources 2018
at [62]. The Tribunal made that determination
on the basis that the grant of the licence was likely to interfere with a number
areas or sites, some located in and around Windjana Gorge National
Those areas or sites, which
the parties had agreed were of particular significance to the Bunuba People,
included a gender restricted
ceremony site, rock paintings and dreaming
[3] If all of
the negotiation parties had entered into an agreement of the kind mentioned in
), then the licence could be validly
granted in accordance with the
Native Title Act
s 28(1)(f).
that has not occurred. Elderberry and Bunuba say they have reached agreement as
between themselves in relation to the grant
of the licence and its effect by
entering into an
Ancillary Agreement
but there is no Section 31
Agreement. Hence, Elderberry’s application to the Tribunal, which is an
alternative way for the
licence to be validly granted: s 28(1)(g)
. Neither Bunuba nor the State oppose Elderberry’s
application.
satisfied that I can adequately determine the issues without the need for a
Native Title Act
. Having taken into account the issues
agreed by the parties and the other requirements of the
Native Title Act
I have determined that the licence may be granted.
What are the relevant issues?
Native Title Act
requires me to make one of the following
determinations:
(a) that the grant of the licence must not be done;
(b) that the grant of the licence may be done; or
(c) that the grant of the licence may be done, subject to conditions to be
complied with by any of the parties.
[6] In making a
determination, I must take into account the five matters (or groups of matters)
ss 39(1)(a)
-(c), (e) and (f) of the
Native Title Act
Tribunal’s task involves a balancing of all of the mandatory
considerations (see
Gomeroi v Santos
at [382]) and the weight to be
afforded to each matter will depend on the evidence (see
Western Australia v
at page 166).
and (b) concern the effect of the grant on particular matters relating
to Bunuba and its intentions for the management, use or control
of the area.
Sections 39(1)(c)
and (e) relate, respectively, to the economic or other
significance of the grant and any public interest in it, and
any other matter I consider relevant.
[8] Importantly,
I must also take into account any relevant issues on which the parties agree
and, with the parties’ consent,
need not take into account the matters
mentioned in
to the extent that they relate to those agreed issues:
Native Title Act
. In this case, each of the parties has given
their consent for the purposes of
; although, as I will explain, not all
issues are agreed.
[9] The State
and Elderberry have provided a
Joint Statement
in relation to matters
they consider relevant to my determination, while Bunuba provided separate
contentions. There is no evidence
before me other than the preliminary mapping
and information about the licence and the licence area provided by the State.
the parties have raised any issue in relation to good faith:
Native Title Act
Which issues are agreed?
its contentions, Bunuba confirmed that it has reached an Ancillary Agreement
with Elderberry which it considers “addresses
each of the matters set out
in [ss] 39(1)(a)-(b)”. This is echoed by the State and Elderberry in their
Joint Statement.
[11] Further,
Bunuba and Elderberry both submit that the Tribunal should take into account the
fact that they have addressed the matters
set out in ss 39(1)(a) and (b) to
their mutual satisfaction.
[12] The State
confirms its reliance on the statements of Elderberry at paragraphs 7–10
of their Joint Statement, which includes
its statements about ss 39(1)(a) and
(b), and agrees to the Tribunal taking those statements into account.
[13] Given the
parties’ agreement that Bunuba and Elderberry have addressed the matters
in ss 39(1)(a) and (b) to their mutual
satisfaction and their consent for the
purposes of s 39(4), I do not propose to further consider the matters in ss
39(1)(a) and (b).
However, I will now turn to consider each of the remaining
matters listed in s 39(1).
What is the economic or other significance of the grant of the
s 39(1)(c), I am required to take into account the economic or other
significance of the licence to Australia, the State,
the area in which the
licence is located and to the Aboriginal peoples and Torres Strait Islanders who
live in that area. This requires
an evaluation of the economic or other
significance of the licence, rather than consideration of the significance of
exploration
or mining generally (
Western Australia v Thomas
[15] The licence
is an exploration licence which would be granted under s 57 of the
(WA), ordinarily for an initial term of five years but
it may be renewed. The State has provided details of the proposed endorsements
and conditions to which the licence would be subject. I note that a range of
regulatory controls apply including under the
Mining Act,
Aboriginal Heritage
(WA) and other environmental and water management legislation.
Elderberry Resources 2018
at [20], the Tribunal noted that Elderberry
considers the area prospective for Proterozoic nickel sulphides and outlined
Elderberry’s exploration strategy and proposed work program.
[17] Elderberry
submits that the grant of the licence is of economic significance to Australia,
the State of Western Australia, the
area in which the licence is located and the
Aboriginal people who live in that area, although no further explanation is
State says that it relies on that statement by Elderberry and agrees
to me taking it into account. Bunuba does not make any submissions
[18] There is no
specific evidence regarding any of the potential benefits arising from the grant
of the licence. The licence application
discloses the rent payable by
Elderberry. There may also be some benefit to Bunuba under the Ancillary
Agreement, but again, there
is no evidence on that point.
[19] I recognise
there may be some economic benefit arising from exploration activity,
particularly to the local area but, overall,
there is little I can draw from the
material, and I give limited weight to this matter.
Is there any public interest in the grant of the
[20] Section
39(1)(e) requires the Tribunal to consider whether there is any public interest
in the grant of the licence. Only Elderberry
and the State addressed the
question of public interest.
[21] This phrase
confers a wide discretionary judgement. As Mortimer CJ observed in
at [221], the scheme of the
Native Title Act
requires the
Tribunal, “informed by the objects of the [
Native Title Act
the values set out in the Preamble”, to “form its own views on where
the public interest lies both as a separate
consideration and as part of a
holistic exercise, reflecting on all the factors in
[22] O’Bryan
J, with whom the Chief Justice agreed, framed the analysis as requiring a
consideration of both the public benefits
and public detriments of the proposed
act in order to assess whether there is any overall (or net) public interest:
at [345]. This analysis has also been recently
canvassed in
[23] None of the
parties have made any detailed submissions on any public interest (whether
benefit or detriment) in the grant of
the licence. Elderberry submits that the
public interest supports the grant of the licence but does not explain why. The
not expressly agree with that proposition but again says that it
relies on the statement by Elderberry and agrees to me taking it
into account.
Tribunal has previously recognised that there is a public interest in
maintaining a viable mining industry (
Western Australia v Thomas
at [138] the Full Court of the Federal Court of Australia
accepted that general proposition while noting that it may be necessary
Tribunal to consider the public interest in the particular project rather than
by reference to the mining industry in general.
I also accept that general
proposition.
importantly though, Bunuba is satisfied that the effects of the grant of the
licence and its interests, proposals, opinions
and wishes will be addressed or
managed through the Ancillary Agreement. For the reasons I discussed in
Elderberry v Wanjina-Wunggurr
at [40] and [42]–[43], I am therefore
of the view that there is public interest in a decision consistent with the
the parties’ negotiations under s 31(1)(b), notwithstanding the
absence of a Section 31 Agreement.
Are there any other relevant matters?
s 39(1)(f) I must take into account any other matters I consider relevant.
[27] I have
taken into account the fact that Bunuba has reached agreement with Elderberry
and that it neither consents to nor opposes
the making of a determination.
[28] There are
no other matters that I consider relevant to my determination in this
Should the licence be granted and, if so, should conditions be
have given significant weight to the fact that Bunuba does not oppose a
determination that the licence may be granted and that
Bunuba and Elderberry
have reached an agreement about the grant of the licence which addresses
Bunuba’s interests, proposals,
opinions and wishes, as well as any effects
under s 39(1)(a) to Bunuba’s satisfaction. Consistent with the
parties’ consent
under s 39(4), I have not further considered the matters
in ss 39(1)(a) or (b).
[30] There is
limited evidence of any economic or other benefit or public interest in the
grant of the licence but, as explained,
I am satisfied there is public interest
in the grant proceeding.
[31] For these
reasons, I conclude that the licence may be granted.
[32] As noted,
the State’s material includes the endorsements and conditions it proposes
to impose on the grant of the licence,
which I have considered in making my
decision. No other condition is proposed by any party and I do not consider it
necessary to
make my determination subject to any conditions to be complied with
by any party.
Determination
determine that exploration licence E 04/2487 may be granted.
Ms Nerida Cooley
According to the
Tribunal’s online mapping tool, Native Title Vision, Windjana Gorge
National Park is now called Bandilngan
National Park.
RTF format (235 KB)
Signed PDF/A format