Aikema & Aikema [2025] FedCFamC1F 550 (15 August 2025)
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
(DIVISION 1)
Aikema & Aikema
[2025] FedCFamC1F 550
File number:
MLC 7465 of 2023
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– PROPERTY –
Marriage of 48 years where neither party brought significant initial assets into
the pool – Where the
husband made greater financial contributions during
employment – Where the wife made the majority of homemaker and parenting
contributions and assisted in the business – Where the Court found the
husband subjected the wife to family violence over the
course of their marriage
that adversely impacted the wife’s contributions – Where the husband
withdrew significant cash
sums pre-separation for his sole benefit – Where
the husband failed to comply with orders for sale and disputed multiple
– Where the collective addbacks were considered under section
75(2)(o) – Where the wife shall receive 57 per cent of
the pool and the
husband 43 per cent.
– PRACTICE AND PROCEDURE
– Where counsel for the husband made an oral application for the Judge to
recuse herself on
the basis of apprehended bias – Where the application
was based on refusal of adjournment, comments made to counsel, remoteness
interpreter arrangements and refusal to allow spontaneous cross-examination of
an interpreter – Where the application was
Legislation:
Evidence Act 1995
Family Law Act 1975
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) r 7.18
Cases cited:
Aleksovski v Aleksovski
[1996] FamCAFC 111
(1996) 135 FLR
Bevan v Bevan
[2013] FamCAFC 116
(2013) 279 FLR 1
Dickons v Dickons
(2012) 50 Fam LR 244
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
In the Marriage of Biltoft
[1995] FamCAFC 45
(1995) 126 FLR 385
Martell & Martell
[2023] FedCFAMCIA
Novikov & Novikov
(2024) FLC 98-083
Royal Guardian Mortgage Management Pty Ltd v Nguyen
(2016) 332 ALR
Division 1 First Instance
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
11 – 13 March, 26 – 28 May 2025
Counsel for the Applicant:
Solicitor for the Applicant:
Asprey Lawyers
Counsel for the Respondent
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Berry Family Law
MLC 7465 of 2023
FEDERAL CIRCUIT AND FAMILY COURT OF
AUSTRALIA (DIVISION 1)
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
30 days of these Orders the parties do all things necessary and sign all
documents as required to place the real property at
B Street, Suburb C being the
whole of the land more particularly described in Certificate of Title ("the real
property") on the market
for sale (“the sale”) on such terms and
conditions as agreed and in default of agreement:
(a) In the event the parties do not agree as to the selling agent and/or
conveyancer within 14 days:
(i) the wife shall nominate three agents and/or conveyancers, and the husband
shall select an agent and/or conveyancer from the wife’s
list within 7
days of receipt of same; and
(ii) in the event the husband fails to make a selection within 7 days of
receiving the wife’s list, the wife shall appoint
the agent and/or
conveyancer.
(b) In the event the parties do not agree as to the terms and conditions of sale
the listing price shall be as determined by the
agent. The parties otherwise
have liberty to apply in relation to the terms and conditions of the sale.
settlement of the sale of the real property the proceeds of the sale shall be
applied as follows:
(a) First to pay the costs, commissions and expenses of the sale;
(b) Secondly, to pay any outstanding rates and taxes and other outgoings with
respect to the property;
(c) Thirdly, 57 per cent of the remaining proceeds to the wife;
(d) Fourthly, the sum of $30,398 to the wife; and
(e) The balance to the husband.
14 days the parties do all acts and things and sign all documents necessary to
direct D Auctions to distribute the proceeds
of sale of the auction of the
parties’ items 43 per cent to the husband and 57 per cent to the wife.
otherwise specified in these orders and save for the purpose of enforcing any
monies due under these or any subsequent orders:
(a) each party be solely entitled to the exclusion of the other to all property
(including choses-in-action) owned by or in the possession
of such party as at
the date of these orders;
(b) each party forego any further claims they may have to any superannuation
benefits belonging to or earned by the other;
(c) insurance policies remain the sole property of the owner named therein;
(d) cash in any joint accounts be divided equally between the parties;
(e) any monies or liabilities held in any bank or credit accounts remain the
sole property of owner in whose name the accounts are
(f) each party be solely liable for and indemnify the other against any
liability encumbering any item of property to which that
party is entitled
pursuant to these orders;
(g) each party remain responsible for any debts in that party’s name;
(h) any joint tenancy of the parties in any real or personal estate is hereby
expressly severed.
AND THE COURT NOTES THAT:
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth), the parties intend that these
orders shall, as far as practicable, finally determine the financial
relationship between them
and avoid further proceedings between them.
Note: The form of
the order is subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to
review to remedy minor typographical or grammatical errors
(r 10.14(b)
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to r 10.13
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) makes it an offence, except in
very limited circumstances, to publish an account of proceedings that identify
persons, associated
persons, or witnesses involved in family law
proceedings.
IT IS NOTED that publication of this judgment by this Court under a pseudonym
has been approved pursuant to
subsection 114Q(2)
Family Law Act
REASONS FOR JUDGMENT
JUSTICE CARTER
INTRODUCTION
final hearing in this matter commenced on 11 March 2025. Accordingly, the
legislation as it was prior to 10 June 2025 is the applicable
legislation.
parties in this matter are unable to reach agreement as to the appropriate
division of their assets following the breakdown of
their 48-year marriage. The
issues in dispute fall into two categories being issues in dispute as to the
pool and issues in dispute
as to the assessment of
(4) factors of
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the Act”).
relation to the pool, the issues are:
(a) whether;
(i) the sum of $173,000 was withdrawn by the husband from various accounts
between 2021 and 2022 and used for his sole use; and if
(ii) should those funds be notionally added back into the pool or taken account
in another manner;
(b) the value of the husband’s motor vehicle 1. The husband previously
agreed it was worth $23,000. However, in the joint balance
sheet tendered at the
commencement of the trial, he contended it should be valued at $8,000. It has
not been valued;
(c) whether the items sold at auction were sold for undervalue as contended by
the husband;
(d) the value of a machine, two compressors and two trailers which have not been
made available by the husband for sale by auction,
in contravention of orders
made on 20 December 2024 and remain in his possession and how these should be
accounted for in the division
of assets. These have not been valued;
(e) whether any storage fees should be included in the pool in relation to the
storage of a compressor to a now defunct company E
Company and/or in relation to
fees the husband asserted are owed to his cousin Mr F;
(f) the value of the husband’s firearms and trailers transferred to Mr F
and how these should be accounted for in the division
(g) the value of a shipping container sold by the husband to Mr H and how this
should be accounted for in the division of assets;
(h) the value of a forklift truck, sold by the wife for $2,000. The husband
asserted the wife sold this undervalue; and
(i) lastly in relation to the parties’ personal assets, the husband seeks
they be auctioned. That is opposed by the wife who
says each party should retain
their own items.
relation to contributions the major issue is whether the husband subjected the
wife to a course of violent conduct that had a significant
adverse impact on her
contributions to the marriage, making them more arduous. That is denied by the
husband. It is his case that
the wife, the parties’ adult sons and
daughter-in-law have fabricated all allegations of violence and coercive
controlling
RECUSAL APPLICATION
must first give my reasons in relation to the application that I recuse myself,
made by counsel for the husband part way through
the first day of trial. The
application was made after I had dismissed an application by the husband to
adjourn the hearing, and
after I had refused to allow counsel for the husband to
cross-examine the wife’s interpreter.
basis for the adjournment application was asserted to be the husband’s
health. To that end, counsel for the husband adduced
a medical certificate dated
2025 which stated:
This is to certify that [the husband], aged 68yrs 3mths, has several medical
conditions including diabetes and peripheral neuropathy
with an ulcer of his
[toe]. He requires regular treatment for his conditions otherwise he risks
gangrene of his [foot].
for the husband asserted the upshot was his client’s health precluded the
trial from proceeding. He also asserted his
client needed an adjournment to
enable him to adduce further medical evidence which he said was necessary for
the Court to determine
any appropriate adjustment pursuant to
those propositions were rejected. First, the certificate did not support any
finding that the husband was unable to participate
in the trial. The husband was
present at Court at the hearing. The certificate did not say he would be too
unwell to attend. Nor
did it say – contrary to counsel’s submissions
– that his attendance at Court would interfere with his treatment.
observed by McClelland DCJ in
Novikov & Novikov
(2024) FLC 98-083, a
generic medical certificate is insufficient – it should state why a
medical condition would prevent the
litigant from participating in the hearing.
The certificate tendered on behalf of the husband fell well short of providing
that information.
the fact that the husband has diabetes was not a new phenomenon. The husband
deposed having diabetes in his trial affidavit
filed on 22 July 2024. Moreover,
the matter was initially listed for final hearing on 1 August 2024. It was
adjourned to 11 March
2025 as counsel for the husband at that time said his
client required an interpreter. Accordingly, the husband had many, many months
to adduce medical evidence as to his health and the relevance of it to any
adjustment pursuant to
s 75(2)(o).
Additionally, I indicated to counsel for the
husband that should he wish to do so, I would consider any application by the
to lead evidence to update his medical condition when he opened his
his submissions, counsel for the husband said his client “needs to see a
specialist urgently”. That was not referred
to in the medical certificate.
Accordingly,
the adjournment application was dismissed.
for the husband then complained about the situation with interpreters.
final hearing had previously been listed on 1 August 2024. On that day, counsel
for the husband for the first time told the Court
his client required an
interpreter beside him for the entire trial. That was despite never having
sought an interpreter at any previous
court hearings, and not having deposed his
affidavits with the assistance of an interpreter. I note that counsel for the
had represented the husband at all previous hearings – and had not
previously indicated there was an issue with his client’s
grasp of English
such that an interpreter would be required at trial. I was informed the husband
had previously been accompanied
to Court by a family member who could provide
him with some language assistance. That was Mr F – who was overseas on 1
circumstances where counsel advised he was unable to obtain adequate
instructions in the absence of an interpreter, the trial was
making every endeavour, the Court was unable to secure two Country G language
in-person interpreters for the final hearing
to commence on 11 March 2025. On 27
February 2025 the Court was advised the only interpreters the Court could source
were unable
to attend Court in-person and would have to provide their services
remotely. That was conveyed to the parties who agreed with that
course of action
on 1 March 2025.
that indication from the interpreting service, the interpreter booked for the
wife physically attended Court on 11 March 2025.
The interpreter arranged for
the husband attended remotely, as he was located interstate. Also on 11 March
2025 Mr F was present
at Court and sat with the husband.
for the husband did not find this satisfactory. There was a somewhat frustrating
exchange between counsel for the husband
and myself about the interpreter
situation, during which I asked counsel for the husband for his client’s
mobile number to
be provided to his interpreter so that he could simultaneously
interpret for his client. This was not immediately forthcoming. I
counsel to “stop trying to put up roadblocks. Give me your client’s
mobile number”.
took significant umbrage at that comment. He subsequently provided the mobile
number for his client which enabled the interpreter
to communicate with the
husband directly. I then stood the matter down so that the interpreter and the
husband could set up a line
of communication.
Court resumed, counsel for the husband said his client’s hearing was
“atrocious” and that he needed to have
the interpreter’s voice
playing out loud through his telephone speaker as he could not otherwise hear
the interpreter if he
held his phone to his ear. I indicated I had no difficulty
with that arrangement. However, counsel for the husband formed the view
was “unfair” to his client that the wife’s interpreter was
physically next to her whilst the husband’s
interpreter was communicating
via the husband’s phone. Despite stating on several occasions this was
counsel was unable to articulate what precisely was unfair
an interpreter in the virtual Court room and speaking to him via a mobile
for the husband then went on to insist that the only way the trial could proceed
would be if the wife’s interpreter
provided interpretation for the
husband, and the wife then had the remote interpreter. I rejected that
proposition in circumstances
where the wife’s interpreter had already been
interpreting for the wife at Court that day, including having been in a room
with the wife and her legal team that morning, preparing for the commencement of
the trial. Counsel for the husband then indicated
he wished to cross-examine the
wife’s interpreter. However, counsel for the husband failed to indicate
any proper basis for
such an application.
for the husband then said that he was content with Mr F assisting his client but
that the husband would use an interpreter
as needed, including when giving his
interpreters were then sworn in.
for the husband then renewed his oral application to cross-examine the
wife’s interpreter. Again, in circumstances where
there was no rational
basis articulated by counsel for the husband for such an application, it was
for the husband then said he wanted to seek instructions from his client as to
whether a recusal application would be made.
Counsel referred to my
“roadblocks” comment. He also said he was concerned I had not
properly considered his client’s
health, nor given him a “proper
opportunity” to provide evidence regarding his client’s health.
matter was stood down, again, for Counsel to get instructions.
the matter resumed counsel for the husband said that he was no longer content to
proceed on the basis that the husband would
call on the interpreter as needed.
Once again, he said he wanted the wife’s interpreter to interpret for his
client. Once again,
that was rejected.
that point, counsel for the husband then said he wished to make an oral
application that I recuse myself.
heard submissions as to the recusal application and dismissed that application
for the reasons that now follow.
articulated in
Ebner v Official Trustee in Bankruptcy
[2000] HCA 63
(2000) 205 CLR 337
, to found a recusal it must be established that a “fair-minded lay
observer might reasonably apprehend that the judge might
not bring an impartial
mind to the resolution of the question” to be decided.
“hypothetical observer is taken to be a rational person who is neither
complacent nor unduly sensitive or suspicious and
to be someone who is aware of
the oath or affirmation taken by judges and their judicial obligations more
generally”; see
Royal Guardian Mortgage Management Pty Ltd v Nguyen
(2016) 332 ALR 128 at [232] the New South Wales Court of Appeal.
satisfy that test, the party making the application must first identify the
matter or matters that it is said might lead the judge
to not bring an impartial
mind to the resolution of the issue. Secondly, they must demonstrate a logical
connection between the identified
matter and the possibility that the judge
might depart from impartial decision making.
best as I could understand the application, counsel for the husband asserted it
was a combination of matters that might lead me
to not bring an impartial mind
to the resolution of the dispute. The factors articulated were that I
(a) refused the adjournment application;
(b) referred to counsel as putting up “road blocks”;
(c) required the matter to proceed with the husband’s interpreter
attending remotely and not being physically seated next to
him in Court;
(d) not allowed the husband to use the wife’s interpreter; and
(e) not permitted counsel to cross examine the wife’s interpreter.
for the husband did not identify any logical connection between those matters
and the possibility that I might not decide
the dispute on its merits.
relation to the adjournment application, there was nothing in the medical
certificate that suggested the husband was unable or
unfit to participate in the
hearing. In relation to the desire to adduce further medical evidence, I repeat
the husband had had months
to get his evidence before the Court. Indeed, he
deposed to his medical conditions in his trial affidavit. Additionally, I
that the husband could seek leave at the commencement of his evidence
to adduce updating evidence as to his health should he wish
relation to my comment about roadblocks, that was made in the context of a
dialogue with counsel about the need for this matter
to be heard and determined.
The matter has been on foot since 5 July 2023. It was already listed for a final
hearing on 1 August
2024. That trial was aborted in circumstances where:
husband’s lawyers made a late request for an interpreter on 15 July 2024,
which the Court was not able to secure on short
husband’s lawyers then said it would be sufficient for an interpreter to
be available to assist the husband only when giving
his evidence;
However, on 1
August 2024 counsel for the husband advised that would not be sufficient and
that his client required an interpreter
throughout the proceedings.
comment regarding “road blocks” was then made in circumstances where
the court had already dealt with an unmeritorious
application for an adjournment
and in the face of the husband’s counsel’s complaints about the
interpreter provided for
the husband being remote. Counsel’s complaint in
that regard was made notwithstanding that:
the parties had
been made aware as at 28 February 2025 that the Court had not been able to
secure in-person interpreters; and
both parties
then agreed to having online interpreters at the hearing.
remained my view that it would be entirely inappropriate to permit the parties
to swap interpreters in circumstances where the
wife’s interpreter had
been present at discussions between the wife and her legal team at Court that
morning. I note that in
passing counsel for the husband suggested the
wife’s interpreter might have been involved in “strategy” for
wife’s case, which I reject as an utterly unfounded comment.
refusal to allow the husband’s counsel to cross-examine an interpreter
could not possibly suggest I would not determine the
matter on its merits.
Counsel for the husband failed to identify what would be the purpose of allowing
him to use Court time set
aside for the resolution of a property dispute between
the husband and the wife to cross-examine a Court appointed interpreter.
of the comments or determinations I made as to the running of the matter either
alone or together could properly be said to give
rise to the relevant
apprehension.
thus declined to recuse myself.
INTERPRETERS
already set out there was significant difficulty in securing interpreters for
the parties. The Court informed the parties on 28
February 2025 that only
telephone interpreters would be available for the final hearing on 11 March
2025. The husband had indicated
that was not ideal for him as he wears hearing
aids. Nonetheless, his solicitor confirmed on 1 March 2025 that he would consent
using a telephone interpreter. However, on the morning of the first day of
hearing the interpreter who had been booked for the wife,
arrived in person. The
husband’s interpreter was located interstate and was only available on the
for the husband took the view that this was unacceptable. As already set out he
inter alia:
(a) that the wife’s interpreter be provided to the husband and the wife
have the telephone interpreter. That was rejected as
by the time counsel raised
that with the Court the interpreter for the wife had been engaged in privileged
discussions between the
wife and her representatives; and
(b) that he be able to cross-examine the interpreter. Apparently, he wanted to
ask her what was in a folder she had brought with
her to Court. That application
was rejected as the answers to that question could have no bearing on any matter
relevant to my determination.
for the husband then said his client was “profoundly deaf”. That
statement is incorrect; the husband does not
have a total lack of hearing and is
not unable to detect any sound at all. He does have some hearing loss, and wears
hearing aids.
accommodate the husband’s hearing difficulties, the husband had his
telephone interpreter coming through his mobile phone
on loudspeaker whilst
seated in the body of the courtroom. However, counsel for the husband said he
found that very distracting –
as people were talking at the same time.
Given that the interpretation was occurring simultaneously this would be an
issue whether
the husband’s interpreter was physically sitting next to him
in the courtroom, or whether he was on speaker phone.
were some ‘feedback’ issues, with an audible ringing sound coming
from the husband’s telephone on occasion.
overcome these issues, I determined to move the hearing to Teams on the
afternoon of the first day. This meant the husband could
have his interpreter on
loudspeaker in a room at his solicitors’ offices without it interfering
with his counsel’s concentration.
we resumed that afternoon, on Teams, counsel for the husband maintained it was
still deeply unfair that his client’s interpreter
was on a phone on
loudspeaker, and the wife’s interpreter was seated next to her in a room
at the wife’s solicitors’
offices. He was, however, still unable to
explain why that was deeply unfair.
the second day of the trial, I was informed by counsel for the husband that his
client was at times unable to hear properly, and
there were still some issues
with an ‘echo’ on the line from the interpreter. At one point
counsel for the husband said
his client did not want the interpreter booked for
his client to provide any interpretation.
may be that the echo was caused by the interpreter having the courtroom playing
though his computer speakers and being picked up
via his phone and then that
being relayed to the husband’s phone. It was suggested to the
husband’s interpreter that
he listen to the courtroom via Teams on his
headphones (ensuring that the voices in the courtroom were not being picked up
phone) and provide interpretation into his mobile phone.
to this arrangement being implemented, counsel for the husband did not continue
to complain that his client could not hear
his interpreter sufficiently clearly.
the matter resumed on Teams for a further three days on 26 May 2025 there were
different interpreters for the parties. Both interpreters
were via telephone. I
was not informed that there were any difficulties between either party and their
allocated interpreter.
do note that there were issues from time to time with the quality of the
interpretation. The wife’s first interpreter on a
few occasions sought to
reassure the wife when she was being cross-examined. There were also times
during the giving of evidence
that the interpreters engaged in a short
discussion with the witness. The explanation given by the interpreter was that
clarifying the question, or the answer or repeating the question. They
were cautioned not to do so and reminded that they must translate
the question
and the response without comment or explanation. I note that both the husband
and the wife at times answered in English.
Notwithstanding
these shortcomings, no suggestion was made by either counsel in their closing
addresses that the level of interpretation
had impacted on the quality of the
parties’ evidence, or on my ability to assess that evidence.
have also formed the view that whilst the circumstances were not ideal, and
there were on occasions some issues with the interpretation,
I was able to
sufficiently hear and understand the evidence of each of the parties and assess
the veracity of it.
husband is 68 years old. The wife is 66. They were both born in Country G and
married there in 1977. They moved to Australia later
parties have three sons – who are all adults and live independently.
is common ground that the parties had no assets of significance at the
commencement of their relationship. The husband was engaged
in employment
outside the home and the wife was primarily responsible for caring for the
children and undertaking other home duties.
husband was generally engaged in employment during the marriage, save for some
periods of unemployment.
parties purchased and sold properties – culminating in the purchase of B
Street, Suburb C (“the former matrimonial
a home on that property in 1998.
wife received an inheritance from her father of $92,790 in 2007. The funds were
used to purchase furniture and the balance paid
into a term deposit.
parties purchased a construction business – J Pty Ltd in around 2010. It
is common ground the parties were both directors
and that the wife assisted in
the administration of that business.
Pty Ltd ceased trading in 2019.
around 2020 the parties renovated the former matrimonial home.
husband received an inheritance from his mother’s estate in 2021 of
$169,196.55.
is the wife’s case that between 2021 to 2022 the husband withdrew about
$173,000 in cash from various accounts which he retained
for his sole use.
2022 the husband travelled to Country W for a few weeks.
parties separated in 2022. The husband had gone to stay with Mr F for a few
days. The wife arranged for the parties’ son
Mr K and his wife Ms L to
attend at the former matrimonial home and help her move out in his absence. The
husband returned to the
premises before they had left, following the wife having
sent him a text message that the garage door had been left open. It is the
husband’s assertion that this text message was sent to entice him back to
the home so there would be an altercation deliberately
orchestrated by the wife,
Ms L and Mr K which would result in the husband being removed from the home.
That is denied by the wife
and her witnesses.
the husband arrived an argument did ensue, and Ms L called the police.
husband was served with a Family Violence Safety Notice and was required to
leave the home. The wife then obtained an interim
Intervention Order in late
2022. That application was ultimately withdrawn by the police in late 2023.
early 2023 the husband attended at the former matrimonial home pursuant to Court
orders to collect his personal belongings. There
was a physical altercation
between the husband and Mr K that day. Mr K was charged and subsequently entered
into a diversion plan.
He acknowledged he had damaged his father’s car
proceedings were commenced by the wife on 5 July 2023.
matter was first listed for trial before me on 1 August 2024. As already set
out, on that day the husband’s counsel advised
his client required the
assistance of an interpreter. The trial was adjourned to 24 February 2025.
matter then commenced on 11 March 2025. It was not able to be concluded in the
three days that had been allocated. The trial was
adjourned part heard to 26 May
2025 for a further three days.
THE EVIDENCE
has not been possible to include every aspect of each of the parties’
evidence. However, I have taken all the evidence into
account. Just because I
have not mentioned something in these reasons does not mean that I have not
considered it.
Evidence Act 1995
(Cth) sets out that the standard of proof in
these proceedings is to a balance of probabilities.
The wife and her witnesses
wife relied on:
(a) Amended Initiating Application filed 30 April 2024;
(b) her trial affidavit filed 10 July 2024;
(c) her reply affidavit filed 29 July 2024;
(d) affidavit of Mr K filed 30 May 2024;
(e) affidavit of Mr M filed 31 May 2024;
(f) affidavit of Ms N filed 3 June 2024;
(g) affidavit of Ms L filed 11 June 2024;
(h) Financial Statement filed 10 July 2024; and
(i) Outline of Case filed 30 July 2024.
wife gave her evidence in a straightforward and genuine manner. She impressed as
genuine and sincere. At times she became obviously
distressed and distraught
– particularly when she was being cross examined about her allegations of
K and Mr M are the parties’ adult sons. Ms L is the de facto partner of Mr
K. They were all impressive witnesses who gave
their evidence in a candid,
straightforward and convincing manner.
the wife’s witnesses acknowledged that they had had some discussions
regarding providing affidavits in support of the
wife in these proceedings, they
were consistent in their descriptions that any discussions were brief, confined
only to the fact
that they were providing affidavits, and did not involve
discussions as to the contents of their affidavits.
reject the suggestion by counsel for the husband that the evidence of the wife,
their sons and Ms L should be regarded with caution
as they had colluded and
conferred with each other as to what to include in their affidavits. Having
heard extensively from the wife
and each of her witnesses, I am not satisfied
there was any collusion. Nor do I find that they discussed in any detail the
that they would include in their affidavits or that they gave other
than impartial evidence based on their own distinct recollections.
also do not regard Ms L having typed up the wife’s notes and/or the
wife’s instructions to send to the solicitors, or
her having attended a
number of the wife’s medical appointments as problematic or nefarious
– the wife’s English
is limited and Ms L provided her with support
and assistance.
suggest that any discussions between the wife and her family members about their
experiences of the husband and the family law
matter infects and wholly
undermines their evidence completely ignores the realities of life.
also reject the assertion that the wife and her family conspired to create what
counsel for the husband described as a “ruse”
to eject his client
from the former matrimonial home. As will be clear from the reasons given later
in this judgment, I am satisfied
that the husband subjected the wife to violence
and I reject the husband’s assertion that the wife and/or her witnesses
or fabricated the allegations of family violence and both coercive and
controlling behaviours perpetrated by the husband.
also found Ms N – the wife’s treating psychologist – to be an
impressive and credible witness. Although her curriculum
vitae was not attached
to her affidavit, it was not in dispute that she is a clinical psychologist. Ms
N advised she has 20 years’
experience.
for the husband appeared unfamiliar with the provisions of Chapter 7 of the
Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia (Family Law) Rules 2021
(Cth) (“the Rules”). Ms N did not give evidence as a single
expert but as the wife’s treating practitioner. Accordingly,
counsel’s objection to Ms N’s affidavit being admitted into evidence
on the basis that she was ‘not a single
expert’ was entirely
misconceived and was dismissed. Additionally, contrary to the position adopted
by counsel for the husband,
Ms N does not have the same duties and rights as an
expert witness pursuant to r 7.18 of the Rules.
N saw the wife over the course of around 23 consultations – commencing for
one session in 2011, then 6 sessions in 2020 to
late 2021 and then for the
balance of the sessions from July 2022.
for the husband endeavoured to attack Ms N for not using ‘tools’ to
assess the wife. He did not identify what
‘tools’ might have been
appropriately used. At any rate, I accept Ms N’s evidence that she
did not employ questionnaires
or behavioural checklists as she described these
as having limited application to people for whom English is not their first
Rather, Ms N’s assessment was based on clinical interviews,
having had the benefit of engaging with the wife over the course
of a number of
sessions commencing in 2011.
for the husband also suggested that Ms N’s report was deficient as the
husband had not been interviewed. That reflected
a lack of understanding of Ms
N’s role. She was not a single expert. She was the wife’s treating
psychologist and accordingly
there could be no expectation that she would have
interviewed the husband.
suggestion that I should reject Ms N’s evidence because it is a
‘mere recitation’ of what the wife told her
is misconceived. A
substantial part of Ms N’s report necessarily includes references to what
the wife told her.
will return to Ms N’s evidence later in these reasons.
The husband
husband relied on:
(a) Amended Response to Initiating Application filed 22 July 2024;
(b) his trial affidavit filed 22 July 2024;
(c) Amended Financial Statement filed 22 July 2024;
(d) Outline of Case filed 30 July 2024; and
(e) list of authorities filed 30 July 2024.
husband was not an impressive witness. He was evasive at times, and did not
answer questions directly. He changed his evidence
on occasion when shown
documents that did not support his evidence, or said he ‘could not
recall’ or that he ‘did
not look at paperwork’. He included a
photograph in his trial affidavit purportedly showing him in a ripped shirt as
that he had been attacked by Mr K in 2023. He admitted under
cross-examination that the photograph was not actually of him. This
was after Mr
K had been cross-examined about the alleged incident.
husband also deposed the wife had not provided him with information of the
auction details in relation to various items until
she provided her sworn
affidavit. That was also not correct. The wife forwarded the details of the
auctions through to the husband,
promptly following the completion of the
auction process, under cover email in 2024. Her affidavit was filed almost three
husband had not complied with various orders of this Court, including not making
items in his possession available for auction.
No reasonable explanation for
that failure was given by him.
formed the impression that the husband had not been forthcoming in his evidence,
and had endeavoured to conduct the proceedings
in a manner that favoured him.
prefer the evidence of the wife and that of her witnesses over that given by the
husband where their evidence does not align.
ASSETS, LIABILITIES AND FINANCIAL RESOURCES AS AT THE DATE OF
FINAL HEARING
parties agree the following reflects their assets, liabilities and financial
resources as at the date of the
B Street, Suburb C
Wife’s bank accounts
Husband’s bank accounts (ANZ Account No...28 and NAB Account No...04)
parties agree that the Suburb C property will need to be sold.
the wife conceded there was a liability to E Company for the storage fees for a
compressor. However, during the course of
his evidence the husband conceded E
Company were no longer trading and they had provided the compressor to him
without requiring
the storage fees to be paid. I will return to this issue later
in these reasons.
Disputes in relation to the pool
to the parties’ joint table of assets and liabilities there are many
disputes in relation to the asset pool.
Notional addbacks relating to alleged cash withdrawals by
the husband between 2021 and 2022
was the wife’s case that the husband withdrew approximately $174,399 by
way of cash withdrawals from various ATMs from three
separate bank accounts as
$36,430 from O
Bank account ending ...31 in the name of the parties’ adult son Mr M
between April 2021 and September 2021;
$48,219 from the
Westpac account ending ...43 which was the business account between May 2021 and
September 2021; and
$88,750 from O
Bank account ending ...66 in the husband’s sole name between May 2021 and
December 2022.
was the wife’s case the husband had failed to provide an adequate
explanation as to how those funds were utilised, and that
it appeared he used
those funds for his personal benefit. The wife asserted in those circumstances,
the monies should be notionally
added back into the property pool.
is a matter of discretion whether or not the Court will notionally addback
assets, and the case law makes is clear that notionally
adding assets disposed
of back into the pool is the exception rather than the rule. The general
principle is that the Court is to
take the property of the parties as they are
at the date of the final hearing. Addbacks should only occur in circumstances
justice and equity require it. In many cases, justice and equity can be
achieved by consideration of the issue under s 75(2)(o) of
the Act rather than
by adding back.
the monies sought to be added back were allegedly withdrawn by the husband
during the marriage and not post separation.
Account ending...31
relation to account ending...31 this was an account in the name of the
parties’ son, Mr M. It was the wife’s evidence
that the husband
required Mr M to open this account in his own name and that the husband then
made a cash payment to Mr M of $40,000
which the husband then withdrew over
time, for his own purposes.
M’s evidence was his father repeatedly requested that he open an account
in his own name, into which funds would be deposited
for Mr M to hold on behalf
of his father. He said his father was concerned that if he had significant cash
savings in his name this
may impact his ability to access Centrelink monies. Mr
M said he eventually agreed to open the bank account as directed. In his oral
evidence Mr M said his father “gave me orders”, and that he set up
the bank account “under my father’s orders”.
Mr M described
being put under pressure by his father to do as he was requesting.
M received the amount of $40,000 into a P Bank account in his sole name in
February 2021. A few days later, Mr M opened the O Bank
account ending...31 and
then promptly transferred the $40,000 into this account.
M’s evidence was that there was one bank card for the account. He said he
withdrew two amounts of $2,000 in April 2021 and
May 2021, at his father’s
direction and provided those monies to his father. He said he thereafter
provided the bank card to
his father at his father’s request, and had no
further use of the funds in the account and made no further withdrawals.
is the wife’s case that all monies withdrawn from the account were
withdrawn and either spent or retained by the husband.
husband’s evidence was that these monies were from his mother’s
estate and that the funds were provided to Mr M in
accordance with his
mother’s wishes. However, the husband conceded there was no suggestion in
his mother’s will that
she intended any such bequest. The husband also
confirmed at trial that there was nothing in writing from his mother confirming
intention to make that payment to Mr M. I note further that the husband
received his inheritance some three months later than this
cash amount was
deposited into Mr M’s P Bank account. No explanation was given as to why
the funds were paid at different
husband also deposed that his sister was the executor of their mother’s
estate and she made the payment to Mr M. Mr M said
his father and his paternal
aunt were involved in the discussions about him holding funds for his father.
The husband did not call
his sister to corroborate his version that the funds
were paid to Mr M for Mr M alone.
husband’s evidence as to the use and application of the funds in this
account was not plausible. Even though he asserted
the funds were entirely Mr
M’s, the husband acknowledged that he did make some withdrawals from the
account, although he was
unable to recall any specific withdrawal he made. He
also accepted that he did have possession of the ATM card “at some
When asked why he would ever have had the card if the account
contained his son’s funds, he answered “We use both of
sometimes he bought things for me, and sometimes I bought things for
a number of occasions, cash withdrawals were made from this account and from
account ending...66 (which is an account in the husband’s
sole name) at
the same ATM in Suburb Q within minutes of each other. Mr M lives in Suburb R,
which is some distance from Suburb Q.
Conversely, Suburb C, where the husband
was then living, is a suburb adjacent to Suburb Q. I do not accept the
husband’s suggestion
that at times Mr M had travelled from Suburb R to
Suburb Q to withdraw cash from this account within minutes of the husband
withdrawing
cash from his account ending...66. It was also not put to Mr M that
he and his father went to the bank together, or that he and his
father both used
the funds in that account.
accept Mr M’s evidence that the husband requested that he open the account
and hold monies in that account on behalf of the
husband. I also accept Mr
M’s evidence as to how the funds were then utilised from that account by
the husband.
Account ending...43
around 2010 to 2019 the parties operated the business called J Pty Ltd. They
were the directors. The wife assisted the husband
in attending to some of the
business paperwork, banking and payment of some bills.
husband confirmed that he ceased working in late 2019, and that J Pty Ltd
finished trading at that time. The balance in the account
was then $64,999. Over
the course of the next few months there were business and other expenses paid
from the account such that by
2021 the balance remaining was $53,043.15.
wife agreed that she used that account to pay business expenses while it was
operating. However, she denied making any cash withdrawals
from the account,
asserting she had only a cheque book for the account and the husband had the
was the wife’s case that from May to September 2021 the husband made
repeated cash withdrawals from the account, unrelated
to the business that had,
by then, ceased operating. Those cash withdrawals totalled $48,219. By September
2021 the balance had been
reduced to zero. It was the wife’s evidence that
she did not have a bank card for this account and that none of the cash
withdrawals
were made by her. She said the husband has provided no feasible
explanation for the withdrawals.
husband denied that he alone made withdrawals from that account after the
business ceased operating. He said both he and the wife
“had full access
to this account”, claiming they both used the card and that both of them
made withdrawals. He said they
also went to the shops together and made
withdrawals. He also said the wife made cash withdrawals from the account using
the passbook,
which the wife denied.
was also the husband’s evidence that he used some of the cash withdrawals
“for [materials] which were required for
the business”. He said he
paid in cash “for the business materials as the price would be
cannot be correct that the cash withdrawals between May and September 2021 were
for business expenses as the business had finished
trading almost 17 months
before the contested cash withdrawals commenced.
accept the wife’s evidence that the cash withdrawals from this account
between May and September 2021 totalling $48,219 were
all made by the husband. I
also find they could not have been applied to business expenses and no proper
explanation as to the application
of those funds has been provided by the
Account ending...66
April 2021 the husband opened an O Bank account ending...66 in his sole name.
He deposited the sum of $100,000 into that account
in May 2021 described as
“Mum s estate [MS S]” (as per the statement).
May 2021 a further $69,196.55 was deposited into that account with the same
descriptor.
husband agreed the wife had no access to that account.
is not in dispute that there were a number of joint expenses paid from this
account. However, it is the wife’s case that
the husband’s cash
withdrawals from this account between May 2021 and December 2022, which totalled
approximately $88,950,
were made entirely by the husband and that there has been
no reasonable explanation for those cash withdrawals.
husband asserted these monies were used to pay for renovations to the former
matrimonial home, to purchase a forklift, to undertake
work on the cars and to
fund outgoings for the home including groceries.
correspondence from his solicitors dated 6 April 2023 the husband asserted that
he had spent $40,000 to $50,000 on renovations
to the former matrimonial home.
However, I do not accept the monies were applied to renovations on the home. The
renovations commenced
in 2019 and were completed in April 2021, almost entirely
prior to the cash withdrawals commencing. The receipts upon which the husband
sought to rely as evidence that the cash withdrawals funded the renovations
mostly pre-date the commencement of the cash withdrawals,
save for one invoice
which was dated March 2023. That invoice is dated significantly after the period
of cash withdrawals questioned
by the wife. At best there may have been some
televisions purchased within the relevant time period.
also does not appear the funds were applied to repairing the vehicles. The
husband has not provided a single invoice to support
his contention that he
worked on the vehicles in the relevant period. Moreover, in a letter from the
husband’s lawyers dated
6 April 2023 the husband advised that the three
vehicles did not start and were “hardly worth anything” in value.
husband also did not even depose as to what work he did, or how much he
might have spent repairing the vehicles beyond saying “I
chose to work on
my [cars]”.
his oral evidence the husband said he had paid $10,000 to purchase the forklift.
The husband has also not produced any documents
to support his assertion that
any monies were applied to purchase a forklift. I note that according to the
husband’s Financial
Statement filed on 17 August 2023, he recorded
the forklift as having a nil value.
assertion by the husband that the monies were otherwise applied to fund the
outgoings for the home and for groceries is also not
a plausible explanation in
circumstances where;
the parties were
both in receipt of Centrelink;
already many purchases of groceries and other household items from that account
separate from the cash withdrawals; and
parties’ spending patterns – as evidenced in their Financial
Statements – demonstrate that neither of these
parties spent significant
funds each week on discretionary items.
husband regarded the inheritance from his mother as being something to which he
alone was entitled. That was clearly his position
as set out in correspondence
from his lawyer dated 6 April 2023 in which the inheritance is referred to and
the lawyer wrote:
We trust your client will agree that this belongs to our client solely, whilst
the inheritance your client has received form her
mother will be for her benefit
the husband’s trial affidavit he said “the funds given to me by my
mother was solely for my benefit and I believe I
could spend this as I
the circumstances, and in the absence of any other plausible explanation, I am
satisfied that the husband’s cash withdrawals
from this account were
substantially retained by him for his own use and benefit.
Determination as to addbacks sought by the wife
in all the circumstances I am not prepared to notionally addback the amounts as
sought by the wife. Rather, in my view the
husband’s greater access to
cash funds in the lead up to the parties’ separation is a matter that can
appropriately be
considered under s 75(2)(o).
Net proceeds of sale of auctioned items
were made on 20 December 2023 for the sale by auction of tools, equipment,
machinery and vehicles with T Auctions to be the
selling agent for Motor Vehicle
2, Motor Vehicle 3 and Motor Vehicle 4. No reserve price was fixed. Some items
were in the wife’s
possession at the former matrimonial home, and other
items were in the husband’s possession.
parties subsequently agreed to appoint D Auctions to sell all the items and
wife complied with the orders for the sale of the three vehicles and the tools
and equipment in the garage at the former matrimonial
items were sold between about March and July 2024. The net proceeds of sale
according to the documents tendered
by the wife from D Auctions was $41,690.19.
The proceeds of the sale of the vehicles account for the majority of those
husband did not comply with the orders for the sale of the items in his
possession – being the machine, the trailers and
a compressor. These items
have still not been sold. The husband continues to retain those items which I
will deal with later in these
was the husband’s assertion that the wife permitted Motor Vehicle 2, Motor
Vehicle 3 and Motor Vehicle 4 to be sold for less
than market value. For the
following reasons, that assertion is not sustained. Similarly, the
husband’s assertion that the
parties’ daughter in law
inappropriately interfered with the sales process and caused the items to be
sold at less than market
value is also not made out.
husband adduced no evidence to support his bald allegation that the wife and/or
Ms L acted inappropriately in relation to the
sale of the items.
orders did not include a reserve price and the parties never discussed that
there should be one.
were no sworn valuations of the vehicles demonstrating what would be an
appropriate sale price. At its highest the husband relied
on an unsworn and
undated appraisal of the vehicles. According to that undated appraisal Motor
Vehicle 3 was worth $25,000; the Motor
Vehicle 2 was worth between $19,000 to
$25,000; and Motor Vehicle 4 was worth between $12,000 to $15,000.
Vehicle 3 sold on about April for $27,500 (being $2,500 more than the
husband’s undated appraisal). Motor Vehicle 4 sold
at the same time for
$10,000 (being the midpoint of the husband’s undated appraisal). Motor
Vehicle 2 sold on about July 2024
for $15,600 (being $4,500 below the undated
appraisal). It is plain that, to the extent that I could put any weight on the
appraisal, there is little difference between what it outlines and the
prices achieved at sale.
in a letter from the husband’s lawyers dated 6 April 2023 it was asserted
that the three vehicles’ registrations
had been “cancelled” as
they were in the wife’s possession. The letter recorded:
Our client confirms [Motor Vehicle 2], [Motor Vehicle 3] and [Motor Vehicle 4]
do not start. In light of this point, out client instructs
each motor vehicle
will require rectification prior to being functional, and for this reason, each
motor vehicle is hardly worth
anything in value.
for the husband made some suggestion that his client had “worked on”
the vehicles and conducted repairs so they
would be in working condition by the
time of sale. That cannot be correct. It is common ground that from the date of
separation until
the date of the sale of the vehicles they were never in the
possession of the husband. Accordingly, he could not have undertaken
any repairs
or maintenance on them.
the absence of a sworn valuation – and in light of the husband’s own
instructions to his lawyers dated 6 April 2023
that the vehicles were
“hardly worth anything in value” – I cannot conclude that the
vehicles ought to have achieved
a higher sale price than they did.
only appropriate figure that can be included in the pool of assets is the actual
sale proceeds.
is regrettable that this issue took up Court time in circumstances where counsel
for the husband ought to have known this argument
could never have been made
Accordingly,
the value to be attributed to this line item is $41,690.
completeness, that amount already includes the net proceeds of sale of Motor
Vehicle 2 which the husband had sought to include
as a separate amount in the
pool for which he contended. It was abundantly clear from the material tendered
from D Auctions that
the amount of $41,690 already included the proceeds of sale
of Motor Vehicle 2. It would have been a double counting to include it
a separate item in the pool. Again, this ought to have been readily conceded by
the husband.
Net proceeds of sale of forklift truck
forklift truck was sold at auction in around mid-2024 for $2,000. It was the
husband’s contention that I should adopt a
value of $2,600 for the vehicle
as there had been an offer to purchase it at that amount. I note however that in
the husband’s
Financial Statement filed 17 August 2023 he attributed
a nil value to the forklift.
is clearly appropriate that I include the actual amount the machine sold for
rather than some aspirational, but unachieved sale
Husband’s ANZ saver account ...51
trial the husband asserted the balance in this account was $25,109.99. However,
no bank statements were tendered to support that
husband adopted his Financial Statement filed 22 July 2024 at the outset of his
evidence. In that statement it is recorded that
the husband had $70,015 in that
the absence of any updated material from the husband – including no
explanation by him as to the application of any funds
if they have been so
depleted – it is appropriate to include the balance deposed to by the
husband in his Financial Statement
which was adopted by him and admitted into
Husband’s Motor Vehicle 1
vehicle was not valued. The husband sought to rely on a printout from U Car
Service. That does not amount to admissible evidence
of value. The husband could
have had the vehicle valued and he chose not to do so.
husband deposed to the vehicle having a value of $15,000 in his Financial
Statement filed on 22 July 2024. He adopted that statement
at the outset of his
evidence. I note further in his trial affidavit the husband refers to having
“obtained current market
values from [U Car Service]” which suggests
a value “between $10,000 to $15,000”. Whilst the printout from U Car
Service is not a valuation, I note the husband has not deposed any reason why
his vehicle would not be appropriately valued at the
higher end of that range,
particularly where that is in accordance with the value the husband attributed
to his vehicle in his Financial
accept the submissions made by counsel for the wife that there is little utility
in ordering the sale of the vehicle in circumstances
where there are already
orders in place for the sale of various items which the husband has simply
failed to arrange.
the absence of a valuation – and in circumstances where I have
reservations that any order for sale would be undertaken in
a timely manner
– I will include the value deposed to by the husband in his Financial
Addback for the shipping container
was the husband’s case that the shipping container was sold to a Mr H for
$500. It was the wife’s case that the shipping
container was worth about
$4,700 and that figure should be notionally added back into the pool.
was no valuation of the container. I am not prepared to notionally addback an
arbitrary value. However, I have reservations
as to the truthfulness of the
husband, particularly where no documents (or evidence from Mr H) regarding his
assertion that the container
was sold for $500 were adduced by the husband.
all the circumstances, I am satisfied justice and equity can be achieved by
consideration of the issue under s 75(2)(o) of the
Addback for the trailer
was the husband’s case that the Trailer was sold to Mr F in 2022 for $500.
was the wife’s case that the trailer was worth about $2,100. It was not
Notwithstanding
the husband’s evidence that it was transferred to Mr F in April 2022 the
husband acknowledged the trailer remained
registered in his name, and indeed the
husband paid the registration fee for the trailer in November 2022. The actual
paperwork to
transfer the trailer was not undertaken until after the payment of
the registration fee in November 2022.
husband’s explanation for the delay was that Mr F was in Country G from
May to October 2022. I am not satisfied this adequately
explains the delay from
April to November to undertake the transfer documents.
note again that Mr F is not on affidavit.
the circumstances I am not prepared to notionally addback an arbitrary value for
the trailer. Rather, I am satisfied justice and
equity can be achieved by
consideration of the issue under s 75(2)(o) of the Act.
Addback for the firearms
was the husband’s case that the firearms were given to Mr F at some
undisclosed time.
to correspondence from the husband’s lawyers dated 24 January 2024, the
husband asserted there were scratch marks
on a number of the firearms from
“ill handling” and that most of them “were rusted”. It
was further asserted
that the husband had intended to sell the firearms to V
Company, but they were not willing to pay any money for the items as they
the view “the guns were not of value”. At that point, the husband
“decided to transfer the firearms to [Mr
was the husband’s assertion that the firearms he transferred to Mr F for
no consideration were worth about $1,600. He asserted
that was the amount that
should be notionally added back into the pool.
was the wife’s assertion that the firearms were worth approximately
$4,600. They have not been valued.
was adduced from V Company.
F was not on affidavit.
with the shipping container and the trailer, I am not prepared to notionally
addback an arbitrary value for the firearms. Rather,
I am satisfied justice and
equity can be achieved by consideration of the issue under s 75(2)(o) of the
Items remaining in the husband’s
already observed, there were a number of items in the husband’s possession
which were required to be sold pursuant to the
orders of 20 December 2023.
However, the husband has not complied with the orders for their sale.
correspondence from the husband’s solicitors dated 24 January 2024 the
husband confirmed he had in his possession two machines,
a compressor and two
trailers. There was a second compressor stored at E Company which was also to be
sold once the storage fees
were paid. The husband has now collected that
compressor.
husband confirmed in his oral evidence that he now has possession of both
compressors. He continues to have two trailers and a
machine. None of these
items have been valued, and in breach of the orders of 20 December 2023 they
have not been sold.
parties did not agree as to the value of those items – with the husband
ascribing a significantly lesser value to the items
(totalling $2,700) to that
ascribed by the wife (totalling $62,026). As already observed, there were orders
made in December 2022
that the items be sold. The husband has not complied with
those orders.
already observed, I have significant reservations as to the husband’s
credibility. I am concerned that the values which he
has attributed to the items
are not accurate. It is problematic that he has not complied with the orders for
sale. Nor has he arranged
for them to be valued.
circumstances where there have already been orders for the sale of the items
– and the husband has taken no steps to comply
with those orders – I
am concerned that a second set of orders for the sale of the items will be
similarly not complied with.
If that were the case, further litigation for
enforcement may become necessary.
Accordingly,
rather than making a second order for the sale of the items, I am satisfied
justice and equity can be achieved by considering
the husband’s retention
of these items under s 75(2)(o) of the Act.
Household furniture
husband proposed that the furniture in the former matrimonial home be sold. He
estimated the items were worth around $25,000.
I note he had attended at the
evidence adduced by the husband
that any of the furniture in the former
matrimonial home was of particular value.
sale was opposed by the wife. She sought to retain the chattels in the former
matrimonial home. She said they were of negligible
husband deposed that he spent approximately $9,900 In late 2022 on household
furniture and chattels when he first moved to the
the circumstances I am satisfied each party has sufficient chattels in their
possession and each will retain those items.
Husband’s assertion there are missing
was the husband’s assertion that there were about $10,000 worth of
additional tools left at the former matrimonial home as
at separation which have
not been sold.
only evidence deposed to by the husband in relation to this matter is contained
at paragraph 66 of his trial affidavit filed 22
July 2024. The husband asserted:
...my solicitors also provided a list of missing items which I had noticed from
the shed after my visit, as agreed between the parties.
The items missing were
of considerable value and were there when I had left the matrimonial home. To
this date, the [wife] has not
provided any explanation as to what has happened
to those items and has ignored any requests to do so.
correspondence from the husband’s solicitors tendered by the wife dated 24
January 2024 it was asserted that the husband
identified 12 items as
“missing” from the garage when he attended there in January but was
“unable to recall all
items in the garage”. There were no values
attributed to the list of items he asserted were “missing” from the
wife denied that she had removed items, or that there were any
“missing” items.
the absence of any evidence at all as to any possible value of the items
asserted to be “missing”, they cannot be included
in the pool. At
any rate, I accept the wife’s evidence that she complied with the orders
for sale of the items in the garage
and that there were no “missing”
Liabilities
was the husband’s assertion that the parties owed storage costs to E
Company mechanics for storing a second compressor at
their business commencing
2021. It was the husband’s assertion in late 2023 that the storage charges
needed to be paid in order
for the compressor to be released. Accordingly, the
orders of 20 December 2023 provided for the parties to pay the storage costs
equal shares so that the compressor held by the mechanics could be sold. It is
common ground that neither party paid any money
to discharge the debt.
the joint balance sheet the husband asserted the amount of $10,520 was owing to
the mechanics. At the commencement of the trial
the wife appeared to accept that
there were storage fees owing. However, it was her case that these should be
paid entirely by the
the final hearing the husband conceded that E Company had ceased trading in
early 2024 and that the compressor had been collected
by him and remained in his
sole possession. He conceded he had not been required to discharge the storage
fees liability prior to
collecting the machine.
though the husband now has possession of the compressor he has failed to sell
husband further asserted that he owes about $6,000 to Mr F for storage of
various items at Mr F’s house. The husband lives
with Mr F. According to
the husband’s Financial Statement he pays $100 per week by way of board to
Mr F. The Financial Statement
did not include any asserted liability to Mr F.
The husband also did not depose in his trial affidavit that he owed any funds to
Mr F. The purported liability has never been raised in correspondence between
the parties.
is a matter of discretion whether to disregard, or to discount the value of some
unsecured liabilities on the basis that they are
vague, uncertain or
unreasonably incurred (see
In the Marriage of Biltoft
[1995] FamCAFC 45
(1995) 126 FLR
The Court can disregard an asserted liability if it is sufficiently
uncertain, or unlikely to be enforced. There may also be circumstances
it might be unjust to include a liability. For instance, if the liability has
been incurred deliberately, or in reckless
disregard of the other party’s
potential entitlement.
an invoice dated January 2024 was tendered, it is entirely unclear to me that
any monies are owed to E Company. According
to the husband, the business has
come to an end. The compressor was collected by the husband and no funds were
required to be paid
by him to secure its release. There were no letters of
demand produced by the husband. In his Financial Statement filed 22 July 2024
and adopted by the husband at the outset of his evidence, there was no reference
to funds owing to E Company.
there was no evidence – beyond the husband’s mere assertion –
that any funds were owing to his cousin
for storage of items on his premises. Mr
F was not on affidavit. There was no record of any agreement. There was no
record of any
demand being made for payment. Any such alleged liability is not
included in the husband’s Financial Statement. I am not satisfied
asserted liability is genuine, or that if genuine it is likely to be enforced.
the circumstances I am not prepared to include either asserted liability in the
asset pool.
Findings as to the pool
the reasons outlined I am satisfied that the pool of assets and liabilities is
B Street, Suburb C
$680,000 – to be sold
Net proceeds of sale of auctioned items
Net proceeds of forklift truck
Wife’s bank accounts
Husband’s ANZ online saver
Husband’s bank accounts (ANZ Account No...28 and NAB Account No...04)
Husband’s motor vehicle 1
less selling costs
parties do not have any superannuation entitlements remaining.
parties agreed the house will be sold.
IS IT JUST AND EQUITABLE THAT AN ORDER BE MADE?
I make any orders pursuant to s 79(2) of the Act, I must first be satisfied that
it is just and equitable to do so. If I am
so satisfied, I am then empowered to
make such order as I consider appropriate taking into account a number of
factors set out in
ss 79(4) and 75(2) of the Act, insofar as they are relevant.
my view, this is one of the “vast majority of cases” referred to by
the plurality of the High Court in
Bevan v Bevan
[2013] FamCAFC 116
(2013) 279 FLR 1
in which the requirements of s 79(2) of the Act are fairly readily
satisfied. It is plainly just and equitable to make an order pursuant
the Act in these proceedings for a division of property between the parties,
particularly considering the parties’
various contributions over the
course of a long marriage.
CONTRIBUTIONS
determining what orders are to be made pursuant to s 79(4), I must consider all
the contributions made by the parties, “of
all kinds and from all
sources...and then translate such assessment into a percentage of the overall
properties of the parties”;
per Baker and Rowlands JJ in
Aleksovski v
[1996] FamCAFC 111
(1996) 135 FLR 131
somehow give “a reasonable value to all of the elements that go to making
up the entirety of the marriage relationship”;
per Kay J in
requires an holistic consideration – and collective weighing – of
contributions. The ascertaining of an appropriate
percentage – and what
orders represent justice and equity in the particular circumstances of each
particular relationship –
involves the exercise of a “wide
discretion” and “not the performance of a mathematical or accounting
see the Full Court
Dickons v Dickons
(2012) 50 Fam LR
244 at [21] and [24–25].
Initial contributions
is common ground that the parties each came into the relationship with minimal
Contributions during the marriage
is common ground that when the husband was engaged in paid employment he worked
long hours and provided the vast majority of the
funds into the parties’
household. It is also common ground that the wife undertook the vast bulk of the
is also agreed that the wife assisted the husband in administrative tasks
relating to the business. That included her assisting
with the paperwork to give
to the accountant.
wife received an inheritance in 2007 of $92,790.72. The wife deposed she put
much of those monies into a term deposit and that
she was able to use the
interest for her own use during the relationship. She said she contributed some
of those monies to purchasing
furniture. She also funded a trip to Country G.
She retained the balance of those funds post separation.
husband received his inheritance late into the marriage. I have already set out
my findings that the husband withdrew a portion
of those monies in cash. He also
used some funds to purchase furniture post separation. He further deposed he had
savings of $110,000
and $17,000 when he prepared an earlier Financial Statement.
In his oral evidence he conceded these funds were largely the balance
inheritance. Accordingly, little of those inheritance monies could have been
contributed to the marriage.
Family violence
was the wife’s case that the husband subjected her to family violence
throughout the course of their relationship, which
made her contributions more
violence is defined in s 4AB of the Act as:
violent, threatening or other behaviour by a person that coerces or controls a
member of the person’s family ... or causes
the family member to be
trial commenced prior to 10 June 2025. Accordingly the approach I must adopt is
as summarised by Aldridge J in
Martell & Martell
[2023] FedCFAMCIA
71 as follows:
It has to be said, that their Honours terms ‘exceptional’ and
‘narrow’ lose much of their force if cases
involving significant
violence are to be the subject of the application of the principles. Such cases
might have been regarded as
exceptional at the time Kennon was decided but they
cannot today be so regarded. Unfortunately the prevalence of family violence
wide and artificial barriers to its recognition, such as trying to limit its
recognition in property cases to exceptional or narrow
cases, has no basis in
principle. As I shall endeavour to explain shortly, the focus of the
majority’s reasoning was on the
nature and quality of the contributions
themselves which were not limited by such qualifying adjectives.
For the reasons given, the words ‘significantly’ and ‘more
arduous’ are not to be read as coterminous with
‘exceptional’.
Rather, they arise from the basis of the principle itself which focuses on
contributions. If the nature
and extent of a person’s contributions are
made more difficult or harder so that they should be accorded greater weight,
that they should be taken into account in the determining of the outcome,
they have therefore been ‘significantly impacted”
‘more arduous’. The focus is not on the conduct per se, but on its
effects on contributions. The threshold for
recognition is therefore met by
conduct which has a discernible effect on the contributions of the other party
such that it should
be recognised in determining the respective contributions of
the parties.
That, in my view, should be the focus and terms such as
‘exceptional’ or ‘narrow’, or indeed,
add an unnecessary and unacceptable gloss suggesting that
a rare and high level of impact is required and that the violence or its
must be exceptional. That is not however, what their Honours said. All that was
required was a ‘significant adverse
impact’ upon a party’s
contributions. The word ‘significant’ was used, in my opinion, as
describing that
the effect must be sufficient to warrant recognition but not
imparting some artificial threshold. The effect of the conduct must
be such that
a greater weight should be given to the contributions.
More recent cases have softened some of the harshness of the original
application of the principles identified in Kennon. For example,
it is now the
position that the adverse effect of the violence on the contributions of a party
can be inferred from the lay evidence
of the parties and that there is no need
to call evidence to ‘quantify’ that effect (Maine & Maine
FamCAFC 270
(2016) 56 Fam LR 500
...; Britt & Britt
; (2017) FLC 993-764 at
[75]; Keating & Keating
; (2019) FLC 993-894 at
, [52]- [67]; Benson & Drury
[2020] FamCAFC 303
; (2020) FLC 993-998... at
It seems to me that regarding Kennon claims as ‘special’ or
‘exceptional’ is apt to mislead. In reality,
all the majority said
in that case was that a person’s contributions are to be assessed in the
light of all of the circumstances
and where those circumstances have the effect
of making the contributions more difficult, onerous or arduous, that should be
in the assessment of contributions. That, of course, takes place in a
holistic manner (Dickons v Dickons
[2012] FamCAFC 154
; (2012) 50 Fam LR 244;
Jabour & Jabour
[2019] FamCAFC 78
; (2019) FLC 193-898).
The wife’s evidence
wife’s evidence and that of her witnesses was that the husband frequently
subjected her to abusive and coercive, controlling
behaviours. As already set
out, I found the wife to be a credible, genuine and compelling witness, and I
regard her as a witness
wife deposed the abusive behaviours began a few months before the parties’
first child was born in 1979. She said the husband’s
behaviour was often
in the context of him being intoxicated.
wife’s evidence of abuse commencing in around 1979 included that the
(a) punched holes in the wall when he became angry at her;
(b) raised his fists and threatened her;
(c) thew plates of food at her;
(d) threw glasses at her;
(e) threw a bottle of wine at her;
(f) locked her outside at night on an occasion and the wife slept in the car;
(g) threw Mr K to the ground and kicked him; and
(h) threw a knife at her.
around 2005 the wife said the husband’s abuse occurred on an almost daily
basis. She said the abuse included:
(a) verbally abusing her, calling a “cunt”, a
“cocksucker”, a “bastard” and “stupid”,
describing her as “a dog”;
(b) threatening to put her in a mental asylum; and
(c) denigrating her to other people.
wife said that she felt isolated and lonely as friends and family rarely visited
given the husband’s behaviour and conduct.
wife deposed that on one occasion in 2018 when Mr K and his wife visited the
parties the husband became enraged and was screaming
at her. He deliberately
smashed some of her furniture and one of the wife’s porcelain dolls. She
said after that, Mr K and
Ms L did not bring their children to the home, which
made the wife feel increasingly isolated.
Mr K and Ms L moved to Adelaide in 2019 the wife deposed the husband smashed
every picture frame in the house that had a picture
of Mr K and his children and
ripped up the photographs.
wife deposes the parties slept in separate bedrooms from 2018. She said from
2019 she felt so unsafe in the home that she spent
most of her time in her
bedroom to avoid the husband. She said he continued to be nasty to her, calling
her names and breaking her
belongings. She said between 2020 to September 2022
the husband forced her to have sex with him. In her oral evidence she described
being too frightened of him to say no and that she had to consent against her
her oral evidence the wife also said she was scared of the husband, that he
would get very angry with her, that he would scream
at her and throw things.
wife further deposed that from 2021 onwards the husband became financially
controlling. She said he limited her access to funds,
and when he travelled to
Country W in 2022 he left her with no cash. She acknowledged she was in receipt
of Centrelink monies –
which were paid into a joint account. However, she
said she was worried about using funds in joint accounts in case this angered
wife said in late 2022 the husband became angry with her, spat on her and
slapped her face. The wife told Ms L about this incident
and asked Ms L to help
her separate from the husband.
L and Mr K attended at the former matrimonial home in late 2022. It was the
wife’s evidence that she believed the husband
would not be there, and that
she had planned to leave the home that day. However, she said the husband
returned to the home unexpectedly
after the wife sent him a text about the
garage door being open. The wife said the husband was furious and told her she
receive anything by way of property settlement as she had never
worked. She said he threatened to burn the house down with her in
it before she
received anything. He was yelling and called the wife a “fucking
idiot”, a “cunt” and said
she was “crazy and should be
locked up”. In his affidavit the husband denied slapping the wife. He
admitted that he had
spat on her, however said he did not “initiate”
the spitting.
police were called to the home. A family safety notice was issued and the
husband was removed from the home. An interim Intervention
Order was made in
late 2022. There were no breaches of that order, and the application was
subsequently withdrawn in 2023.
relation to the assertion of financial abuse, I am satisfied the wife was able
to access her modest Centrelink monies that were
paid into the parties’
joint Westpac passbook account. I accept the wife was also able to arrange
payments of the parties’
joint bills from that account. At the time the
husband travelled to Country W there was about $3,500 in that account. That
payments made to the husband through Centrelink.
wife also had control over the balance of the funds she received by way of
inheritance in 2007. She has had the benefit of retaining
those funds
post-separation – although I accept she may have been unable to
immediately access those monies at the time the
husband travelled to Country W
as they were invested in term deposits.
the time of the husband’s travel to Country W, there were no funds in the
J Pty Ltd account.
husband has not explained how he funded his three-week trip to Country W. I note
that a number of cash withdrawals were made from
account ending...66 in the
weeks leading up to his departure.
accept the husband removed the sum of $161,213 – joint monies that had
been in a term deposit until early 2022 – from
the parties’ joint
Westpac passbook account immediately upon it being paid into that account. Of
those monies, he paid the
sum of $160,000 into his personal account ending...90.
He had control of those funds, retaining them in that personal account, for
husband misled the wife when he told he had paid those
monies into
superannuation. The wife was unable to access any portion of those moneys for
many months, including during the time
the husband travelled to Country W in
late 2022. When cross-examined about removing these monies from the joint
account, the husband
said these were his inheritance funds. It was pointed out
to him that could not be correct as the term deposit had been in existence
at least 2019 and he only received his inheritance in mid-2021. The husband then
said he did not recall, and that he “never
paperwork”.
accept that the husband controlled the parties’ joint savings in the term
deposit and prevented the wife from accessing those
monies. I also accept that
when the husband was in Country W the wife only had access to funds in the joint
passbook account –
which included funds that were paid from Centrelink for
the benefit of the husband. I accept that the wife would have been worried
accessing funds beyond her own Centrelink monies.
was common ground that in late 2022 – after the husband returned from
Country W – he paid the wife $75,000, being what
he called ‘her
half’ of the term deposit funds. I have already referred to the
wife’s evidence that the husband
told her at separation she would receive
no more funds than that, which I also accept.
Mr K’s evidence
K deposed he recalled his father pinning his mother to the wall with his hand
around her throat, choking her, and shouting. He
said his father was banging his
fist on the wall next to his mother’s head, yelling at her. He said his
father broke the plaster
wall. This occurred when he was about 6 years old.
K deposed that when he was about seven there was an incident where his father
threw plates and glasses at his mother and was yelling
at her. He said he
remembers his mother taking him and his younger brother away from the home to
escape, and they were collected
by a relative. In his oral evidence Mr K
described this incident as being “stuck in my memory” and that it
traumatised
K further deposed as to a family holiday in about 1991 during which he said the
father was “continuously” yelling and
arguing with his mother and
his grandfather removed his father from the home because of his aggressive
behaviour. Mr K said that
when he was a young adult and disagreed with his
father, his father would become aggressive and then take his anger out on the
K deposed to visiting the former matrimonial home in 2005 to visit his mother.
He said his father was verbally abusing his mother,
and that he threw items at
her including his wine glass, plates and other items off the table. Mr K said he
called the police and
he took his mother away from the house that night for her
K recalled an incident in 2018 in which he, Ms L and their children visited his
parents. He said his father was yelling and screaming,
blaming his mother for an
item he could not find. He said his mother was crying and trembling. He said his
father picked up various
items belonging to his mother – including
porcelain dolls, books and furniture, and smashed them on the tiles in the
He said his father also threw other items at his mother. After that
event Mr K and Ms L took the wife home with them where she stayed
for about a
week. Mr K said after that he did not take his children to the house again as he
did not feel it was safe.
Additionally,
Mr K deposed that his father regularly denigrated his mother, in front of him,
his siblings and visitors to the house.
He recalled his father calling his
mother “fucken stupid cunt”, “cock sucker”,
“stupid bitch”
and “mental”. He recalled his father
threatening to send his mother to a “mental ward”. He said friends
some family members stopped visiting the house.
cross-examination Mr K maintained that he had witnessed his father being violent
and abusive towards his mother. He described
his evidence as being a
“brief description of all the things that happened over the years”
to his mother. Mr K was cross-examined
as to why there was no specific date or
incident attached to his assertion that his father spat at his mother. Mr K
said it occurred
so regularly it was impossible to provide any specific
instance. He gave examples of when his father spat in his mother’s face
including if she misplaced his keys, or if she disagreed with something he
was apparent that Mr K struggled with his emotions during cross-examination when
required to recall the father’s behaviour
towards him and his mother. As
already noted, Mr K presented as genuine and credible, and I accept his
Ms L’s evidence
L started dating Mr K in 2009. She said at that time she attended regularly at
the former matrimonial home. She deposed that the
husband drank alcohol to
excess. She said the husband’s behaviour was unpredictable – and
that sometimes he would be
talkative and on other occasions quite aggressive.
She described some family meals as being highly stressful, when the husband was
being very aggressive towards the wife. That included the husband demeaning the
wife calling her “crazy” and “a
fucking cunt”. It also
included the husband throwing food and plates if he did not believe the meal had
been cooked correctly
by the wife.
L also recalled that the husband broke the wife’s items including her
porcelain dolls, her books and her knitting, if he
could not find something or
was unhappy with the meal the wife had prepared.
L said that when she and Mr K had children, they often cut short their visits to
the parties’ home as “we would never
know what type of drunk [the
husband] would be” and whether he would be abusive to the wife.
L also recalled visiting the parties’ home in 2018 when the wife was
crying and the husband was angry and blaming the wife
for losing an item of his.
Ms L deposed the husband was:
...screaming and throwing things at [the wife] such as books and sewing items.
He then started picking up furniture that was in the
room, such as the coffee
table, smashing them in the hallway. [The husband] broke at least one of [the
wife’s] porcelain dolls.
L said she and Mr K then took the wife to their home for about a week as they
did not feel comfortable leaving her in the house
with the husband. Ms L said
that was the last time she took the children to the former matrimonial home.
L said that in late 2022 she and Mr K flew to Melbourne to help the wife move
out. She said the husband turned up and was very
angry. She said he told the
wife she would not get a cent and that he would burn the house down with her in
it if she tried to get
any cash. Ms L said she called the police after the
husband made that threat.
reject the submission made that Ms L was meddling or manipulative or that she
was “more than happy to let [the husband] rot
in the shed”. Those
comments by counsel for the husband were unkind, unhelpful and made without any
proper basis. On the contrary,
Ms L has acted as a supportive daughter in law to
the wife. I regard Ms L as a most impressive witness. She was straightforward
genuine and I accept her evidence.
Mr M’s evidence
M also deposed that he saw his father losing his temper and screaming at his
mother on many occasions. He said his father would
often smash items in anger
and his mother would be distressed. On one occasion about 20 years ago Mr M said
he called the police
when his father had been angry and intimidating towards his
mother. In his oral evidence Mr M said his father had an “anger
tantrum”, that he was throwing stuff, smashing things and out of control.
He said he had also seen his father threaten his
mother, and throw items at her
including ashtrays, glasses, cutlery, knives, forks, plates and glasses of wine.
Mr M said his father
also subjected him to name calling, calling him a
“fucking idiot”, and putting him down in front of his friends. It
apparent from his demeanour that these were uncomfortable memories for Mr M
also accept Mr M’s evidence. He presented as authentic and compelling.
Contemporaneous reports
is not in dispute that there are no police records to corroborate the
wife’s allegations. However, there is evidence that
the wife made reports
of the husband’s poor behaviour towards her, and the impact it had on her
wellbeing well prior to the
parties’ separation. Indeed, the wife raised
the husband’s treatment of her with her general practitioner as early as
2001. They are not a recent invention.
wife was referred to the primary mental health team at X Hospital in 2005 by the
wife’s general practitioner at Y Medical
Centre. That referral letter
refers to the wife experiencing depression and anxiety, low self-esteem,
tearfulness and poor concentration.
The wife had described episodes of panic and
feeling frightened. The referral letter refers to the wife having raised the
violence towards her in 2001. Dr Z described:
The domestic situation is difficult...There is a history of abuse by her
husband. When she talked to me of this in 2001 she was reluctant
outside agencies. (She has little/no family in Australia).
She was prescribed Zoloft in 2002 after becoming very upset on hearing of
grandfather's illness
In 2003 she described chest tightness occurring when under stress ie whenever
husband became drunk. She actually did eventually attend
counseling with [AA
Mental Health Service].
In 2004 after the physical violence had been escalating she actually left him
for a short time. I don't think it was so much the
violence directed at her but
at her disabled son that prompted her to leave. She was given the contact number
for [BB Family Support
Service] but in the end decided to give her husband a 3
month trial (much pressure from his family).
Since then nothing much would appear to have changed.
a report to the wife’s general practitioner in 2011 from Dr CC, psychiatry
registrar at DD Mental Health Service contained
in the file notes of Ms N,
it was recorded that “[h]er husband...has been abusive to her for many
report also contained the following description of the husband by the
She described her husband ... as “moody” and “scary”,
and said he can be abusive and violent in the form
of yelling, and throwing and
breaking things, but has never hit her. He drinks alcohol heavily every day, and
they never go out.
N’s letter to the wife’s general practitioner in 2012 similarly
referred to the wife describing the husband as “moody”
“angry, irritable and demanding”. The wife also reported;
...that he “screams” at her over minor matters daily and that she is
scared of him because of this so tries to minimise
the cause for his anger.
Additionally,
Ms N’s file included a referral from the wife’s General Practitioner
in 2020. That was almost three years
prior to the parties’ separation. In
that referral it was recorded that “her husband is verbally very abusive,
He humiliates
her in front of his friends”.
N’s report to the wife’s General Practitioner in 2020 included
references to the husband making unkind and abusive
comments that embarrassed
the wife and contributed to her low mood, distress and difficulties with sleep.
her report dated June 2024 prepared for these proceedings, Ms N confirmed that
...has consistently reported a very unhappy relationship as her husband. She has
reported that he frequently made unkind, and derogatory
comments about her to
her directly and to his friends and to their family. She reported that he called
her names and accused her
of inappropriate behaviours that she did not do. She
reported that he often “screamed” at her. [The wife] reported
very ashamed and embarrassed by these comments. She reported feeling
scared of him. [The wife] reported that she had tried to get
her husband to stop
these comments, without effect. [The wife] reported times that her husband threw
objects at her when he was angry.
She reported at least one incident when he
locked her out of the home.
[The wife] reported that her husband used alcohol excessively. She reported he
regularly drank from early in the morning until night,
and that when intoxicated
his behaviour toward her was “nastier” and more distressing.
N also observed that prior to separation, the wife
...reported little contact with her children as contact with them provoked angry
interactions with her husband which she found intolerable.
Further, she reported
that her husband forbade her from speaking to their children.
The husband’s evidence
was notable that in his trial affidavit the husband did not respond to each
allegation by the wife and her witnesses with particularity.
Rather, the husband
deposed that the parties’ relationship was mostly civil and respectful. He
acknowledged the parties had
some arguments, but “firmly” denied
there was any violence as deposed by the wife. He specifically denied having
her or “raised a hand” to her. The husband also denied that
he had been violent to the children. The only concession
he made was that the
parties spat at each other on about the date of separation – although he
asserted he did not initiate
to the husband, the relationship was progressing well until after he returned
from a holiday in Country W in about mid-September
2022. He said the wife then
travelled to Adelaide to stay with Mr K until about October 2022. He said after
that time the wife was
“always attempting to provoke me and entice me into
escalating our arguments”. He said he just ignored the wife’s
attempts to “incite” him. He said the parties then often argued
my personal bank
account” to try to end the arguments, but she wanted more funds.
was the husband’s evidence that he was “ambushed” and
“set up” in November 2022. He said there were
discussions about the
house and the wife spat on his face and he spat back. The husband said Ms L
blocked the husband from leaving
the house and Mr K grabbed him and pulled him
to the ground.
husband deposed that in February 2023 when the husband returned to the former
matrimonial home to collect personal belongings
Mr K assaulted him and ripped
his shirt. The husband annexed a photograph to his trial affidavit showing a
man’s torso in a
plaid shirt with a torn pocket. As already noted, the
husband conceded Mr K did not tear the husband’s shirt, and the photograph
was not of the husband, but of another relative.
was the husband’s evidence that the wife, Mr K, Mr M and Ms L had all
conspired together and lied about him being violent
in order to remove him from
the former matrimonial home and secure a better financial outcome for the wife
from these proceedings.
Findings as to violence
do not agree that the evidence of the wife or her witnesses was inconsistent or
vague. The fact that the wife could not recall “what
time of year”
it was or which hand he had used to punch the wall in 1979 when the husband
assaulted her did not detract from
the veracity of her evidence. Similarly, that
the wife could not recall which hand the husband used to throw a bottle of wine
her, or in which direction she moved to avoid being hit by the bottle in
relation to an incident 40 years ago did not undermine her
credibility.
that Mr K could not recall the time of year regarding the incident he witnessed
as a young child was not surprising. He
was only about six at the time of that
event and it would be odd if he was able to remember the sorts of details that
of him by the husband’s counsel. He was able to recall where
the family was living at the time of that incident – which
is consistent
with the level of recollection that might be expected given Mr K’s age and
the time and the years that have passed
wife and her witnesses each recalled different events. I do not agree that this
undermined their evidence. Rather, they each gave
evidence of a variety of
events that they independently recalled. That there were many different events
referred to across the affidavits
of the wife and her witnesses, supports a
finding that the husband’s abusive behaviour was frequent.
wife, Ms L and Mr K all gave consistent evidence in relation to the incident at
the former matrimonial home in 2018 when the husband
was enraged and
deliberately destroyed some of the wife’s personal items. It is notable
that Ms L and Mr K declined from that
time to bring their children to the home
as the husband’s behaviour was too unpredictable.
already set out I found the wife and each of her witnesses to be credible and
genuine witnesses.
am satisfied to the requisite standard that the husband engaged in a pattern of
acts including multiple incidents of property damage,
assaults, threats,
humiliation and verbal abuse, and intimidation and coercive behaviour which
frightened and controlled the wife.
I am satisfied that the violence perpetrated
by the husband on the wife was enduring, significant and frequent.
The impact on the wife.
wife deposed that the husband’s abusive behaviour made her feel fearful,
anxious, isolated and alone. She said his behaviour
impacted her self-esteem.
was Ms N’s evidence that the wife had consistently reported her mood to be
low and her anxiety high since the referral in
2011. She also noted the wife
“acknowledged chronic low self worth”, and that post separation she
had spoken “repeatedly
and repetitively of the difficult experiences
during her marriage”, demonstrating distress congruent with her
recollections.
Ms N concluded:
...symptoms of anxiety and depression have been present since 2011 and have
interfered with [the wife’s] functioning. Consistent
themes of rumination
include her husband’s unpleasant behaviour and [the wife’s] efforts
to minimize conflict with him.
Patterns of low mood, low self esteem and
hopelessness are also linked with her experience of her husband’s
behaviour as she
has felt unable to reduce or avoid his angry behaviour toward
(as per original)
already observed, Ms N was an impressive witness and I accept her evidence.
am satisfied the husband’s treatment of the wife contributed to her low
self-esteem, her low mood, feelings of hopelessness
and isolation, and her
anxiety. I am also satisfied that she was fearful of the husband, and that she
endeavoured to modify her behaviour
so that he would not be antagonised.
all the evidence into account, I am satisfied the wife’s contributions
were made more difficult or arduous as a result
of the husband’s behaviour
over the parties’ lengthy marriage, such that they are to be given greater
The approach by counsel for the husband
for the husband appeared to labour under a number of misapprehensions regarding
family violence, and the evidence upon which
this Court can rely in order to
make findings that there has been family violence.
Counsel appeared
to consider there had been no “physical violence” as the
wife’s evidence was that the husband had
“never hit” her. It
is archaic to suggest that in the absence of a specific allegation that the
husband “hit”
her, the wife’s evidence of the husband’s
behaviour towards her and that of her witnesses could not be characterised
physical violence. His behaviour as deposed to by the wife and her witnesses
quite clearly included physical acts of violence.
The line of
questioning that the wife could not be reporting sexual abuse because the wife
did not explicitly tell the husband “no”
and that she was “not
forced” to have sexual intercourse was also archaic.
cross-examination of the wife and Mr K as to ‘what time of year’ did
the alleged incident take place, or ‘what
hand did he use’, or
‘which way did you duck’ was unhelpful. These questions were put in
relation to incidents
that occurred many decades ago. Mr K was a young child. It
is not surprising that the wife and Mr K could not recall this level of
Counsel referred
to the wife being unable to establish her allegations of violence and abuse
“beyond a reasonable doubt”.
That is obviously not the relevant
standard of proof.
emphasised a lack of police reporting and/or charges being laid as supporting
that the alleged violence did not occur. Submissions
to that effect overlooked
the wife’s age and cultural background which provided context for the
non-reporting.
for the husband also referred several times to the police having withdrawn the
Intervention Order as corroborating that the
allegations were fabricated. It was
asserted by counsel for the husband that the police determined to withdraw the
application on
the basis that there was a “lack of evidence” to
support the order being made on a final basis. There was no evidence,
husband’s assertion, as to the reason the police withdrew their
application. At any rate, I am not bound by the
determination of the police to
withdraw the application. I note further that the statement made by the wife in
support of her Intervention
Order was not in evidence before me. Accordingly, I
do not know what evidence was to be adduced in the Magistrates’ Court and
whether there was any difference between that and the evidence that this Court
the grounds upon which an Intervention Order can be made requires the Court to
be satisfied that that family violence has
been perpetrated
is likely to occur again. The parties separated on 27 November 2022, and there
had been no breaches of the interim Intervention
Order at the time of the
scheduled final hearing 11 months later in October 2023. That may provide an
explanation as to why the decision
was made not to proceed with the application.
the absence of any evidence from the police it would be entirely speculative for
me to put any weight on the decision made by them
to withdraw the application
without the testing of evidence as indicative of the untruthfulness of the
wife’s allegations.
Post-separation contributions
wife has had the benefit of living in the former matrimonial home to the
exclusion of the husband since November 2022. That property
is unencumbered.
Section 75(2)(o)
husband has had the benefit of the proceeds of sales of the trailer and shipping
container. As already observed, I have significant
reservations as to the
accuracy of the husband’s evidence as to the value of those items. In
relation to the shipping container
the husband was required by order made 20
December 2023 to provide particulars of that sale. He has not done so.
the husband’s evidence he gave away the firearms.
already noted Mr F – who received a trailer and the firearms – was
not called by the husband.
husband has also retained two compressors, a machine and two additional
trailers. All of those items were required to be sold
by orders of this Court
with which the husband chose not to comply. Nor did he attend to having the
items valued. He did not disclose
until part way through the running of the case
that the second of the compressors had been released into his possession.
have already set out the differences in the parties’ estimates of the
value of the chattels retained by the husband, and my
concerns about the
likelihood of noncompliance with an order for sale.
all the circumstances, I am satisfied it is appropriate that I take the
husband’s retention of the cash payments for the
trailer and shipping
container, the ‘giving away’ of his firearm collection and his
retention of various other items
into account under s 75(2)(o) of the Act.
relation to the cash withdrawals made by the husband pre-separation, I am
satisfied that the husband accessed those funds from
all three of the accounts
and used those funds substantially for his own use and benefit, to the exclusion
of the wife.
wife also retained the balance of her funds from her inheritance. I was not
advised as to the quantum as at separation, or how
those funds have been
parties’ access to those funds, to the exclusion of the other, are also
matters I take into account.
RELEVANT CONSIDERATIONS PURSUANT TO SECTION 75(2) OF THE
already observed at the first day of trial, counsel for the husband sought to
adjourn the proceedings to enable his client to adduce
additional medical
evidence. He asserted this was relevant to determine the question of any
adjustment pursuant to s 75(2) on the
basis of the husband’s health. As
noted, I refused the adjournment application. However, I indicated that if the
husband sought
to adduce some updating evidence as to his health, I would
consider that application.
such application was ever made. Indeed, counsel for the husband opened –
and closed – his case on the basis that there
were no grounds for any
adjustment pursuant to s 75(2) of the Act in favour of either party.
remain perplexed as to why counsel sought an adjournment ostensibly to adduce
medical evidence to support an adjustment on the basis
of s 75(2) factors of the
Act and then neither sought to lead any evidence from his client in this regard,
nor assert there was any
basis for an adjustment in his client’s favour. I
was left wondering what the purpose was then, for the earlier adjournment
application.
parties are in their sixties, and neither are in employment, or likely to secure
employment.
husband wears a hearing aid, which costs him around $44 a week. He also has
diabetes, high cholesterol and high blood pressure.
He takes medication for
those matters along with medication for a “bad back”. He is in
receipt of the aged pension.
wife is also in receipt of the aged pension. She describes herself as being in
poor physical and mental health.
ASSESSMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS AND PROSPECTIVE NEEDS
party brought into the marriage any assets of significance. It was a lengthy
marriage, that produced three children. When
he was engaged in employment, the
husband worked long hours, and his income supported the household. The wife
assisted the husband
with his business, provided the vast majority of care for
the parties’ children and attended to the running of the household.
already set out, I am satisfied the husband subjected the wife to family
violence throughout the marriage, which made the wife’s
contributions more
note the wife has had the benefit of living in the unencumbered former
matrimonial home post-separation to the exclusion of the
husband. She retained
the balance of her inheritance at separation.
have also considered the items retained by the husband and/or divested by the
husband from him as well as considered the husband’s
greater access to the
parties’ cash funds in the months leading up to the parties’
separation.
all the contributions of all kinds and from all sources made by each of the
parties across their long relationship, I am
satisfied that these are
appropriately assessed at 57 per cent to the wife and 43 per cent to the
all the circumstances I am not of the view that it is appropriate for there to
be any further adjustment in favour of either party
on the basis of the s 75(2)
considerations.
ORDERS TO BE MADE
husband’s “keep” is currently $86,814. The wife’s is
$44,385. Taking that into account, in order to achieve
an overall division of
assets 57 per cent to the wife and 43 per cent to the husband, the house will be
sold and the proceeds divided
in the percentages as determined with the sum of
$30,398 to be paid to the wife from the husband’s share.
proceeds of the auctions that are currently with D Auctions will be divided in
the percentages assessed.
all of the foregoing reasons, I make the orders as are set out.
I certify that the preceding three hundred and
seven (307) numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of
Honourable Justice
Dated: 15 August 2025
RTF format (978 KB)
Signed PDF/A format