Fairfax & Fairfax [2021] FamCAFC 166 (27 August 2021)
FAMILY COURT OF AUSTRALIA
Fairfax & Fairfax
[2021] FamCAFC 166
Appeal from:
FCCA Orders dated 27 January 2021
Appeal number(s):
NOA 8 of 2021
File number(s):
BRC 720 of 2020
Judgment of:
Date of judgment:
Catchwords:
– APPEAL – PARENTING
– Appeal against interim parenting orders suspending the children’s
time with the mother
– Where the appeal is futile – Where subsequent
orders were made for the mother to spend supervised time with the children
– Where the findings and conclusions of the primary judge were open on the
evidence – No error established – Appeal
dismissed – No order
as to costs.
– APPLICATION IN AN APPEAL –
Application to adduce further evidence – Where the further evidence is not
to the appeal and does not establish error on the part of the primary
judge – Application dismissed.
Legislation:
Family Law Act 1975
ss 65DAA(3)
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth) r 19.34
Cases cited:
(1998) 197 CLR 172;
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
[1936] HCA 40
Appeal Division
Number of paragraphs:
Date of hearing:
The Appellant:
Litigant in person
Counsel for the Respondent:
Solicitor for the Respondent:
Best Wilson Buckley Family Law
Counsel for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Mr McGregor
Solicitor for the Independent Children's Lawyer:
Wallace Perkins Family Law
BRC 720 of 2020
APPEAL DIVISION OF THE FAMILY COURT OF
INDEPENDENT CHILDREN'S LAWYER
DATE OF ORDER:
THE COURT ORDERS THAT:
1. The appellant’s Application in an Appeal filed 13 August 2021 be
2. The appeal be dismissed.
Note: The form of the order is
subject to the entry in the Court’s records.
Note: This copy of the
Court’s Reasons for judgment may be subject to review to remedy minor
typographical or grammatical errors
(r 17.02A(b) of the
Family Law Rules 2004
(Cth)), or to record a variation to the order pursuant to 17.02
Family Law Rules
IT IS NOTED
that publication of this judgment by this
Court under the pseudonym
Fairfax & Fairfax
has been approved by the
Chief Justice pursuant to
s 121(9)(g)
Family Law Act 1975
REASONS FOR
INTRODUCTION
1 On 27 January 2021, a Federal Circuit Court judge
made interim orders that the parties’ four children live with Mr Fairfax
(“the father”), that the previous orders providing for the children
to spend time with Ms Fairfax (“the mother”)
be suspended, and that
a recovery order issue in relation to the children to return them to the
father’s care. The primary
judge also made orders that the father ensure
the children continue to communicate with the mother by video call, and that the
be restrained from removing or attempting to remove the children from the
father’s care until further order. Finally there
was an order made
transferring the proceedings to the Family Court of Australia.
2 Apart from that latter order, the mother by her Amended Notice of Appeal
filed 29 April 2021, appeals against the orders of the
primary judge. The appeal
is resisted by the father and the Independent Children's Lawyer
3 For the reasons which follow, the appeal must be dismissed.
4 Both the mother and father are presently 44 years
of age. They commenced cohabitation in 2004, married in 2006 and separated,
initially under one roof, in 2018. By then all four children had been
5 On 21 January 2020, the father commenced proceedings in the Federal Circuit
Court of Australia, which proceedings ultimately encompassed
both parenting and
property matters.
6 During the currency of that litigation, various iterations of interim
parenting orders have prevailed. As at the time of the hearing
primary judge, the relevant interim orders provided that the parties have equal
shared parental responsibility, and for
the children to live with the father,
but spend specified time with the mother.
7 Pursuant to those orders, the children went into the mother’s care on
4 December 2020 and were due to return to the father’s
care on Christmas
Day 2020. However the mother thereafter kept the children (although she claims
that the father simply failed to
attend to collect them), but whatever be the
case, as at 27 January 2021, the children had not spent time with the father
December 2020.
8 It was against that background that the father sought a recovery order for
the children, and that the mother’s time with the
children return to being
supervised. That proposal was supported by the ICL. However whilst the primary
judge made the recovery order,
as has been noted, her Honour suspended the
mother’s time with the children and transferred the matter to the Family
of Australia. In the transcript of the hearing, which stands as the
reasons for the orders, the primary judge said:
...I’m going to defer the matter of supervised
time at the moment. Hopefully, the matter will be shortly received by a Justice
of the Family Court and I am going to suspend the mother’s time until
further order...
(Transcript 27 January 2021, p.8 lines 15–18)
9 Subsequently the mother brought this appeal, and on 30 March 2021 the
primary judge heard the mother’s application for a stay
of her orders of
27 January 2021. Whilst that application was refused, the primary judge then
also made orders, pending the appeal,
for the children to spend supervised time
with the mother at specified times. Before me, no party raised any issue about
the primary
judge being able to make further interim parenting orders in
proceedings which were no longer in the Federal Circuit Court of Australia,
hence I need say nothing more about that.
THE APPLICATION IN AN APPEAL
10 By Application in an Appeal filed 13 August 2021
the mother seeks to adduce further evidence in the appeal. She also seeks an
of time to file her schedule of costs, which was not filed within the
time imposed by the Appeal Registrar’s order.
11 Section 93A(2) of the
Family Law Act 1975
(Cth) (“the
Act”) gives this Court a discretion to admit further evidence on appeal.
That power is subject to s 96 but
is otherwise unfettered by legislation.
12 The principles relevant to the discretion were discussed in the High Court
(1998) 197 CLR 172, where McHugh, Gummow and Callinan JJ
114. No doubt the Full Court will readily admit further
evidence which is not in dispute and which the Court is able to evaluate
take into account in considering the appeal without the necessity to have the
proceedings re-heard. Further evidence of this
kind is particularly likely to be
admitted where the evidence relates to events occurring after trial. In the case
of undisputed
evidence which the Full Court can evaluate as part of the evidence
in the appeal, the discretion to admit the evidence may even be
exercised without the Full Court considering what effect it would have had on
the trial judge's decision. In that context,
the likely effect of the further
evidence on the Full Court's view of the evidence before the trial judge is the
important consideration.
Where there is no need for a new trial or extensive
taking of evidence, other discretionary factors such as the availability of the
evidence at the trial and the need for finality of litigation are likely to be
more relevant in the exercise of the discretion than
the effect that the
evidence would have had at the trial.
116. The failure to have adduced the evidence before the primary judge will be
a variable factor, the weight of which will depend
upon all the other factors
pertinent to the case. Where the evidence has been deliberately withheld, the
failure to call it will
ordinarily weigh heavily in the exercise of the
discretion. In other cases, the failure to call the evidence even if it could
been discovered by the exercise of reasonable diligence may be of little
significance. No invariable rule concerning the failure
to call the evidence can
or should be laid down in view of the wide discretion conferred on the court by
the section.
148. ... The power conferred by s 93A(2) is not a solvent for correcting orders
that the Full Court regards as unsatisfactory but
which contain no appealable
error. New hearings are not to be ordered merely because there is a real chance
that a different order
might be made by a different judge or that there is a
real chance that the order under appeal does not serve the best interests of
child. It is true that finality of litigation cannot play the part in the
exercise of the s 93A(2) discretion that it does in
the exercise of the
discretion to order a new trial in common law proceedings. Nevertheless, it does
have a role to play in the exercise
of the s 93A(2) discretion. Whatever the
limits of that role, it at least rules out the admission of further evidence
where the appellant
cannot establish any error in the making of the orders but
seeks to have a new trial because on the whole of the evidence now available
different orders might be made at that trial.
13 Relevant to appeals concerning parenting orders, the High Court went
117. The discretion to admit further evidence obviously
needs to be exercised with much care in parenting cases. The decision as to
should have the day to day care of children will so often be an agonising one,
as indeed it is in the present case where both
parents are anxious for their
children’s welfare. The advantage said to be attached to the opportunity
of a judge at first
instance to see and hear the witnesses on issues of
credibility and the like may perhaps on occasions be exaggerated. Nevertheless,
those advantages are likely to be real ones in a parenting case heard by a
specialist judge whose decision will involve a choice
of who will be a better
“custodian” of the children: sometimes either parent would be an
excellent choice, and often
neither would be ideal.
118. The need for caution is particularly great when an order for a change in
the residence of children has been made and the appellant
seeks to tender
further evidence pointing to changes in circumstances, outlook or apparent
welfare. In all but the most ideal of
circumstances, some time will be taken by
children to adapt to their different situations. So too the public and private
in the finality of litigation must be given some weight even in cases
of this kind. The important private interests of children are
unlikely, save in
special circumstances, to be served by frequent displacements of them and the
uncertainty of prolonged and repetitive
proceedings.
14 The mother filed two affidavits on 13 August 2021 in conjunction with her
Application in an Appeal to adduce further evidence.
The first affidavit
comprising 99 pages purports to reply to the submissions of the ICL made in her
Summary of Argument filed 11
June 2021, and to that extent the affidavit annexes
the following documents: a parenting plan proposed by the mother with a
affidavit sworn 19 July 2021; an undated affidavit of the mother
purportedly filed in QCAT proceedings in relation to a costs dispute
between the
mother and her former lawyers; and a letter dated 28 July 2021 (including
annexures) addressed to the Department of Justice
and Attorney-General in
relation to an application for a Blue Card exemption.
15 It is evident that each of the documents sought to be adduced all
post-date the hearing before the primary judge. However it is
not at all clear
what their relevance is to the appeal, nor how they demonstrate error on the
part of the primary judge.
16 The further affidavit will not be admitted.
17 The second affidavit of the mother filed in conjunction with her
Application in an Appeal is principally directed towards matters
relating to
costs. However that part of the affidavit is a somewhat rambling discourse about
the conduct of the proceedings to date,
and the attached schedule is not
calculated by reference to the relevant scale, and somewhat astoundingly, claims
costs totalling
$1,710,200.00. The schedule further seeks “damages sought
as restitution” in the sum of $2,800,000.00.
18 Insofar as it seeks to lead additional evidence relevant to the substance
of the appeal, the affidavit merely says “I wish
to rely on this and my
previous affidavits and further affidavits of further evidence.” Plainly
no basis for the admission
of any of that material is established.
19 The appellant’s Application in an Appeal filed 13 August 2021 will
be dismissed, although I will allow her to rely upon the
schedule of costs.
THE APPEAL GENERALLY
20 The appeal is from interim parenting orders. The
Amended Notice of Appeal filed 29 April 2021 does not indicate whether leave to
appeal is sought, although in that document, the previous iteration of the
Notice of Appeal, which sought leave to appeal, has been
varied by striking out
the “X” next to the word “yes”. In any event, despite
whatever ambiguity exists, leave
to appeal is not required.
21 The appeal is brought from the exercise of a discretion. The constraints
upon appellate interference with a discretionary decision
are well known. In
House v The King
(1936) 55 CLR 499
said at 504–505:
The manner in which an appeal against an exercise of
discretion should be determined is governed by established principles. It is
enough that the judges composing the appellate court consider that, if they had
been in the position of the primary judge, they
would have taken a different
course. It must appear that some error has been made in exercising the
discretion. If the judge acts
upon a wrong principle, if he allows extraneous or
irrelevant matters to guide or affect him, if he mistakes the facts, if he does
not take into account some material consideration, then his determination should
be reviewed and the appellate court may exercise
its own discretion in
substitution for his if it has the materials for doing so. It may not appear how
the primary judge has reached
the result embodied in his order, but, if upon the
facts it is unreasonable or plainly unjust, the appellate court may infer that
in some way there has been a failure properly to exercise the discretion which
the law reposes in the court of first instance. In
such a case, although the
nature of the error may not be discoverable, the exercise of the discretion is
reviewed on the ground that
a substantial wrong has in fact
22 Additionally, it must be said that generally the grounds of appeal in the
Amended Notice of Appeal filed 29 April 2021 are not
in fact proper grounds of
appeal, and certainly do not engage with the principles in
I propose to address the challenges advanced under them as if they were properly
cast grounds of appeal.
23 I should also note that unfortunately, the mother’s Summary of
Argument extensively comprised a critique of the written reasons
of the primary
judge of 30 March 2021 for refusing the stay of her Honour’s 27 January
2021 orders. Whilst the mother contended
in her oral submissions that that
decision was somehow relevant to this appeal, plainly it was not.
24 Finally, I should note that in practical terms the appeal is futile. Not
only is the mother presently in fact the beneficiary of
subsequent orders
permitting her to spend time with the children pending the appeal, but
thereafter the matter which the primary
judge reserved to the Family Court of
Australia, namely the question of whether the mother’s time with the
children should
be supervised or not, will be able to be agitated by the mother.
Indeed there was no impediment to her doing so even while the appeal
25 However notwithstanding that futility, I will briefly consider the grounds
26 This ground provides:
The Honourable Judge made error as there is no
justification for the making of an order restricting and suspending any time
together between the parent and child and ruling that the children cannot
live with their Mother. There is not a single instance
that exists between the
Mother and her four children. Where the Mother has harmed the children or placed
them at risk of harm or
neglect whilst in her care nor by breaching orders and
therefore no evidence of that occurring.
(As per the original)
reasons given by the primary judge for the
suspension of the mother’s time were brief. Relevantly they provide:
The mother was very unhappy with the orders that were
made by me following a pretty comprehensive hearing, interim hearing. There
two reports of some significance before me. I am concerned that these children
have not attended school in the last term and
have not attended school on a very
important day, their first day back for the New Year, and I have confidence
that, if I make an
order for the children to be returned to their father’s
care this afternoon, the mother will [not] comply with that order...
... I am satisfied on the evidence before me that, if the children are ...
returned to their father ... they will not be at any risk
of harm in the
interim... I am satisfied that he will ensure the children attend school and
ensure the children are supervised at
all times...
(Transcript 27 January 2021, p.7 line 47 to p.8 line
28 It seems tolerably clear that her Honour was satisfied that, whilst
recently in the mother’s care, the children had not been
attending school,
both in 2020 and 2021, but that they would attend school if in the
father’s care. It is therefore simply
not correct to say, as this ground
contends, that there was no articulated justification for making “an order
restricting and
suspending any time” between her and the children, as
patently their education was a significant matter which, given recent
militated against them being in the mother’s care. It is not to the point
that the mother may not have ever harmed
the children, placed them at a risk of
harm, or neglected them; the primary judge was persuaded that she had not
facilitated their
attendance at school, but the father would. Further, no risk
of harm attached to the children whilst in the father’s care.
conclusions were well open to her Honour on the evidence.
29 Moreover it must be understood that the primary judge was suspending the
mother’s time with the children in the anticipation
that, upon the
transfer of the matter to the Family Court of Australia, the question of the
imposition of supervision of the children’s
time with the mother and the
like would be dealt with promptly. Therefore the anticipated time of
“restriction and suspension”
was very limited. That such did not
apparently transpire does not speak to error by the primary judge. In any event,
as I have said,
there are now orders permitting the children to spend time with
the mother.
30 There is no merit in this ground and it fails.
31 This ground provides as follows:
2. The Orders deny four children any time with their
mother. There are no grounds for these orders that make an error in principle
that they deviate from
section 65DAA(3)
Family Law Act 1975
that it is in
the best interests of children to spend substantial and significant time with
each parent.
(As per the original)
32 This ground asserts that the primary judge failed to comply with the
statutory direction in
Act, namely that she was
obliged to consider, amongst other things, whether substantial and significant
time with each parent was
in the best interests of the children.
33 Whilst it would have been better if the primary judge had indeed referred
to the relevant provisions which governed the discretion
that she was about to
exercise, it is plain that against the background of her Honour having
undertaken a more extensive consideration
of the interim parenting arrangements
for these children on 28 January 2020, the 27 January 2021 orders were intended
to be in the
nature of very short term interim orders, pending the Family Court
of Australia becoming seized of the matter and addressing the
appropriate
interim regime pending trial. It is apparent that the question of education
loomed large in the primary judge’s
mind and, inferentially, at least in
the very short term, that issue determined that their best interests lay in
their time with
the mother being temporarily suspended. Therefore it is simply
not correct to say that the primary judge did not consider the children’s
best interests, but rather implicitly she determined that in the very short
term, their best interests lay in them not spending substantial
and significant
time with the mother.
34 Again, in any event, I note that subsequently the primary judge has made
further interim orders permitting the children to spend
supervised time with the
mother. True it is that those orders are expressed to be pending the appeal, but
nonetheless, assuming they
were implemented, the mother ought to have been
spending time with the children over the last few months.
35 This ground has no merit and fails.
36 This ground provides as follows:
3. I did not remove or with-hold the four children from
the other parent. I have been seeking a shared equal-time parenting arrangement
from the outset. Self-represented, I was seeking agreement taking responsibility
for parenting needs at hand in compliance to order
12 of the FCC Orders
28/01/2020:
‘The Parents are to consult with each other about decisions
to be made in the exercise of their shared responsibility as follows:
shall inform the other parent about the decision to be made; b)they shall
consult with each other on terms that they agree;
c) they shall make a genuine
effort to come to a joint decision’
and in accordance with section 63
B of [the Act].
(As per the original)
37 In order for this ground to succeed, the mother would need to demonstrate
that the inferential finding by the primary judge, namely
that the mother had
been wrongfully retaining the children contrary to court order, was not
reasonably open on the evidence, whereas
plainly it was. It was expressly
asserted by the father in his affidavit in support of the application, and the
mother’s denial
of it in her affidavit was fraught with difficulty, in
that it seemed to tacitly concede that she had retained the children contrary
orders, but that doing so was in their best interests.
38 This ground of appeal has no merit and must fail.
39 This ground provides as follows:
8. The Court ignored the contentment of the four
children enjoyed in the weeks over Christmas in the stable, happy care that had
been provided by the Mother they now spend no time with by court-ruling and were
stolen from by needless court-order, a deprivation
of the basic human rights of
child and parent.
(As per the original)
40 This ground appears to contend that the primary judge had no regard to the
fact that the children had enjoyed their recent time
with the mother,
notwithstanding that it had been spent with her contrary to court orders. Whilst
her Honour’s reasons are
brief, there is no reason to think that she
overlooked the mother’s submission and evidence that she has “kept
the children
in a stable base over the last eight weeks”. However given
that the youngest child was, at the time, still six years of age,
and the oldest
only 13, the extent to which the children’s wishes, or indeed any alleged
enjoyable experience they had whilst
spending time with the mother was deserving
of weight, was exquisitely a matter for her Honour.
41 There is no merit to this ground of appeal and it fails.
42 No ground of appeal is established. The appeal
must be dismissed.
43 In the event that the appeal was dismissed, both
the father and the ICL sought that the mother pay their costs.
44 Although not as badly infected, the father’s schedule of costs,
which claimed at least $14,125.01, suffered from a related
strain of the same
disease as did the mother’s schedule. One only needs to recognise that it
included no less than two and
a half days of counsel’s preparation to
appreciate that it was likely not prepared on a strictly party/party basis. That
to say, the amount of work claimed was likely in excess of that reasonably
necessary to achieve justice in, and reasonably proportionate
self-represented litigant’s four ground appeal, arising from a proceeding
where the entire transcript occupied only nine
pages, and where there was no
appeal book ordered (see r 19.34 of the
Family Law Rules 2004
45 The likely erroneous basis on which the schedule was prepared is also
apparent from the fact that each claimed solicitor/client
item is replicated in
the party/party bill, a most unlikely coincidence.
46 The ICL’s schedule simply claimed an
$4,424.09, which although seemingly reasonable, absent detail, was unable to be
47 I do not propose to either, in effect, tax the father’s schedule, or
guess the items in the ICL’s schedule. Of course,
as counsel conceded, I
could nonetheless fix an amount for both the respondent’s and ICL’s
48 However, whilst the appeal was unsuccessful, the mother’s present
financial circumstances are fraught, and the father’s
are not. Whilst it
may be likely that the mother is ultimately entitled to a significant property
settlement, I cannot presently
determine what range it might lie in. Therefore I
am not attracted to making an order for costs, but deferring their recovery
the final property settlement.
49 I decline to make any order for costs.
I certify that the preceding forty-nine (49)
numbered paragraphs are a true copy of the Reasons for Judgment of the
Honourable Justice
Dated: 27 August 2021
RTF format (401 KB)
Signed PDF/A format