Nyungar Circle of Elders v West Australian Newspapers Ltd [2001] HREOCA 1 (12 April 2001)
HUMAN RIGHTS AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
RACIAL DISCRIMINATION ACT 1975
Matter No. H 98/27
ALBERT CORUNNA, RICHARD WILKES, VIOLET NEWMAN, MINGLI WANJURRI, LEISHA
EATTS, ROBERT BROPHO AND KEN COLBUNG COMPRISING THE NYUNGAR
Complainants
WEST AUSTRALIAN NEWSPAPERS LTD
REASONS FOR DECISION
Inquiry Commissioner Graeme Innes AM
Location of Hearing: Perth
Hearing Dates: 29 April 1999
Date of Decision: 12 April 2001
Appearances: Mr Greg McIntyre instructed by Dwyer Durack for the
complainants
Mr Wayne Martin QC instructed by Freehill Hollingdale and Page for the
1. INTRODUCTION
This complaint arises from a cartoon entitled "Alas Poor Yagan" ("the
cartoon") published in The West Australian newspaper on 6 September
1997. It is
alleged that this cartoon is offensive to Aboriginal people because of their
race in breach of
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
(Cth) ("the
The complaint was lodged on 24 September 1997 by Ms Hannah McGlade on behalf
of the Nyungar Circle of Elders.
On 4 March 1998 the Race Discrimination Commissioner ("the Commissioner"),
being of the view that the cartoon fell within the exemptions
RDA, declined to continue to inquire into the complaint on the ground that the
matter complained of was not unlawful. The
complainants required the matter to
be referred to the Commission for public inquiry and the matter was so referred
by the Commissioner.
During the course of the inquiry, the complainants made application for the
joinder of Mr Dean Alston, the cartoonist, as a respondent
to the inquiry. By
decision of 15 October 1998 (written reasons dated 17 November 1998), Inquiry
Commissioner Peter Johnston declined
to grant this application. On 29 April 1999
in Perth I conducted a public hearing into the complaint. The following are my
for decision.
2. THE CARTOON
A copy of the cartoon is Annexure A to these reasons.
It is alleged that the cartoon breaches
for a number of reasons. First,
it presents a demeaning portrayal of Yagan, an ancestor of the complainants.
Second, it is alleged
that the cartoon contains references to the Waugyl, a
religious figure. Third, it treats the issue of death in a manner which causes
offence. Fourth, it provides intimate details of the ancestry of individuals and
offends them. Fifth, it identifies individuals who
are not ordinarily in the
public arena and draws them into the arena of public humiliation.
complainant’s representative, Mr McIntyre, particularised the matters of
concern in the cartoon in the following way:
Just to turn to the cartoon itself, and point to the particular matters which
we say are of concern. Firstly, in the first frame
it is indicated that this a
story from the Dreamtime, which as I've already said, is a commonly understood
aspect of Aboriginal culture.
It indicates that it's a story about Yagan's head
returning home, and there had been some prior publication of this issue, so that
was a matter which was within the public arena and clearly identifies it as
being about a matter of Aboriginal cultural concern,
given the context of the
previous newspaper articles.
In the next frame it's put in the context of Mr Colbung teaching young people
and that, we would suggest, is a cultural pursuit, which
is commonly understood
to be part of Aboriginal practice. It's in that frame that the ancestry of Mr
Colbung is dissected, and it
is put into his mouth to tell the children that
some of his ancestors were Danish, so that he's a Viking Nyungar.
The next frame addresses Mr Bodney, where Mr Colbung is telling the children
that Mr Bodney's people are Jamaican, so he's a Calypso
Nyungar. Then there is
the reference to Albert Corunna who is said to be a Pilbara Nyungar, and there
are a number of other things
happening in that frame. The children respond,
"But we thought the Nyungars were from around here", so there comes the barb, if
you like, which suggests that the individuals are in fact dishonestly portraying
themselves as being connected to Yagan.
The cartoon has Mr Colbung responding by saying, "Shut up, or the Wagyl will
get you" which is the first introduction of the specific
religious mythical
ancestral figure in a disparaging light. It may be familiar to you, but you'll
hear evidence about the role of
the Waugyl as a serpent existing at the time of
creation whose role was at that time to create the waterways, and who remains as
part of the life force within waters throughout the area, in fact it was said
throughout the country, but of a particular identification
and name, the Waugyl,
in relation to Nyungars of the Swan Valley.
In the next frame there is then some reference to a collection of other
people, to Richard Wilkes, whom I haven't mentioned before,
but in terms of
being a public figure, probably sits somewhere on the borderline, having had
some public exposure but of a limited
kind. Mr Robert Bropho is mentioned to -
I think it could fairly be said - to have had a fair degree of public exposure.
Wanjurri Nungala, who I suspect has not had any significant public
exposure, and Leisha Eatts who will give evidence as to her complete
public exposure.
In the next frame there is yet another aspersion cast where Mr Colbung says,
"The four of them took off while the going was good"
and the innocent child has
then had put in its mouth the words, "And while the grant money was good" which
of course is another derogatory
imputation that the persons who were involved in
the matter were merely doing it for reasons associated with greed. There is
a side comment put into the mouth of Mr Colbung, "That Wagyl is getting
closer to you lad" which again is just an insulting use of
that Dreamtime
It then starts to come to its conclusion where in the next frame Mr Colbung
is depicted as saying, "And they brought back Yagan's
head" and the children
asking, "And did it unite all the Noongars, Uncle Colbung?" and the response in
the next frame, "Well, er."
Now, that seems to be the political comment which
it might be said was in the public interest, that there was some disunity among
the Nyungars, and it's clearly done in an inferential way, perhaps in the
context of other newspaper articles which had highlighted
questions of
disagreement among the group as to the process of going and collecting Yagan's
head and bringing it back.
If that was all the cartoon dealt with, we might have less reason to
complain. However, it too of course follows a theme of requiring
of Aboriginal
people degrees of unity which are not required of other sectors of the public in
the conduct of their public and private
affairs. In that sense it also is a
derogatory comment which is not justified in the public interest. Finally, in
the final frame
there are words put into the mouth of the head of Yagan,
apparently sitting in a box in the corner of the frame, where we suggest
have him speaking at all is some degree of insult; to have him commenting on the
scenario is another degree of insult; and
the words that he uses is a further
degree of insult where it is put into his mouth, "Crikey, give me a warm beer
and a quiet pommy
pub any day."
3. THE LEGISLATIVE PROVISIONS
SECTION 18B
REASON FOR DOING AN ACT
(a) an act is done for 2 or more
reasons; and
(b) one of the reasons is the race, colour or national or ethnic origin of a
person (whether or not it is the dominant reason or a
substantial reason for
doing the act);
then, for the purposes of this Part, the act is taken to be done because of
the person's race, colour or national or ethnic origin.
SECTION 18C OFFENSIVE BEHAVIOUR BECAUSE OF RACE, COLOUR OR NATIONAL OR
ETHNIC ORIGIN
It is unlawful for a person to do an act, otherwise than in
private, if:
(a) the act is reasonably likely, in all the circumstances, to offend, insult,
humiliate or intimidate another person or a group of people;
(b) the act is done because of the race, colour or national or ethnic origin
of the other person or of some or all of the people in
For the purposes of subsection (1), an act is taken not to be
done in private if it:
(a) causes words, sounds, images or writing to be communicated to the
(b) is done in a public place; or
(c) is done in the sight or hearing of people who are in a public place.
In this section:
public place
” includes any place to which the public have
access as of right or by invitation, whether express or implied and whether or
not a charge is made for admission to the place.
SECTION 18D EXEMPTIONS
Section 18C does not render unlawful
anything said or done reasonably and in good faith:
(a) in the performance,
exhibition or distribution of an artistic work; or
(b) in the course of any statement, publication, discussion or debate made or
held for any genuine academic, artistic or scientific
purpose or any other
genuine purpose in the public interest; or
(c) in making or publishing:
(i) a fair and accurate report of any event or matter of public interest;
(ii) a fair comment on any event or matter of public interest if the comment
is an expression of a genuine belief held by the person
making the comment.
SECTION 18E VICARIOUS LIABILITY
subsection (2), if:
(a) an employee or agent of a person does an act in connection with his or
her duties as an employee or agent; and
(b) the act would be unlawful under
this Part if it were done by the person;
this Act applies in relation to the person as if the person had also done the
Subsection (1) does not apply to an act done by an employee or
agent of a person if it is established that the person took all reasonable
to prevent the employee or agent from doing the act.
4. PRELIMINARY MATTERS
At the hearing, Mr McIntyre sought to revisit the issue of the joinder of Mr
Alston which had been decided by Commissioner Johnston
in October 1998. I ruled
that there was no authority in the legislation for me to revisit Commissioner
Johnston's decision.
5. EVIDENCE OF THE PARTIES
5.1 Preliminary evidentiary matters
The respondent objected to the evidence of each of the complainants'
witnesses. In relation to the complainants themselves, the respondent’s
representative, Mr Martin submitted that the test in s.18C was objective and
evidence of the subjective reactions of the complainants
was inappropriate and
possibly misleading. Mr Martin submitted the evidence of Dr Mickler was
irrelevant because the test looks to
the reasonable ordinary reader and an
academic assessment may potentially mislead. Thus, it was argued, the only fact
the complainants
needed to establish was publication and that was admitted. The
question of what a reasonable reader, not overly hardened and not
sensitive, would draw from the cartoon is not a question for evidence.
Mr McIntyre submitted that it was appropriate for me, as decision-maker, to
take into account the position of a person affected by
the publication, although
not necessarily adopting that view. He agreed that the test in s.18C was
objective but argued that this
should not be construed to amount to a "totally
objective person in the sense that the person neither has a race, an ethnic
a colour or a nationality". The legislation requires an assessment of
the impact on a particular group and evidence of this impact,
which can only be
done by "sampling", is relevant. Mr McIntyre argued that Dr Mickler's evidence
would assist the Commission in its
understanding of the "science of ... mass
communication".
Having considered the submissions of the parties, I allowed the calling of
the complainants' witnesses. I took the view that, although
the relevant test
may be an objective one, there was an argument that the views of the
complainants may be relevant, and I did not
want, by refusing to hear that
evidence, to not have those views available to me. I considered the views of Dr
Mickler to have a
bearing on my determination of what may be reasonable
5.2 Evidence for the complainants
5.2.1 Evidence of Albert Corunna
Mr Corunna told the Commission that his mother had passed on to him the
tradition of Yagan and how he was related to them. He said
that Yagan was only
three generations removed from him. He said that he had participated in
discussions and legal proceedings regarding
the return of Yagan's head to
Australia. He did not go to London to pick up the head but was part of meetings
to organise the return.
Mr Corunna said that his mother was from the South-West and he had cultural
connections there as well as to the Pilbara region where
his father came from.
His role in the retrieval of Yagan's head was because he was regarded as a
leader of his people and because
he belonged to the area because his mother was
born there.
Mr Corunna said the cartoon made him feel "terrible" because it did not give
all the facts. For example, it implied Corrie Bodney
was part of the delegation
to bring the head back. Also, he said that the cartoon portrayed "us as all as
half-breeds and that we're
just rushing in there to get money". The cartoon made
jokes of the dead and this was not done in his culture.
The Waugyl was described as the creator of all waterways and as having a
major role in the creation Dreamtime story. The Waugyl would
protect those who
were his people; that is, those who belonged to the area.
Mr Corunna said that he had made a couple of statements to the newspapers in
In cross-examination, Mr Corunna agreed that freedom of speech was important,
as long as it was balanced. He agreed that there had
been a dispute between him
and Corrie Bodney as to who Yagan's closest living relative was and that there
had been press coverage
land rights claims. Mr Corunna agreed that the issue of the return of Yagan's
head had been in the press almost daily prior to the publication of the cartoon.
He also agreed that The West Australian had, in
its editorial of 27 August 1997,
supported the return of Yagan's head.
5.2.2 Evidence of Richard Wilkes
Mr Wilkes described his reaction to the cartoon as follows:
Well, my reaction is that it's very corruptive in the beliefs of our people.
Also it gives the opinion that we're of mixed blood,
. . . and then there's the
clip saying "Nyungar", and then the Pilbara Nyungar, and it's a diversity thing
that is saying that we're
a split race of people, which I don't believe that we
are. We've had problems but we've overcome them . . . which we always did
we have the elders such as myself and others around the place who tried to bring
this togetherness within our communities where
we live. It's based on religion,
our culture, and I mean this culture goes 40,000 years, and even it's said to be
more than that,
. . . my upbringing was that of being a Nyungar first and
foremost and not of any other blood that people seem to think that runs
So I don't class myself in a colour, class or creed or whether I'm a
half-caste or a quarter-caste or a whatever caste you want to
call me. My
upbringing has been that of being a Nyungar person from the Swan River area.
I'm a Dumbleyung Nyungar. I belong to
the Durbelyuregin and descendant of the
Moora and the Bilyar tribes . . with connection to the Bilyu and the Wirrup
tribes and tribes
that complement this area. . . . what Ken is telling the
children, . . . he threatens them with our spirits, with a spiritual influence,
being the Waugyl - that's the Rainbow Serpent, our own serpent, the creator of
the waterways and the fresh water, the underground
We knew of the water running down from the top to the south and the creator
the mother earth, in
creating the father . . . of the six seasons that we have, and creating with the
mother and with the Waugyl,
creating all these things that kept my people in
harmony with the land prior to the coming of other people to this country.
are the things that I'm talking about today, and this is about what this
cartoon has disrupted. . .and also Temyu Yagan, that's my
grandfather, and he's
a special . . icon figure within the structure of the Nyungar tribes from
around this area, and all Aboriginal
people from wherever . . they come from
respect the things that Yagan stood for.
. . . we're trying to carry on the same traditions that Yagan set in
negotiating with the present landowners for equality and for
rights to live in
this country, this great country that we share, that we share in a lesser degree
to other Australians. To say
that a person like Yagan's status and stature, to
say that, "Crikey, give me a beer in a warm, quiet Pommy pub any day," is
blasphemous
in my way of thinking, and I was very, very upset and with The West
Australian and with the cartoonist for doing what they did.
Let me say that Nyungar people always draw what they think is right, and our
drawings - we never, ever criticise and belittle other
people. We just draw
spiritually and for the enjoyment of other people to enjoy, and those - and it's
recorded in the rock paintings.
It's in our art, wherever we go and that kind
of thing. We never draw character figures such in the sense as what's been
here. We always draw what we see and what's important to people, not for
people to laugh at other people.
Mr Wilkes said he was part of the trip to collect Yagan's head but made no
decisions. He participated in meetings of Nyungar people
before the trip was
The witness said that he was concerned at the depiction of Aboriginal people
as reliant on handouts. He regarded the trip as analagous
to the unknown soldier
and had no complaints about the money spent on doing that.
Mr Wilkes was aware of the media articles about Yagan's head prior to the
publication of the cartoon. He had not been involved in
the litigation with
Corrie Bodney although he knew about it while he was in England.
In cross-examination, Mr Wilkes said that he is Mr Corunna's first cousin and
was aware that Mr Corunna had said that they were both
living relatives of
Yagan. He agreed that a smaller group than originally planned had gone to London
because ATSIC and the Federal
government withdrew their funding and that there
was a concern, because of Mr Bodney's litigation, that State funding would also
be withdrawn.
5.2.3 Evidence of Mingli Wanjurri Nungala
Ms Nungala was a member of the delegation to the United Kingdom to retrieve
Yagan's head. She had been associated with Mr Bropho and
the Nyungar Circle of
Elders group for 10 years or more and for that reason she went to London. She
described her attitude to the
cartoon as follows:
Well, I think someone showed it to me, I don't always get the paper . . .
When I first saw just the first few words, "Alas, poor
Yagan," and that just
jumped right at me and I couldn't figure out what this was going to be, so as I
read on - I mean, I had to
read it a few times, I was quite shocked. I think
that I went and showed it to someone else at the house and we were sort of in
shock and disbelief and started to cry. We often have things aimed at us,
directed towards us - under the banner of free speech,
I suppose - but I think
this was - I felt that this was one of the worse things that I'd really ever
come across in the press and
we only have one paper here, which is really
unfortunate, not like in the bigger cities, so this view would have been seen by
many people and read, and it humiliated me.
As I said, there were tears and shock about it, disbelief that people could
go this far to make fun of us. There are a lot of other
things in that cartoon.
When we looked at it later, with my daughter particularly - there's an awful lot
in the cartoon. I've never
really had to examine a cartoon before, but
everything derogatory and demeaning to us - even the way that Ken is talking to
the children.
It brought back memories of what happened to our children - our
children now and children before - how children have been used and
also just the
opposite way of teaching culture is that children don't pipe up and query things
like it's done there and like when
I'm working in schools, sometimes the
teachers - sorry.
Concerning the Waugyl
] . . my grandmother reared me and she always
taught me mainly by showing . . . She used to show me the water places and
always - my country is a little way from here, but sometimes there
were frogs that were the sacred animals and sometimes there were
snakes, but sometimes there were small sort of carpet snake-type of ones and
sometimes there were big water pythons, depending
where we were, but always the
water places and the Waugyl were important. She used to not always call it
that, there are different
names for different nations.
Asked if it was culturally appropriate to use the Waugyl in this way
Well, it's making fun of it. Our people never - well, they didn't have to, and
my grandmother with me – particularly, I can
relate to me - didn't talk to
me that way. When she told me that I couldn't go there and I couldn't do that
and I had to be careful,
I did it. I did what she told me and most people do,
most children do, and you pass that down.
Regarding mixed parentage
] Well, that's - when we talk about mixed
parentage and - well, I am one and we've come mainly by a relationship from a
from another country and a black woman of this country and much of it
hasn't been happy, so that doesn't bring great connotations.
That brings about
the power struggles between men and women, it brings about the - in my mind, and
it did then when we discussed
it - it brought about the taking away of the
Aboriginal man from his land and the black woman was exposed to the white man
were either raped and taken by the white men - and that's what that
brings up to me, it's quite negative, not a happy - - -.
Ms Nungala said that her visit to London to retrieve Yagan's head was one of
the most important, spiritual and religious things she
had ever done.
5.2.4 Evidence of Doolan Leisha Eatts
Ms Eatts recalled how she felt when first seeing the cartoon as follows:
. . . it brought deep and great distress in my spirit and it made me sick
and depressed for weeks, because I regard Yagan as our
ancestor and leader and
warrior and, as Aboriginal people, we hold our warriors in high esteem and
respect and I felt that for anyone
to make a comic joke of our dear departed is
an insult to all Aboriginal people. I am a well-respected community elder
the northern suburbs and it brought me shame and distress to be
portrayed in such a comic fashion as I am held in high esteem by
She said that she did not go to London with the delegation but had been
involved in preparatory meetings. She had not been involved
in the Supreme Court
litigation.
In relation to the Waugyl, Ms Eatts said that:
I felt very upset about that because it shows in the picture of the children
talking about the Waugyl to Ken Colbung, and in the Nyungar
culture children
doesn't talk up to their elder about a Waugyl because the Waugyl is a sacred
being for elders and not for children
to speak up to the elders - the children
stay in their own children's place.
She said that the reference to the beer stereotyped Aboriginal people as
being drunk.
Ms Eatts said that she had only had her name appear in the paper on one
occasion prior to this, telling a story about a death in custody.
cross-examination she said that her name was mentioned in the article in The
West Australian of 2 September 1997. She said that
she had been picked to go to
London but had not done so because the money could not be raised. She clarified
that her complaint about
the depiction of the children in the cartoon is that
they were speaking back to an Elder.
5.2.5 Evidence of Kenneth Colbung
Mr Colbung explained that he had heard about Yagan's head in about 1950 and
had been trying to locate it. He said that he was ancestrally
connected to Yagan
in the tradition of Aboriginal law. His mother was from the Mount Barker area
and his father was Danish. He was
conceived as the result of the rape of his
mother. He has been brought up to consider himself as an Aboriginal person and
seen himself in any other way.
Mr Colbung said that he knew Mr Bodney but had not been involved in the
litigation which had taken place when he was in England. He
described the
history and organisation of the delegation to retrieve Yagan's head. He
indicated that some people might have felt
that they missed out and that there
might have been cultural reasons why some people wanted to go in that they might
have felt that
they missed out on fulfilling their cultural
responsibilities.
In relation to the issue of the grant money, Mr Colbung said that ATSIC
withdrew its funding.
Mr Colbung told the Commission that he thought the reference to Yagan and the
"warm beer" was derogatory and disrespectful, especially
to his religion. He
compared the situation to the return of the unknown soldier. He also said that
the Waugyl was “a spiritual
being that started the world” and that
he felt "very crooked" about the use of the Waugyl in the cartoon. He said that
he considered
the human dignity and rights of Aboriginal people to have been
overlooked.
In cross-examination Mr Colbung agreed that he had addressed a large crowd of
people at the airport to meet the delegation returning
from London and had made
comments about the recent death of Princess Diana. He said that his comments had
been misrepresented in
5.2.6 Evidence of Robert Bropho
Mr Bropho was part of the delegation to retrieve Yagan's head and had been
involved in meetings prior to the delegation leaving. He
had been approached by
the State government to go. His reaction to the cartoon was that:
The cartoon was very destructive. It hurt the Aboriginal culture, it hurt my
feelings. It was slinging off in a very ghastly matter.
In relation to the Waugyl, Mr Bropho said that the cartoon was very insulting
because the Waugyl was his "life through my old people
which the white man will
Mr Bropho said that Yagan was significant because they were as one through
the spiritual dreaming. The connection of Yagan with the
"warm beer" was an
insult. It was wrong to talk about dead people in a comic way.
In relation to the issue of mixed ancestory, Mr Bropho said that "the mixed
blood in Aboriginal people is not the fault of the black
man. Again it falls
back on the white man for participating in having that done"
5.2.7 Evidence of Dr Stephen Mickler
Dr Mickler, a lecturer in the School of Communication and Cultural Studies at
Curtin University of Technology who had completed his
PhD thesis on the
representation of indigenous people in the WA media, gave evidence to the
Commission.
Dr Mickler referred to the findings of the Australian National Opinion Poll
(ANOP) Report
Winning Middle Australia
published in 1985 as informing his
analysis. Particularly relevant were the ANOP findings that:
* There was no depth of understanding of Aboriginal culture. "Real"
Aboriginal people were considered to be confined to those "full
bloods" living a
traditional tribal lifestyle.
* Aboriginal people are perceived as a privileged group and as suffering
from a handout mentality. White Australians actually regard
Aborigines as
over-privileged, in receipt of overly generous government handouts and living in
the benefit of undeserved concessions.
* There was no widespread understanding of the special significance of the
land and only a rudimentary knowledge of sacred sites and
the significance of
sacred sites and land.
* There was a lack of sympathy for Aboriginal people and a lack of
appreciation for their social problems.
* Positive views about Aboriginal people that do exist stem largely from the
traditional stereotype of the noble savage.
* Alcohol abuse is seen as the main problem confronting Aboriginal people,
before other issues such as unemployment or education.
Dr Mickler indicated that these views are relevant factors in the assessment
of the cartoon; for example, the conclusion that there
is a rudimentary
knowledge of sacred sites would apply to the mention of the Waugyl in the
cartoon. Again, the finding about the
"handout mentality" is relevant in respect
of the mention of the motives of Aboriginal Elders.
Dr Mickler said that the cartoon depicted people who would not ordinarily be
depicted in a cartoon of this nature. It included persons
who would not
constitute public figures who would normally be considered to be "fair game". He
said that he did not believe that
a dispute between non-Aboriginal people would
be treated in this way. He said that it is not unusual in a political cartoon to
a figure who effectively speaks the opinion of the publisher and that it
was not unusual to have children, as the voices of "truth",
in this role.
In cross-examination, Dr Mickler said he could not comment definitively on
the use of children as truthsayers in other cultural contexts.
He agreed that
since the ANOP survey in 1985, media coverage of the dispute over the Swan
Brewery site had contained repeated references
to the Waugyl and that the term
"Waugyl" would be recognised by members of the Perth community.
Asked about his reference to the public status of the complainants, Dr
Mickler said that his views had been formed without regard
to any specific
material from the press during the two weeks prior to the cartoon. He accepted
that a person could become a public
figure fairly quickly. He did not accept
that reviewing the press material was necessary to his conclusions regarding
whether the
complainants were public figures.
5.3 Evidence for the respondent
5.3.1 Evidence of Paul Murray
Mr Murray is the editor of The West Australian and was at the time of the
publication of the cartoon. He is responsible for all editorial
content in the
He gave evidence that the newspaper had published articles on Yagan's head
prior to the publication of the articles referred to in
these proceedings. He
said that he intended the paper to look deeply into the divisions in the
Aboriginal community, an issue in
which he had background knowledge. He wanted
to pursue the various associations claimed with Yagan. He co-wrote the editorial
27 August 1997 and it expressed his views. His view was that the return of
Yagan's head was a crucial issue for Aboriginal people
and for all West
Australians. Mr Murray said that the disputation within the Aboriginal community
in WA was damaging to the prospects
of its return.
The cartoon was the regular Saturday cartoon of Dean Alston. Mr Alston rang
the witness on the Thursday night prior to publication
and discussed the idea
for the cartoon. Mr Murray said that he told Mr Alston that it would be "very
controversial" and asked him
to discuss it again the following day. On Friday,
Mr Murray looked at the draft sketches and had another discussion with Mr
He told the Commission that he said to Mr Alston that there would be
some "flak" over the cartoon. However, he formed a view that
the cartoon was a
valid comment on recent events and when he was presented by Mr Alston with the
final version, he approved it for
publication.
The story of the dispute was a story that The West Australian was leading on.
Mr Murray did not recall any complaints about the articles.
After the cartoon
was published there was one letter to the editor complaining about it which was
published by the paper.
Mr Murray said that the main "comment" of the cartoon was that the behaviour
of the individuals concerned was undignified and that
Yagan would not have
approved of such a dispute. The previous articles had pursued the issue of
infighting and the cartoon questioned
their association with Yagan. The
reference to "government grant" justified the public interest in running the
cartoon. The references
to individuals was because the trip was taxpayer funded.
A further comment was that the Elders had lost the significance of the return
Yagan's head which was intended to unify, but only caused division.
Mr Murray told the Commission that The West Australian prides itself on its
coverage of Aboriginal issues and in 1994 had won the
Louis Johnston award for
good reporting of Western Australian Aboriginal issues for a series on native
title. He expressed reservations
dated and that there had been a "significant shift in the landscape" since 1985,
the High Court native title decisions and the reconciliation
The witness said that Mr Alston is regarded as one of Australia's best
cartoonists, is highly experienced and has won many awards.
His work, including
strip cartoons, has been exhibited in the Gunyulgup art gallery and they are
advertised for sale every day in
the newspaper.
In cross-examination Mr Murray accepted that people perceive things
differently because of their culture and that this was a factor
that he took
into account in the exercise of his judgment. He produced the newspaper for
everyone and took advice on cultural issues
from the public. He had no
recollection of being provided with material in 1989 and 1991 regarding the Swan
Brewery site and he denied
that the newspaper had never done an in-depth feature
on the site.
Shown two cartoons depicting the Waugyl and two dealing with the death of
Princess Diana, all of which had been published in the newspaper,
Mr Murray did
not agree that Mr Alston did not display sarcasm or derision when dealing with
sensitive cultural matters of a European
origin but did so when considering the
Waugyl. He agreed that the cartoon here in issue was not respectful of the
Waugyl and that
the two cartoons concerning Princess Diana were "sensitive
In relation to the newspaper's stance on Aboriginal issues, he agreed that
there was a "downside" to their approach and that some
articles had upset the
Aboriginal community. In re-examination, Mr Murray told the Commission that it
was the newspaper's editorial
policy to draw attention to the plight of
underprivileged groups in the community, including Aboriginal people, and that
articles on these themes on many occasions.
6. SUBMISSIONS OF THE PARTIES
6.1 The complainants’ submissions
In summary, the complainants make the following submissions:
6.1.1 Was the act reasonably likely to have the effects alleged?
It is accepted that the test is objective. However, such an assessment needs
to take into account the race, colour or national or
ethnic origin of the person
or group of persons offended. The ordinary reasonable man on the Clapham
omnibus (who is not likely
to be an Australian Aborigine from Western Australia
of the Nyungar group) is not reasonably likely to be offended by something which
is said concerning the culture, deceased ancestor or mixed ancestry of an
Australian Aborigine living in Western Australia of the
Nyungar group. Thus, the
issue is what would be reasonably likely to offend a person who is an Australian
Aborigine of the Nyungar
It is well accepted that in the application of an objective standard the
particular circumstances, special knowledge, personal characteristics
position of the person or, in this case, group are relevant to be taken into
account and relevant circumstances in this case include
particular knowledge and
feelings of the group because of their racial and ethnic background, in
particular religious observances,
knowledge and sensitivities, and sensitivities
s.18C that it is a necessary element of the act being unlawful that it be
offensive, insulting, humiliating or intimidating to a
person or group of
persons of a particular race, colour or national or ethnic origin.
Application of the objective test does not involve the decision-maker placing
himself in the shoes of the offended group, so as to
conclude that they ought
only to have been offended if he would have reacted in the same way, because to
do so might cause him to
substitute his own individual strengths or weaknesses.
In making the relevant assessment, the decision-maker should have regard to
the principles of substantive equality which are embodied
in the RDA.
The evidence demonstrates that the Nyungar people revere the Waugyl as a
creation figure, hold their ancestors in high regard, revere
the deceased
remains of their ancestors and are sensitive about highlighting the racial mix
of their ancestory for reasons associated
with the history of colonisation. The
inclusion in the cartoon of references to the Waugyl, the remains of Yagan,
Yagan consuming
alcohol and the mixed ancestry of Nyungar people is reasonably
likely to offend, insult and humiliate the complainants and Nyungar
particular.
6.1.2 Ethnic group
The Nyungar people are an ethnic group with a shared history, separate
cultural tradition, common geographical origin, descent from
common ancestors, a
common language and a religion different from the general community surrounding
6.1.3 Was the act done because of race or ethnic origin?
The references in the cartoon to Yagan and the Waugyl have no significance
but for the race or ethnic origin of the complainants and
the Nyungar people.
Thus, they were included "because of the race, colour or ethnic origin of the
person or some or all of the people
in the group" and fall within s.18C(1)(b) of
In this regard, the relevant "act" is the cartoon as a whole. However, the
elements of the cartoon are significant in assessing the
reasons for doing the
"act". At least one of the reasons for including the references to Yagan and the
Waugyl is the "race, colour
.. ethnic origin" of the complainants and s.18B
deems the act as a whole to have been done "because of" their race (etc). Other
(such as the use of public funds and internal disputes) do not take the
cartoon outside the scope of s.18C.
6.1.4 Exemptions - section 18D
Section 18C only applies to the "discriminatory reasons" and not those such
as the expenditure of public funds and internal disputes.
Thus, s.18D does not
apply to those latter reasons.
It cannot be fair comment or in the public interest to demean the Waugyl and
its role in Nyungar religious tradition, to caricature
Yagan and to mock the
mixed ancestry of Nyungar people (I have compendiously referred to these as the
"demeaning comments"). It is
irrelevant, therefore, that there was a public
interest in the return of Yagan's head or the internal dispute and that fair
may have been made on these matters.
To the extent that the cartoon did constitute comment, the demeaning comments
were not on a matter of public interest and were not
an expression of genuine
belief held by the publisher. Section 18D does not apply to the comments on
other matters.
In relation to the question of "artistic work", while the original drawings
may constitute such a work, the act of the editor in publishing
the cartoon in a
newspaper does not constitute the "exhibition or distribution of an artistic
work". Alternatively, the written words
accompanying the drawings are not an
artistic work.
6.1.5 General approach
The type of comments at issue in this case are analagous to but more serious
than those in
Wagga Wagga Aboriginal Group v Eldridge
(1995) EOC 92-701.
The test for s.18C is not as high as that set under the NSW and SA
legislation.
The right to freedom of expression is not without limitation and must be
balanced with the right to a dignified and peaceful existence
without racial
harassment. There is no right to freedom of speech which operates as an
exception to the prohibitions in the RDA.
Sections 18C and 18D express the
Parliament's intention as to the appropriate balance.
6.1.6 Remedies
The complainants sought an apology, an undertaking that respect be shown to
Nyungar culture and religion, including their deceased
warriors, the
implementation of the Royal Commission into Aboriginal Affairs with respect to
the media and an award of compensation.
They submit if a breach of the RDA is made out, a sensitive complainant may
recover the full extent of his or her loss. Thus, the
loss for Ken Colbung would
be greater in view of the circumstances in which he became a person of mixed
parentage. Also, the sensitivity
of the complainants to the association of Yagan
with alcohol may increase compensable damage. Finally, the fact that some of the
complainants were not public figures would entitle them to a greater measure of
6.1.7 Standard of proof
The relevant standard is proof on the balance of probabilities. In this case
it is not criminal conduct which is alleged, and there
are no penalties imposed
by the legislation. The statutory remedies are analogous to those open in an
ordinary civil suit and the
degree of satisfaction required in this case is no
higher than in an ordinary civil suit.
6.2 The respondent's submissions
6.2.1 General approach to the complaint
The respondent submitted that this case raised an important issue of freedom
of speech and that the RDA should be construed so as
not to inhibit the fair and
free publication of comment or the free expression of artistic works. In
striking the balance, the Commission
must give full recognition to the "vital
principle of freedom of speech".
The extrinsic legislative materials shed light upon the balance which the
legislature was seeking to strike between the inhibition
of offence on racial
grounds on the one hand, and the protection of freedom of speech on the other.
The Explanatory Memorandum observed
The Bill is not intended to limit public debate about issues that are in the
public interest. It is not intended to prohibit people
from having and
expressing ideas .. and maintains a balance between the right to free speech and
the protection of individuals and
groups from harassment and fear because of
their race, colour or national or ethnic origin.
The Minister's Second Reading Speech stated that:
The Bill places no new limits on genuine public debate. Australians must be
free to speak their minds, to criticise actions and policies
of others and to
share a joke. The Bill does not prohibit people from expressing ideas or having
beliefs, no matter how unpopular
the views may be to many other people.
Mr Martin makes two general points concerning the cartoon both of which
indicate that the cartoon must be considered in the context
in which it arose.
The first is that the essence of the cartoon was a discussion, in the public
interest, of a matter which was clearly
in the public arena, being the return of
Yagan's head. In particular, the division in the Aboriginal community was a
public topic
and that this disputation was not assisting the retrieval of the
head. The cartoon must be viewed in the context of the public discussion
preceded it. This discussion involved a variety of claims of geneological links
with Yagan, some of which are alleged to have
been dubious, and the cartoon made
satirical comment on these claims.
Second, the inferences sought to be drawn from the cartoon must be reasonable
and not strained. Thus, for example, the references
to the grant money should be
seen in the light of the withdrawal of ATSIC funding and not in regard to
generalised views about the
reliance of Aboriginal people on government
hand-outs. The reference to the "warm beer" is a reference to Yagan wishing the
disputation
to end and any construction that Aboriginal people can be made to go
away with beer is an unreasonable reading of the cartoon.
These matters are referred to in more detail below.
6.2.2 Was the act reasonably likely to have the effects alleged?
The complainants' concession that the test under s.18C(1)(a) is an objective
one was properly made (
Bryant v Queensland Newspapers Pty Ltd,
President Sir Ronald Wilson, 15 May 1997, unreported). The RDA requires a robust
approach to the degree of offence required
and merely trivial matters do not
fall within the section.
The submission that the special cultural characteristics of a particular
group are properly taken into account in assessing whether
the relevant conduct
is reasonably likely to offend (etc) must be rejected as to accept it would mean
that liability would depend
on the idiosyncratic sensitivities of a particular
person or group of persons. This submission is in conflict with cases that apply
the objective standard by reference to the audience of the publication (see
Enquiry into Broadcasts by Ron Casey
(1989) 3 BR 351
Neal v Sunday
News Auckland Newspaper Publications
(1985) EOC 76
In this case, the objective standard is to be applied by reference to the
purchasers and readers of "The West Australian" who would
have read the cartoon
in the context of the preceding articles concerning the return of Yagan's head.
These articles reveal that
the delegation, its constitution, its timing and its
funding were all matters in the public arena, as were the geneological links
the various delegates. The importance of the various articles in The West
Australian that preceded publication of the cartoon
cannot be overstated as they
establish that there was public controversy regarding the return of Yagan's head
including questions
Aboriginal community, the dispute as to who should comprise the delegation
retrieve the head, the issue of whether the timing of the delegation was related
to the litigation and/or the possible withdrawal
of funding for the delegation,
the competing claims of various individuals with respect to their relationship
to Yagan and whether
the money spent on retrieving Yagan's head could have been
better spent.
In the context of this public debate, the inferences suggested by counsel for
the complainants are strained and would not be drawn
by any reasonable reader.
In particular, the reference to the mixed ancestry is a reference to the
competing claims of those individuals
relating to the return of Yagan's head and
cannot reasonably be construed as a general comment on the mixed ancestry of
people. The reference to the grant money is a reference to the issue
concerning the timing of the delegation and the fact that some
of the grant
money was withdrawn as a consequence of the dispute between different sectors of
the Aboriginal community. No reasonable
reader would construe that portion of
the cartoon as a general reference to Aboriginal people being dependent upon
handouts. The
final panel in the cartoon suggests Yagan would not have wished to
be involved in the dispute. No reasonable reader could construe
that panel as
referring to a general association between Aboriginal people and alcohol.
Further, the complainants' reaction to the cartoon was partly due to
differences in culture; for example, in respect of relationship
between children
and their elders, the Aboriginal attitude to the Waugyl, the Aboriginal attitude
towards drawing and the Aboriginal
attitude to the dead. These differences do
not lead to a breach of the RDA.
Overall, the question is one which must be determined by the Commission for
itself, by reference to the ordinary reasonable reader,
not unduly sensitive nor
unduly hardened, drawing upon the Commission's knowledge and experience of
ordinary human affairs.
This is not a task which is assisted by a
consideration of evidence adduced as to the effect of a particular publication
on a particular
individual or individuals. Such evidence is likely to distract
the Commission from the objective nature of its task.
The fact that a person is the subject of criticism may render them more
likely to put an extreme construction on the cartoon and the
evidence should be
approached cautiously, with this in mind. The RDA does not purport to inhibit
criticism as such and reactions
to the cartoon which are derived from the
ordinary human response to criticism must be necessarily excluded from
consideration by
the Commission.
In considering the objective test, the Commission should also bear in mind
the proposition that the RDA is not intended to unduly
constrain freedom of
speech and allows a fair degree of journalistic licence (
This construction is supported by the extrinsic legislative materials. The
Explanatory Memorandum describes the prohibition created
by section 18C as
analogous to that in relation to sexual harassment and the Second Reading Speech
in the Senate expressly referred
to an "objective test" to reflect "community
standards of behaviour rather than the subjective views of the complainant".
Thus, s.18C(1)(a) is not invoked because the publication is not reasonably
likely in all the circumstances to offend a reasonable
6.2.3 Was the act done because of race or ethnic origin?
Section 18C introduces a purposive, causative element. The act of publication
must be done because of the race (etc) of the other
person. The fact that it
happens to concern a group who have a race (etc) is not sufficient. This
construction is supported by the
extrinsic material and the approach taken in
Awa v Independent Auckland Ltd
(a defamation case).
No inference can be drawn from the fact of publication that there was a
causal nexus between publication and membership of the group.
The cartoon was
published because of the public interest in the issue over the previous two
weeks. Mr Murray's evidence was that
the cartoon was published to provide
satirical comment on a matter of public importance and it was not put to him
that it was published
because of the ethnicity of the Nyungar people.
Thus, s.18C has no application as the relevant causal nexus is not
established.
6.2.4 The exemptions - section 18D
If the Commission does not accept the respondent's submissions regarding
s.18C, the respondent relies on all three subparagraphs of
s.18D. In construing
this section, the Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill is relevant. The
Explanatory Memorandum stated that:
Proposed section 18D provides a number of very important exemptions to the
civil prohibition created by proposed section 18C. The
exemptions are needed to
ensure that debate can occur freely and without restriction in respect of
matters of legitimate public interest.
However, the operation of proposed
section 18D is governed by the requirement that to be exempt, anything said or
done must be said
or done reasonably and in good faith. It is not the intention
of that provision to prohibit a person from stating in public what
considered generally to be an extreme view, so long as the person making the
statement does so reasonably and in good faith
and genuinely believes in what he
or she is saying.
First, there is the exemption which deals with an act that is done reasonably
and in good faith in relation to artistic works. This
exemption would cover both
serious drama and comedy acts. Whilst some of these performances may cause
offence to some people, they
are presented as entertainment and are not within
the scope of the prohibition. ...
There is an exemption relating to the making or publishing of a fair report
of an event or matter of public interest. The media is
entitled to report events
as they happen. The publication must be fair. The provision would not effect the
accurate reporting of
public debate on matters of acknowledged sensitivity, for
example, policy on Native Title or Migration.
Finally, there is an exemption for the making or publishing of a fair comment
on a matter of public interest. This is qualified by
the requirement that the
comment be an expression of a genuine belief held by the person making the
comment. This is also subject
to the overall qualification in section 18D that
to be exempt, anything said or done must be said or done reasonably and in good
In relation to all three subparagraphs, the respondent submits that they are
all subject to the requirement that the conduct be undertaken
"reasonably and in
good faith". There was no evidence to suggest that the publication was done
unreasonably or in bad faith and the
contrary was never put to Mr Murray.
In relation to subparagraph (a), there is no doubt that this is an artistic
work which means something that the general community
would regard as a work
containing significant artistic content. The cartoon is such a work; each panel
contains work of artistic
merit. The cartoonist is regarded as an artist and his
works are displayed and sold as such. There is no evidentiary basis for a
contrary finding. The complainants' attempt to distinguish between the words and
drawings does not reflect the terms or intention
Second, in relation to subparagraph (b), the cartoon has a genuine purpose in
the public interest, that is, to encourage public debate
on issues of public
Lange v ABC
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
stresses the public interest in
free debate on matters of public controversy. The publication of cartoons is an
important aspect
of such debate. There can be no suggestion that the cartoon was
published for anything other than a genuine purpose in the public
interest. No
such proposition was put to Mr Murray.
Third, in relation to subparagraph (c)(ii), the content of the cartoon is
fair comment on a matter of public interest. It is not
the publication itself
which must be in the public interest, but the content of the publication. The
content of the publication -
the return of Yagan's head - was a matter of public
Further, the law of defamation provides guidance in respect to whether the
comment is fair. Thus, comment that is hyperbolic, strong
or unjust may still
be fair. That the Commission may disagree with it also does not render comment
In relation to the genuine belief of the newspaper, the relevant belief is
that of its editor, Mr Murray. Mr Murray gave uncontested
evidence of his
beliefs and this is corroborated by the editorial of 27 August 1997.
6.3 Complainants' submissions in reply
In summary, the complainant made the following submissions in reply:
* The objective standard in s.18C is referable to the persons likely to be
offended and not the audience. The
test is not appropriate although
test does focus on the affected group.
* The views of a section of the community should not be dismissed because
they are a minority group.
* The "substantive differences in cultural approach" are precisely the kind
of matters which human rights legislation is designed
to protect. Section 18C is
intended to make unlawful "racist defamation".
* The peculiar sensitivities of an individual are relevant for the purpose
of quantification of damages (the "eggshell skull rule").
* This case is not about disagreement with a cultural attitude or practice,
case. In this case, the publication complained of makes
"sarcastic side-swipes" at matters of Nyungar culture in the course of
on the conduct of individuals.
* It is not necessary for there to be evidence that Mr Murray had
subjectively considered as a reason for publishing the relevant
material that
the group were of a particular racial or ethnic group in order to meet the
requirements of s.18C(1)(b). The only reasonable
inference open is that the
references to the ancestry of the complainants, the Waugyl and Yagan had no
meaning but for their racial
or ethnic significance in relation to Nyungar
* If the Commission were to reach a conclusion that the work of Alston is
capable of being considered to be "an artistic work", the
reproduction or
publication of this work in hundreds of thousands of copies of the newspaper is
not the "distribution of an artistic
work" within the terms of s.18D(a).
* It is not denied that there were matters of public controversy referred to
in the cartoon which could be said to have been published
for a genuine purpose
in the public interest, or to be a comment based on a genuine belief. However,
this does not make it "reasonable"
or "fair", as is required to sustain the
exemption in s.18D, to include within the cartoon published the references to
the Waugyl and Yagan, in the form in which they appeared.
7. FINDINGS OF FACT
I have considered the evidence before the Commission and make the following
factual findings.
Firstly, the cartoon in question, titled "Alas Poor Yagan", and annexed to
this decision, was published in The West Australian newspaper
on 6 September
1997. It was drawn and written by Dean Alston, an employee of the newspaper, and
clearly published with the support
of the newspaper’s editor Paul Murray.
These facts are not disputed by the respondent. Mr McIntyre for the complainants
the cartoon and the way in which the various frames breached the
relevant provisions of the legislation. I adopt that summary as
representing the
views generally of the complainants, as detailed in their evidence. I do not
adopt the summary as representing what
the cartoon portrays. It is a complex
work, and represents different things to different people. Mr Alston did not
give evidence,
but even if he had it seems to me that his view, too, could only
represent one person's view of the cartoon, albeit that he was the
drew and composed it. However, as indicated earlier, the evidence of the
complainants is relevant in my assessment of
the objective test for the purposes
of my decision. I particularly note the evidence of those of the complainants
who were members
of the delegation who travelled to England to bring back
Yagan's head. I accept their evidence that this was a very spiritual experience
for them, and that this cartoon would have been particularly distressing. A
number of the witnesses, both in the delegation and not,
compared the return of
Yagan's head to the symbolic return to Australia of the body of the unknown
soldier from Gallipoli, and I
find this to be a valid analogy. I accept the
evidence of Paul Murray, confirmed by the complainants, that much material
to the return of Yagan's head had been published in The West Australian
in the few weeks prior to the publication of the cartoon.
The people referred to
in the cartoon had been referred to on previous occasions. Some litigation had
occurred regarding the matter,
and the preparations for and trip of the
delegation had received much publicity. The West Australian had, editorially,
the importance of the return of Yagan's head as a means of unifying
the Aboriginal community, and had been critical that its return
had become the
subject of further division.
8. FINDINGS ON THE LAW
8.1 General approach to the interpretation of Part IIA
8.1.1 Introduction
Racial Hatred Act 1995
(Cth) (the “RHA”) inserted
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
deals with the prohibition of offensive behaviour based on racial
hatred making it unlawful to do a public act which is likely to
insult, humiliate or intimidate another person or group of people” where
the act is done because of their race,
colour or national or ethnic origin
Racial Hatred Bill 1994
(the “Bill”) was introduced
largely to address concerns highlighted by the Human Rights & Equal
Opportunity Commission’s
National Inquiry into Racist Violence
(1991) (“NIRV”) and the
Royal Commission into Aboriginal Deaths
(1991) (“RCADC”).
The NIRV found, inter alia, that “racist violence on the basis of
ethnic identity in Australia exists at a level that causes
concern and it could
increase in intensity and extent unless addressed firmly..."(p. 387). The RCADC
noted that Aboriginal people
suffered verbal abuse constituting racial
vilification as part of systemic discrimination, particularly at the point of
the police (p. 71).
The Bill was thus introduced to “close a gap in the legal protection
available to the victims of extreme racist behaviour”
(see House of
Representatives, Explanatory Memorandum).
The Bill generated considerable debate within the Australian community before
it was passed by the House of Representatives on 16
November 1994. The debate
focussed on how laws purporting to provide protection to victims of racist
behaviour impact upon freedom
8.1.2 Freedom of speech
Since 1992 there have been a series of decisions handed down by the High
Court of Australia which have become collectively known as
the Free Speech Cases
Australian Capital Television Pty Ltd v Commonwealth
[1992] HCA 45
(1992) 177 CLR 106
Nationwide News Pty Ltd v Wills
[1992] HCA 46
(1992) 177 CLR 1
Theophanous v Herald
& Weekly Times
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104
Cunliffe v Commonwealth
[1994] HCA 44
182 CLR 272).
While these cases do not enunciate a right to free speech per se, they do
find that the representative nature of the Australian democracy
is reflected in
the Constitution and that the protection of political speech and communication
is an inherent requirement of the
democratic structure. (
Theophanous v Herald
& Weekly Times
[1994] HCA 46
(1994) 182 CLR 104
at 121 per Mason CJ, Toohey and
Gaudron JJ).
However, around the time that the Bill was introduced the above formulation
was accepted by many as giving rise to a broader implied
right to freedom of
speech. The argument was that because government may legislate on a wide range
of matters, nearly every area
of life is political. Thus “ . . the
freedom of communication on public affairs and political discussion is, in
different from freedom of speech”. (see Sir Maurice Byers,
“Free speech a certain casualty of race law”,
The Australian
21 November 1994, p.11; see also the Explanatory Memorandum to the Bill which
notes, inter alia, that "the High Court has recently
established an implied
guarantee of free speech inherent in the democratic process enshrined in our
Constitution”).
In this regard it should be noted that since the Bill was passed there have
been two further High Court decisions which have relevantly
limited the right
Levy v State of Victoria
(1997) 189 CLR 579
; Lange v Australian
Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520).
The limitation is explained
by McHugh J in the following terms:
“The freedom protected by the Constitution is not ... a freedom to
communicate. It is a freedom from laws that effectively
prevent members of the
Australian community from communicating with each other about political and
government matters relevant to
the system of representative and responsible
government provided by the Constitution...[O]ur Constitution does not create
of communication. It gives immunity from the operation of laws that
inhibit our right or privilege to communicate about political
or government
Levy v State of Victoria
(1997) 189 CLR 579
The protected freedom is therefore the freedom to communicate about political
or government matters so as to enable people to exercise
a free and informed
choice as electors. The sections of the Constitution from which that freedom is
implied preclude the curtailment
of the freedom by legislative or executive
power, but they do not confer a personal right to the individual of freedom of
Lange v Australian Broadcasting Corporation
[1997] HCA 25
(1997) 189 CLR 520
Even if a right to free speech existed, there are several legal limitations
to it. As Freckleton notes, “...an enormous array
of legislation regulates
what may and may not be said” (“Censorship and Vilification
Legislation”
Australian Journal of Human Rights
334-335). Libel laws and obscenity and indecency laws are just a few examples
of such limitations (see also the Explanatory
Memorandum which notes that there
is no unrestricted right to say or publish anything regardless of the harm that
can be caused;
Wagga Wagga Aboriginal Action Group v Eldridge
(1995) EOC 92-701
at 78,266 where the Tribunal noted that the right to free
expression “has never been an absolute or unequivocal right”).
Nevertheless, at the time the amendments were debated there was, and probably
still is, a public perception that a right to free speech
exists. The debate
therefore was whether a legislative proscription of acts which may be seen to be
racially vilifying was an unfair
intrusion on freedom of speech.
8.1.3 The debate surrounding the introduction of vilification
legislation
On a general level free speech proponents argued that legislation purporting
to regulate expressions which may be seen as racially
vilifying impedes the
proper expression of contrary points of view. Freckleton argues that
"passionate denunciation or the use of
caricature can easily enough merge into
the giving of offence, the exposure to ridicule and the expression of reasoned
and unreasoned
intolerance. The line between criticism and abuse all too often
is blurred. A danger that exists in this regard is that vilification
be used by subgroups within racial minorities to suppress proper expression of
disagreement” (Freckleton, op cit.
at p. 339; see also
R v Keegstra
(1991) 61 CCC (3d) 1
at 120, where a minority of the Canadian Supreme Court
questioned intrusions by government departments into freedom of speech where
would never have been previously allowed but for the introduction of similar
legislation in Canada. Some of the examples cited
include the banning of Leon
Uris’ 1984 novel,
on the basis that it was pro-Zionist and
Salman Rushdie’s
Satanic Verses
on the basis that it violated
s.319.2 of the Canadian Criminal Code (wilful promotion of hate against an
identifiable group)).
This argument is often termed the ‘tolerance argument’ and is
based on the notion that people should be tolerant of all
view points no matter
how offensive or undesirable the opinion expressed might be.
The argument further states that by allowing hate speech to be heard,
“we are reminded of how undesirable it is, our commitment
“tolerance” is reinforced, and we are theoretically forced to combat
hate speech as a community” (McNamara
and Solomon, “Commonwealth
Racial Hatred Act 1995
: Achievement or Disappointment?”
at p 285). On this view, the way to fight hate speech is to
counteract it with more speech, not by legislative proscription.
Other arguments put forward in a similar vein are the ‘truth seeking
and ‘market place of ideas’ arguments.
The rationale of the truth seeking argument is that all ideas and views, no
matter how unpalatable for some, should be expressed as
a way of seeking the
truth. Building on this the ‘market place of ideas’ argument holds
that the expression of all ideas
is necessary not only for seeking truth, but
for upholding the democratic process as a whole. As Freckleton argues:
“The input of multiple voices into the democratic process is
fundamental to the integrity of government decision-making. Expression
integral part of the development of ideas, of extending the boundaries of
knowledge and of understanding the human condition.
It is vital that
dissenters, in particular dissenters whose discord is politically unwelcome or
iconoclastic, not be suppressed
from involvement in the process. Once the
freedom to contribute to public debate is significantly restricted, the
integrity of the
democratic fabric loses a vital element” (op cit. at p.
On the other side of the equation, those in favour of legislation proscribing
racially vilifying conduct denounce the use of the free
speech doctrine for
attacking legislation designed to protect victims of racial hatred.
In the first instance they deny that there is an entrenched constitutional
right to free speech. In light of the High Court decisions
this argument probably holds more sway. However, they argue if
there exists a right to free speech it should not be used to allow
denigration of victims of racial hatred (see
JR v Wholesale Travel Groups
(1991) 3 SCR 154
(1992) 95 DLR (4th) 202
Mahoney, “Hate Vilification Legislation and Freedom of Expression”
[1994] AUJlHRights 21
Australian Journal of Human Rights
at p. 359). As Mahoney
argues, “this misunderstands the proper role of governments and free
speech” (ibid.).
With respect to tolerance based arguments, proponents of racial vilification
legislation say that such arguments tend to portray the
victims of hate speech
as intolerant, rather than focussing on the behaviour of the perpetrator(s) and
its consequences. They also
tend to portray incidents of racial intolerance as
isolated. This skews the way in which society perceives racially motivated
because they are seen as harmless pranks in which the victim is simply
being overly sensitive. As McNamara and Solomon point out,
“tolerance” then becomes an excuse for “non-responsiveness and
non-regulation” whenever incidents of racial
hatred occur
(“Commonwealth
Racial Hatred Act 1995
: Achievement or
Disappointment?” (op cit at p 285). In this equation the victim’s
context is ignored and the actual
harm suffered by the victim is denied.
A racially motivated incident is generally not seen by the victim as an
isolated incident. In most cases, even though the victim
may not have
previously suffered a personal attack, it is likely that other members of the
victim’s community, or the community
as a group, have been targeted
before. In this way “...it is logical [for the victim] to link together
several thousand real
life stories into one tale of caution”: Matsuda
Public Response to Racist Speech: Considering the Victim’s
Michigan Law Review
at p. 2331. For the
victim, therefore, incidents of racial hatred are not inconsequential but real,
and increased vigilance (or
‘over sensitivity’) is not only
justified but necessary.
In terms of the harm suffered, the negative effects of hate speech are very
real. As Matsuda observes, “[v]ictims of hate propaganda
have experienced
physiological symptoms and emotional distress ranging from fear in the gut,
rapid pulse rate and difficulty in breathing,
nightmares, post-traumatic stress
disorder, hypertension, psychosis and suicide” (op cit at p.2336).
Professor Patricia Williams
refers to the psychic impact of racist speech on the
victim as “spirit murder” (“Spirit-Murdering the Messenger:
The Discourse of Fingerpointing as the Law’s Response to Racism”
42 Miami Law Review
127 at 129 cited in Matsuda).
Some commentators observe that the effects of hate speech are such that it is
not uncommon for victims to do whatever they can to
avoid receiving hate
messages, to the extent of moving home or leaving a job. In this way the
victim’s freedom can be completely
curtailed as a result of hate speech
(see Matsuda, op. cit at p.2336-2338; Sake Akmeemana and Melinda Jones,
“Fighting Racial
Racial Discrimination Act 1975
Review, Race Discrimination Commissioner
, 1995 129 at
On a group level, racist speech has the effect of subordinating a particular
group, the ultimate aim of which is to exclude that group
from participating
freely and without fear in the body politic (see Akmeemana and Jones, supra);
McNamara and Solomon, op cit. at
p.286). In the extreme case, the subordination
of the group can lead to conduct of a violent nature such as rape, torture and
History and more recent events have proved that these harms are real.
In light of these harms, proponents of racial vilification legislation have
also denounced the ‘truth seeking’ and ‘market
ideas’ arguments.
With respect to the truth seeking arguments, they say that speakers and
writers of racist speech purposely misquote and fabricate
evidence. As such,
"rather than serving as a means to discover the truth, hate propaganda conceals
the truth about the target groups
and takes away or chills their speech through
a system of ... racism. (Mahoney, op cit. at p.361). On this basis, hate speech
often the antithesis of truth seeking and should not be used as a
justification for non-regulation of racial vilification.
In relation to the market place of ideas argument, some commentators argue
that the barriers in accessing the public forum which exist
disadvantaged groups, particularly ethnic minorities, are completely ignored.
There is an assumption that all groups in
society enjoy equal access to
information and the opportunity to communicate and be heard (see Mahoney op cit.
at p.361-362 and McNamara
and Solomon, op cit. at p.286). However, as Mahoney
argues, “[b]ecause equality of access to the media does not exist between
advantaged and disadvantaged groups, reliance on the “marketplace”
to protect the disadvantaged from the promotion of
hatred against them is
guaranteed to fail” (op cit. at p.361). Therefore, the only way to
protect victim communities from
racial hatred is for the State to legislatively
proscribe hate speech.
8.1.4 The Balancing Exercise
The enactment of
of the RDA was intended to answer that call.
However, in crafting that legislative response, the Commonwealth Parliament
to have intended to strike a balance between two rights: the right to
freely express or communicate certain matters and ideas and
the right to live
free from vilification.
That intention may be discerned from the Explanatory Memorandum, where it was
“The Bill maintains a balance between the right to free speech and the
protection of individuals and groups from harassment
and fear because of their
race, colour, national or ethnic origin. The Bill is intended to prevent people
from seriously undermining
tolerance within society by inciting racial hatred or
threatening violence against individuals or groups because of their race,
or national or ethnic origin.”
The structure of the legislation provides the framework within which this
balancing exercise must take place.
The general protection for individuals or groups from harassment or fear
because of their race, colour, national or ethnic origin
is set out in s.18C.
Section 18D then sets out what can be viewed as a protection of freedom of
particular forms of expression,
by outlining certain exemptions to which the
general prohibition of s.18C will not apply. The exemptions, which are
discussed further
below, aim at preventing the stifling of activities which,
although likely to offend etc are done reasonably and in good faith.
In practical terms then:
“It is for the complainant to establish that the respondent's act was
reasonably likely to offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate
another person or
group, and that the act was done because of the race, colour, or national or
ethnic origin of the complainant or
group of people of which the complainant is
a member. However, if so established, the onus then rests with the respondent
on the balance of probabilities, that his or her action falls within
one of the exemptions in section 18D” (Explanatory Memorandum).
It is against this background that I must construe the provisions set out in
8.2 Who are the complainants?
The original complaint was lodged by Ms McGlade "on behalf of the Nyungar
Circle of Elders". Commissioner Johnston was of the view
that, as the Elders had
no specific legal personality, the complainants needed to be separately named.
Mr McIntyre put to me that
the complainants were "a collection of individuals on
behalf of the Nyungar Circle of Elders who are representative of that group
at least a portion of that group".
The complaint was not lodged as a representative complaint and there was no
evidence before me that the legislative requirements for
such complaints have
been met. Consequently, I am of the view that the complainants in this matter
are the seven named Nyungar Elders,
being Albert Corunna, Richard Wilkes, Ken
Colbung, Robert Bropho, Leisha Eatts, Mingli Wanjurri and Violet Newman.
8.3 Was there an "act" within s.18C(1)?
The relevant act is the act of publication of the cartoon and this is not in
dispute. This is noted in my findings of fact.
8.4 Was the act reasonably likely to have the effects alleged?
In considering this question, I have taken into account the evidence of the
complainants, and Dr Mickler to a limited extent. The
RDA clearly specifies an
objective test and the case law supports this construction (See the comments of
Sir Ronald Wilson, the then
President of the Commission, in
Queensland Newspapers Pty Ltd
, op cit).The President formed this view
because of the words “reasonably likely” and indicated that a
complaint would
not be successful merely because a complainant was offended by a
particular action.
Commissioner Wilson appeared to assume that the question of whether a person
would be reasonably likely to be offended by a particular
action should be asked
in terms of whether the complainant or persons of the race, colour, or national
or ethnic origin of the complainant
would be reasonably offended. The
Commissioner stated:
But are the words reasonably likely to offend, insult, humiliate or
intimidate the complainant or some people of English origin ?
This suggests that the “reasonable person” may be a reasonable
person of a particular race, ethnic origin etc. However,
it is not clear what
characteristics would be considered relevant for the purposes of the objective
test. Commissioner Wilson indicated
that assessment of whether a particular
action would be reasonably likely to offend would be “a question of fact
in every case,
depending on the context in which the allegedly offensive word or
words is used."
Although section 20C of the New South Wales
Anti-Discrimination Act
(the “ADA”) makes it unlawful to incite hatred towards,
serious contempt for or severe ridicule of a person or group
on the ground of
their race, that section involves a consideration of the concept of the
reasonable person which is useful in the
current context. The case of
Harou-Sourdon v TCN Channel Nine Pty Ltd
(1994) EOC 92-604
followed the
Australian Broadcasting Tribunal’s decision in the
Inquiry into
Broadcasts by Ron Casey
(1989) 3BR 351. The test for whether a person had
engaged in acts that would “incite hatred towards, serious contempt for,
or severe ridicule of, a person or group of persons on the ground of race of the
person or members of the group”
C(1) ADA) was considered to be an
objective one based on a hypothetical listener or viewer. In
Harou-Sourdon
, the Equal Opportunity Tribunal referred to the statement
made in the Ron Casey decision:
The yardstick should not be a person peculiarly susceptible to being roused
to enmity, nor one who takes an irrational or extremist
view of the relations
among racial groups. The hypothetical listener should in the Tribunal’s
view, be described as an ordinary,
reasonable person not immune from
susceptibility to incitement, nor holding racially prejudiced views.
into Broadcasts by Ron Casey
The description of the reasonable
person in defamation law by Hunt J. in
Farquhar v Bottom
(1980) 2 NSWLR
at 385-6 is often relied upon-
I must be guided and directed by the test of reasonableness. I must reject
any strained, or forced, or utterly unreasonable interpretation
proceed upon the basis that the ordinary reasonable reader is a person of fair
average intelligence ...who is neither
perverse ... nor morbid or suspicious of
mind... nor avid for scandal... and does read between the lines in the light of
his general
knowledge and experience of worldly affairs.... It is important to
bear in mind that the ordinary reasonable reader is a layman,
not a lawyer, and
that his capacity for implication is much greater than that of the lawyer
Western Aboriginal Legal Service v Jones
(2000) NSW ADT 102
Tribunal, interpreting the equivalent NSW legislation which is differently
worded, said
The question of what standard to apply in determining whether a statement is
defamatory has not been answered uniformly. The criterion
commanding the widest
verbal support seems to be the reaction aroused in citizens of "fair average
intelligence" or "ordinary decent
folk in the community taken in general". The
test is not identical with "reasonable" still less with "ideal" ...the
increasing diversity
of beliefs and attitudes in modern (Australian) society
precludes an appeal to a single standard of "right-thinking" people, and
suggests as sufficient that the allegation was calculated to stir up adverse
feelings among a substantial and respectable group of
the community, though not
in other quarters .... On the other hand, it is not sufficient that the words
are regarded as prejudicial
by only a small minority whose standards are so
anti-social that it would not be proper for courts to recognise them."
decision was overturned on appeal, but not on this point.
Some interesting
comments are made in the article by Akmeemana and Jones (op cit). This article
deals briefly with the objective
standard contained in s.18C of the RDA:
The section requires an objective consideration of the context, of the
circumstances or environment in which the act occurred. The
question arises as
to whether the evaluation of the offensive nature of the comments should be
based on the view of the ‘reasonable
victim’ as to what is
offensive, or that of the reasonable person in the general public. Unless the
‘reasonable victim’
standard is adopted, the standards of the
dominant class are merely perpetuated and there is no sensitivity to cultural
difference...The
adoption of the ‘reasonable victim’ standard can be
interpreted as a means of eliminating a systemic barrier. Complainants
longer be subject to the views of the dominant group concerning the types of
comments that are offensive. (p168).
This view seems to confirm and expand on the comments made by Sir Ronald
Wilson in the
Queensland Newspapers
case referred to above. In
v Canada Employment and Immigration Commission
, the Canadian Human Rights
Tribunal adopted the “reasonable victim” perspective in determining
whether particular questions
asked of the complainant in a job interview and
refusal to employ the complainant constituted sexual harassment or sex
discrimination.
The complainant was a well known media figure because of a
previous human rights complaint relating to sexual harassment in a traditionally
male dominated occupation. In a job interview with the Canada Employment and
Immigration Commission, the complainant was asked for
her response to a number
of hypothetical situations of sexual harassment and was questioned extensively
The court referred to a United States Court of Appeal decision,
which went “beyond merely the reasonable person/objective
standard” to adopt the “reasonable victim’s perspective”
(at D/192). The Court of Appeal stated:
..we believe that in evaluating the severity and pervasiveness of sexual
harassment, we should focus on the perspective of the victim...If
examined whether a reasonable person would engage in allegedly harassing
conduct, we would run the risk of re-enforcing the
prevailing level of
discrimination. Harassers could continue to harass merely because a particular
discriminatory practice was common,
and victims of harassment would have no
We therefore prefer to analyze harassment from the victim’s
perspective. A complete understanding of the victim’s view
among other things, an analysis of the different perspectives of men and women.
Conduct that men consider unobjectionable
may offend women...
In the Ellison case, the test was the perspective of the “reasonable
In order to shield employers from having to accommodate the idiosyncratic
concerns of the rare hypersensitive employee, we hold that
a female employee
states a prima facie case of hostile environment sexual harassment when she
alleges conduct a reasonable woman
would consider sufficiently severe or
pervasive to alter the conditions of employment and create an abusive working
environment..
We adopt the perspective of a reasonable woman primarily because we believe
that a sex-blind reasonable person’s standard tends
to be male-biased and
tends to systematically ignore the experiences of women.
Stadnyk v Canada Employment and Immigration Commission
Tribunal Chairperson was prepared to adopt the reasonable victim test for the
purposes of the case and assume “a heightened
degree of sensitivity and
concern about sexual harassment by the reasonable person (in this case, a
reasonable woman)”. (p
D/193). However, the Tribunal Chairperson did not
find the conduct of the interview or the denial of the opportunity offensive and
considered the complainant to fit the definition of the “rare
hyper-sensitive employee” referred to in the
case. In the
appeal of the
decision in 1995, the Canadian Human Rights Review
Tribunal specifically referred to the standard of the reasonable woman used by
the Tribunal Chairperson and found no error in law (p D201).
It seems to me that, in the context of remedial legislation such as the RDA,
and noting the comments in Australian cases and articles,
and US and Canadian
cases, the reasonable victim test is the appropriate test to adopt. This
addresses the difficulty inherent in
the reasonable person test of continuing
the dominance of the dominant class or group, yet recognises that the views of a
hypersensitive
"victim" or member of the relevant class will not prevail. It is
a matter for me to decide whether a reasonable victim, in all the
circumstances,
would have experienced the effects alleged.
In this context, I have considered the evidence of the complainants as
relevant to the reaction of a reasonable Nyungar person to
the cartoon. While
the reactions of the complainants are not determinative of the question I have
to decide, they are clearly relevant.
I have also taken into account the evidence of Dr Mickler in so far as it
provides an analytical context for the understanding of
communications regarding
indigenous persons in the Western Australian media. I have not used Dr Mickler's
evidence for any broader
I agree with the submission of the respondent that the context in which the
article appeared; that is, the preceding articles in The
West Australian are
relevant to consideration of the questions before me and I have taken them into
account where appropriate. For
this reason, I am not persuaded that the cartoon
introduces people to the public arena who have not previously been there. The
respondent's
submissions are particularly relevant in respect of consideration
of s.18D and they are discussed below in this context.
I am satisfied that, based on the reasonable victim test, a reasonable
Nyungar or Aboriginal person would have found the contents
of the cartoon
offensive, insulting, humiliating or intimidating. In fact, although my findings
above make it unnecessary to take
the further step, I also find that a
reasonable person, not necessarily of Nyungar or Aboriginal descent, would also
have found the
cartoon offensive or insulting. Perhaps they would not have found
it humiliating or intimidating if they were not of those races,
but a finding on
the first two would be enough to satisfy the statute. I have formed this view
because-Firstly, the cartoon presents
a demeaning portrayal of Yagan, an
ancestor of the complainants - particularly the reference to a warm beer and a
quiet pommie pub
in the context of the widespread community view regarding the
relationship between alcohol and Aboriginal people. Secondly, the cartoon
contains derogatory and demeaning references to the Waugyl, a religious figure.
Thirdly, it treats the issue of death in a manner
which causes offence to
Aboriginal people. Fourthly, it provides intimate details of the ancestry of
individuals in circumstances
where the intercourse was not a matter of choice
for the Aboriginal women concerned, and suggests a diminishing of the race by
resultant racial mix. Fifthly, it reinforces a misinformed and stereotypical
view of Aboriginal people of taking advantage of government
Was the act done because of race or ethnic origin?
Section 18B provides that this must only be one of the reasons for the doing
of the act, and not necessarily the dominant or substantial
reason. I must
therefore determine whether it was one of the reasons for the publication of the
There is no doubt in my mind that one of the reasons for the
publication of the cartoon was the race of the persons referred to in
cartoon, and of the complainants. Yagan is a well-recognised and highly
regarded ancestor of the Nyungar people. The cartoon
was an attempt to
laughingly and mockingly represent the issues around the return of Yagan's head
to Perth. Whilst it was dealing
with this as an issue important to all members
of the Western Australian community, there was a clear causal connection between
and Aboriginality. Further, there are numerous allutions in the cartoon to
traits or sectors of Aboriginal people and society - elders,
the Waugyl, and
Yagan himself. Finally, all of the people referred to in the cartoon are
involved with the issue because of their
Aboriginality.
8.6 Was The Act
Done Otherwise Than In Private
Section 18C (2) (a) provides that an act
is done otherwise than in private if it "causes words, sounds, images or writing
to be communicated
to the public". There are few better ways of communicating
something to the public than publishing it in a statewide newspaper such
West Australian. The legislators clearly intended this exception to relate to
private situations, where such behaviour is
not regulated. There has been some
discussion in earlier cases of more borderline situations such as words spoken
on private property
but heard in public places, or whether employment is
otherwise than in private. This is not one of those borderline situations, and
there is no doubt that this act was done otherwise than in private.
8.7.1 Introduction
As mentioned in 7.1 above section 18D sets out certain exemptions which can
be viewed generally as protecting expressions or communications
of a certain
nature to which the general prohibition of s18C will not apply.
Section 18D provides:
Section 18C does not render unlawful anything said or done reasonably and in
good faith:
(a) in the performance, exhibition or distribution of an
artistic work; or
(b) in the course of any statement, publication, discussion or debate made
or held for any genuine academic, artistic or scientific
purpose or any other
genuine purpose in the public interest; or
(c) in making or publishing:
(i) a fair and accurate report of any event or matter of public interest; or
(ii) a fair comment on any event or matter of public interest if the comment
is an expression of a genuine belief held by the person
making the comment.
As stated in the explanatory memorandum to the amending legislation, "the
exemptions are needed to ensure that debate can occur freely
and without
restriction in respect of matters of legitimate public interest."
8.7.2 Approach to exemptions
Where a respondent seeks to claim the benefit of the exemptions under s.18D
they have to satisfy the Commission that each element
necessary to succeed has
been established:
Bryl and Kovacevic v Nowra and Melbourne Theatre
(1999) Human Rights & Equal Opportunity Commission, 21 June
1999, per Commissioner Johnston at p.15 (
In deciding whether those elements have been satisfied, the exemptions should
be read broadly rather than narrowly (
to the performance of a play which the complainants argued offended, insulted,
humiliated and intimidated a group of about
40 people "loyal to the lawful
republic of Bosnia-Herzigovina". The complainants claimed that the characters
in the play were portrayed
in an offensive manner because of their national or
ethnic origin.
In expressing the opinion that a broad interpretation was necessary,
Commissioner Johnston stated:
This is consistent with the presumption that a fundamental tenet of the
common law is freedom of expression (
Attorney-General v Guardian Newspapers
[1990] 1 AC 109 at 283;
Brown v Classification Review Board
(1998) 154 ALR 67
at 76-77). Incursions by statute into freedom of expression
should not be lightly assumed. A statutory provision that purports
to have that
effect should be strictly construed (
[1994] HCA 15
(1994) 179 CLR 427
Freedom of expression is not, of course, absolute. It is, when viewed in
relation to a provision like section 18D, a consideration
to be taken into
account when determining whether conduct is exempt, even if it otherwise would
contravene section 18C. Section
18D is a corrective provision to prevent
government from stifling non-conformity or ideas that may displease, or which
Some commentators have argued that the breadth of the exemptions undermines
the protection afforded by s 18C: (Akmeemana and Jones
op cit; Eastman,
“Drafting Racial Vilification Laws: Legal and Policy Issues”
Australian Journal of Human Rights 285
; Solomon, “Problems in
Drafting Legislation Against Racist Activities”
[1994] AUJlHRights 17
Journal of Human Rights 265
). One could also argue that a broad
interpretation of the exemptions is contrary to the presumption that exemptions
in beneficial
legislation should be construed narrowly rather than broadly.
The exemptions are, however, to be read in conjunction with the overriding
consideration as to whether the relevant act complained
of was said or done
"reasonably and in good faith", which may, to some extent, confine the scope of
the exemptions.
8.7.3 The overriding requirement that the act be 'reasonable and in good
The Explanatory Memorandum states:
The operation of ... s.18D is governed by the requirement that to be exempt,
anything said or done must be said or done reasonably
and in good faith. It is
not the intention of that provision to prohibit a person from stating in public
what may be considered
generally to be an extreme view, so long as the person
making the statement does so reasonably and in good faith and genuinely believes
what he or she is saying.
The respondent bears the onus of demonstrating that they acted reasonably and
in good faith.
Bryl and Kovacevic v Nowra and Melbourne Theatre
Commissioner Johnston noted with respect to the requirement of
reasonableness that "a margin of tolerance" should be exercised in
deciding what
is reasonable, and that the Commission should "not find the threshold of what is
unreasonable conduct too readily crossed".
He further stated that “moral
and ethical considerations, expressive of community standards, are relevant in
determining
what is reasonable”.
With respect to the requirement of good faith Commissioner Johnston stated
that a finding that a respondent committed an act lacking
good faith:
requires the Commission to identify conduct that smacks of dishonesty or
fraud; in other words something approaching a deliberate
intent to mislead or,
if it is reasonably foreseeable that a particular racial or national group will
be humiliated or denigrated
by publication, at least a culpably reckless and
callous indifference in that regard. Mere indifference about, or careless lack
of concern to ascertain whether the matters dealt with ... reflect the true
situation, is not capable of grounding an adverse finding
of bad faith for the
purposes of section 18D” (p.19)
Those comments were made in the context of considering a dismissal
application pursuant to section 25X of the RDA. However, I consider
have more general application.
Some useful guidance may also be obtained by considering the defence of fair
comment. In
Western Aboriginal Legal Service v Jones
(supra) the
defamation law fair comment defence was contrasted with the NSW exemption
relating to matters done “reasonably
and in good faith”. The
Tribunal stated:
It is apparent that the common law defence of fair comment is broader or more
liberal than the exception in section 20C(2)(c) that
the public act be "done
reasonably and in good faith". For a comment or statement to be "reasonable", as
opposed to "fair", it must
be one which the ordinary, reasonable person would
consider to be reasonable in the circumstances of the case. In contrast, as
Fleming indicates ... "a comment which is fair need not be reasonable
...it may be exaggerated, obstinate or prejudicial, provided
it is honestly
held". It follows that a comment or statement which is exaggerated, obstinate or
prejudiced, is unlikely to be "reasonable".If
a statement is made in "good
faith" that would appear to be the converse of acting with malice. "Good faith"
appears to imply the
absence of spite, ill-will or other improper motive. As
with malice, "good faith" appears to be a state of mind, and the crucial
in determining the presence of "good faith" would seem to be "whether the
commentator honestly believed in the truth of what
he or she said".
I am satisfied that, in this instance, the respondent acted reasonably and in
good faith. The cartoon concerned was published after
a series of articles and
editorial comments dealing with this issue. It was an issue of importance for
the West Australian community
in general, as well as to the Aboriginal
community, and was treated as such by the newspaper. In publishing the cartoon I
am satisfied
that the newspaper did not act outside Commissioner Johnson's
"margin of tolerance". Testing the cartoon against "moral and ethical
considerations, expressive of community standards" I am satisfied that the
newspaper acted reasonably. While it may be argued that
the cartoon could be
characterised as “exaggerated” or “prejudiced”, I do
not consider that it was sufficiently
exaggerated or prejudiced (having regard
to the surrounding circumstances) to breach the standard of reasonableness. Paul
gave evidence that he had made a judgement call, knowing that the cartoon
would receive some opposition, but forming the view that
it was appropriate to
represent an important community issue in this way. My view in this area is
strengthened by reading the other
material in The West Australian published on
this issue, which provided a balanced report of what took place, and an opinion
in the main, encouraged unity in, and support of, the Aboriginal
community. There was no evidence before me which suggested that
the conduct of
the respondent smacked of "dishonesty or fraud" to follow Commissioner
Johnston's formulation for the good faith requirement.
Nor was there evidence of
"malice" on the part of the respondent. I am therefore satisfied that the
respondent is able to make out
the first requirements of s 18D.
8.7.3.1 Section 18D(a): something said or done in the performance, exhibition
distribution of an artistic work
What falls within the exemption relating to artistic works depends on the
interpretation given to the term 'artistic work'.
The only area of law where the meaning of 'artistic work' has been considered
in any detail is the area of copyright law.
”) defines an artistic work as:
“(a) a painting, sculpture, drawing, engraving or photograph, whether
the work is of artistic quality or not;
(b) a building or a model of a building, whether the building or model is of
artistic quality or not; or
(c) a work of artistic craftsmanship to which neither of the last two
preceding paragraphs applies;
but does not include a circuit layout within the meaning of the "
Layouts Act 1989
It is not clear how much use such a definition might be in this jurisdiction,
suffice to say that what appears to have been considered
as an artistic work for
the purposes of attracting copyright protection, is different to what Parliament
appears to have contemplated
as an 'artistic work' under the exemption in
s.18D(a) of the RDA.
The reference to the 'performance' of an 'artistic work' in the RDA appears
to contemplate that an artistic work can be a dramatic
work of some description,
such as a play or a film. Certainly this was the case in
offending form of expression was a play.
However, the definition of artistic work in the
not contemplate the performance of a play or a film. To the contrary the
draws a distinction between 'artistic works' and what it
defines as a 'dramatic work'.
Nevertheless, the type of works which are considered artistic works under the
are rather broad in themselves, and need not necessarily
possess artistic quality, unless it is a work of artistic craftsmanship.
respect to the latter the House of Lords considered that to be of artistic
quality, the work must have come into existence as
the product of an author who
is consciously concerned to produce a work of art:
George Hensher Ltd v
Restawile Upholstery (Lanes) Ltd
[1975] RPC 31.
This approach takes into
account the creator's subjective intention which, it is submitted, serves to
broaden the type of works
which may be considered 'artistic works'.
Furthermore, as Akmeemana and Jones note, "a court would not be likely to
introduce a distinction between 'real artistic works' and
'pseudo artistic
works'" (p171), particularly in this jurisdiction where freedom of expression is
at issue as much as racial vilification.
In light of the above, it seems that 'artistic work' under the RDA would have
to be interpreted broadly rather than narrowly.
This is precisely what some commentators fear will allow hate propagandists
to spread their word behind the veil of art (see for example
Akmeemana and Jones
(p171)). Whilst I share the views of Akmeemana and Jones in this regard, it
seems to me that there is no doubt
that a cartoon is an artistic work in the
sense intended by the legislators. Putting aside for the moment any views as to
the content
of the cartoon, the drawings and words relating to them are works of
artistic merit. The cartoonist, Dean Alston, is regarded by
the community as an
artist, and has been recognised by the receipt of various awards as a successful
one. Cartoons, as with paintings,
drawings and sculpture, are widely acclaimed
by society as works of art. The complainants argue that while the original
may constitute an artistic work, their publication in a newspaper does
not constitute exhibition or distribution and thus the publication
protected by the exemption. This argument appears to me to be a nonsense. Such
publication is the standard way in which cartoons
are made available to the
public. The newspaper is sold to the public, and prints of the original cartoons
are sold separately. No
doubt the cartoons are exhibited for the purpose of
sale. In all of these ways the cartoon is distributed or exhibited. The
complainant's
alternative argument is that while the drawings may constitute an
artistic work the written words accompanying them do not. Again,
I cannot accept
this argument. The words and the drawings together constitute the cartoon. To
attempt to separate the two would be
straining the meaning in the extreme. It
would be analogous to suggesting that the cinematography in a movie was an
artistic work,
but the script or soundtrack were not. Whilst I agree that this
exemption limits the racial hatred provisions of the RDA to a large
seems to me that the intent of the legislators is very clear.
8.7.3.2 Other Exemptions and Public interest considerations
Whilst my finding above means that the complaint
will be dismissed, I have also considered the application of the second and
subparagraphs of the exempting section. Those sub-paragraphs include
requirements that the communication or expression be in or involve
public interest.
The question of what is in the public interest has been
considered in the context of the defamation law defences of fair comment and
privilege. In that context, it has been held that whenever a matter "is such as
to affect people at large, so that they may be legitimately
interested in, or
concerned at, what is going on, or what may happen to them or others; then it is
a matter of public interest on
which everyone is entitled to make a fair
London Artists Ltd v Littler
[1968] EWCA Civ 3
[1969] 2 QB 375
[1968] EWCA Civ 3
at 198 per Lord Denning MR (CA). I consider that that approach to the
question of what is in the public interest is of some assistance
interpretation of the RDA.
However, for the reasons set out below, I consider that a direct application
of the concepts of defamation law to the exemptions in
the RDA would be unwise,
because the two bodies of law safeguard two quite different sets of rights.
Section 18C of the RDA seeks to protect a person or a group from fear,
humiliation or intimidation because of their race, colour or
national or ethnic
origin. Defamation seeks to protect an individual's reputation. It arises where
a person (the defendant) communicates
any matter to a third party which would
negatively impact upon the reputation of another person (the plaintiff) in the
eyes of the
third party.
While unjustifiable attacks on an individual's reputation should not be
countenanced, it is ultimately the individual who suffers
the impact of the
offence as he or she is personally affected. With breaches of racial hatred
legislation, however, the impact differs.
As mentioned elsewhere, matters
constituting vilification , even if levelled at an individual, are rarely
perceived as isolated incidents.
The impact of the vilification is often felt
by the racial or ethnic group to which the individual belongs.
In any event the RDA contemplates that breaches of the provisions of
can be levelled at groups as well as individuals. Such breaches therefore appear
to have a wider social impact.
On this basis, different considerations will apply when seeking to determine
what is in the public interest for the purposes of defences
to the tort of
defamation as opposed to exemptions to breaches of
of the RDA.
One such consideration would be the social impact of the tort or breach.
Justifying breaches of racial hatred legislation by reference
to a 'public
interest' in the free communication of information has the potential to be more
socially divisive than justifying, on
the same basis, an attack against an
individual's reputation. The public interest aspect of the exemptions in the
RDA should therefore
be read more narrowly, and the public interest of the
racial group in question should be taken into account when considering the
general public interest.
8.7.3.3 Section 18D(b): Statement, publication, debate or discussion made
or held for any genuine academic, artistic, scientific purpose
or other genuine
purpose in the public interest.
The Explanatory Memorandum contains no guidance as to the purpose or breadth
of this exemption. It does, however, appear that the
exemption is rather broad.
Certainly, the breadth of the exemption would be governed by the interpretation
given to the term “genuine”,
but the RDA does not explain which
factors might be considered in determining what is a “genuine”
purpose. The Explanatory
Memorandum does nothing to clarify the position by
simply substituting the term "genuine" with "worthwhile". This prompts the
what is a worthwhile purpose in the public interest?In my view
"genuine" or "worthwhile" must contain some element of honesty of
purpose. By
way of example, if something is said or published with the primary intention of
furthering a discussion or debate, then
it would be genuine. If, in contrast, it
was said or published with the intention of inciting hatred of a particular
racial group,
then this exemption could not apply.
In accordance with the ejusdem generis rule of statutory interpretation,
"other genuine purpose in the public interest" would have
to be of the same kind
or nature of purpose as those already particularised. Whether this might
include a political purpose or the
purpose of furthering public debate has not
been considered. It is, however, likely that such purposes would be covered.
suggests that this exemption and the fair comment exemption (discussed
below) were intended to cover political and public interest
debates at all
levels. She further argues that even if these exemptions did not exist, a
respondent could still mount a defence
on constitutional grounds given the
implied freedom of political communication: see Eastman op. cit. p. 293. In my
opinion it is
therefore difficult to see what benefit might be gained from
trying to exclude such purposes from the ambit of this exemption.
The respondent argues that this cartoon was published in the course of
encouraging public discussion or debate about the return of
Yagan's head to
Australia. Mr Murray gave evidence to the effect that that was his purpose in
publishing the cartoon and it was not
suggested to him that he was pursuing some
other purpose. It was further asserted by the respondent that such a purpose
characterised as a “genuine purpose in the public
interest”. I accept those arguments, taking into account my view that
adopts a narrow interpretation of what is in the public interest in the context
of the RDA. As indicated in my consideration
of the "reasonable" and "good
faith" provisions I have come to this view considering the cartoon in the
context of other material
published in The West Australian on this issue.
Therefore, this second subparagraph would also exempt the cartoon from the
application
8.7.3.4 Section 18D(c): Fair and accurate reports
in the public interest and fair
comment on any matter of public interest where the comment is a genuinely
held belief.
The Explanatory Memorandum provides little guidance as to how the two
exemptions in 18D(c) should be interpreted. In relation to fair
reporting it
The media is entitled to report events as they happen. The publication must
be fair. The provision would not affect the accurate
reporting of public debate
on matters of acknowledged sensitivity, for example, policy on native title or
immigration.
Little is said regarding fair comment except that the exemption is qualified
by the requirement that the comment be an expression
of genuine belief held by
the person making the comment and that the exemption is subject to the overall
requirement of reasonableness
and good faith.
It is clear, however, that these exemptions are intended to protect the free
communication of both the details of and opinions about
any matter of public
Subject to the concerns expressed above regarding the application of
“public interest” definitions derived from defamation
consider that defamation law provides some assistance in the interpretation of
these exemptions.
What constitutes a fair report?
What might constitute a fair report in the context
of the RDA exemptions has concerned some commentators. Eastman, for example,
Is it fairness all round? Fairness to the victim, fairness to the reporter,
or the manner in which the issue or event is reported
? (Eastman, op.cit. p
In defamation law, the fairness or accuracy of a report has been considered
largely in relation to reports of parliamentary and judicial
proceedings. In
relation to parliamentary proceedings:
. . . for a report to be fair it must not be slanted or distorted, although
it will not lose that attribute by comprising a summary
or sketch of any part of
the proceedings which is of special interest:
Cook v Alexander
[1973] 3 All ER 1037 (CA).
Punctilious accuracy is not essential, so long
as the report does not give a misleading impression of what was said or written
the legislature:
Jones v John Fairfax & Sons Ltd
(1986) 4 NSWLR
A report being essentially descriptive, is limited to an account of
events which have happened, [and] cannot properly include comments
or opinions
of the reporter
: Burchett v Kane
[1980] 2 NSWLR 266
(Balkin & Davis,
Law of Torts
, Butterworths (1996), 2nd ed., p.
Similarly, in relation to judicial proceedings it has been considered that to
be fair and accurate, a report of such proceedings must
not give a misleading
picture of what happened at the proceedings:
Jones v John Fairfax & Sons
(1986) 4 NSWLR 466 (CA)
Federal Capital Press of Australia Pty Ltd v
(1992) 108 FLR 118
per Gallop J.
It is also clear that a report will not be fair if there is some mala fides
involved in the writing or publication of the report.
For example, a report in
which the writer knowingly makes a false statement, or is influenced by spite or
ill-will directed towards
the person or people about whom the report is written
would be unfair: see
Wright v Woodgate
[1835] EngR 354
(1835) 2 Cr. M&R 573
[1835] EngR 354
at 246 per Parke B, quoted in Lord Shaw in
Adam v Ward
at 349 (HL) which discusses the instances in which qualified privilege in
defamation law will be lost by abuse of the privilege.
It seems to me that the general view of a report would not include a cartoon.
A cartoon by its nature is the satirisation of, or comment
upon, something known
to the audience of the cartoon. It goes further than reporting the details of
events, although this may be
a component. For that reason, the "fair report"
provision does not, in my view, apply to the present matter.
Although the cartoon is arguably a comment (as opposed to a
report), the respondent did not lead any evidence regarding the belief
maker of the cartoon (being Mr Alston). Section 18D(c)(ii) appears to require
that I be satisfied that the comment represented
the “genuine
belief” of the person making the comment, as opposed to the publisher. In
adopting that interpretation of
section 18D(c)(ii), I note the distinction drawn
at the beginning of section 18D(c) between “making” and
“publishing”
a comment or report. It therefore seems clear from the
statutory context that Parliament intended that the locus of the relevant
“genuine belief” was to be the person in the position of Mr
In those circumstances and in light of my findings above, I need not
further consider the application of section 18D(c)(ii). I have,
however, set out
below my views regarding the interpretation of that section.
What constitutes 'fair comment'?
In defamation law, a comment will be a fair comment if it is:
a matter of public interest;
* a statement of opinion not fact;
on true facts; and
* honestly held.
Subject to the public interest concerns previously outlined, I see no reason
why the above factors should not be used as a guide in
determining whether a
comment is a fair one for the purposes of applying the fair comment exemption
under the RDA.
Matter of public interest
As noted above, the scope of the term “public
interest” in the context of alleged breaches of
is narrower than
in the field of defamation. The public interest of the racial group in question
should be taken into account when
considering the general public interest.
Nevertheless, it would be my view (were it necessary to decide the issue) that
the matters
canvassed by the cartoon fall within that narrower definition of
the public interest.
Statement of opinion not fact
It has been held that to be fair, a comment must
appear to be "a deduction, inference, conclusion, criticism, judgment, remark or
observation" as opposed to a "direct statement concerning, or description of " a
matter of public interest:
Clarke v Norton
[1910] VicLawRp 83
[1910] VLR 494
Hawke v Tamworth Newspaper Co Ltd
[1983] 1 NSWLR 699
Hunt J cited in Balkin and Davis op.cit p. 551.
The above formulation draws a distinction between a 'comment' on a matter of
public interest as opposed to simply a 'description of'
that same matter. This
is the distinction between a fair report and a fair comment.
There is no reason why a comment should be limited to verbal expressions
only. A written opinion can also constitute a comment for
the purposes of the
exemption. To the extent that a cartoon or caricature can convey an opinion or
attitude, I see no reason why
they too would not be covered by the
Based on true facts
As stated elsewhere, a report in which the writer
knowingly makes a false statement would not constitute a fair report.
an opinion based on false statements would render a comment based on
such statements an unfair one:
Hunt v Star Newspaper Co Ltd
[1908] 2 KB
at 319 per Fletcher Moulton LJ (CA);
Thompson v 'Truth' & 'Sportsman'
(1932) 34 SR (NSW) 21
at 25 (PC). However, there is some suggestion
that the facts upon which the comment is based need not be precisely accurate as
as they are substantially true:
Jeyretnam v Goh Chok Tong
at 1114 (PC).
I need not express a concluded view on this point in light of my findings
Honestly held
Under s 18D(c)(ii), a comment will be fair if it is "an expression of a
genuine belief held by the person making the comment". In
this context a
"genuine belief" is synonymous with "a belief honestly held".
As noted above, I am unable to be satisfied in relation to this element of
the defence by reason of the fact that the respondent has
not sought to adduce
any evidence regarding Mr Alston’s state of mind. However, I have set out
below some further comments
regarding this element.
In terms of what may
constitute a belief honestly held the prevailing view seems to be that most
comments would be acceptable provided
that the person making the comment
honestly believed that what he or she was saying was true:
Every latitude must be given to opinion and prejudice...Mere exaggeration,
would not make the comment unfair. However wrong the opinion
may be in point of
truth, or however prejudiced the writer, it may still be within the prescribed
Merivale v Carson
(1887) 20 QBD 275
at 280-1 per Lord Esher MR
The existence of the genuine belief component to the fair comment exemption
has greatly concerned some commentators. Eastman, for
example, argues that "[a]
respondent to a complaint ... merely need assert that his or her comments
reflect their beliefs and they
will be excused" (op. cit at p 289). Solomon
further adds that this "...places more importance upon protecting the
perpetrator's
statements or acts, no matter how evil-intentioned or reckless,
than upon the harm caused to the targeted persons or group and to
generally": Solomon op. cit. at p.276-277.
Despite the apparent latitude that must be given to opinion and prejudice,
there are some limits placed on such comments.
Firstly, with respect to vilification offences, there are different public
interest considerations as discussed above. While the
matter on which the
comment was made may be a matter of public interest, it may not be in the public
interest to uphold the legitimacy
of those comments because of the wider social
harm that may be caused.
Secondly, there are situations in which the honesty of an opinion can be
questioned. Where the comment is based on facts which the
person making the
comment knows to be false, then the opinion cannot be said to be a genuinely
held belief. Furthermore, if the
person making the comment is acting out of
malice, then he or she cannot be said to be expressing their real opinion: see
Renouf v Federal Capital Press of Australia Pty Ltd
(1977) 17 ACTR 35
54 per Blackburn J. While these limits have only previously been applied in
defamation cases, I see no reason why they should
not apply in the context of
the RDA exemption particularly bearing in mind that the comment is not protected
unless it is made reasonably
and in good faith.
At common law it appears that a publisher will be vicariously liable for
opinions expressed by the author of a comment unless the
publisher expressly
states that it does not adopt the views expressed:
Lyon v Daily Telegraph
[1943] KB 746
[1943] 2 All ER 316 (CA)
McLeod v Jones
Hawke v Tamworth Newspaper Co Ltd
[1983] 1 NSWLR 699
Telnikoff v Matusevitch
[1992] UKHL 2
[1992] 2 AC 343
[1992] UKHL 2
[1991] 4 All ER 817
824-5 per Lord Keith (HL);
Perran v North Queensland Newspaper Co Ltd
[1993] HCA 64
(1993) 178 CLR 309
[1993] HCA 64
117 ALR 569
This position is further enhanced by the provisions of s 18D of the RDA.
Clearly, Mr Alston was the agent, if not the employee, of
the respondent.
Further, Mr Murray adopted his opinions in publishing the cartoon. This is not
in issue, though, as the exemptions
9. CONCLUSION
Whilst I am satisfied that the publication of the cartoon with which this
matter deals is in breach of s.18C of the RDA, based on
my findings in relation
to the exemptions set out in s.18D the complaint is not made out. Accordingly, I
dismiss the complaint the
subject of this inquiry. In so doing I am conscious of
the distress caused by this cartoon to the complainants, and I am satisfied
their evidence was a genuine expression of that hurt. I am also cognisant of the
commitment of the editor of the respondent,
Mr Murray, to fairly report and
comment on Aboriginal issues, and his genuine belief that the return of Yagan's
head should have
been a unifying rather than a divisive process.
process of public debate the balancing of the sensitivities of the non-dominant
racial group against the importance of commenting
appropriately on issues of the
day is a fine one. While this cartoon crossed that line, and made inappropriate
references to Nyungar
ancestors and beliefs, it did not breach
Racial Discrimination Act
Dated this day of 12 April 2001
GRAEME INNES
INQUIRY COMMISSIONER
RTF format (14.6 MB)
Signed PDF/A format